

Great Universal
 Dear Mrs Davis 
‘Mrs Davis, we're going to pay you another £1,500 a year’…
If you happen to go out to work, a message like that from your boss would, I'm sure, bring a broad smile to your face.
Or suppose that your husband gave you a cheque for £15,000; wouldn't that be worth a hug?
Well, Mrs Davis, I can't promise you a rise (and I certainly wouldn't be bold enough to ask you for a hug!) but what I can offer you is the chance to choose between a substantial pay-rise…£1,500 a year…and a cheque for the generous sum of £15,000.
The reason I can offer you this choice is because, on its way to you now, is an invitation to enter our ‘DOUBLE YOUR MONEY’ prize draw.
Your selection to receive this invitation, and the allocation, exclusively to you, of seven numbers that you alone can enter in the draw, means that you could be just one step away from winning the first prize in this £40,000 draw — which would give you the choice that I mentioned between a lump sum and an income for life.
Look out for the envelope that will bring your invitation, and be ready to tell us your preference as soon as it arrives.
Yours sincerely,
Peter Baker Prize Draw Manager
Zetters The Pool of London
21st June 1990  Dear Mr Heaps 
Upon checking our records, we were disappointed to note that you have not renewed your standing entry that finished on 2nd June 1990.
As we pride ourselves on our service we would certainly like to hear from you if there is any reason for not renewing your entry.
What ever the reason is, Mr Heaps, please drop us a line to tell us about it.
Use the enclosed reply paid envelope (no stamp needed).
If you have already posted a renewal or a new coupon since we prepared this letter thank you.
So may we wish you good luck for the future.
Looking forward to hearing from you soon.
Assuring you always of our best attention.
Business Media Research Committee
 Dear Sir/Madam 
Spring 1990
The BMRC Businessman Readership Survey
We should like to ask for your co-operation in the BMRC Businessman Survey.
This letter is to explain the purpose of the survey.
The survey is a large study sponsored by the Business Media Research Committee, a body which represents publishers of newspapers and magazines.
The survey updates the series of studies in readership and lifestyle habits of men and women in professional, business and administrative occupations, provided by nine surveys since 1973.
It is undertaken on behalf of the Committee by Research Services Limited, a company with considerable experience in the research field.
The sample for this study is designed to represent people in certain occupations or with particular qualifications throughout Great Britain.
Addresses have been drawn by statistically random methods and, as you will appreciate, the success of the research depends upon our obtaining the highest possible response rate as only then can we ensure that the sample is truly representative.
I can assure you that any information given during the interview will be treated in the strictest confidence.
It will be amalgamated with information obtained from others to provide a complete statistical picture of the characteristics of people in particular occupations.
Thank you for taking part in this survey.
Yours faithfully,
No nonsense loans to meet your every need.
From £400 to £10,000
FOR STRAIGHTFORWARD PROFESSIONAL AND CONVENIENT SERVICE, PHONE MERCANTILE ACTION LINE 0800 262 951
Call one of our friendly, financial experts for a no-obligation consultation.
Our lines are open from 9am to 8pm.
Monday to Friday.
Most of us need to borrow money at some time or another.
Sometimes it's because we need to make a home improvement — putting in a new kitchen for example.
Or perhaps the car has really given up and it's time for a new, or good second-hand one.
Alternatively, you might have found yourself without the ready money you needed to snap up a bargain — like that washing machine you saw in the sales.
Even if you don't need the money for domestic or emergency reasons, you might need a holiday somewhere special — to go to your daughter's wedding in Australia — or to go on a second honeymoon.
And although you might have money saved up, you might be unwilling or unable to touch it.
Whatever you need a loan for, a Mercantile Credit Personal Loan is one of the simplest ways of making something affordable.
As we are a member of the Barclays Bank Group, you know that you would be dealing with a highly reputable company.
With ready cash in your bank account you can spend the money as you want.
You pay a rate of 28.5% APR for loans of £400-£999 and 26.5% APR for loans of £1000–£10,000.
We require no security against your loan.
You don't have to risk your home or its valuables.
Or find a deposit.
To make you feel even more confident, all our loans offer free life protection, up to a maximum outstanding balance of £15,000.
And our optional Payment Protector plan covers you against loss of income in the event of sickness, accident or compulsory redundancy (subject to a few simple conditions).
We've been lending money to individuals for over 50 years so we're certainly experienced in keeping our customers satisfied.
To find out more about Mercantile Credit Personal Loans, call The Mercantile Action Line on 0800 262 951 (your call is free).
Or simply complete the coupon opposite, tear off and post.
You won't even need a stamp.
We'll then send you full details and an application form.
Just remember that we aim to make it as simple and straightforward as possible for you to borrow the amount you require — with confidence.
Whether you contact us by ‘phone or by post, you are under no obligation.
To sum up, here are some of the benefits a Mercantile Credit Personal Loan offers.
A cash sum to spend as you wish
Borrow any amount from £400–£10,000
No security required
Free life protection
Optional Payment Protector plan
Over 50 years solid financial experience
House Hunting A Guide to the Jungle
Bristol & West Building Society
Contents
Where do I start
Establishing what you want and what you can afford — Page 2–3
Organising your team
The role of your mortgage advisor.
Finding a solicitor and surveyor — Page 4–5
Choosing your equipment
The types of mortgage available, MIRAS and the use of indemnities — Page 6–7
Getting it in the bag
The buying process — arranging your mortgage, exchanging contracts and completion — Page 12–13
Buying a property at auction
The peaks and pitfalls of buying at public auctions — Page 14–15
Home, dry and how to stay that way
Mortgage related insurance and planning for the future — Page 16–17
Personal budget planner
For your own use in establishing what you can afford — Page 18
Buying & selling…some of the costs
A brief summary of some of the costs involved in buying and selling a house — Page 19–20
Congratulations!
You're already on the right track!
Welcome to the strange, exciting, occasionally hair-raising but always fascinating world of house-hunting.
It's often described as a jungle, and to be totally frank, it is.
You can get lost here.
You can get rich here (well, some people manage it).
And there are all kinds of exotic life-forms here: some of them helpful, some of them not- all with their own languages and customs.
But don't be overawed.
Very few people actually disappear without trace, and most people (about 65% of the population of Great Britain, no less) come out happier, and financially healthier than when they went in.
And if they can do it, so can you.
If you want a better-than-equal chance of success, you've started in exactly the right place.
When you go househunting with the Bristol and West, you start off with a big advantage.
That's partly because we're one of Britain's biggest building societies.
But more important, because of the unusual amount of care we take to get things right.
Right for our savers.
Right for our home-buyers.
The way we've been getting them right ever since 1850.
We think you'll appreciate that extra care in the weeks and months ahead.
And now, on with the hunt!
Where do I start?
As with any important expedition, the best place to start is in the comfort of your own sofa, making a plan of campaign.
The better your plan, the more likely you are to end up in the right place.
By the way, you'll notice that househunting involves large amounts of coffee, tea and paper.
You'll have to supply the first two for now, but we have made a start with the paper work.
You can use the Monthly Repayment Table (in our Mortgage Guide) and the Personal Budget Planner to keep track of events, so get them ready now.
What do you want?
Actually writing it down can really help to crystallise your thoughts — as well as helping other people (like us, and estate agents) to help you.
Put the details on your Househunting Checklist: Area?
Number of bedrooms?
Flat or house?
Garage?
Old or new?
Are you prepared to take on something that needs repairs or not?
What have you got?
Hopefully, some money in a Bristol & West account.
As you will see some money may be required as a deposit and for your fees.
Have you got any savings bonds?
Life Assurance?
Shares or title deeds tucked away anywhere?
If so, dig them out now because they could help you get a bigger mortgage.
What can you afford?
We can lend you up to 3½ times your annual salary, plus your partner's salary—or 2½ times your combined salaries.
So, supposing your income is £10,000 and your partner earns £5,000 you could be in a position to borrow either £40,000 or£37,500.
But don't start rubbing your hands yet, that ‘could’ is important.
You'll normally need at least 10% of the price of the house.
However, Bristol & West now offer 100% mortgages when there is no deposit.
You'll need money to cover fees and expenses.
To help you work out what these costs are likely to be, we have included a guide at the end of this booklet detailing the main expenses.
And we both need to be sure that you can afford the repayments.
Use the Monthly Repayments Table to find out what these could be, and the Personal Budget Planner (included at the end of this guide) to work out what you can afford.
Now pick up your phone, call us, and move on to Stage Two.
Organising your team
In the jungle, you need allies you can trust — and the most trustworthy one of them all is (you guessed!) the Bristol & West.
Well, it sounds a very obvious thing for us to say — but it stands to reason.
We'll be financing your purchase (not just arranging it) over the next 20 to 25 years or more — so your well being is vitally important to us.
Your interests, in other words, are our interests.
So before you see anybody else, see us.
Your Mortgage Advisor
Your Bristol & West Mortgage Advisor is the ‘anchorman’(or woman) for the whole operation — and does a lot more than just give you a ‘yes’ or ‘no’when you ask for a mortgage.
Our Mortgage Advisors have helped with more house-hunts than most people have had hot dinners — so their brains are well worth picking.
They know all about the different types of mortgages and can offer impartial advice.
And if you choose an endowment mortgage, they'll even help you select the best deal around.
They can tip you off about possible snags,— and about the shortcuts as well.
And they know everybody who's worth knowing in the househunting jungle — which makes them the ideal people to recruit the rest of your team.
Your solicitor
If you haven't got one, we'll help you choose one.
If you've already got one, check with us that he or she is acceptable for preparing mortgage documents: if the same one can work for both of us, you'll save money.
Your solicitor's main job will be conveyancing — the legal transfer of ownership of your new home.
You can do this through a Licensed Conveyancer, or even do it yourself, but having said that solicitors nowadays (at least, the ones we use) tend to give pretty good value for money.
Most of them will give you a written quotation for their services, in advance, if you ask for one.
Also, they are professional negotiators .
A good one can deal calmly and quickly with situations that would have you losing sleep, your patience, and perhaps the house.
Your surveyor
We will recommend a fully qualified surveyor who will make sure of the condition of the property.
A full survey report is not usually required in respect of properties covered by NHBC insurance, but the Society does require its own valuation report which enables us to assess the value of the property for mortgage purposes.
By helping you to select a surveyor and combining this with our own valuation report, we can also save you some money.
Choosing your equipment
In order to survive the jungle and live to tell the tale it is important not only to have good companions, but also to have the best available equipment.
The first and essential thing that you will require is your mortgage.
There are two main types — Repayment, and Interest Only — and they both have two main ingredients:capital (the money you pay for your home), and interest (what you pay for borrowing it).
The thing to remember is that interest is tax-deductible (up to certain limits) and capital isn't.
Repayment mortgages are the basic kind of mortgage.
They repay your interest and capital together, in monthly instalments which change from time to time, as our interest rates change.
Interest only mortgages give you the money you need, and you don't pay it back until your mortgage term is up.
Until then, you only pay interest.
Just like a repayment mortgage, the interest rates can change, and this will affect your monthly payment.
So don't stretch your budget too far and the interest rate — and your payment — can go up, as well as down.
Meanwhile, you pay into a special investment fund — usually an Endowment Policy, arranged through an insurance company — which pays you a lump sum at the end of your mortgage term or on death, and you repay the capital out of this.
And if the insurance company does its job well (and we'll help you choose one that will) there should be a tidy tax-free bonus at the end — for you to use however you please.
E-Type Mortgage.
The Bristol & West have now gone one better than the standard endowment mortgage.
The E-Type Mortgage is a special low cost endowment designed to give you as much help as possible once you have fought your way out of the jungle.
In order to give you even more help, we are foregoing the annual renewal commission with certain life insurers.
Instead of keeping the money for ourselves we will re-invest it on your behalf in your endowment plan.
This means that you will pay no more than you would on a normal low cost endowment but get a larger lump sum surplus at the end of the mortgage term.
Our mortgage advisors will explain the details of how this mortgage works, but it is just one more way that the Bristol & West have found to help you out of the jungle.
MIRAS
With a repayment or interest only mortgage, the MIRAS (Mortgage Interest Relief at Source) scheme makes getting your tax relief very simple.
Instead of claiming it year by year, you just fill in a form when you apply for your mortgage.
The tax-relief is paid to us — and we take it off your monthly instalments.
Indemnity Guarantee
This helps you to afford the home you thought you couldn't.
If your loan exceeds 75% of the value of the property, additional security will be required on the ‘excess loan’.
Usually this security will be an insurance company indemnity guarantee.
This take the form of a ‘one off’ single premium insurance payment.
As an example of the cost of an indemnity guarantee (this will vary depending upon the percentage of the property value you borrow), on a loan which exceeds 75% of the property value by £5,000, the ‘one off’ payment would be about £175 (depending on the size of the loan and the percentage of the advance).
Your mortgage certificate
This shows that the Bristol & West is behind you, and says you're a genuine, serious house-hunter, with real buying power — to be treated with the greatest respect!
We simply ask a few questions about your income and the level of deposit you have available and then issue you with a certificate which:— tells you how much we are able to lend you.
— reserves the money for you for up to three months.
Happy Hunting
You are now in an unusually powerful position: you have a strong, professional team behind you, and a good few thousand pounds' worth of buying power in your pocket.
If you're a first-time buyer, your position is better still: you have nothing to sell, so you can buy what you want when you want.
The sort of buyer every seller loves.
It'll be years before you're in this position again, so don't give it up until you're absolutely certain you've found the place you want.
Estate Agents
Estate agents make money by selling houses, normally about 1.5–2% of what the seller gets for his house:(up to £600 pounds on a £30,000 house) so they don't mind working for it.
They'll be happy to show you lots of properties, take you back for a second and a third look, keep you informed about new properties — as long as you seem clear about what you want and serious about buying it.
Show them your Checklist and Mortgage Certificate.
They show that you're not just a ‘browser’, but are serious — and you'll get a lot more help as a result.
Looking at houses
Look at lots of them.
The more you see, the better you'll get at assessing their value and spotting problems.
And the more problems you spot, the more money you'll save.
The main rule is ‘be nosey’— and this may take a little practice if you're looking at secondhand (ie other people's) homes.
The people may be very nice, but this isn't a social visit.
Make notes if you can.
It can be surprisingly hard to remember quite obvious things afterwards.
Ignore the décor.
In new homes, it's probably been planned by a professional, to make the place look extra-spacious.
If the décor's awful, you can always change it.
And whatever it's like, it's not what you're paying for.
The mortgage doesn't cover it — just the building.
Look into everything, even the loft if you can.
It doesn't take a degree in surveying to spot daylight between tiles, damp marks or old wiring.
If you really like the place, make an offer — but make clear that it's only ‘subject to survey and contract’.
And don't be rushed.
The seller is probably at least as anxious to sell as you are to buy.
Getting it in the bag
Good teamwork is vital here.
When you've made your offer, there are three things to do: get the mortgage finalised, exchange contracts, and complete the purchase.
Ready?
Here we go.
1.
Getting your mortgage
First, complete your Application Form and send it to us with your valuation fee.
The property is inspected by a valuer who tells us whether the place you're buying is worth what we'll be lending — not what you're paying for it.
Only you can be the judge of that.
Our mortgage offer is based on this valuation, and you should get it within ten days.
If it's less than you wanted, don't give up hope immediately.
It may be a useful lever for getting the price down.
Our offer doesn't include a surveyor's report.
If you want one, we can do it at the same time as the valuation, at a reduced fee, but we must be told at the outset.
However, you'll still be somewhat out of pocket if you decide not to buy the property.
2.
Exchange of Contracts*
•This is how it's done in England and Wales — not in Scotland.
The contracts are the written agreements between you and the seller — setting the price, terms and date for the property to change hands (completion date).
Your solicitor will help you to negotiate these: for example, if you want a reduction in price, or want the seller to do repairs before completion.
Meanwhile, he has to check that the sale's legal.
He also has to check that there are no major road or other Local Authority plans that could affect your property.
This is the ‘local search’.
It isn't complicated or expensive, but it can take time — so it's worth getting it in hand early on.
Once contracts are agreed and exchanged, the price and terms are fixed, and the house is as good as yours.
3.
Completion Date
On completion, the house actually becomes yours — and you can move into it.
It's usually (but doesn't have to be) a month after contracts have been exchanged.
When you've got your completion date, you can breath a sigh of relief — and get your removal firm organised.
Buying a property at Auction
Hidden in the house buying jungle can also be found the Public Auction.
Buying a property at Auction can be a most rewarding experience and mortgage finance for Auction purchasers is available from us, dependent on the preparations made by you prior to the Auction date.
Some Rules to Understand
It is important that you should recognise the legal obligation incurred once the Auctioneer's hammer has fallen in the sale room.
The successful bidder is under a binding contract to purchase the relevant property.
A Memorandum of Contract must be completed and exchanged prior to the successful bidder leaving the Auction Room.
A deposit of 10% of the purchase price must be presented.
What sort of properties are sold at Auction?
Auctioneers will recognise certain properties as suitable to be sold by Auction.
These will be properties likely to attract keen bidding in a buoyant property market, for instance, a derelict cottage ideal for improvement, or a house with a large garden having development potential.
If you find that the property you want is to be sold at Auction, remember that a lot of time, effort and fees can be expended prior to an Auction and there is no guarantee that you will be successful in purchasing the property.
Although there may appear to be numerous difficulties, don't be discouraged.
We are very sympathetic to Auction purchases regardless of the somewhat daunting differences from that of a Private Treaty sale.
We would advise you to give us sufficient notice, usually 12 working days prior to Auction date, once a suitable property has been found that you are interested in.
A valuation fee will be paid with the Mortgage Application, and the subsequent inspection will sometimes result in additional information being required eg estimates for essential repair work or modernisation, etc.
Again it will be necessary to instruct a solicitor to examine the general and special conditions of sale relating to the property, and also carry out the usual and necessary enquiries and searches with all relevant authorities and other bodies.
When you have received an Offer of Mortgage, to enable a bid up to a maximum agreed limit, a further visit to the property should be made near to the date of Auction, to ensure that everything is in order.
Your solicitor or estate agent could also be asked to carry out bidding on your behalf as an Auction saleroom can be a tense and nerve-racking place to the unfamiliar.
HOME AND DRY AND HOW TO STAY THAT WAY
Congratulations!
You've braved the jungle.
It's a good feeling, isn't it?
You can feel this good permanently, with the right insurance.
Bristol & West offers a range of insurance services, many specially negotiated and not available elsewhere.
Buildings insurance is essential and therefore usually arranged for you by the Society.
This will cover the cost of rebuilding your property should something disastrous occur.
The premium is usually paid monthly to the Society along with your mortgage payment.
The amount of cover is index linked to match increases in building costs.
If the buildings insurance on the property you buy is tied by a lease (this will usually only apply to flats) additional buildings insurance may not be required.
In this instance Bristol & West Home Contents Insurance provides an alternative way to insure your belongings.
Whilst contents insurance isn't compulsory it is strongly advisable.
‘Homesure’ combines buildings and contents insurance, providing very wide cover in one simple policy, which will replace most items ‘as new’.
As the mortgage payment and related insurance premiums will constitute a major part of your monthly outgoings, the Bristol & West provides Incomesure, a special sort of insurance, to protect your ability to maintain these payments in the case of unemployment, accident, or sickness.
Finally, life insurance to protect your loan is vital.
An endowment mortgage gives life cover automatically; repayment loans need separate cover and Bristol & West Mortgagesure provides this simply and cheaply — it will pay off the mortgage should you die.
In addition, Mortgagesure Plus provides the option of a tax-free income for your partner.
Don't keep problems to yourself
If you have a problem, call us immediately.
A trouble shared is a trouble halved — and probably solved, when you're with the Bristol & West.
Building on your investment
The best way to finance a new extension, roof, kitchen or bathroom is through your mortgage.
Call us anytime and ask about a ‘Further Advance’.
Getting ready for next time
What's this?
You've hardly got your breath back, and we're already talking about ‘next time’?
Well,just in case you get the itch again (and almost everybody does sooner or later) keep in touch.
Call in and see what terms we're offering on our different accounts — and use them to gain excellent returns on anything you can manage to save.
See you soon!
PERSONAL BUDGET PLANNER
Use this budget planner to work out what you can afford.
First of all, detail all your expenses — on a monthly basis — in the left hand column.
Then detail your income — after tax — in the right hand column.
Subtract your expenses from your income and you can see at a glance how much income is left to spend.
BUYING AND SELLING…= SOME OF THE COSTS
This is a brief summary of some of the costs involved in buying and selling a house.
It does not include every possible expense as each purchase and sale could have some variations.
YOUR HOME IS AT A RISK IF YOU DO NOT KEEP UP REPAYMENTS ON A MORTGAGE OR OTHER LOAN SECURED ON IT.
A written quotation about terms of business is available on request.
For as little as 25p per day — a combined savings and security plan that can pay out TWICE!
The Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN
generous protection for your family and a lump sum payment for you.
‘Two-in-one’ security from a different kind of policy…invest your money for capital growth AND generous life cover!
It's perhaps understandable that most people tend to think of life insurance in one of two ways — either as a means of cushioning loved ones against the financial upset that sudden death could cause, or as an investment with the future in mind.
Rarely, however, have these two benefits been so effectively combined as in the new DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN from Reader's Digest.
Traditionally, life insurance policies have been geared to either protection or investment, rarely to both.
But DOUBLE PAYMENT, specially developed for Reader's Digest by Guardian Royal Exchange, promises you full-cover life insurance and a generous cash sum — either on your 65th birthday or after ten years, whichever is later.
So, by staying alive until that date, you can look forward to a substantial return on your investment — while remaining safe in the knowledge that, in the event of your death during that period, or subsequently, your family will be protected against any financial problems that might lie ahead.
This, however, is by no means the sum of its benefits.
Our new Plan is called DOUBLE PAYOUT for a very good reason: not only can you guarantee yourself a cash payout in time for your 65th birthday (if you're over 55, you get your payment after ten years), you can assure your family a further cash sum when your death finally does occur.
It is, in essence, a life insurance plan that can pay out TWICE.
We believe there is no other policy of this type offering better returns for a similar risk.
What DOUBLE PAYOUT would mean to you…
Cover for life…protection for your family
It's a chilling fact that, between their 40th birthday and normal retirement age, one in four men and one in 11 women will die*.
In other words, the risk of losing a parent, partner or a breadwinner is one that faces every family.
Each year in Britain,tens of thousands of families suffer in this way and would benefit from the protection that life insurance can offer.
The first priority of any life insurance policy must be to provide immediate financial help for your dependents in the event of bereavement — and the Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN meets this requirement with flying colours.
Thanks to the wide choice of premiums , you can choose what you consider to be the right amount of protection for your family for the duration of your policy.
Depending on your age and the premium you choose starting from as little as 25p a day — the Plan can provide cover to well over £14,000.
Bear in mind, too, that we can guarantee acceptance for the policy for anyone aged between 18 and 69 who can truthfully answer ‘NO’ to the question on the Guarantee of Acceptance.
Cover takes effect from the moment your policy is issued, and you can rest assured that any claim will be expertly, sympathetically and speedily handled.
And if you do die before your 65th birthday, your dependents would receive the cash benefit that had built up at that time, or Guaranteed Minimum Death Benefit — whichever is the greater.
*Source: English Life Table no. 13
…
PLUS a cash sum for you
One of the chief attractions of the Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN, however, is that it does more than offer you family financial security in the event of your death.
It guarantees YOU a lump sum — either on your 65th birthday or after ten years, whichever is later.
(And under current legislation, the payout to you will be free of both income tax and capital gains tax , because GRE will have already paid tax on the underlying investment.)
Think of what such a lump sum could mean to you, especially if — as for most people — your 65th birthday marked your retirement.
Depending on the amount, you could put it towards paying off a mortgage, extending your home, taking a special holiday, even moving house — things you may have promised yourself for years, comforts you will certainly have earned by the time you retire.
All the benefits you receive will of course depend on your age at the time the policy is issued, the size of your monthly premium and the amount of your future bonuses.
The benefits you gain can increase each year in the form of these bonuses, which build up annually from the investment of your premiums in the Guardian Life Fund.
Because future bonuses depend on future profits earned by the GRE Life Fund, we cannot of course tell you precisely what your lump sum payment would be.
Nevertheless, the table opposite will give you some idea of what to expect: for example, a man aged 30 investing just £25 a month could look forward to a cheque for £63,400 on his 65th birthday — with another £19,400 for his family if he died at the age of 80.
The total value of his DOUBLE PAYOUT, in this case, would be only just short of £83,000!
(Remember, too, that your policy continues to share in profits after you have received your payment, so the benefits your dependents receive will also be enhanced by all bonuses subsequently declared.)
So, for a few pounds a month now, you could build up a very welcome nest-egg for yourself and provide financial protection for your family at the same time.
…and a second sum for your family when you die
The benefits of the DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN can continue even after you receive your tax-free payout, in the form of a further lump sum — again taxfree — payable to your dependents on your death.
Once the tax-free payout is made, bonus payments would continue to be added and the amount paid out would never be less than the Guaranteed Minimum Death Benefit specified in the table opposite.
So simply by carrying on your premium payments at the same level, the DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN will give you continuing protection for the rest of your life.
PLUS…unique to the DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN, DOUBLE the original sum assured for death by accident
An exclusive feature of the Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN is an additional benefit which is added at no extra cost!
In the event of you losing your life in an accident outside work, we guarantee to pay your dependents DOUBLE the original sum assured.
The very special problems that sudden death can cause make this benefit a very significant and welcome one.
Rest assured, too, that this payment in the event of accidental death would be made in addition to any bonuses earned by your policy in the period preceding your death.
Some examples of how Reader's Digest customers can benefit from our DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN…
Alec and Sandra of Leeds , both 38, are planning ahead for their retirement, when they plan to move to a cottage in the Yorkshire Dales.
Seeing the merit of paying in the highest monthly premium (£35), they can each look forward to a tax-free payment at the age of 65 — £37,500 for Alec and £37,800 for his wife — which will help bring the retirement home of their dreams well within their reach.
Meanwhile, through taking out individual DOUBLE PAYOUT PLANS, each has provided the other with a guaranteed lump sum in the event of death — in Alec's case, at least £11,655.
Chris of Dunstable , age 29, recognises the importance of providing financial security for his young family — wife Susan, 27, and twin daughters Sarah and Lianne.
Although his commitments and the size of his salary only allow him to pay the £15 monthly premium rather than a higher amount, he regards DOUBLE PAYMENT as a very low-cost way to both save the future and guarantee a large cash sum for his family if they have to claim.
Of particular importance to Chris, and economics teacher, is the fact that, by investing in DOUBLE PAYOUT and earning annual bonuses, his savings should keep pace with inflation.
Trevor of Bridgend was 59 last birthday and has learned the hard way that insurance gets harder to acquire the older one gets.
With DOUBLE PAYOUT, however, he enjoys a very reasonable level of cover and the pleasing prospect of a tax-free windfall in just ten years' time.
As Trevor is self-employed and intends to carry on working beyond the usual retirement age, he'll receive his payout just when he needs it — with cash to spare, helping towards the world cruise that he and his wife had always promised themselves.
Once the ten years is up, he plans to continue paying his £25 monthly premium and so ensure his wife Gwyneth a further cash payout when he dies.
Margaret of Carlisle , 47, was widowed two years ago and knew at first hand the financial problems that can arise from the sudden death of a loved one and the trauma of finding that her partner was inadequately insured.
Having resolved never to let it happen again, she aims to provide not only for her retirement but for her daughter Gemma, aged ten, who with luck will be well settled into her career by the time Margaret's DOUBLE PAYOUT policy matures.
Mindful of her husband's death in a road accident abroad, Margaret particularly appreciates the additional, no-cost fatal accident cover that the policy provides.
If the same should happen to her, Margaret knows that Gemma will benefit to the tune of at least DOUBLE the original basic sum assured.
Low-cost cover to suit YOUR requirements.
CHOOSE THE COVER YOU WANT — FROM JUST £7.50 A MONTH
The table below will help you and your partner select the cover you require at a price to suit your budget.
There are five monthly premium levels from which to make your choice — but remember that the more you put in, the more you'll get back!
Note: This table provides an indication of the possible benefits which might be paid under this policy.
In keeping with rule laid down by Lautro (Life Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory Organisation), future benefits are illustrated in relation to two bases — the higher illustration representing a future rate of return of 10.5% p.a. and the lower illustration representing a future rate of return of 7% p.a.
These two amounts do not represent the upper and lower limits of the possible amount of the benefit — what is actually paid will of course depend on the possible bonuses added to the policy.
These illustrations should not be used as a basis for comparing similar policies issues by other life assurance companies or friendly societies.
The figures presented in this table are provided by GRE, who are responsible for the administration of your policy and payment of all benefits.
The figures set out here apply to men, but please note that benefits for women are never less than those shown.
Remember…
DOUBLE PAYMENT gives you the best of both words.
It provides substantial life cover…and it can give you a big tax-free payout.
Apply now: full instructions are in the accompanying letter from Mark Dugdale.
Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN COMPLETE PROTECTION FOR YOUR FAMILY IN A POLICY THAT CAN PAY OUT TWICE!
A ten-point Plan that's packed with benefits!
1.
Low-cost cover
From just 25p a day, you can help protect your dependents against the crippling financial penalty of losing a parent or partner — and secure yourself a cash payout…at the age of 65 if you're aged between 18 and 54 when cover commences, or after ten years if you're aged between 55 and 69.
2.
A second payout later
Even after you've received your payout, you can guarantee your family a second payout on your death, simply by carrying on paying the premiums.
3.
Guaranteed premiums
Once your policy has been issued, we guarantee that your monthly premium will not be increased at any time, even after you receive your payout.
4.
High protection
Depending on your age and choice of premium, the Plan can provide cover to well over £14,000
5.
Immediate cover — and guaranteed acceptance
Your full life cover commences the moment your policy is issued.
So the sooner you apply, the sooner you're protected.
Acceptance for the Plan is guaranteed if you're aged between 18 and 69, provided you can truthfully answer ‘NO’ to the question on your Guarantee of Acceptance.
6. 14-day approval
Should you find, on receipt of your policy, that it fails to meet your requirements in any way, you have a legal right to cancel it within 14 days without payment.
7.
DOUBLE cover against accidental death — FREE!
Exclusive to the DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN is our guarantee that, should you fall victim to a fatal accident outside work, your dependents will receive, at no extra cost, at least DOUBLE the sum assured.
8.
Prompt settlement
Every claim will be handled expertly and sympathetically.
Our insurer, Guardian Royal Exchange, has an excellent reputation for speedy settlement.
9.
Guaranteed refund
We're so confident of this Plan's uniqueness that if, within three months or so of your Plan commencing, you should find and be accepted for another policy offering the same cover and benefits on more favourable terms, we guarantee to cancel your Plan and refund any premiums you have paid.
10.
Outstanding value
All these advantages, in a Plan affording so much cover at so little cost, add up to an outstanding — and exclusive — insurance that shouldn't be missed!
Your questions answered about the Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYMENT PLAN
Q. How long will the DOUBLE PAYMENT PLAN cover me?
A. Quite simply, for life.
While one of the outstanding attractions of the policy is that you receive a cash payment on your 65th birthday (or after ten years, whichever is later), the benefits certainly don't end there.
Providing you continue to pay your monthly premiums — which won't increase, incidentally — you'll remain covered for the rest of your life for at least the Guaranteed Minimum Death Benefit.
Q. So what would my dependents receive in the event of my death?
A. Your dependents would receive the sum assured together with all bonuses attaching to the policy at that time.
This total would  never be less than the Guaranteed Minimum Death Benefit.
Q. How will my benefits grow?
A. Through Guardian Royal Exchange's bonus system.
When you invest in DOUBLE PAYOUT, your share of the profits of the GRE Life Fund will be regularly added to your policy.
Q. Can my partner take out a DOUBLE PAYMENT PLAN — and is it worth it?
A. Yes on both counts!
These days, it's more and more important for both partners to have life cover.
Even if only one of you has a paid job, the death of the other would almost certainly deal a severe financial blow to the household.
Simply ask your partner to complete the relevant section of you Guarantee of Acceptance.
Q. Are there any age limits or exclusions?
A. We guarantee acceptance to anyone aged between 18 and 69, providing they can truthfully answer ‘NO’ to the question on the Guarantee of Acceptance.
Q. What are the benefits to me of paying by Direct Debit?
A. It is, simply, the easiest, most convenient and most secure way of paying your premiums.
Direct Debit makes sure that your premiums are automatically kept up to date, and that you don't have to worry about bills and reminders.
Direct Debit payments can be cancelled by informing GRE and asking your bank, in writing, to stop paying the premium.
Q. What happens if I wish to stop paying premiums?
A. Various options would be open to you.
In cases of genuine financial hardship, for example, GRE could arrange for you to receive reduced benefits and to pay reduced premiums.
If you do stop paying premiums, however, you would receive either reduced benefits, called a paid-up policy, or a cash surrender value as determined by GRE.
A surrender value may not be available if premiums have been paid for less than two years.
A paid-up policy is only available if premiums have been paid for three years and the reduced sum is £400 or more.
The table below, supplied by GRE, shows surrender values at the end of each of the first five years of the policy.
These values have been calculated according to the rules prescribed by Lautro.
GRE does not guarantee that the amount paid will be the same as that indicated.
The amount actually payable could be higher or lower and will depend on the bonuses added to the policy and the surrender basis in force at the time.
The values shown here are per £10 of monthly premium.
Other values can be calculated proportionately; for example, for £20 premiums the values can be doubled.
Reader's Digest and GRE…meeting YOUR needs
It was in the course of researching our customers' needs that we discovered how surprisingly few families have adequate life insurance.
So, as a company with considerable interest in the welfare of the millions of families we serve, we decided to discuss what was needed with Guardian Royal Exchange.
Together, we developed the Reader's Digest DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN for the exclusive advantage of Digest customers.
With your monthly premiums invested in the GRE Life Fund, your level of benefits can increase over the years to give you rock-solid protection and a handsome double cash payout.
One of the country's foremost insurance underwriters, with roots dating back to 1720 and currently handles assets exceeding £8,500 million, Guardian Royal Exchange has an excellent reputation for courteous and prompt service.
GRE were founder members of the Insurance Ombudsman Bureau, which monitors and arbitrates insurance matters, and members of both Lautro and the Association of British Insurers which set down codes of practice for all members to comply with.
We believe this gives further reassurance of YOUR safety and protection of YOUR interests.
Effects of Inflation:
Both the purchasing power of the ultimate benefit and the real cost of any future premiums payable will depend on the rate of inflation over the period of the contract.
By way of illustration the following table shows what £1,000 will be worth in today's money at the end of the periods shown if the annual rate of inflation over the period is as shown:
TO APPLY FOR THE READER'S DIGEST DOUBLE PAYOUT PLAN…complete and return your Guarantee of Acceptance as instructed TODAY!
Birmingham Midshires Property Services
GIVING ESTATE AGENCY A GOOD NAME AND SOCIETY MEMBERS AND EXCLUSIVE 25% SAVING
Birmingham Midshires Property Services — a new force in estate agency
Birmingham Midshires is developing an estate agency network dedicated to providing its customers with a service built on reliability, efficiency and above all, QUALITY.
We employ friendly, professional staff who can offer the benefit of many years' experience in the housing market.
…with a name you can trust
Whether selling or buying, you can benefit from the service we offer.
Birmingham Midshires Property Services (BMPS) was formed in 1988 and is a major part of the Birmingham Midshires Group.
We employ over 700 staff, and currently handle thousands of residential house sales through our substantial branch network, details of which will be found on the reverse of this leaflet.
In every aspect of our operation we aim to reflect the Society's principles of quality service and customer care.
…and available to Society members at a 25% saving
A warm welcome is extended to all Members wishing to use our estate agency service.
For those wishing to sell, we would like to offer the opportunity to save 25% off the normal fee.
Available exclusively to the Society's investors and borrowers, * this saving applies to any property offered for sale through Birmingham Midshires Property Services where the instruction is confirmed by 31 August 1990.
If you are thinking of moving and would welcome a free market valuation, or if you would like to know more about this offer, simply complete the attached voucher and take it into your local Birmingham Midshires Property Services branch, or send it to us, FREEPOST,(no stamp required).
*Not applicable to persons under 18 years of age.
Full written details of this offer are available on request from any office of Birmingham Midshires Property Services.
SUMMARY FINANCIAL STATEMENT
For the year ended 31 December 1989
EXTRACTS FROM CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT
1989 was an eventful year for building societies.
It saw the first public flotation of a building society, the first moves towards acquisition of a major bank, Girobank, by another society, some further widening of building society powers, a tendency for more societies to become ‘tied agents’ of insurance companies and further excursions by societies into the wider field of financial services.
GROUP STRATEGY
It is the policy of the Board and Management of the Society to increase our share of our traditional business, to become more nationally represented, and to offer to our customers a comprehensive range of financial products.
The following comments demonstrate the very considerable progress made in that direction during this year.
MORTGAGE LENDING
The year was characterised by the continued high interest rates and the resultant depression in the housing market.
Nevertheless, in the highly competitive situation which developed, building societies were able to increase their share of this market and Birmingham Midshires' share of building society net advances rose during 1989 to 1.7% compared with 1.6% the previous year.
Mortgage assets at the end of 1989 stood at £2,588.0 million, compared with a figure of £2,087.8 million the previous year.
INVESTMENT BUSINESS
Net investment in your Society during the year amounted to £256.2 million compared with a figure of £321.3 million in 1988.
This reflects the difficult savings market in 1989.
The year saw another milestone in the life of the Society in that, for the first time, the total assets passed the £3 billion mark.
PROFITS
On its traditional business, the Building Society itself returned a pre-tax profit of £34.0 million compared with a figure of £29.8 million in 1988.
This was a significant achievement in the highly competitive situation to which I have referred.
The Group pre-tax profit for the year was £32.2 million, against a comparable figure of £29.9 million the previous year.
This takes into account the loss of £2.4 million in the estate agency subsidiary, Birmingham Midshires Property Services Limited and the initial costs of expansion into other activities, as mentioned below.
SUMMARY FINANCIAL STATEMENT
This summary financial statement is only a summary of information in the accounts directors' report and annual business statement.
Insofar as this summary financial statement summarises the information in the annual accounts, those accounts have been audited.
The annual accounts, directors' report and annual business statement will be available to members and depositors on demand at every office of Birmingham Midshires Building Society from 11th April 1990.
SUMMARY DIRECTORS' REPORT
Review of the Business
The financial statement presents the rules of the group for the year ended 31 December 1989.
Group profits after tax increased to £20.7m (1988 £19.4m), an increase of 6.7%.
Total assets grew to £3,160m (1988 — £2,729.9m), a growth rate of 15.8%.
Reserves grew 4.8% to £134.9m (1988 — £128.7m) and free capital reached 4.9% of share, deposit and loan liabilities,(1988 — 4.3%).
Subordinated loan capital of £40m was obtained during the year, increasing gross capital for future requirements.
Review of Events
Additional powers under the Building Societies Act 1986, were exercised during the year.
Those taken up enabled the Society to expand its business activities in 1989.
This included the acquisition of an Independent Insurance Brokers, Perkins Slade Ltd.
The continued development of Estate Agency business, Birmingham Midshires Property Services Ltd, which grew from 13 to 96 branches.
Mortgage Asset Management Ltd was created to administer mortgages on behalf of other financial institutions and two mortgage finance companies were also acquired during the year.
New savings and mortgage products continued to be developed and launched by the Society, including Multipoint, Quantum Plus, Easy 3 mortgage and the Self-Build mortgage.
Future Developments
The Group remains fully committed to the provision of mortgage finance to individuals whilst providing associated services and products from subsidiary companies.
The Society will continue to review business opportunities to develop the Group's activities.
BIRMINGHAM MIDSHIRES PROPERTY SERVICES
During 1989 we negotiated the acquisition of the estate agency arm of Pioneer Insurance Company, which with other acquisitions, brings out total property services outlets to 96, thereby taking the Society well on the way to our target representation of 150 estate agency branches.
The acquisition of existing agencies has significantly widened our geographical representation and has been achieved at considerably lower costs than incurred by others who had previously entered the business.
INSURANCE BANKING
We were particularly pleased to have had the opportunity of acquiring Perkins Slade Limited, a highly regarded insurance broking business based in Birmingham, Petersfield and Bridgwater.
The highly experienced management and staff of Perkins Slade, under the leadership of Mr David Slade, bring anew dimension to the Birmingham Midshires Group and we aim to develop further professional brokerage services to companies and individuals.
MORTGAGE ASSET MANAGEMENT
Mortgage Asset Management is the business of managing mortgage loans funding from sources outside the Building Society itself.
During the year, Mortgage Asset Management Limited has been further developed and now has a portfolio totalling £74 million.
MANAGEMENT
At the end of the year the Board agreed with the Chief Executive, Mr Philip Court, that he could take early retirement, and this took effect from the end of January 1990.
Mr Court was a principal architect of this Society as it is today and I am grateful for this opportunity to pay tribute to the very considerable part he has played in the development of the Society over the past 16 years.
He retires with our good wishes for the future.
With effect from 1 February 1990, Mr D A McDonald, Chief General Manager, assumed the responsibilities of Chief Executive.
My Board colleagues and I are appreciative of all that has been achieved by Management and Staff during the past twelve months and I am immensely grateful to the Deputy Chairman and all Members of the Board for their unfailing support and co-operation during an eventful and, I believe, very successful year of operations.
D G HANSON, Chairman
AUDITORS' REPORT
AUDITORS' REPORT TO THE MEMBERS AND DEPOSITORS OF BIRMINGHAM MIDSHIRES BUILDING SOCIETY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 1989
We have examined the above summary financial statement.
In our opinion the summary financial statement is consistent with the accounts, business statement and directors' report for the year ended 31 December 1989 and conforms with the requirements of Section 76 of the Building Societies Act 1986 and regulations thereunder.
Birmingham 7 March 1990
Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte Chartered Accountants
Birmingham Midshires new Multipoint Account.
Fast and easy access to your money, 24 hours a day.
NOW WITH EXTRA NEW SERVICES!
APPLY NOW AND GET TWO FREE GREAT ESCAPES WEEKENDS!
MULTIPOINT The new cashcard account from Birmingham Midshires
Now there's a new, interest-bearing cashcard account from Birmingham Midshires.
Multipoint.
Multipoint gives you the freedom to deposit and withdraw your money 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
It gives you access to over 4,000 cash machines throughout the United Kingdom…and the number is growing all the time.
It pays you generous interest on your money, and there are no account charges.
Multipoint offers all these important benefits plus two free Great Escapes weekends guaranteed!
There's no other cashcard quite like it.
TWO FREE GREAT ESCAPES WEEKENDS GUARANTEED*
As soon as you open your Multipoint Account, we'll give you two special Great Escapes vouchers, absolutely free.
They entitle you to two free weekends' accommodation for two in over 180 superb British hotels, at a wide range of holiday destinations, from picturesque Devon to the rugged Scottish Highlands.
All you have to pay for are the meals.
Alternatively, you can use your vouchers for huge savings at exclusive European hotels.
Remember, to ensure that you receive your free Great Escapes vouchers, use the special Application Form attached.
*Offer ends 30 April 1990.
24-HOUR ACCESS TO YOUR MONEY
Your Multipoint cashcard can be used at any Birmingham Midshires Multipoint cash machine, for a wide range of services including…
Cash withdrawals of up to £250 a day
A £30 fastcash service when you're in a hurry
Balance enquiries
A mini-statement showing your latest five transactions
Cash and cheque deposits
Depositing money is easily done, with an envelope dispensed by the cash machine: having completed your details, simply seal the cheque or cash in the envelope and insert it into the machine.
You can also withdraw and deposit money across the counter in any of our branches just by presenting your card.
And from May 1990
Standing Orders
Bill Payments
Account Transfers
From May 1990, there will be three convenient new Multipoint services.
You will be able to arrange standing orders, pay bills and even transfer your money to other Birmingham Midshires accounts.
See opposite for details.
USE MULTIPOINT AT OVER 4,000 LINK MACHINES
You can use Multipoint for cash withdrawals, fastcash and balance enquiries at cash machines throughout the UK.
That's because Multipoint is part of the Link network, composed of thousands of cash machines at branches of other leading building societies and banks — and the number is growing all the time.
So whether you're visiting Perth or Penzance, you need never go short of cash.
What's more, when you've completed 20 transactions, we'll automatically send you a full statement to keep you completely in the picture.
YOU'LL EARN INTEREST TOO
Unlike some cashcard accounts, Multipoint pays you interest.
You'll find the rates very competitive — and the more money in your account, the higher interest you receive.
Your interest is calculated daily and then paid back into your Multipoint Account every year on 1st July.
So you can reap the benefits of earning interest on your interest straightaway!
HOW TO OPEN AN ACCOUNT
It couldn't be easier — you can start your account with as little as £1.
Just complete the enclosed Multipoint Application Form and place it in the envelope, together with a cheque for a minimum of £1.
Or simply transfer a sum from your existing Birmingham Midshires branch together with your completed Application Form .
In a short time you'll receive your new multipoint cashcard, and just a few days later a Great Escapes brochure displaying over 180 excellent hotels to choose from, together with your two FREE Great Escapes vouchers.
So return your Application Form today, and you can look forward to an easy, instant access to your money, anywhere in the country, seven days a week.
N.B. Our Great Escape offer is only valid if your Multipoint application is made on the special form attached.
THREE USEFUL NEW SERVICES available from May 1990
STANDING ORDERS
You will be able to use your Multipoint Account to make weekly, monthly, quarterly, half yearly or annual payments of any fixed amount.
All you have to do is fill in a simple form available from any Birmingham Midshires branch, and we'll do the rest.
BILL PAYMENTS
With Multipoint, you can also arrange to pay your bills to up to 15 different payees.
Just complete a single form with your payee details at any Birmingham Midshires branch.
Then whenever you want to make your payment, just key in the amount at any Birmingham Midshires cash machine.
MULTIPOINT ACCOUNT TRANSFERS
You will also be able to transfer money from your Multipoint Account to any 3 Birmingham Midshires investment accounts of your choosing.
Simply fill in the relevant form at a Birmingham Midshires branch, and then you can quickly and easily transfer your money using any Birmingham Midshires cash machine.
Make the most of your money with Multipoint
SERVICES AVAILABLE AT ANY BIRMINGHAM MIDSHIRES MULTIPOINT CASH MACHINE
Cash withdrawals of up to £250 a day
A £30 fastcash service when you're in a hurry
Balance enquiries
A mini-statement showing your last five transactions
Cash and cheque deposits
SERVICES AVAILABLE AT ANY LINK CASH MACHINE
Cash withdrawals
£30 fastcash
Balance enquiries
NEW MULTIPOINT SERVICES FROM MAY 1990
Standing orders
Bill payments
Account transfers
THE LOW INTEREST BANK LOAN EVERY HOMEOWNER SHOULD HAVE
AND HERE'S WHY
Think for a moment what your house is worth today.
Now, remind yourself what you paid for it.
Next, calculate the difference, less your out-standing mortgage.
Would we be right in thinking, a tidy sum?
Money that you could be putting to work.
It could extend or improve your house in so doing adding even more value to your most valuable asset.
It could buy that second car you've always promised yourself.
It could be invested: in art, in antiques or a second home.
It could give your family a long-awaited and richly deserved holiday.
Or it could help you re-structure your finances by paying off all you owe on store cards, credit cards and hire purchase.
Up to £50,000.
YOU DECIDE HOW MUCH YOU NEED.
With a First National Bank loan secured on your property you have the opportunity to borrow up to £50,000 for any purpose whatsoever.
As you would expect from a bank as big and established as First National Bank (group assets exceed £1 billion), the interest rate on the money you borrow is extraordinarily competitive: 22.6% APR variable.
A lower interest rate, in fact, than for unsecured loans.
You'll also have longer to repay.
You can repay the money over five to fifteen years and you decide how long.
So for example if you were to have £10,000 over 180 months, your monthly payments would be £179.93 and the total amount payable would be £32,387.40.
If you choose to use a First National Bank loan to restructure your finances you could well find your monthly payments are less than half what you pay now.
FREE LIFE ASSURANCE PAYMENT PROTECTION.
PEACE OF MIND
If you're under 60 you automatically get free life assurance for the amount you owe, subject obviously to certain modest qualifications.
(How many banks do you know that offer such a service, free as well?).
You can also insure your payments in case you're unable to work due to sickness, accident or redundancy.
Single cover, for the prime earner in the family, can cost as little as 15p a month for each £100 you borrow.
Joint cover, for you and your partner is only 30p.
To apply for a First National Bank loan, fill in the application form opposite.
Written quotations available on request.
Or for an immediate quote call us free of charge on 0800 850 850.
WHAT IS A FIRST NATIONAL BANK LOAN?
It is a low interest bank loan designed exclusively for Home Owners.
As a result of inflation and part repayment of mortgages most home owners have a property which is worth far more than they owe on it.
A First National Bank loan enables you to make use of this asset which will provide the security for your loan, whether you own a house, flat, bungalow or cottage.
WHAT MAKES IT SPECIAL?
A First National Bank loan puts valuable cash in your pocket and is an extremely flexible facility which enables you to choose the sum you wish to borrow at a monthly repayment you feel able to manage comfortably.
IS MY APPLICATION CONFIDENTIAL?
Yes.
No one will call unless you ask us, and we will not approach your employers for information.
CAN I APPLY IF I AM SELF-EMPLOYED?
Yes — Please indicate in the application form your current net income.
CAN I GET A FURTHER ADVANCE?
Yes.
Once your account has been opened and is running satisfactorily, requests for further loans will be considered on the existing account with the minimum of formality.
WHAT HAPPENS IF I DIE BEFORE THE LOAN IS REPAID?
If you are under 60 when the advance is made your life is insured at no extra cost.
The amount still outstanding on the loan to a maximum of £15,000 is automatically settled should you die before your 65th birthday.
The loan would not become a burden to your dependents.
WHAT HAPPENS IF I AM ILL, HAVE AN ACCIDENT OR I AM MADE REDUNDANT?
With First National an optional insurance scheme is available to cover your monthly repayments if you are unable to work owing to accident, sickness or redundancy.
This scheme is fully explained in the leaflet ‘Protection for you and your family’.
Apply by completing the box at the bottom of the application form.
ARE THERE ANY CHARGES OTHER THAN INTEREST?
No.
WHAT HAPPENS IF I WANT TO SETTLE EARLY?
You can do this at any time and will receive a rebate against future charges in accordance with the provisions of the Consumer Credit (Rebate on Early Settlement) Regulations 1983.
CAN I PAY MORE THAN THE AGREED MONTHLY INSTALMENT?
Most certainly and if you do you will be saving money because with First National you are only charged interest on the amount you owe, calculated on a day-to-day basis.
WHAT DO I DO NOW?
Just complete the application form overleaf and send it to us Freepost 1, Harrow, Middlesex, HA1 1BR.
Normally we will send you a copy of the Agreement by return.
Once you have signed the original Agreement and returned it to us, your money should be with you within two weeks.
SAY YOU DECIDE TO BORROW £15,000
You probably already have something special in mind: home extension, extensive redecorations and improvements, garden landscaping…the choice is wide.
Which repayment period will you choose?
With a First National Bank loan you have a wide choice.
Longer loan periods mean your monthly repayments can be correspondingly lower — Look at the repayment examples overleaf and you'll see what we mean.
FIRST NATIONAL BANK.
FIRST FOR A BANK LOAN
NOTICE OF THE FOURTH ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING OF BRITISH GAS PLC
British Gas
 Dear Shareholder 
You are cordially invited to attend the fourth British Gas Annual General Meeting which will be held in the Arena at the national Exhibition Centre (NEC), Birmingham on Thursday 9 August 1990.
The Meeting starts at 2.15 pm.
By law a company like British Gas has to hold a meeting of its shareholders once a year.
This gives the Board an opportunity to report to shareholders and to obtain their approval for resolutions that are voted upon at the Meeting.
These resolutions cover the re-appointment of Directors, the payment of dividends and other items.
The following pages of this Notice of the Annual General Meeting give details of the business to be transacted at the 1990 Meeting.
The Notice is a formal document and some of it is complicated and may be difficult to understand.
We say more about the resolutions in the explanatory notes but if you have any queries about them please telephone our Shareholder Enquiry Office where the staff will be able to help you.
The telephone number is 071–834 2000 and more details about the Office can be found on page 19 of the Annual Report.
The Meeting itself will start at 2.15 pm but the doors of the Arena will be open from 12.30 pm.
There will be an exhibition showing the range of our activities, and tea, coffee and biscuits will be available free of charge.
To speed up your entry into the Arena, please bring your Admission Card (card B on the Proxy Card) with you.
We are keen to help any disabled shareholders who come to the Meeting and have set aside a car parking area for people whose show a disabled sticker.
Anyone accompanying a disabled person will be admitted to the Meeting, as will guide dogs.
There will be special areas with induction loop facilities for the hard of hearing and sign language interpreters will be on hand.
Staff will be available throughout the Meeting to provide assistance to shareholders.
Again, if you have any questions about the arrangements for the Meeting, the Shareholder Enquiry Office will be pleased to help.
Yours sincerely
Robert Evans, CBE 
Chairman and Chief Executive
Notice is hereby given that the fourth Annual General Meeting of British Gas plc will be held at the National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham B40 1NT, on Thursday 9 August 1990 at 2.15 pm for the transaction of the following business:
Resolution 1
To receive the Report of the Directors and the Accounts for the year ended 31 March 1990.
Resolution 2
To declare a final dividend of 7.3 pence per ordinary share payable on 3 October 1990 to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 10 August 1990.
Resolution 3
To re-appoint Mr N Blacker as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 4
To re-appoint Mr C H Brown as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 4a
To re-appoint the Rt Hon Peter Walker MP as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 5
To re-appoint Mr C E Donovan as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 6
To re-appoint Mr S Kalms as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 7
To re-appoint Baroness Platt of Writtle as a Director of the Company.
Resolution 8
To re-appoint Price Waterhouse as Auditors of the Company to hold office until the next general meeting at which Accounts are laid before the Company and to authorise the Directors to fix their remuneration.
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass Resolutions 9 and 10 as special resolutions and Resolutions 11, 12 and 13 as ordinary resolutions.
Resolution 9
That the Directors be given power, pursuant to Section 95 of the Companies Act 1985, to allot equity securities (as defined in Section 94 of that Act) for cash, pursuant to the general authority conferred by special resolution passed on 20 November 1986, as if Section 89(1) of the Act did not apply to the allotment, provided:
(a)
the power hereby conferred is limited:
(i)
to the allotment of equity securities in connection with a rights issue in favour of the holders of ordinary shares where the equity securities respectively attributable to the interests of the ordinary shareholders are proportionate (as nearly as may be) to the respective numbers of ordinary shares held or deemed to be held by them, subject only to such exclusions or other arrangements as the Directors may deem necessary or expedient to deal with fractional entitlements, legal or practical problems arising in any overseas territory or by virtue of shares being represented by depositary receipts, the requirements of any regulatory body or stock exchange, or any other matter; and
(ii)
to the allotment (otherwise than pursuant to sub-paragraph  above) of equity securities up to an aggregate nominal value of £53 256 906.
(b)
the power hereby granted will expire 15 months following the passing of this resolution or, if earlier, at the conclusion of the Annual General Meeting of the Company to be held in 1991, except that the Company may make an offer or agreement before it expires which would or might require equity securities to be allotted after it expires and the Directors may allot equity securities in pursuance of the offer or agreement notwithstanding its expiry.
Resolution 10
That Article 129 of the Articles of Association of the Company be amended by:
(a)
renumbering Article 129 as Article 129 (1) and substituting for the initial word ‘A’ the words ‘Except as provided in paragraph (2) below, a’;
(b)
inserting a new paragraph (2) after the renumbered paragraph (1) of that Article 129 as follows:
‘(2) The Company may, in accordance with section 251 of the Act and any regulations made under it, send a summary financial statement to any member instead of or in addition to the documents referred to in paragraph (1) above; and where it does so, the statement shall be delivered or sent by post to the member not less than twenty-one clear days before the annual general meeting before which those documents are to be laid.’
Resolution 11
That the British Gas Executive Share Option Scheme (‘the Scheme’) the rules of which are produced to the Meeting (and, for the purpose of identification, signed by the Chairman) be approved and the Directors be authorised to take all necessary steps which they consider necessary or appropriate to carry the Scheme into effect including the submission of the Scheme to the Board of Inland Revenue for approval under Schedule 9 to the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988.
Resolution 12
That, subject to the approval of shareholders to Resolution 11 above:
(a)
the British Gas (Overseas Employees) Share Option Scheme (‘the Overseas Scheme’) the rules of which are produced to the Meeting (and, for the purpose of identification, signed by the Chairman) be approved and the Directors be authorised to take all necessary steps which they consider necessary or appropriate to carry the Overseas Scheme into effect; and
(b)
the Directors be authorised to establish any further employee share option scheme which they consider appropriate for employees of the Company or any subsidiary or associate of the Company who are resident or working outside the United Kingdom, provided that:
(i)
the terms of any such scheme (an ‘overseas scheme’) shall, so far as practicable having regard to the local circumstances, confer benefits which in the opinion of the Directors are substantially similar to those which will be conferred by the proposed British Gas Executive Share Option Scheme to be approved as Resolution 11 (‘the Scheme’); and
(ii)
the number of shares which may be subscribed for under any overseas scheme shall be limited to the extent necessary to ensure that shares so subscribed, when aggregated with shares subscribed for under the Scheme, the Overseas Scheme and any other overseas scheme similar to the Scheme, will not exceed the limits on the numbers of shares which may be issued under the Scheme.
Resolution 13
That the British Gas Employee Profit Sharing Scheme and the British Gas Sharesave Scheme be altered in the manner described in the attached Explanatory Notes.
A member entitled to attend and vote is entitled to appoint a proxy or proxies to attend and, on a poll, to vote instead of him.
A proxy need not be a member of the Company.
By order of the Board G C Hogg Company Secretary 
Dated 5 June 1990 
Notes
1
A proxy form is enclosed with this Notice.
Instructions for use are shown on the form.
2
The following documents, which are available for inspection during normal business hours at the registered office of the Company on any weekday (Saturdays and public holidays excluded) from the date of this Notice until the date of the Annual General Meeting, will also be available for inspection at the place of the Annual General Meeting from 12.30 pm on the day of the Meeting until the conclusion of the Meeting:
(i)
copies of service contracts of the Directors with the Company;
(ii)
the register of interests of Directors (and their families) in the share capital of the Company;
(iii)
copies of the Articles of Association of the Company*;
(iv)
copies of the proposed amendments to the Articles of Association under Resolutions 10 and 14*;
(v)
copies of the Rules of the proposed British Gas Executive Share Option Scheme and British Gas (Overseas Employees) Share Option Scheme and of the Rules as amended of the British Gas Sharesave Scheme and of the Trust Deed and Rules of the British Gas Employee Profit Sharing Scheme*.
* These documents will also be available for inspection during usual business hours on any weekday (Saturdays and public holidays excluded) at the offices of Herbert Smith, 35 Cannon Street, London EC4M 5SD for 14 days prior to the Annual General Meeting.
EXPLANATORY NOTES
Accounts (Resolution 1)
The Directors of the Company are obliged to lay the Accounts before the Company in a general meeting.
The Auditors' report on page 24 of the Annual Report and Accounts will be read at the Meeting.
Dividend (Resolution 2)
A final dividend of 7.3 pence per ordinary share is recommended by the Directors for payment to shareholders on the register at the close of business on 10 August 1990.
A final dividend can only be paid after it has been approved by the shareholders at a general meeting and Resolution 2 seeks such approval.
An interim dividend of 3.2 pence per ordinary share was paid on 28 March 1990.
Re-election of Directors (Resolutions 3 to 7)
Article 96 of the Company's Articles of Association requires Mr Blacker, Mr Brown and Mr Walker to retire at the Annual General Meeting since they were appointed by the Board after the 1989 Annual General Meeting.
Resolutions 3, 4 and 4a propose their re-appointment as Directors.
The Rt Hon Peter Walker, MBE MP (aged 58) was appointed a Director by the Board on 1 June 1990 (after the Annual Report and Accounts were finalised).
He is the Member of Parliament for Worcester and was, until recently, Secretary of State for Wales.
He has had a distinguished career as a businessman and a politician and, on two occasions, has been the Cabinet Minister responsible for UK energy matters.
He is a Non-Executive Director of Smith New Court, Rothschild Wales and the Worcester Group.
The Articles of Association of the Company require a proportion of the Directors to retire at each Annual General Meeting.
At the Annual General Meeting Mr Donovan, Mr Kalms and Baroness Platt of Writtle will retire by rotation and Resolutions 5, 6 and 7 propose their re-appointment as Directors.
Re-appointment of auditors (Resolution 8)
The Company is required to appoint auditors at each general meeting at which accounts are laid before the Company to hold office until the next such meeting.
Resolution 8 proposes the re-appointment of Price Waterhouse as auditors of the Company and authorises the Directors to fix their remuneration.
Authority to allot shares (Resolution 9)
The balance from the Company's authorised share capital of £1 375 000 001 which remains unissued is now approximately £310 million (22.5%).
The Directors already have a general authority to allot the unissued shares which was given by a special resolution passed on 20 November 1986 and is valid until November 1991.
As a result of Section 89 of the Companies Act 1985, if the Directors wish to allot the unissued shares for cash (other than pursuant to an employee share scheme), they must in the first instance offer them to existing shareholders in proportion to their holdings.
There may be occasions, however, when in order to act in the best interests of the Company, the Directors will need the flexibility to finance business opportunities as they arise by the issue of ordinary shares without a pre-VXKVK offer to existing shareholders.
At last year's Annual General Meeting the shareholders granted that authority to the Directors.
That authority will expire at the end of this year's Annual General Meeting and Resolution 9 seeks a renewal of it.
The resolution is in substantially the same form as last year's resolution, with the same limit of 5% of the issued ordinary share capital being imposed on the issue of new shares without first offering those securities to existing shareholders.
Like last year, it also seeks a disapplication of the pre-VXKVK rights on a rights issue so as to allow the Directors, when making a rights issue, to exclude or make such other arrangements as may be appropriate to resolve legal or practical problems which might for example arise with overseas shareholders.
Summary financial statements (Resolution 10)
The Companies Act 1989 and regulations made under it allow listed companies to issue summary financial statements to those shareholders who do not wish to receive the full annual report and accounts.
The proposed amendment to the Articles of Association contained in Resolution 10 will enable the Company to introduce summary financial statements in 1991 or subsequently, if it is thought desirable to do so.
Executive share option scheme (Resolution 11)
In the Offer for Sale document published at the time of the Company's flotation in 1986, it was stated that in due course consideration would be given to the introduction of a Share Option Scheme for Executive Directors and senior management but that no such scheme would be operated without the prior approval of shareholders and in any event not before 1988 at the earliest.
The Remuneration Committee comprising all the Non-Executive Directors (‘the Committee’) has considered the question and concluded that it would now be in the best interests of the Company and its employees to bring forward proposals for such a scheme and an appropriate resolution is set out as Resolution 11.
The principal features of the proposed scheme (‘the Scheme’) which will be submitted to the Inland Revenue for approval under the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 are as follows.
(a)
The Scheme will be under the administration of the Committee.
(b)
All Directors and employees who are required to work for at least 25 hours and 20 hours respectively per week for the Company and its participating subsidiaries are eligible to be nominated for participation in the Scheme by the Committee.
(c)
Options will be granted under seal and will be exercisable within a period of ten years and will entitle the recipients to acquire ordinary shares in the Company at a price determined by the Committee, being not less than the average of the middle market quotations for such shares as derived from the Daily Official List of The Stock Exchange for the three dealing days immediately preceding the date of grant or the market value (as agreed with the Inland Revenue) of the shares as at the date of grant (or, in the case of new shares, their nominal value if greater).
Each individual's participation will be limited so that the aggregate price payable on the exercise of all options granted to him under the Scheme in any ten year period (but leaving out of account options which have been exercised) will not exceed four times his annual remuneration.
(d)
Before any options are granted to replace those which have already been exercised and which would result in the total value of options granted to an individual under the Scheme (including options which have been exercised) exceeding four times his annual remuneration, the Committee will satisfy itself that the grant of such options is justified by the performance of the Company in the previous two to three years.
(e)
The first grant of options will be made following the approval of the Scheme at the Annual General Meeting and, thereafter, within the period of 42 days after the announcement of the Company's results for any period.
Options may also be granted at any other time when the Committee considers exceptional circumstances exist which justify the grant of options.
No options may be granted later than the tenth anniversary of the Scheme.
(f)
Options will normally only be exercisable after the expiry of three years from the date of their grant by a person who remains a director or employee.
Options may, however, be exercised for a limited period in certain specified circumstances, including death, ceasing employment on account of injury, disability, pregnancy or redundancy, retirement, the sale of the business or subsidiary for which the employee works or (at the discretion of the Committee) if the employee ceases to be employed in any other circumstances.
Options will lapse if the option holder ceases employment otherwise than in the circumstances referred to above.
Exercise is allowed in the event of an amalgamation, reconstruction or take-over of the Company; alternatively, options may, with the agreement of the acquiring company, be exchanged for options over shares in the acquiring company or a company associated with the acquiring company.
Options may also be exercised in the event of the voluntary winding-up of the Company.
(g)
Options are not transferable and may only be exercised by the persons to whom they were granted or their personal representatives.
Shares will be allotted or transferred within 28 days of the exercise of an option and the Directors will endeavour to obtain a waiting list for any shares which are issued.
(h)
Shares allotted under the Scheme will rank (subject to dividend and other entitlements arising by reference to a date prior to the date of exercise)pari passu in all respects with the other shares then in issue.
(i)
In the event of any capitalisation or rights issue by the Company, or of any consolidation, sub-division, reduction or other variation of its share capital, the number of shares subject to any option and the acquisition price may be adjusted by the Committee, with the approval of the Inland Revenue, subject to the auditors confirming in writing that such adjustment is, in their opinion, fair and reasonable.
(j)
The Directors may alter the Scheme with the prior approval of the Inland Revenue, but the basic structure (and in particular the limitations on the number of shares which may be issued under the Scheme) cannot be altered without the prior sanction of the Company in general meeting.
(k)
The following limits apply to the number of shares which may be issued under the Scheme:
(i)
not more than 500 000 000 shares (representing 10% in aggregate of the authorised ordinary share capital of the Company at the time of the Offer for Sale in 1986) may be issued under the Scheme;
(ii)
not more than 10% of the issued ordinary share capital for the time being may in aggregate become issuable under all schemes during the ten year life of the Scheme;
(iii)
not more than 5% of the issued ordinary share capital for the time being may in aggregate become issuable during the ten year life of the Scheme; and
(iv)
in any five year period not more than 5% of the issued ordinary share capital for the time being may in aggregate become issuable under all employee share schemes;
(v)
in the four year period commencing on the date of adoption of the Scheme not more than 2.5% of the issued ordinary share capital for the time being may be issued under the Scheme.
For the purposes of the limits described in sub-paragraphs ,, and  above, options which lapse in accordance with the Scheme shall cease to count.
The Committee considers that the limits of 5% on the number of shares which may become issuable under the Scheme in the ten year life of the Scheme is appropriate and adequate.
Overseas executive share option schemes (Resolution 12)
Difficulties can arise where overseas employees participate in a share option scheme approved by the Inland Revenue in accordance with UK legislation.
First, under an approved share option scheme overseas participants are restricted to shares under option up to a maximum of £100 000 value (UK resident participants are not restricted to £100 000 value and are eligible for the grant of options over shares up to an aggregate value of four times annual remuneration).
Secondly, local taxation, securities laws and exchange controls often need to be taken into account and it is helpful if the Directors have the flexibility to grant options which take account of local regulations.
It is proposed, therefore, to establish a separate scheme under which options may be granted to overseas employees in excess of the £100 000 limit up to four times annual remuneration.
The terms of this separate scheme to be known as the British Gas (Overseas Employees) Share Option Scheme will be based on the proposed executive share option scheme for UK executives subject only to certain necessary modifications to reflect the absence of approved status under UK legislation.
It is proposed that authority is also given to the Directors to establish further share schemes for overseas employees similar to the proposed executive share option scheme intended to reflect the appropriate taxation and regulatory requirements of any relevant overseas jurisdiction.
Any shares issued under the proposed British Gas (Overseas Employees) Share Option Scheme and any future share schemes established for overseas employees will count against existing limits.
A resolution to approve the proposed British Gas (Overseas Employees) Share Option Scheme and to give the Directors the appropriate authority to establish further share schemes for overseas employees is set out as Resolution 12.
Alterations to existing employee share schemes (Resolution 13)
The Directors propose a number of changes to the two existing schemes, the British Gas Employee Profit Sharing Scheme and the British Gas Sharesave Scheme.
These changes are intended to update the schemes and, in particular, reflect recent developments in the practice relating to such schemes and to ensure conformity between all schemes.
(a)
Options will in future be capable of grant under the British Gas Sharesave Scheme during any period when the Directors consider exceptional circumstances exist which justify the grant of options at that time.
(b)
The maximum number of new shares which may be issued under the schemes is restricted to 5% of the issued ordinary share capital over the first five years ending in 1991 and thereafter 3% over any three year period.
The operation of this 3% in three year rule is likely to be unduly restrictive when it first applies because of the expected need to grant substantial new options to sharesave scheme participants and at the same time allow for the first allocations under the proposed executive share option scheme.
In order to retain flexibility the Directors propose that the 5% in five year limit should be continued indefinitely.
It will be appreciated that this change will not in any way increase the number of shares which may be issued under all schemes.
(c)
It is proposed to extend the circumstances in which the price and number of shares under the British Gas Sharesave Scheme may be adjusted to include an ‘open offer’(an offer to shareholders similar to a rights issue) or any other variation of share capital which the Inland Revenue accepts as sufficient ground for such an adjustment and at the same time to allow for adjustments to reflect changes in the class of shares, or the rights attaching to shares, under option.
(d)
It is proposed to give the Directors the authority to alter the schemes to take account of or comply with any changes in any proposed or existing legislation affecting the schemes, or to take account of any take-over or reconstruction of the Company or to obtain or maintain favourable taxation treatment of the Company, any subsidiary or any participant, in each case excluding any changes which affect the basic structure of the schemes or the limits on the number of shares which may be subscribed for under the schemes.
This proposal will give the Directors the flexibility in future to make relatively routine changes to the schemes and the Directors intend initially to use this authority to incorporate the power to allow option holders, with the agreement of any acquiring company, to exchange their options over shares in the Company for options over the shares of that company (or another company in the same group) as permitted by statute since 1987.
(e)
It is proposed to alter the Profit Sharing Scheme so that the Directors may permit participation in the Profit Sharing Scheme by employees who are temporarily or permanently working overseas.
BUSINESS REQUISITIONED BY SHAREHOLDERS
On 28 September 1989 the Company received notice pursuant to Section 376 of the Companies Act 1985 from Mr Noel Falconer and other shareholders of their intention to move the following resolutions at the Company's Annual General Meeting in 1990.
Since the first of the resolutions (Resolution 14) proposes a change to the Company's Articles of Association, it will have to be moved as a special resolution.
The second resolution (Resolution 15) will be moved as an ordinary resolution.
Resolution 14
That the following clause be added to Article 93:
‘his nomination is requisitioned under the Companies Act; in which case, and provided this is submitted not less than seventy days before the date appointed for the meeting, it shall be circulated, with a supporting statement of up to fifty words, without charge.’
Resolution 15
That Noel Falconer be appointed a director of British Gas.
The Company is required by Section 376 to give shareholders notice of these resolutions.
EXPLANATORY NOTES TO RESOLUTIONS 14 AND 15
Amendment of Article 93 (Resolution 14)
The effect of the proposed addition to Article 93 would be to require the Company to include in the Notice of the Annual General Meeting, free of charge, any notification made by shareholders of their intention to propose a person for election as a Director, provided it is received not less than 70 days before the meeting.
Mr Falconer and the requisitioners of the resolution believe that Article 93 is ‘inadequate in view of our huge shareholder register’ and that ‘some less wise future Board could block a nomination, by filling the Calling Notice with other items, so that an extra line meant an added page, with heavy costs the requisitioners would have to meet’.
Your Directors firmly believe that the proposed addition to Article 93 is not in the interests of the general body of shareholders.
First, the Company is already required to circulate nominations made under requisition without charge if no additional costs are involved.
If there are additional costs, the Companies Act 1985 entitles the Company to require requisitioners to deposit a sum sufficient to meet such costs unless the Company resolves otherwise.
If the amendment to Article 93 were accepted, the Company, and hence the general body of shareholders, would have no choice but to bear such additional costs, however great they were or however many requisitions there may be.
This appears to your Directors to be unreasonable and not in the interests of the Company.
Second, it creates two classes of Director nomination, those received in time for inclusion in the Notice of the Annual General Meeting and those received too late.
Nor is there any reason why the Articles of the Company should depart from the pattern of other major companies.
Appointment of Mr N Falconer (Resolution 15)
In putting forward his nomination as a Director of the Company, Mr Falconer and the requisitioners have expressed the view that ‘the balance of the Board would be improved by the addition of a small-shareholder’.
Your Directors consider that Members of the Board should not represent particular interests or groups but be committed to representing all shareholders, whatever the size of their holding.
Your Directors unanimously recommend that you vote against Resolutions 14 and 15.
OF ALL THE THINGS YOUR FAMILY CAN LEAST AFFORD TO LOSE…
WHAT DESERVES THE BEST PROTECTION?
You protect your car against accidents.
You protect your home contents against damages.
You protect your valuables against loss.
…shouldn't you protect yourself against the financial effects of a serious injury?
THE SUN ALLIANCE PERSONAL ACCIDENT PLAN
Specially developed to give you and your family financial protection if you are seriously injured
When you buy a valuable piece of equipment, like a new car or furniture for your home, one of the first things you do, is to insure it in case of accidental damage.
But what about yourself?
A serious accident can have a dramatic effect on your family's finances.
And if it does happen to you, how are you going to cope with all the household bills, which still have to be paid?
Not to mention all the other expenses that arise just when you can least cope.
That's why the Personal Accident Plan makes such good sense.
It has been specially developed by Sun Alliance to protect you and your family against the financial consequences of a permanently disabling accident.
And as one of our existing policyholders, you are now invited to take advantage of this special Plan.
And providing you are eligible and you reply by the closing date, your acceptance into the Personal Accident Plan is guaranteed.
Peace of mind costs from as little as £6.95 per month
For as little as £6.90 per month you can have the peace of mind that you are guaranteed a tax-free lump sum of up to £75,000, if you are seriously injured.
In other words, financial protection when you need it most.
And you can choose from two levels of cover: the Standard Plan and the Premier Plan.
(Please note that the above benefits relate to the Standard Plan.)
Your spouse and children too can be included in the Plan at special rates.
Automatic Inflation Protection
Built into the Personal Accident Plan is an automatic increase in benefits and premiums by 5% each year, to help your insurance cover keep pace with inflation.
Special privileges for Sun Alliance policyholders
We've relaxed many usual conditions to make applying even easier for our existing policyholders.
And there's no age limit for applicants.
(Please note that benefits are halved for policyholders aged 60 or over and the benefit for injury preventing you from working again would cease to be applicable.
And for children ⅕ of the amount of those benefits stated for adults are payable except in the case of a fatal accident where 1/50 of the total benefit would be paid.)
What's more, you won't have to undergo a medical examination, or any probing questions about your health or occupation.
And you're committed to nothing by replying.
In fact, you won't have to pay a penny until you've studied your policy in depth.
You'll have up to 15 days to make up your mind, so you've absolutely nothing at all to lose.
On the contrary, joining the Personal Accident Plan now could provide the financial lifeline you need, if the unthinkable happens to you.
Guaranteed Acceptance
Your acceptance into the Plan is automatically GUARANTEED providing you are resident in England, Scotland, Wales, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man and you apply before the closing date.
Free gifts when you take out the Personal Accident Plan
Apply now for the protection of the Plan and we'll send you a free First Aid Kit in a neat and practical case, when you take up the policy.
It contains everything you're likely to need for the minor emergency.
And if you also apply for protection for your spouse or your whole family, you will receive a stylish Pocket Calculator as an extra free gift.
Apply today to make the most of this special offer.
0800 300 880 CUSTOMER CARE LINE OPEN DURING WORKING HOURS 5 DAYS A WEEK FOR IMMEDIATE COVER
Up to £100,000 tax-free to help your family recover financially.
Guaranteed acceptance if you apply by the close date.
Costs from as little as £6.95 per month.
No medical.
No age limit.
No health questions.
Special terms for couples and families.
Hospital and convalescence benefits.
Free First Aid Kit when you take out the Plan.
Plus free Pocket Calculator when you take out family or spouse cover.
Why you should take out the Sun Alliance Personal Accident Plan
1 Accidents DO happen.
Over 70,000 people are killed or seriously injured every year in road accidents alone.
And an accident can happen anywhere, at any time just when you least expect it.
2 Your employer is not legally obliged to continue paying your salary.
He is only obliged to pay you Statutory Sick Pay.
But how long can he afford to pay you?
Six months?
A year?
What then?
3 This Plan gives you THREE different kinds of protection: payments for all kinds of permanent injuries; plus hospitalisation and convalescence benefits while you're recovering; or death benefit for your next of kin if you die in an accident.
And you get all this protection from one simple monthly premium.
4 Who would pay the mortgage, the electricity and gas bills, food and clothes for the family, if you can't?
Unfortunately, household expenses don't go away just because you're in hospital or can't work for any length of time.
The lump sum cash benefit you would receive could be a great help.
Please don't wait to find out these harsh facts the hard way.
When a tragedy happens, it may be too late.
From just £6.95 a month the Sun Alliance Personal Accident Plan gives you the reassurance of large cash payments at a most difficult time — when you may no longer be able to earn a living yourself.
The Sun Alliance Personal Accident Plan has been exclusively developed for our existing Sun Alliance Policyholders.
Reply by the closing date to take advantage of this special arrangement.
Yes, the ‘unthinkable’ could happen to you…
It happened to these two people, who both fortunately had taken out a Personal Accident Plan with Sun Alliance.
A FATAL COLLISION
Within twelve months of taking out a joint policy, a successful businesswoman was killed in her car when a lorry swerved across her path.
A LIFELONG HANDICAP
A civil servant in his early 50's was involved in a serious car accident on his way to visit relatives.
As a result of his injuries, he has become partially paralysed on his left side.
He will never work again.
They both probably thought it could never happen to them.
LET THE SUN ALLIANCE PERSONAL ACCIDENT PLAN HELP YOUR FAMILY RECOVER FINANCIALLY, IF IT DOES HAPPEN TO YOU.
GUARANTEED ACCEPTANCE FOR SUN ALLIANCE POLICYHOLDERS
Sun Alliance hereby guarantee that as one of our policyholders, you will be accepted into the Personal Accident Plan — providing your application is posted by 14 June 1990 and you are permanently resident in England, Scotland, Wales, the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.
Sun Alliance further guarantee that you may, within 15 days, return your policy if it does not meet your requirements, and that you will be under no obligation whatsoever.
Norman A Webb Divisional Manager
SPECIAL PRIVILEGES FOR EXISTING SUN ALLIANCE POLICYHOLDERS…
NO MEDICAL EXAMINATION REQUIRED
NO QUESTIONS ASKED ABOUT YOUR OCCUPATION OR STATE OF HEALTH
NO AGE LIMIT FOR APPLICANTS
NO UNNECESSARY FORMALITIES
CIS
CO-OPERATIVE INSURANCE SOCIETY LIMITED
NOTICE TO HOLDERS OF MOTOR POLICIES DUE FOR RENEWAL IN JULY 1991
The object of this letter is to notify policyholders of any changes affecting their policies.
REVISION OF PREMIUMS
The continuing rise in claims costs has made it necessary to increase the Society's premium rates for all classes of motor policy.
For some policyholders the increase is partially or even wholly offset by adjustments made to the premiums for
(a)
certain models of motor car for which the Rating Group has been reduced and
(b)
vehicles garaged in certain Rating Districts where the claims experience has been particularly satisfactory.
For risks in Northern Ireland and certain other Rating Districts where the experience has been unfavourable the premium increase is higher than elsewhere although it will still be partially offset where the Rating Group of the insured car has been reduced.
Special Discount
The Special Discount is being continued on the same basis (see page 2) and for those policies which qualify for the first time the increase is offset by approximately 6%.
SPECIAL DISCOUNT
The Society is a Co-operative organisation operating for the benefit of its policyholders.
To give policyholders the security they need the Society, like any other responsible motor insurer, includes in its premiums a prudent allowance for the effect of future inflation on the cost of claims.
If the inflation rate subsequently falls below the level allowed for a surplus of funds may result.
The Society is unique in sharing any such surplus with its policyholders by means of a Special Discount which benefits those motor policyholders whose premiums have substantially contributed to the surplus and therefore helps to ensure that the cost of motor insurance is shared more fairly.
Policies with prefix letters PM or FM (Motor Car), MC (Motor Cycle) or CM (Commercial Vehicle — excluding policies numbered lower than 100,000) will qualify for a Special Discount of just under 6% where the policies have been in force continuously for at least three years when they are renewed during the year commencing 1st July 1981.
It is intended that the system of Special Discounts should continue in subsequent years, although the percentage discount and the rules by which policies will qualify may vary from year to year and the possibility cannot be ruled out that circumstances may arise which would make it inappropriate to grant any Special Discount at all.
The allowance of the Special Discount in individual cases will also be a matter for the Society's discretion.
THE PREMIUM REQUIRED TO RENEW YOUR POLICY IS SHOWN ON THE RENEWAL NOTICE AND WHERE THE SPECIAL DISCOUNT HAS BEEN ALLOWED THE LETTER ‘S’ APPEARS IN FRONT OF THE GROSS PREMIUM.
WE VALUE YOUR BUSINESS AND HOPE THAT WE SHALL CONTINUE TO HAVE YOUR SUPPORT.
Chief General Manager.
NOTICE TO THE HOLDERS OF POLICIES WITH PREFIX LETTERS PM OR FM (MOTOR CAR) OR MPH (PRIVATE HIRE)
Repairs to your Motor Car
This opportunity is taken to bring to your notice the vehicle inspection service provided by the Society's Motor Claims Offices throughout the United Kingdom to ensure that policyholders' claims receive urgent attention.
Our claim form includes advice on the action you may take if you intend to claim under the policy but we wish to emphasise that IF YOUR MOTOR CAR IS INSURED AGAINST DAMAGE and is IMMOBILISED AT THE REPAIRERS' PREMISES your local Motor Claims Office will arrange for an inspection by an Engineer immediately on receiving details from you by telephone, whether the claim form has been completed or not.
(To enable us to give instructions for the repairs to be started you should also submit the completed claim form without delay together with a detailed estimate.)
The address and telephone number of the Motor Claims Office can be obtained from your agent or District or Regional Office.
Appointed Repairers
Our Appointed Repairers Scheme is designed to supplement this inspection service and if you live in an area covered by the Scheme and you intend to make a claim under the policy for damage to your motor car we suggest that you consult one of our Appointed Repairers who will offer you the following advantages should they carry out the repair:—
1)
an authority to commence preliminary work on IMMOBILISED MOTOR CARS immediately on production of your Certificate of Motor Insurance or Cover Note,
2)
a high standard of equipment,
3)
a valet service for your vehicle after repair,
4)
a collection and delivery service,
5)
a guarantee of their work.
The names, addresses and telephone numbers of relevant Appointed Repairers are shown on the claim form which will be issued to you if you report a claim but this information can also be obtained from your agent, District or Regional Office or Motor Claims Office.
IF YOUR MOTOR CAR IS NOT INSURED AGAINST DAMAGE the services offered by our Appointed Repairers can be recommended although the question of its repair will of course be a matter for your own attention.
CIS Insurance Plans
CIS policies are available to meet all the normal insurance requirements of an individual or a family.
Most people need either life assurance protection or a means of regular saving — many need both — any they may also require insurance on their house and its contents and on their car or motor cycle.
To meet these needs we have a wide range of plans which can be adapted to suit individual means and requirements.
Below we give a list of some of our most popular insurances and in each case there is an explanatory leaflet which tells you precisely how the plan works.
Plan for Prosperity
Ten Year Savings Plan
Plan for Retirement
Pension Annuity Plan
Savings and Security Plan
Mortgage Security Plan
Low Cost Mortgage Plan
Children's Plan
Domestic Combined Insurance
If you are interested in any of these insurances please ask for details.
Your CIS agent will be pleased be supply you with the leaflet you require together with a personal quotation if you wish.
Headstart 531
PUTTING YOU BACK IN CONTROL OF YOUR MORTGAGE
These days, everyone with a mortgage is feeling the interest rate squeeze.
But imagine how easy your monthly budgeting would become if you could reduce your mortgage payments for the next three years.
Well now, as a Debenhams Cardholder, you can — by transferring your mortgage to HeadStart 531 from The Mortgage Corporation.
SO HOW DOES HEADSTART 531 WORK?
The HeadStart 531 endowment mortgage — as its name implies — allows you to postpone 5% of your endowment mortgage payments this year, 3% next year and 1% in the final year.
Better still, these amounts are subtracted from a mortgage rate which is fixed for three years at 13.99% (APR 15.0%).
And as you'll know exactly what you'll be paying every month, HeadStart 531 is a perfect recipe for planning your budget with confidence.
If you don't wish to defer payments you can choose a standard fixed rate of 13.79% (APR 14.8%) for 3 years.
‘So it's easier to plan our finances?’
‘Yes, because we know exactly what we're paying for the next 3 years’
AND AFTER 3 YEARS?
With our standard fixed scheme, after 3 years your payments simply revert to our standard variable rate.
With HeadStart 531, the amount you postpone, together with interest charged on that amount, is added to your original loan after 3 years and payments are then based on the new balance at the standard variable rate.
Your mortgage increases by just 11.79% and no more, which means you stay in control of the payments deferred.
FIXED LEGAL FEES FOR REMORTGAGES.
If you live in England or Wales, our fixed legal fee service is available on remortgages up to £250,000.
Under this scheme we have arranged for a firm of Solicitors to deal with the remortgage legal work for just £175 (excluding Land Registry fee).
HOW MUCH CAN WE BORROW?
With HeadStart 531 you needn't simply match your existing mortgage.
You can, for example, borrow a little more for home improvements, a much deserved holiday or whatever you choose.
But naturally, the amount you can borrow depends on certain factors, such as your age, income and where you live:
Outside London, the minimum property value must be £20,000 and inside London, it must be £50,000.
And the age of the primary application should be at least 20 years.
WHY NOT START TODAY?
Perhaps the best thing about HeadStart 531 is how quickly you benefit.
In fact, all you have to do is complete and return the Personal Quotation Request opposite in the envelope provided TODAY!
Or if you prefer, you can call direct on 0483 754400.
The Mortgage Corporation
Backed by one of the world's largest financial institutions, The Mortgage Corporation has lent over £3 billion to over 55,000 mortgage customers since they opened for business in 1986.
SUN LIFE
Any additional endowment cover you may require with HeadStart 531 can be provided by Sun Life, one of the UK's most respected life assurance companies.
Based in Bristol, Sun Life has a history that stretches back as far as 1810.
Today, the company manages over £8,000 million in various funds for more than 750,000 policy holders.
Your mortgage payments significantly reduced for 3 years.
Monthly payments can be guaranteed exactly until 1993.
Easy and simple transfer from your present mortgage.
Additional endowment cover can be arranged through Sun Life.
Remortgage legal services available for a single fixed fee.
THE SAVINGS ARE SIGNIFICANT.
Currently, the typical monthly payment for a £50,000 endowment mortgage is £554.27. * But in the first year of HeadStart 531, this would drop to just £287.15** — a very impressive saving!
And these reduced payments continue for the next 3 years — as you can see from the chart below.
*Example Notes: Example based on a standard £50,000 endowment mortgage from The Mortgage Corporation.
Interest rates in years 1, 2 and 3 — 15.65% (Typical APR 16.8%).
** Example Notes:Example based on £50,000 endowment mortgage, term 26 years.
Year 1 — 13.99% (Typical APR 15.0%)Year 2 — 13.99% (Typical APR 15.0%)Year 3 — 13.99% (Typical APR 15.0%).
APR's include an estimate of the lenders legal and valuation fees together with an acceptance fee of £150 with loan repayable at the end of the term.
Mortgage guarantee policy may be required.
Loan secured by endowment mortgage, minimum age 20 years.
All payments shown are net of tax relief (MIRAS) at the basic rate of tax.
A written quotation is available on request.
APR variable after Year 3.
YOUR HOME IS AT RISK IF YOU DO NOT KEEP UP REPAYMENTS ON A MORTGAGE OR OTHER LOAN SECURED ON IT.
‘Darling, I've shrunk the monthly mortgage payments’
‘How?’
‘Because with HeadStart 531, we pay less until 1993 — Guaranteed’
‘How do we get more details?’
‘Send off the personal quotation request or phone direct on 0483 754 500’
OUR BANK CHARGES EXPLAINED
OUR BANK CHARGES EXPLAINED
At Barclays, we aim to make our charges simple and clear.
Which is why we've recently abolished some charges altogether and simplified others.
When charges are made, standard rates apply for the services provided to our personal customers.
From now on, you'll know what our charges are, so there'll be no surprises.
However, if you're not paying charges now, then don't worry, these changes are unlikely to result in you having to pay charges in the future.
All the free services we provide with The Barclays Bank Account plus a list of services we charge for can be found on the following pages.
We might like to keep this leaflet with your statements for easy reference.
Personal customer tariff.
On all three options of The Barclays Bank Account — Flexible, Interest or Instant, the following services are free, whether your account is in credit or overdrawn:
cheque books and payment of cheques
payments into your account
issue of Barclays Connect or Barclaybank cards
paying standing orders and direct debits
use of a network of over 5,300 cash dispensers
preparing and sending out statements
stopping lost or stolen cheques.
The above relates to UK sterling transactions only.
WHAT IF I NEED AN OVERDRAFT?
You can apply for an overdraft* on both the Flexible and Interest options of The Barclays Bank Account.
From July onwards, if you arrange your overdraft in advance with your branch, you will only pay a monthly usage fee plus interest if your account is overdrawn.
If you overdraw without arranging it in advance with your branch, your overdraft is termed ‘unauthorised’ and consequently the usage fee charged will be higher.
Arranged overdrafts on the Flexible option.
If you're likely to overdraw frequently by more than £50, then the Flexible option is probably the one for you.
Once your overdraft is arranged, the monthly usage fee will be £3 if you overdraw by more than £50.
Remember, there's no arrangement fee, no normal transaction charges to pay, just the £3 usage fee.
Interest is charged at 1.85% per month (Equivalent Annual Rate 24.1%).
Arranged overdrafts on the Interest option.
If you are likely to need an overdraft only occasionally, then the Interest option is the one to go for.
With the Interest option there's a monthly usage fee of £6 if you overdraw by more than £50.
Again, there's no arrangement fee, no normal transaction charges to pay, just the £6 monthly usage fee.
Interest is charged at 1.85% per month (Equivalent Annual Rate 24.1%).
Remember, when your Interest option account is in credit it earns interest.
Unauthorised overdrafts.
If you overdraw by more than £50 or exceed the limit of an arranged overdraft, you will be charged a monthly usage fee of £10 (rather than £3 or £6 for the Flexible or Interest options).
Interest will be charged on the whole balance.
Where no overdraft has been arranged, unauthorised borrowing will be charged at 2.625% per month (Equivalent Annual Rate 35.4%).
Please note.
It's obviously important to make sure you don't take on more than you can afford.
We will be glad to talk to you about this before you borrow.
And if you should run into difficulties repaying your overdraft, please speak to us as early as possible.
Are there any other charges I should be aware of?
If we have to return cheques, standing orders or direct debits unpaid because there are insufficient funds in your account, then a further charge of £15 will be made on that day.
This charge also applies to items which would normally have been returned but which have been guaranteed by a Barclays Connect card or cheque guarantee card.
However, any letters we send or telephone calls we make in connection with your overdraft will in future be free which, we hope you will agree, is good news.
When will the new charging system start?
From June, our new system of charges will operate on a monthly basis instead of quarterly (although interest will continue to be charged quarterly).
As we switch to this system, two charges may initially appear on the same statement.
But this is not a duplication.
These charges will cover your last overdraft fee charged under the quarterly system and the first monthly usage fee on the new system.
It will be clearly indicated on your statement the period to which these charges relate.
Under the new monthly system, the usage fee will be charged to your account on the first Friday of each month and will cover the period up to the preceding Sunday.
ADDITIONAL SERVICES FROM BARCLAYS BANK
We also offer the following range of services.
If you need to use them, you now have a record of how much they will cost, in advance.
Stopped cheque
(not lost or stolen cheques which are free) £5
Special clearance
(sending a cheque to another person's account by guaranteed post to arrive the following day for immediate clearance, if there are sufficient funds to cover it) £10
Bankers draft
(a guaranteed payment issued by the Bank) £8
Same day electronic payment
(same day transfer of money to another person's account in the UK) £15
Safe deposit
Documents/envelopes £5.75 (inc.
VAT) per quarter
Small boxes/parcels £5.75 (inc.
VAT) per quarter
Large boxes/parcels £11.50 (inc.
VAT) per quarter
Safe deposit access charges
Documents/envelopes Free
Boxes/parcels — up to and including 3 visits per quarter Free
— more than 3 visits per quarter £6.90 (inc.
VAT) for every visit
Purchase of shares 
Please enquire at your branch
Foreign transactions 
Please enquire at your branch
NOW YOU KNOW WHAT OUR CHARGES ARE
This list of our charges covers services for our personal customers.
We hope you will keep it to hand and that you find it useful for the future.
But if you do have any questions, please get in touch with your branch and we will answer them quickly and clearly.
And remember, if you've never had to pay charges before and you don't pay them now, then probably nothing has changed for you — except perhaps, that you're better informed.
Please note.
* Overdrafts are only available to customers aged 18 or over (20 in Jersey).
These charges and interest rates are variable and the Bank reserves the right to amend them from time to time.
A written quotation for our lending services is available from Barclays Bank PLC .
YOU'RE BETTER OFF TALKING TO BARCLAYS
BARCLAYS PERSONAL BANKING
VITAL INFORMATION TO HELP YOU START YOUR OWN BUSINESS
INCLUDING FRANCHISING
Getting your business on the road
THE BARCLAYS SMALL BUSINESS PACK
There are few experiences more exciting than starting your own business.
It offers new opportunities, a new way of life, and a new independence.
It also presents a number of risks and pitfalls, which, with the right help you can minimise.
Years of experience in helping hundreds of thousands of businesses to start up and prosper have placed Barclays in a unique position to help you, too.
Our comprehensive range of services has been developed to make sure that your business is given the best possible start.
To help you to take the first important steps, we have produced the Barclays Small Business Pack.
It contains a set of readable, no-nonsense booklets which offer clear, practical advice on organising and running your business, from its conception and initial preparation to coping with growth.
Setting Up Your Business helps you to identify the opportunities and problems which you could face.
Financial Planning for Your Business assists you in drawing up and presenting your business plan, and Monitoring and Controlling Your Business helps you to run it efficiently.
The Pack also contains helpful inserts describing clearly the Barclays services which we offer to new and growing businesses.
Franchising — taking a safer route
THE BARCLAYS FRANCHISE PACK
An increasingly popular way of starting a new business is to take up a franchise.
When you do, your aim is to buy a blueprint from a franchise for running a business profitably and efficiently.
You retain a high degree of independence, but with the support and guidance of the franchiser.
There are, of course, proven and untried franchisers, and you must thoroughly evaluate the franchise before you commit yourself.
The final decision on whether or not you are the right person with the right franchise must be yours.
But the Barclays Franchise Pack can guide you in making that decision by prompting the questions that you should ask of both yourself, the prospective franchiser, and even some of the existing franchisees.
It also gives details of the special range of services which Barclays can offer to meet your needs in setting up your franchise business and running it profitably.
Behind the Franchise Pack lies the experience and skill of a team of franchising experts, who understand the special problems of this type of business, and can help to overcome the pressures which it frequently creates.
Their expertise, together with the services which Barclays can provide, can enable you to take advantage of a challenging, and frequently very rewarding, opportunity.
SEND NOW FOR THESE IMPORTANT INFORMATION PACKS
Dedicated to helping the small business, these packs are free, with the compliments of Barclays Bank.
To receive them, remember to complete, detach and return the coupon overleaf.
There is nothing to pay.
Just place it in an envelope and send it to the FREEPOST address provided.
BANKING FOR BUSINESS BARCLAYS
YOU'RE BETTER OFF TALKING TO BARCLAYS
BARCLAYS INFOFILE
Containing the latest details on the information you requested
IS THE WAY YOU SAVE OPEN TO QUESTION?
Choosing a savings account to match your individual needs can raise a number of questions.
You may have a lump sum to invest or you may want to save on a regular basis.
High interest rates are ideal but do you need instant access to your money?
Long term growth is attractive but so is a regular income.
At Barclays we understand that choosing the right savings account to suit your own particular needs can be confusing.
That's why we suggest you talk to us first.
In every Barclays branch you can get free professional advice on savings from one of our Personal Bankers, or another member of our trained staff.
Personal Bankers sit on your side of the counter so they are easy to talk to.
They understand the many options available to savers and are trained to ask questions that get straight to the heart of the matter.
AN EASILY ACCESSIBLE SAVINGS ACCOUNT — THAT'S BARCLAYPLUS
BarclayPlus is a new style of savings account which you can open with as little as £1.
So, whether you're saving for something special or for a rainy day, you can start earning interest straightaway.
The great thing about BarclayPlus is that your savings are always within reach.
Because, providing you have the money in your account, the BarclayPlus card lets you withdraw money anytime.
A BarclayPlus account is free to open and easy to run.
Cash when you need it.
Your special BarclayPlus card lets you get cash from dispensers throughout the country at the touch of a button, 24 hours a day.
You can use any of over 5,000 cash dispensers because Barclays belongs to one of the largest networks of these machines together with Lloyds, The Royal Bank of Scotland and the Bank of Scotland.
You can withdraw up to £50 a day as long as you have enough money in your account.
And at Barclays cash dispensers you can check your balance and order a statement.
Interest on your savings.
Even if you open your account with just a few pounds, you can immediately begin to enjoy the benefits of a good rate of interest.
This is calculated daily and paid into your account every quarter.
So, even your interest can be earning interest while leaving you the option of getting at your money instantly if you need to.
A GOOD RATE OF INTEREST FROM ONLY £500 — HIGHER RATE DEPOSIT ACCOUNT
If you've got £500 or more to save, but still require instant access, a Barclays Higher Rate Deposit Account is right for you.
And, if you have a Barclays current account, you can experience at once the convenience of having both your savings and your current account under the same roof.
To transfer funds to your Higher Rate Deposit Account from your Barclays current account or vice versa, you can save on shoe leather simply by giving us your instructions over the telephone.
And for regular savings we can easily set up a standing order.
Extra interest.
Our Higher Rate Deposit Account now offers you the benefit of tiered interest rates.
When the balance on your account reaches £2,000, £10,000 or £25,000, we pay a higher rate of interest on the whole amount.
So you can be sure that the more you save, the more interest you'll earn.
Full details of our interest rates are in a separate leaflet which is available from any Barclays branch.
We're very competitive with building society high interest savings accounts, as well as giving you instant access to your money and all for a minimum balance of £500.
And, you can choose whether to receive your interest monthly or quarterly.
Monthly income option.
With a Higher Rate Deposit Account you have the option of monthly interest paid straight into your Barclays current account.
This provides you with a regular income from your savings.
Access to your money.
Getting your hands on your money could hardly be easier or quicker.
Whether you have to make urgent repairs to your car or pay for that holiday you've been saving for, you can get money out of your account without giving us any notice at all— and you won't lost any interest.
A TOP RATE OF INTEREST ON YOUR SAVINGS — BARCLAYS CAPITAL ADVANTAGE
If you have £10,000 or more to invest, you'll be looking for a good return on your money.
Which is exactly what the Barclays Capital Advantage account gives you.
And it doesn't tie up your money for long periods of time.
Nor do you have to be a Barclays customer to open one.
Extra Interest.
Our Capital Advantage account now offers you the benefit of tiered interest.
When the balance of your account reaches £25,000 or £50,000 we pay an even higher rate.
So you can be sure that the more you invest, the more interest you'll earn.
And you can now choose whether to have your interest paid monthly or quarterly.
Full details of our interest rates are in a separate leaflet which is available from any branch of Barclays.
Monthly income option.
With a Capital Advantage account you have the option of monthly interest paid straight into your Barclays current account.
This provides you with a regular income from your savings.
Withdrawals.
There is no restriction on the amount you can withdraw as long as you maintain the minimum balance of £10,000 in your account.
One month's notice is required for any withdrawals, but should you need your money in a hurry you can of course, withdraw it at any time.
However, withdrawals made without a month's notice will be subject to a charge of 50p per £100 withdrawn.
There is a minimum charge of £10.
If your current account is with Barclays, you can easily arrange for sums to be transferred between this and your Capital Advantage account.
How much do I have to deposit?
The minimum deposit we ask for is £10,000.
There is no upper limit to the amount you can invest.
OTHER ACCOUNTS IN OUR RANGE
Supersavers.
This is an account for young savers.
It is an ideal way to start the under 14's on the right road to savings.
All a child needs is £1 as their first deposit.
From then on, it's up to them how much they save and how often.
When they open an account they'll receive a free account opening pack and, if they are over seven, they'll also become members of the Barclays Supersavers Club and they'll receive regular copies of the club magazine.
Every six months we'll send them a statement showing how much they've paid in and withdrawn and, more importantly, how much interest they've earned.
Deposit Account.
A Barclays Deposit Account is designed to make savings simple, convenient and safe.
Whether you're saving for something in particular or a rainy day, just put your money in and it will start working for your straightaway.
All you need to open the account is £1 and every six months interest is added to your account.
You can have all or part of your savings back in cash whenever you like, subject to seven days' notice.
Investment Account.
If you're looking for a fixed rate and a fixed term this is the account for you.
The minimum investment is £2,500 and you may deposit up to £25,000.
You can choose to invest for one, three or six months.
At the end of the term you have three options.
You can either invest both the original sum and interest for another fixed term.
Or, we can automatically re-invest the original sum and transfer the interest to another account.
Or, you can simply withdraw your deposit, along with your interest.
Treasurer's Deposits.
This service is a high return investment for lump sums of over £10,000.
The minimum amount accepted for deposit varies according to the term you choose.
The table shows the types of deposit and the minimum amount required.
There is no maximum investment.
The interest rates for Treasurer's Deposits are based on the City of London money market rates.
The exact rate for the investment is fixed at the time the deposit is made and then runs through the period chosen.
On deposits of up to one year, interest is paid on the day of withdrawal.
For longer periods, interest is paid six monthly from the date of deposit.
Interest is paid gross to all customers investing £50,000 or more for a fixed term of at least seven days.
SPECIALIST FINANCIAL SERVICES
The Barclays Groups, through its branches and subsidiary companies, provides a comprehensive range of financial services catering for all your personal needs.
If you are interested in anything from Personal Equity Plans, unit trusts and pension schemes to life assurance, insurance and executor and trustee services, we will be delighted to advise you.
We can also arrange for you to receive specialist tax advice.
If you would like to talk to one of our specialist financial advisors, just contact your local branch where the staff will be happy to arrange an appointment for you.
WHAT TO DO NEXT
If you would like some help to decide which account is right for you, talk to one of our Personal Bankers.
If you would like details of our current interest rates ask at any branch for our savings rates leaflet.
Whatever your savings needs, Barclays will be able to help you reach the right decision.
FAST ACCESS TO YOUR MONEY
MONTHLY INCOME
LONG TERM GROWTH
TOP INTEREST RATES
ABBEYLINK TERMS & CONDITIONS
ABBEYLINK CARD CONDITIONS
These terms and conditions (as amended from time to time‘the Conditions’) regulate the use of an Abbeylink Card (‘your Card’) and form the basis of a contract between the customer (you) and Abbey National plc (us).
You will be bound by them upon (i) signing an application for an Abbeylink Card of (ii) signing your Card or (iii) using your Card (whichever occurs first).
Your Card
Your Card (which has your name printed on it) may only be used by you.
It is our property and must be returned on request.
Care of Your Card and PIN
You must keep your Card safely and take all possible care to avoid its loss or theft.
The PIN (Personal Identification Number) must remain your personal secret, you must memorise it and NOT keep a record of it (even in disguised form).
Allowing anyone to discover your PIN (intentionally or otherwise) is a breach of the Conditions and we may debit your account with any withdrawal made by use of your Card in such circumstances.
Registered Address
The address which you have given to us (‘your Registered Address’) is the address to which your Card and any notices or other communications regarding it (including notification of the PIN) will be sent.
You are required therefore to notify us if you change your address and to ensure that the arrangements for receiving mail at your Registered Address are safe.
If you fail to do so we will accept no responsibility for any unauthorised use of your Card.
4 Loss or Theft
If your Card if lost, mislaid or stolen
(A)
You must notify us immediately either at any of our branch offices or by telephoning the CARD ADMINISTRATION MANAGER at Abbey House, 201 Grafton Gate East, Milton Keynes MK9 1AN.
Tel no. 0908 691122 (24 hour service).
Verbal notification must be confirmed in writing within SEVEN DAYS.
(B)
We may provide the Police with any information we consider relevant.
Withdrawals
(A)
‘Withdrawal’ for the purpose of the Conditions includes a withdrawal by way of funds transfer either to any other account you have with us or to the account of any other person or body (with us or otherwise).
(B)
We will debit amounts withdrawn by use of your Card to whichever of your accounts you select except for any withdrawals made after either (i) your right to use your Card has been terminated under Condition 8 or (ii) we have received your notification of the loss or theft of your Card under Condition 4 (provided you are not in breach of these Conditions).
(C)
You must not use your Card to withdraw more money from an account than is available for withdrawal.
If you do so you must repay to us immediately the amount by which your withdrawal exceeded the amount available and if you fail to do this we may debit any other account or accounts you may have.
Deposits
We will credit amounts deposited by use of your Card to whichever account you select but if the amount actually received by us differs from that stated by you, your account will be debited or credited (as the case may be) with the amount of the difference.
If this is done, we will write to you at your Registered Address (see Condition 3) within 10 days of the deposit and tell you.
Liability
We accept no liability for any loss or damage caused by either (i) your breach of the Conditions (as in force at the time of the breach) or (ii) failure of any services to which your Card relates due to mechanical or other reasons.
Termination or Suspension
(A)
You may terminate your right to use your Card by giving written notice to us and returning your Card.
(B)
We may at our discretion and without prior notice terminate or suspend your right to use your Card.
Such action will be confirmed to you in writing and (if appropriate) we may demand the return of your Card.
Variation of Conditions
We may remove, change, or add to the Conditions at any time in which event we will give you notice in accordance with Condition 10.
Notice
Any notice or other communication required under the Conditions must (unless otherwise specified) be given as follows:
(A)
By you, to us at any of our branches or to the CARD ADMINISTRATION MANAGER, Abbey House, 201 Grafton Gate East, Milton Keynes MK9 1AN.
(B)
To you, by such one or more of the following methods as we deem appropriate:
(i)
general notice displayed in any of our branches;
(ii)
general notice in one or more daily newspapers of our choice with national circulation; or
(iii)
personal notice to you, at your Registered Address (see Condition 3).
Confidentiality
When you use your Card for a transaction to be carried out with or through the agency of another organisation or individual, we reserve the right to supply to that organisation or individual (as the case may be) such information as may be appropriate in the circumstances.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Despatch of Card and PIN
Please allow 14 days for your card and PIN to arrive, and ensure you look out for their arrival if you have shared postal arrangements.
PIN
Your PIN is the key that unlocks your savings.
It will give access to your savings when used with your Abbeylink card.
Do not tell anyone your number.
You should memorise the number and not write it down (even in a disguised form).
You must destroy the notification of PIN sent to you by us.
Your PIN can be changed as often as you like.
You should change it if you believe that anyone else (even a member of our staff or your family) knows your number, or if you have difficulty in remembering the number you have been allocated.
Instructions are sent to you with your card, and can also be requested on the screen of Abbeylink machines.
Primary Accounts
Although any eligible accounts held by you can be associated with a single card, one account must be nominated as the Primary Account to which all transactions relate unless you select a different account for a particular transaction, for example because there are insufficient funds in the Primary Account to meet the withdrawal.
However, ‘FAST CASH’ withdrawals and all transactions on machines which are not ABBEYLINK machines can only relate to the Primary Account, and no other account can be selected for these particular transactions.
Bill Payment Accounts
Cards may be used for this facility, subject to the Terms and Conditions of the account from which payment is made.
Joint Accounts
Cards cannot be jointly held although separate cards may be issued, on application, to individual holders of joint accounts provided that all joint holders of the account are authorised to operate the account alone.
The use of such card will be permitted on the assumption that the person initiating any transaction on the joint account is doing so with the authority and consent of the other account holder(s).
Retained Cards
Circumstances may arise where a card is retained by an Abbeylink machine.
This can happen when the wrong PIN is entered more than once or where there is a technical failure of the card or of the machine.
We will ensure that the card is returned or re-issued as quickly as possible.
Our branch staff are not able to open machines or retrieve cards although they may be able to offer other assistance.
Deposit Envelopes
If you wish to make Abbeylink deposits you must use the official envelopes provided by us and ensure that the envelope is properly sealed before depositing it in the Abbeylink machine.
The use of other envelopes will not invalidate the transaction but may give rise to delays.
For your protection, all envelopes deposited will be endorsed by the machine with the number of your nominated account and the amount you record by entry on the machine as deposited and will subsequently be opened in the presence of two of our employees.
On this understanding, the contents of the envelope are accepted subject to verification.
Deposits made by use of Abbeylink are not available for withdrawal within 3 working days in the case of cash deposited or 7 calendar days in the case of cheques, and in each case this excludes the date of deposit.
A working day is any day except Sunday or a public holiday.
Special Notice
Our Commitment to your Satisfaction
Legal & General is committed to ensuring that you are treated in a well-informed manner…with fairness, with courtesy and with a respect for your insurance needs.
As you would expect, the Legal & General commitment extends to dealing with any possible dissatisfaction you may have in a straightforward, helpful way.
We believe the key to customer satisfaction is to provide speedy access to those best placed to resolve issues quickly and efficiently.
If you have a complaint
please contact Legal & General staff at the address/telephone number shown on your policy or your last renewal notice or the intermediary who arranged your insurance.
To help us give you a speedy response it would be appreciated if you could have your policy number readily available.
If you are not satisfied with the manner in which your complaint is handled,please contact the General Insurance Manager immediately at the address shown on your policy or last renewal notice.
In the unlikely event that the General Insurance Manager is unable to resolve your complaint, you should write to the Managing Director, Legal & General Insurance, Southgate House, 15 Cannon Hill, London N14 7DA.
The Insurance Ombudsman
Personal Insurance customers of Legal & General have the right to ask the Insurance Ombudsman to review their complaint.
Legal & General is a founder member of the Insurance Ombudsman scheme and agrees — whatever the circumstances — to accept the Ombudsman's decision as binding.
The Ombudsman independently considers unresolved complaints from individuals regarding Personal Insurances such as Home Risks, Motor, Personal Accident & Sickness, and Travel.
There is no charge for this service.
The Association of British Insurers
Legal & General is a member of the Association of British Insurers.
The Consumer Information Department of the ABI, or their regional offices, which are listed in local telephone directories, can provide assistance to any individual or organisation.
Please keep this Notice with your Policy
LEGAL AND GENERAL ASSURANCE SOCIETY LIMITED
Dear Policyholder,
HOME RISKS INSURANCE
This year we are making important changes to the BUILDINGS Section of your Home Risks policy.
All Home Risks policies set out the cover for BUILDINGS, whether or not this cover is currently in force, so we are sending you the new wording, which you should keep with your policy.
Premium rates for some other Home Risks insurances, particularly CONTENTS have also been changed.
Please read what follows carefully to see how it affects you.
The enclosed Renewal Notice/Advice Slip shows the cover actually in force under your policy.
BUILDINGS
I am pleased to tell you that improvements in cover will apply to BUILDINGS insurances from the renewal date.
The changes are set out in detail overleaf but the main points are:
1.
Your policy already provides cover against damage by Subsidence (sinking of the ground beneath your home) but not against Heave (swelling up of the ground beneath your home).
Many homes are damaged by Heave each year so we have decided to include this cover in your policy.
2.
If your home is damaged by Subsidence or Heave you have to pay the first part of the claim yourself.
In future, the amount which you have to pay will be limited to a maximum of £500.
3.
In view of the increasingly high awards being made by the Courts, cover under the Property Owners Liability Section of your policy is increased from £250,000 to £500,000.
Even before these improvements take effect, though, we are finding that claims have in recent years increased faster than premiums.
Most other Insurance Companies are finding the same thing.
The cause is partly increased VAT but still more important are increasingly frequent periods of severe weather.
The last few years have seen widespread damage to homes through storms, floods, extreme cold and subsidence caused by drought.
Because of the need to keep premiums in line with claims we have reluctantly had to make the first increase in our basic BUILDINGS rate for many years.
The new basic rate is £1.50 per £1,000 sum insured and the premium shown on your Renewal Notice takes account of this new rate.
Note.
If you are prepared to pay the first £50 of all claims * yourself, you will be entitled to a premium discount which is normally one sixth of the new premium.
If you wish to change your BUILDINGS insurance to this basis do not pay the premium shown .
Instead, fill in the section at the foot of the page overleaf, detach it and return it at once,with the complete Renewal Notice .
You will then be sent fresh renewal papers showing the revised premium.
* Except those claims arising from Subsidence, where the special conditions apply, or from Fire or Property Owners Liability, where the first £50 will not be excluded.
CONTENTS
Claims resulting from thefts continue to increase alarmingly.
Despite this, in most areas we are continuing to hold our rates down.
In some of the worst affected areas, though, particularly in and around London, we have had to increase our rates in line with increasing claims.
If this affects you, the enclosed Renewal Notice takes account of the new rates.
In the coming year, many people will have their homes damaged or their property stolen.
I hope you will not be one of those who suffer but the increasing chance makes your Home Risks Insurance more essential than ever and I am very pleased that you have chosen to buy your protection from Legal and General.
Yours sincerely,
Manager (General Insurance Operations).
HOME RISKS POLICY
The following changes are operative from renewal and this notice should be kept with your policy for future reference.
A.
Under Section 1 — Buildings
1.
Under 4.
STORM TEMPEST AND FLOOD, sub paragraph 4(a) exclusion (i) is restated as follows:
by frost subsidence heave or landslip
2.
Paragraph A5 is restated as follows:
SUBSIDENCE and/or HEAVE of the site on which the buildings stand and/or LANDSLIP excluding
(a)
loss or damage
(i)
caused by normal settlement or shrinkage or to solid floors caused by compaction of infill
(ii)
occurring whilst the Buildings are undergoing demolition structural alterations or structural repairs
(iii)
to swimming pools terraces paths drives walls gates and fences unless the Private Dwelling or its out-buildings are damaged at the same time
(iv)
arising from the use of defective materials or faulty workmanship
(b)
in respect of each and every incident of loss 3% of the cost (as at the date the claim is notified to the Society) of re-building as new the whole of the Private Dwelling and its outbuildings
In respect of each individually insured private dwelling house maisonette apartment or flat and its outbuildings the amount excluded shall be limited to £500
3.
The indemnity under Paragraph D for damages in respect of any one claim or number of claims arising out of any one cause shall not exceed £500,000.
B
The following printed ENDORSEMENT is added to the wordings at the end of the Policy Booklet.
ENDORSEMENTS
The insurance by this Policy is subject to an endorsement below only if the reference set against it is specified in the Schedule of the Policy.
£50 Excess BJ The Society shall not be liable for the first £50 of each and every loss arising from any of the causes specified in Paragraphs A.2 to A.4 inclusive A.6 to A.11 inclusive B.1 and B.2 of Section 1 of this policy.
23 March 1980–22 March 1981
£50 Excesses — BUILDINGS
If, when you have read the letter overleaf, you decide to accept responsibility for the first £50 of claims please fill in the boxes below.
Then detach this section and return it,with the complete Renewal Notice .
Do not enclose any payment at this stage.
You will be sent fresh renewal papers showing the revised premium.
I wish to accept responsibility for the first £50 of all claims under Section 1 — Buildings of the above policy (other than claims arising from Subsidence, where special conditions apply, or Fire or Property Owners Liability).
I understand that this figure will be reviewed from time to time in the light of inflation.
Legal & General
Dear Policyholder,
HOME AND PERSONAL INSURANCE
We are pleased to say that this Policy is one of the best in the market to meet the requirements of Policyholders.
However, for some time the cost of claims has continued to rise.
As a consequence we have had to revise some of the premium rates applying to various sections of your Policy.
We have done all we can to keep these changes to a minimum.
If they apply to you, your new premium will be shown on the enclosed renewal notice.
Buildings
The rate for Buildings insurance has been increased by 10p per £1000 Sum Insured which means that the rate for standard cover is now £1.60 per £1000 sum insured.
This is the first general Buildings rate increase since 1980 and is necessary due to the rising number and increasing cost of claims since then, in particular those arising from exceptional weather and subsidence.
Contents
We have revised our premium rates because of the continuing increase in the cost of theft claims — 1983 saw a 24% increase over 1982 and there has been a further 12% increase in the first half of 1984.
Our new rates reflect more accurately how the risk of theft varies from one part of the country to another.
Personal Property ‘All Risks’, Freezer Contents, Personal Accident and Small Craft
We are able to maintain our existing premium rates for these sections of your policy.
Some Policyholders whose cover includes Personal Property ‘All Risks’ may find that their Policy Schedule shows a sum insured of £1,000 under Item 1 (Clothing and Personal Belongings and Valuables).
This is now the minimum sum insured for Item 1.
Caravan
The rate for caravan insurance has been increased to £1.50 per £100 sum insured.
FREE INCREASE for Contents and Buildings Sums Insured
There is still considerable evidence that many Policyholders are inadequately insured, especially for house contents.
At this renewal of your Policy, you may increase your Contents and Buildings sums insured free of charge .
Working out how much you should insure for may be difficult.
The results of our own research into the minimum cost to replace the basic contents of different types of property to a reasonable standard may be of assistance as a guide.
Compare these with your Contents Sum Insured as shown on your renewal notice:
One or two bedroomed house, flat, bungalow with three main rooms or smaller, £10,000
Three bedroomed semi/terraced/town house, flat or bungalow with four main rooms, £12,500
Three bedroomed detached house, four bedroomed semi/town house, £15,000
Four bedroomed detached house, £18,500
If your sum insured is less than that recommended for your type of home, we strongly recommend that you increase it.
Fill in the tear-off slip and SEND IT WITH YOUR RENEWAL PREMIUM either to the Office address shown at the top of the renewal notice or to your insurance adviser.
You will be sent a revised Policy Schedule.
Yours sincerely
LEGAL & GENERAL  
Legal & General Assurance Society Limited
Dear Policyholder,
This year we are once again introducing some important changes to our Home Risks Policy.
The cover for everyone with Buildings and Contents insurance has now been index-linked, a service which not all our policyholders have benefited from in the past.
Basically, this means that your sums insured are adjusted each year in line with the rise in the cost of rebuilding and repairs, or of replacing your possessions.
It saves you from becoming under-insured as a result of inflation, with the risk of having to find thousands of pounds out of your own pocket in the event of a serious claim.
(But don't forget that you still need to make sure you start with the right sum insured and to tell us if you improve your home or add to your possessions.)
In addition, we have increased the Occupiers and Family Personal Liability cover from £250,000 to £500,000 to take account of the very large settlements being made by Courts to accident victims nowadays.
With this kind of insurance, you will not need to worry about being ruined as a result of some unlucky accident for which you, as an occupier, are held responsible.
Regrettably, theft losses from people's homes have gone up alarmingly, particularly in the larger towns and cities and, as a result, we have had to increase some of our rates.
But the increases have been kept to a minimum, and in one or two cases rates have even been reduced.
And we are continuing our discount system introduced last year.
These and several other changes are explained in more detail inside.
Meanwhile, I am sure that you will find your Legal & General policy continues to represent value for money compared with our competitors.
Yours sincerely,
D.W. Coulton General Insurance Manager 
‘BUILDINGS’ INSURANCE
Like most other things, the cost of rebuilding and repairs has greatly increased in recent years.
Those policyholders without index-linked policies have had to frequently increase their sum insured so that it keeps pace with inflation and continues to cover the full cost of rebuilding their homes.
To overcome this problem, we have now index-linked everyone's cover.
This means that your sum insured has been increased by the same percentage as the rise in the Building Housing Cost Index (prepared by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors) in the twelve months before your renewal date.
You will find your new sum insured on your Renewal Notice.
It will be similarly adjusted every year in the future in accordance with Endorsement BE as printed in your policy document.
It is thus automatically kept up-to-date and, providing you were not underinsured to start with, you need no longer worry about becoming underinsured as a result of inflation.
Unfortunately, some policyholders were inadequately insured, thus imposing an unfair burden on all the others.
For this reason, we have been forced to increase our minimum sum insured to £17,500.
In fact, this would pay to rebuild only the most modest house, and the table below gives examples of what it would cost to rebuild different types of houses in different parts of the country.
If you find your new sum insured is not adequate, please let us know so that it can be increased to a more appropriate amount.
Medium semi-detached pre-war three-bedroomed house in S.E. England
Large semi-detached Victorian four-bedroomed house in Central London Medium detached post-war three-bedroomed house in Scotland
Small semi-detached post-war two-bedroomed bungalow in S.W. England
Small terraced two-bedroomed Victorian House in N.W. England
Medium detached pre-war three-bedroomed house in West Midlands
Small semi-detached Victorian three-bedroomed house in Yorkshire
(Costs as at September 1981.
They include allowances for site clearance, Architects' and Surveyors' fees, walls, gates, fences and, where appropriate, a brick-built garage — all of which should be included in your sum insured.)
Your new premium is shown on your Renewal Notice.
This shows both the increase due to index-linking and, if applicable, an increase where your sum insured was previously under £17,500.
But the basic cost of our insurance remains unchanged at £1.50 per £1,000 of cover.
And, if you are prepared to pay the first £50 of any claim yourself, the basic rate is only £1.25 per £1,000.
Please refer to the section at the bottom of the right hand page.
‘CONTENTS’ INSURANCE
The cost of replacing your possessions has risen greatly in recent years.
Here, too, all those policyholders whose cover has not been index-linked have had to frequently increase their sum insured in order to avoid becoming under-insured.
To relieve policyholders of this burden, we have now index-linked everyone's cover.
Your sum insured has been increased by the same percentage as the rise in the Durable Household Goods Section of the Government's General Index of Retail Prices in the twelve months before your renewal date.
(In fact, the Durable Household Goods Index rose by only 5% in 1980 compared with a 15% rise in the Retail Price Index.)
Your new sum insured is shown on your Renewal Notice, and it will be similarly adjusted every year in future in accordance with Endorsement BF as printed in your policy document.
It is thus automatically kept up-to-date and, providing you were not underinsured to start with, you need no longer worry about becoming under-insured as a result of inflation.
Unfortunately, some policyholders were inadequately insured, thus imposing an unfair burden on all the others.
We have, therefore, been forced to increase the minimum sum insured to £6,000 (Replacement as New policies) and £4,500 (all others) **
In fact, our research shows that the value of the possessions of most of our policyholders is over £10,000.
To help you calculate the value of your possessions, there is a guide on the back of this leaflet.
If you find your sum insured is not adequate, please let us know so that it can be increased.
Your new premium is shown on your Renewal Notice.
This shows both the increase due to index-linking and, where applicable, an increase where your sum insured was previously below the new minimum.
In addition, rates have been increased for the minority of our policyholders who live in the larger cities because of the soaring number of thefts there.
(An exception to this is Leeds, where some rates have been reduced.)
But, if you are prepared to pay the first £50 of any claim yourself, you will be entitled to a discount — normally 50p per £1,000 of insurance.
Please refer to the section below.
**
except where higher minimum sums insured apply or where special arrangements have previously been made.
‘ALL RISKS’ INSURANCE
The cost of claims has increased dramatically.
However, we have held rates steady for the majority of our policyholders and, in some areas, have even reduced them.
But there have been some increases for those living in the larger cities, which have been worst hit by the crime wave.
Again some policyholders have been underinsuring themselves, leaving everyone else to carry an unfair burden.
For this reason, we are introducing a minimum sum insured for all policyholders on Items 1 to 4 of £250.
(For an explanation of what Items 1–4 cover, please refer to your policy document.)
‘CARAVAN AND SMALL CRAFT’ INSURANCE
Because of the increased cost of repairs, premium rates have had to be increased.
The premium rate for Caravans is now £1.25 per £100 of insurance, and the rate for Small Craft is £2.00 for each £100 of insurance.
The minimum premium for each Section is increased to £15.
EXCESSES
If you are prepared to pay the first £50 of all claims yourself, you will be entitled to a discount on your premium.
This will normally be 25p per £1,000 of insurance for ‘Buildings’ and 50p per £1,000 of insurance for ‘Contents’.
If you wish to take advantage of this discount, do not pay the premium shown on your renewal notice.
Instead, fill in the section below, detach it and return it at once, with the complete Renewal Notice.
You will then be sent fresh renewal papers showing the revised premium.
NOTE:
The £50 excess will not apply to: Buildings — claims arising from subsidence, where the special conditions apply, or from Fire or Property Owners' liability, where the first £50 will not be excluded.
Contents — claims arising from Occupiers' Liability or Family Personal Liability.
CONTENTS REPLACEMENT COSTS
— use this guide to calculate the value of your possessions.
The replacement cost figures shown in the table are an example of the household items owned by a typical family of four in a modest three bedroom house.
Remember, if your policy is for ‘Replacement as New’ then your sum insured should be for the full replacement cost of all your possessions.
If not, then your sum insured should be based on current replacement costs less an allowance for wear and tear — giving a sum insured of perhaps two thirds of the replacement cost depending on the average age of your possessions.
BUILDINGS — HOUSEHOLD CONTENTS — PERSONAL PROPERTY ‘ALL RISKS’ INSURANCE
AN IMPORTANT NOTICE
Dear Policyholder,
In common with all insurance companies, Legal & General has from time to time to adjust its premium terms to take into account the changing nature and frequency of household insurance claims.
From renewal on or after 1 February 1986, the following alterations and improvements will apply to your cover with us.
ADDITIONS TO YOUR COVER
We have made some important alterations to your Policy to give you the benefit of cover which is right up-to-date
Wider cover during Household Removal.
Deletion of £15 excesses on certain Buildings claims.
Liability Indemnity Limits have been increased to £1,000,000.
Many endorsements have been rewritten in the easier to read style of the Policy.
Full details are shown in the attached leaflet ‘Important changes to your Home and Personal Policy’, and the Memorandum which should be kept as part of your Policy.
ALTERATIONS TO YOUR PREMIUMS
The Policy minimum premium is now £25.
The Buildings rate per £1000 sum insured is increased by 20p.
For the reasons outlined below, we have had to raise our Contents premiums in certain areas of the country.
Minimum sums insured are now:
‘Reinstatement as New’ Contents cover £9000
Personal Property ‘All Risks’:
Clothing and Personal Effects £1250
Personal Money £ 250
Pedal Cycles £ 200
Buildings cover £25,000
If you paid additional premium to delete the standard £15 excesses under the Buildings Section of the Policy you will find this charge is no longer made.
If you have chosen to bear the first £50 of claims, you will find that renewal is offered on the basis of a £100 excess for all claims,(except Subsidence for which the excess is unaltered).
WHY THE INCREASE IN PREMIUMS?
Naturally, it is always our aim to keep our premium rates as competitive as possible.
However, increases from time to time are unavoidable.
The increase in the rate for cover under our Buildings insurance and the increase in the Contents and ‘All Risks’ rates in certain areas are due to a number of factors:
(a)
The increased cost of subsidence claims has had an effect on the rates of our Buildings Policy.
The 1984 cost of subsidence damage claims is estimated at £140m — a 70% increase over 1983 — and it is predicted that the total is certain to continue to rise.
(b)
The unusual frequency and cost of severe weather conditions (the arctic weather of 1981, 1982 and the gales of 1984).
(c)
The cost of claims for theft particularly in the larger towns and cities has increased quite noticeably.
In 1984 the total payments made by insurance companies for household thefts was more than £200m.
ARE YOUR SUMS INSURED ADEQUATE?
In the event of a serious loss considerable hardship can be caused by under insurance.
Working out how much to insure for may be difficult.
The results of our own research into the minimum cost to replace the basic contents of different types of property to a reasonable standard may be of assistance as a guide :
1 or 2 bedroomed house, flat, bungalow with 3 main rooms or similar
3 bedroomed semi/terraced/town house, flat or bungalow with 4 main rooms
3 bedroomed detached house, 4 bedroomed semi/town house
4 bedroomed detached house
Inadequate sums insured might reduce your premium but they will not increase you peace of mind, so please compare these figures with your Contents sum insured as shown on your renewal notice.
If you would like to increase your sums insured, please use the attached coupon.
A buildings cost chart and a room-by-room contents check list are printed overleaf for your assistance.
HOW CAN YOU REDUCE YOUR PREMIUMS?
Many claims are for small amounts which are costly to administer.
Some insurers have already decided to impose compulsory excesses to eliminate such claims.
We are able to offer you the choice.
If you haven't already chosen to pay an excess, worthwhile premium savings can be made if you choose to pay the first £100 of claims made under the Buildings or Contents sections of the Policy.
Savings with a ‘Voluntary £100 Excess’
Should you wish to take this option, please use the attached coupon.
LEGAL & GENERAL MEANS PROMPT, FAIR SETTLEMENT
As important as being insured for the correct amount is the knowledge that you are insured with a company which will deal with your claim fairly and efficiently.
That has always been our intention and you will find that this attitude makes a lot of difference at the time when it really counts.
That is why covering yourself with a Legal & General Home and Personal Insurance Policy makes sound, common-sense.
The current increase in premiums (where applicable) is unavoidable — and it simply reflects a situation which applies to every insurance company.
Finally, please don't forget that we are more than happy to accept your premium payments over £50 in instalments.
A form for this purpose is enclosed.
Of course we hope you never have to make a claim — but if you do, rest assured that it will be in good hands.
If you would like help or advice please contact your insurance adviser or Legal & General at the address shown at the top of your renewal notice.
Yours sincerely
LEGAL & GENERAL 
CONTENTS CHECKLIST
You must insure for the full value of the contents of your home — the amount it would cost you to replace all your possessions with new items of a similar kind.
We have produced this checklist to help you work out the correct figure.
Using this form go from room to room noting down what it would cost you to replace as new every item in it.
When you have finished, add together the individual room totals to arrive at your grand total — the amount you should insure for.
The result may surprise you.
BUILDINGS
HOW TO ESTIMATE THE COST OF REBUILDING YOUR HOME
You must insure for the full cost of rebuilding your home — including any domestic outbuildings, garages, swimming pools, tennis courts, paved terraces, paths and drives, walls, gates and fences, plus an allowance for site clearance and professional fees.
Remember that the rebuilding cost will almost certainly not be the same as the market value of your property.
Use the five steps and chart below to work out a reasonable estimate of the cost of rebuilding your home.
Find out which insurance area you live in 
Work out the size of your house
Take the external measurements (length and breadth only) of your house, multiply them, then multiply that figure by the number of storeys
Use the chart opposite to establish the rebuilding cost per sq.
ft. for your kind of house in your area
Multiply the cost per sq.
ft. by the size of your house
Add the replacement cost of your garage, out-buildings, swimming pools, service tanks, paths, walls, etc.
Important Changes to your Home and Personal Insurance Policy
We have made some important alterations to update the cover under your Home and Personal Policy from renewal on or after 1 February 1986.
The changes are incorporated in the Memorandum which forms part of your Policy; and your Schedule shows you which Sections of the Policy you have insured.
Wider Cover During Household Removal
If you have chosen Contents cover, your Contents are now covered against accidental loss or damage whilst in transit between your present and new private dwellings.
The move must be undertaken by professional removal contractors and completed within three days.
A £25 excess applies and brittle items must be packaged by professional packers.
Deletion of £15 Excess on Buildings
If you have chosen Buildings cover, you no longer have to pay the first £15 of damage to your property resulting from:
Malicious Acts and Vandalism
Escape of Water
Storm and Floor
Falling Trees
and if applicable Accidental Damage to Buildings
Note: The Subsidence excess remains unaltered.
Discounted premiums are available if you choose to pay the first £100 of all other claims under the Buildings and/or Contents Section of your Policy.
Limit of Indemnity
The limit of the amount we will pay for claims in respect of Property Owner's Liability (Section 1) and Occupier's Liability (Section 2) has been increased to £1 million.
Endorsement Writings
Many endorsement wordings have been restated in the easier to read style of your Policy.
The new wordings for the more commonly used endorsements are shown in the attached Memorandum to Policyholder.
If the wording for any other endorsements applying to your Policy has been restated, the new wording is attached separately.
Your Schedule shows the references of any endorsements applying to your Policy.
Important
The wordings of the following two endorsements have been changed significantly and the major changes are:
PI: Locks Warranty:In addition to withdrawing keys from locks, the keys must now also be placed where they cannot be seen by a would be thief.
PJ: Protection Warranty:Additional security is required in respect of double leaf hinged doors, unless your current level of security already meets the new requirement.
If either endorsement reference appears on your Policy Schedule you should study the new wording closely.
Home and Personal Insurance Policy
MEMORANDUM
Your renewal notice shows the Sections you have chosen to be covered together with any endorsements applicable.
This memorandum forms an appendix to your Policy and should be kept with your Policy documents.
Applicable to HOME AND PERSONAL INSURANCE POLICIES from the first renewal on or after 1 February 1986.
Section 1.
BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY OWNER'S LIABILITY
Under the heading YOUR COVER UNDER PART 1, the following are restated:
Malicious acts and vandalism,except for loss or damage occurring in the circumstances detailed in * The Buildings Unoccupancy Clause in your Policy .
Storm and flood,except for:
(i)
loss or damage caused by frost, subsidence, heave or landslip;
(ii)
loss or damage to fences and gates.
Escape of water from or frost damages to any washing machine dishwasher or plumbed-in domestic water or heating installation,except for loss or damage occurring in the circumstances detailed in *The Buildings Unoccupancy Clause in your Policy .
Falling trees and parts of trees,except for damage to fences and gates .
And if your schedule shows that Accidental Damage to Buildings is included
14.
Accidental damage to the Buildings however caused,except for:
(i)
the cost of maintenance and redecoration;
(ii)
damage caused by settlement or shrinkage;
(iii)
damage caused by wear and tear, depreciation, rot, fungus, insects, vermin, atmospheric or climatic conditions or gradually operating cause;
(iv)
damage caused by domestic pets;
(v)
damage caused by faulty workmanship, defective design, or the use of defective materials;
(vi)
damage occurring whilst the Buildings or any part of them are let or lent;
(vii)
any damage specifically excluded under Paragraphs 1–13 of this Section
Under the heading CLAIMS SETTLEMENT UNDER PART 2, Legal & General's limit of liability is increased from £500,000 to £1,000,000
SECTION 2.
CONTENTS AND OCCUPIER'S LIABILITY
Under the heading, YOUR COVER UNDER PART 1, the following is added.
Loss or damage to Contents during Household removal.
Legal & General will cover your Contents against accidental loss or damage whilst in transit between your Home and your new permanent residence within Great Britain, Northern Ireland, Isle of Man or the Channel Islands by professional removal contractors including temporary storage of up to three days,except for:
(i)
the first £25 of each and every loss or damage;
(ii)
loss or damage to china, glass, earthenware and other items of a brittle nature unless they have been packaged by professional packers.
SECTION 4 FREEZER CONTENTS
Under the heading CLAIMS SETTLEMENT UNDER THIS SECTION, the following paragraph is added:
Your sum insured will not be reduced following payment of a claim provided that the freezer is in effective working order.
ENDORSEMENTS
BP and BQ are new endorsements:
BP £100 Excess Buildings.
We shall not be responsible for the first £100 of each and every loss or damage from any of the causes specified in Paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and (if applicable) Paragraph 14 of Part 1 of Section 1 of this Policy.
BQ £100 Excess Contents.
We shall not be responsible for the first £100 of each and every loss or damage under Part 1 of Section 2 of this Policy.
The following endorsements are restated:
BC More than one Home Insured.
All limitations and exclusions in this Policy apply separately to each of the Buildings or Contents in each Home insured in the same manner as if each had been insured by a separate Policy.
PD Intruder Alarm Warranty.
There is no liability under Sections 2 and 3 of this Policy for loss or damage by theft or attempted theft from the Home unless the following requirements are met by you or by a responsible person acting on your behalf:
1.
The intruder alarm installed at your Home must be kept in proper working order under a continuing maintenance contract with the installing Company or such other Company as is agreed in writing by us.
2.
Your intruder alarm (or such parts of your intruder alarm as may be agreed in writing by us) must be set before you your family or domestic employees retire for the night.
3.
Your intruder alarm must be set whenever the Home is left without a responsible person in attendance.
4.
Your Home must not be left without a responsible person in attendance unless as far as you or your representatives are aware the intruder alarm including all British Telecommunication lines used to transmit any signal/call is fully operational and working.
5.
Your intruder alarm must not be altered or replaced without our prior written agreement.
6.
You must tell us immediately if the Police give formal notice to you of withdrawing response to signals/calls made by your intruder alarm.
PI Locks Warranty.
There is no liability under Sections 2 and 3 of this Policy for loss or damage by theft or attempted theft from the Home unless:
(a)
other than for windows in occupied bedrooms the security devices fitted to the Home are put effectively into operation and
(b)
keys are withdrawn from the locks fitted to the Home and placed where they cannot be seen by anyone intent on making an unauthorised entry
(i)
whenever the Home is left without a responsible person in attendance or
(ii)
immediately before you your family or domestic employees retire for the night.
PJ Protection Warranty.
There is no liability under Sections 2 and 3 of this Policy for loss or damage by theft or attempted theft from the Home unless:
1.
a)
other than for windows in unoccupied bedrooms the security devices fitted to the Home are put effectively into operation and
b)
keys are withdrawn from the locks fitted to the Home and placed where they cannot be seen by anyone intent on making an unauthorised entry
(i)
whenever the Home is left without a responsible person in attendance or
(ii)
immediately before you your family or domestic employees retire for the night.
2.
THE MAIN ENTRANCE DOOR(S)/DOOR(S) OF FINAL EXIT to the Home is/are secured by one of following:
(a)
A lock made to the specification of the British Standard BS 3621 (1980) or BS 3621 (1963) bearing the British Standards Institution ‘Kite mark’;
(b)
A Banham M/101 lock;
(c)
A Bramah lock;
(d)
A Chubb ‘Castle’ 3G110, or any other Mortice Deadlock in the Chubb ‘Security’range;
(e)
An Ingersoll D20, M6, M7, SC71, NS80, SC74 or SC76 lock and in the case of double leaf hinged doors in addition the first closing leaf is secured by either:
(i)
flush mounted bolts fitted top and bottom to the inner meeting edge of the first closing leaf or
(ii)
key operated security bolts which mortice into the first closing leaf top and bottom
3.
ALL OTHER EXTERNAL DOORS (excluding metal framed patio doors) to the Home are secured by:
(a)
any lock which is detailed under 2 above for a main entrance door(s)/final exit door(s) together with
(b)
for single leaf doors key operated security bolts which mortice into the door top and bottom or (for other than single leaf glass panelled doors) barrel bolts of at least 8″ length fitted top and bottom or 
(c)
for double leaf hinged doors flush mounted bolts fitted top and bottom to the inner meeting edge of the first closing leaf or key operated security bolts which mortice into the first closing leaf top and bottom
4.
ALL METAL FRAMED PATIO DOORS to the Home if not used as main entrance doors or doors of final exit are secured by any of the following:
(a)
manufacturer's key operated deadlocks;
(b)
manufacturer's key operated security bolts;
(c)
key operated security devices fitted by a qualified locksmith to supplement original protections.
5.
ALL ACCESSIBLE WINDOWS, FANLIGHTS AND OTHER OPENINGS to the Home WHICH PERMIT ENTRY are secured by any of the following:
(a)
key operated security bolts;
(b)
key operated window locks;
(c)
permanent or key operated window stops;
(d)
adhesive on glass louvred window panes to prevent easy removal of glass panes.
2L Excluding Theft (Not Involving Forced Entry).
Paragraph 6 of Part 1 of Section 2 of this Policy is restated as:
6.
Theft or attempted theft, except for loss or damage:
(i)
where force is not used to gain entry to the Home;
(ii)
occurring in the circumstances detailed in the *Contents Unoccupancy Clause.
2W Insurance of Personal Belongings.
Contents Item 1 of Part 1 of Section 2 of this Policy applies only to Personal Belongings including cash, currency notes and bank notes up to £100 or 5% of the sum insured under this Item (whichever is the less) in your Home belonging to you and members of your family permanently residing with you or for which you or they are responsible.
But not:
(a)
motor vehicles, caravans, trailers, aircraft, hovercraft or boats, or parts of accessories on or in any of them;
(b)
livestock or pets;
(c)
securities for money and documents;
(d)
any part of the Buildings its walls and ceilings coverings and the like;
(e)
landlords furniture fixtures and fittings;
(f)
property more specifically insured;
(g)
property held or used for business purposes.
MIDLAND SWITCH
Faster than Cheques at Check-outs
Switch
How many times have you faced the glares of your fellow shoppers in supermarkets as you struggle to pack your bags with one hand and write a cheque with the other, or fumble around for cash to pay for your goods.
If you have a Midland AutoCheque Card, it is a situation in which you need never find yourself again.
FASTER THAN CHEQUES AT CHECK-OUTS
Wherever you see the Switch sign you can pay for goods and services simply by handing over your AutoCheque Card.
The card is passed through a special reader which prints a receipt.
You sign the receipt and collect your copy.
That's all there is to it.
The money will be deducted from your current account within a few days of your purchase — just like a cheque, but so much easier.
And, you will find that paying by Switch does not restrict you to your cheque card limit.
So provided you have the money in your account, you can spend as much as you like.
KEEPING TRACK
You do not have to worry about keeping track of your spending.
You will get a receipt for each transaction and full details will appear on your next statement — where you spent your money and how much.
THE COST
There are no charges for Switch transactions if your current account remains in credit.
Even if you go overdrawn you will find charges for Switch are cheaper than paying by cheque.
LOST OR STOLEN CARDS
If you are unlucky enough to lose your AutoCheque Card or have it stolen, any Switch withdrawals made from your account by forging your signature will be refunded — even if they occur before you advise us of the loss.
All we ask is that you advise your branch immediately you are aware of the loss.
Alternatively you can call our 24 hour emergency services on 081–450 3122 (telex 341552 MIDCDO G).
WHERE TO SHOP
More and more Retailers are turning to Switch as a way of cutting down queues and offering customers a more convenient way to pay.
The list is growing daily and includes:
Switch can also be used in selected outlets of:
Isn't it time you started paying by Switch?
All you need is an AutoCheque Card.
Royal Insurance
RESPONSIBLE MATURE HOUSEHOLDERS WHO CAN SAY ‘YES’ TO THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS…
SHOULD BE REWARDED WITH HIGH QUALITY LOW COST CONTENTS INSURANCE
I (or my husband/wife) am aged 50 or over
I am insuring the contents of my/our main home
My/our home is built of brick or stone with a slate or tiled roof
My/our home is designed for no more than 4 bedrooms
My/our home is not left regularly unattended due to all adults being in full time work or education
No member of the household has made more than two claims or made a single claim above £2,500 on home insurance in the last two years
Royal Insurance HOMESHIELD 50
QUALITY, LOW COST HOME CONTENTS INSURANCE
When you have reached the prime of life and acquired a home and possessions to be proud of, you want to be sure that you have reliable insurance — but at a price that you feel recognises and rewards the care that you take.
So, at Royal Insurance we decided to develop a NEW high quality home CONTENTS insurance policy especially for the over 50s who qualify for lower insurance premiums.
We carried out extensive market research before introducing HomeShield 50, an up-to-date policy with all the cover that research told us you expect.
But for good measure we added extra benefits to ensure that the policy is right for the risks that householders face today.
FOR EXAMPLE WE INCLUDED
£250 TO REPLACE LOCKS IF YOUR KEYS ARE STOLEN
SPECIAL EXTRA COVER FOR CHRISTMAS AND WEDDING GIFTS
COVER FOR SATELLITE DISHES
LOSS OF METERED WATER OR HEATING OIL
LOSS OF FOOD IF YOUR FREEZER BREAKS DOWN
And with HomeShield 50 you have the option to include cover for:
PERSONAL POSSESSIONS — items lost or damaged anywhere in the world;
LEGAL EXPENSES — for up to £50,000 legal costs.
And of course the BUILDINGS of your home.
WE ALSO ADDED 3 VALUABLE 365 DAYS A YEAR TELEPHONE HELPLINE SERVICES
24 HOUR EMERGENCY HELPLINE
If disaster strikes, such as a flood or a burst pipe, you can guarantee it will be at the most inconvenient time.
That's when immediate telephone advice and help from a tradesman is really needed.
24 HOUR LEGAL ADVICE
Immediate access to expert advice on any private legal problem.
24 HOUR DOMESTIC GLASS REPLACEMENT
Priority domestic glass replacement service by Solaglas.
TAKE MORE CARE — MAKE MORE SAVINGS
HomeShield 50 is already a low-cost policy because it's specially designed for mature, responsible householders who take care of their home and their possessions.
But to reward those who take even more care, there are more premium savings.
5% DISCOUNT For Neighbourhood/Home Watch membership
UP TO 15% DISCOUNT For suitable home security
AND 7 ½%; DISCOUNT If you choose to pay the first £50 of each claim.
SIMPLY COMPLETE AND TEAR OFF THE COUPON BELOW.
POP IT INTO AN ENVELOPE AND POST TODAY, MARKING YOUR ENVELOPE: ROYAL INSURANCE (UK) LTS., HOMESHIELD 50, FREEPOST, LIVERPOOL L69 4BW.
REMEMBER IT'S FREEPOST & NO STAMP IS NEEDED.
HOW HOMESHIELD 50 REWARDS YOU AND GIVES YOU PEACE OF MIND
A wide ranging policy at a competitive premium.
5% Discount off Contents and Personal Possessions premiums for members of Neighbourhood/Home Watch Schemes.
15% Discount off Contents and Personal Possessions premiums for Royal Insurance approved home security.
5% Discount off Contents and Personal Possessions premiums if your home is protected by a professionally installed and maintained burglar alarm system.
7 ½%; Discount off Buildings, Contents and Personal Possessions premiums if you choose to pay the first £50 of each claim.
24 hour Emergency Helpline service.
24 hour Legal Advice service.
24 hour Domestic Glass Replacement service from Solaglas.
10% savings on retail price of window locks, door locks and smoke detectors from participating Chubb Super Centres.
Choice of monthly premiums from your Bank current account or some types of Building Society account.
Or pay annually.
Easy to understand ‘Plain English’ policy.
30 day approval offer enabling you to satisfy yourself that HomeShield 50 meets your requirements.
PAY MONTHLY FOR HOMESHIELD 50 THE EASY AND CONVENIENT WAY
The easy way to pay your premiums is monthly by direct debit through your Bank current account or some types of Building Society account.
This means that your policy will continue automatically, but of course you can stop your HomeShield 50 cover whenever you wish.
SEND FOR YOUR NO OBLIGATION QUOTATION BY COMPLETING THE COUPON AND POP IT IN AN ENVELOPE MARKED: ROYAL INSURANCE (UK) LTD., HOMESHIELD 50, FREEPOST, LIVERPOOL L69 4BW.
the easier way to pay
ESIPLAN 12
monthly payments
A Credit Agreement regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974
One single monthly payment can cover all your Eagle Star policies.
Spread your premium payments over 12 monthly instalments.
No more worries about overrunning renewal dates.
Simplify your budget planning.
All you need to know about Direct Debiting Instructions
The bank or financial institution instruction form conforms to the strict requirements of the Association for Payment Clearing Services and in addition Eagle Star Group give you the following assurances:
direct debits under the instruction will be originated only in respect of premiums payable as notified in advance and agreed by you;
you may cancel your Direct Debiting Instruction at any time by notifying your bankers and advising Eagle Star, but please see the How to cancel section below.
Eagle Star has executed a form of indemnity in favour of the members of the Association for Payment Clearing Services.
This means that if Eagle Star should originate Direct Debits in error, you may seek reimbursement from us through your bankers under the Indemnity.
Your future renewals
When your policy becomes due for renewal there will be no need to complete a fresh application and direct debit instruction.
Instead a new agreement will be sent to you which will advise of any alterations to the premium and credit charge for the year.
Monthly direct debits to cover the amount due will continue automatically unless you inform us that you do not wish to use Esiplan 12.
How to cancel
If you formally notify us of your wish to cancel a policy* we will stop debiting your monthly payment.
Please do not advise your bank or financial institution to cancel the Direct Debiting Instruction if there are other policies under the instruction.
Bear in mind that if a total loss occurs you still have to pay any outstanding instalments and if a Motor policy is cancelled you are liable for premiums up to the date we receive from you the Certificate(s) of Insurance.
Subject to Policy Conditions
How Esiplan 12 works
The premiums for your annually renewable non life policies will be combined in one Esiplan 12 series of 12 monthly instalments.
You must be at least 18 years old,have a suitable account with a clearing bank or other financial institution represented by the Association for Payment Clearing Services and your premiums for each policy should not exceed £20,000.
Here's all you do
1.
Simply complete the Application and Direct Debiting Instruction and return them with your Proposal Form or Renewal Notice.
2.
Enclose a cheque (payable to Eagle Star Group) for TWO months instalments as a deposit.
The other ten payments will be collected monthly from your account on the same debiting date each month.
3.
Make sure they reach your local Eagle Star branch or broker at least 5 days before the renewal date of your policy or, if more than one policy is involved, before the earliest renewal date.
N.B. If you change your Bank you will need to complete a new Direct Debit Instruction.
Please contact your local Eagle Star branch giving as much advance notice as possible.
You will also need to complete a fresh application if you elect to pay another policy by ESIPLAN.
Here's what it costs
Included in the 12 monthly instalments is a small credit charge.
It is currently 6 per cent of the premium (typical A.P.R. 13.7 per cent.
*).
On an annual premium of, say, £180.00 the credit charge per month works out at 90p.
Additional or return premiums will be dealt with separately from the Esiplan 12 Scheme.
Example
First 2 instalments to be paid on submission of Esiplan 12 application i.e. £31.80.
*Actual A.P.R. will be quoted in writing upon receipt of your application.
A GIFT FOR YOU —
When you apply for the NatWest Hospital Income Plan before the close date.
This smart, compact personal radio features quality stereo sound and two receiving bands.
Great for long journeys, or whenever you want to listen to the radio in private.
It's designed to fit neatly in a pocket while you listen — and it's yours absolutely FREE when you apply for the NatWest Hospital Income Plan before the date shown on your Application Form.
Please allow 28 days for delivery.
Protect Your Family With The NatWest Hospital Income Plan
Nobody can guarantee good health, or predict an accident.
The NatWest Hospital Income Plan offers practical financial assistance at a time when you and your family need it most.
You and your Spouse could be covered from as little as £7.90 per month — and you could both claim Double Benefits of £80 each if you were hospitalised at the same time because of illness — and Double again if you were hospitalised simultaneously following an accident.
And for just £2.50 per month all your eligible children could be covered too and receive half the adult benefits stated.
Good health should never be taken for granted — so taking out the NatWest Hospital Income Plan is a responsible decision which gives your family valuable financial support when they really need it.
And remember — you'll qualify for the special free gift overleaf once your Plan is in force!
What the NatWest Hospital Income Plan means for you
£40 per day, tax-free, as soon as you're admitted to hospital for a period of up to one year.
Double Benefits of £80 per day for a period of up to one year — if you're hospitalised because of an accident.
Double Benefits of £80 each for husband and wife when hospitalised at the same time for any reason, whilst both insured under the same policy.
Double Benefits for you and your Spouse — £160 each per day for a period of up to a year — in the event of you both being hospitalised at the same time because of an accident, whilst both insured under the same policy.
Once you are a policyholder, premiums will not be increased on account of age or the number of claims made.
Additional cash payments for certain permanent injuries.
Lump sum Convalescence Benefit — £20 per day, also tax-free — for a period of up to one year, payable on discharge when a hospital stay is 21 days or more.
Additional cash payment of £2,500 to your estate in the event of your death as the result of an accident.
MEDICAL WAIVER
This is to certify that the above named is exempted from any form of medical examination and will not be asked any medical questions regarding this application for the NatWest Hospital Income Plan — PROVIDING THE APPLICANT IS ELIGIBLE AND RETURNS THE APPLICATION FORM BEFORE THE CLOSE DATE ABOVE
From the moment you join the NatWest Hospital Income Plan, you will be covered for any new medical conditions that occur.
The Plan cannot cover you during the first 24 months for any existing medical condition you may be suffering from or have received treatment for in the two years prior taking out the Plan.
Please refer to ‘Your Questions Answered’ leaflet for full details of your cover.
A Specially Selected Savings Plan For NatWest Customers That Offers Tax-Free Growth
YOUR QUESTIONS ANSWERED ABOUT A LIMITED TAX-FREE INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITY
WHY IS THE FAMILY BOND SPECIAL?
There has probably never been more choice for places in which you can invest than now.
But it is fact that most investment schemes are subject to one form of tax or another.
This is why the Family Bond is special — because it is tax-exempt.
Indeed, legislation actually limits the amount which individuals can invest into the scheme.
After all, a fund which does not pay tax should normally out-perform a similar fund that does.
That is why the Family Bond is an ideal investment for every adult (regardless of marital status or dependants) contemplating a regular savings scheme.
HOW HAVE OUR MANAGED FUNDS PERFORMED?
Because we can invest your money tax-free and your return is paid to you tax-free, your investment has the potential to be amongst the highest performers.
Family Assurance Society's managed funds have over the past 13 years produced overall growth rates averaging 17% per annum.
Their current fund, which is open to new investors, is the Performance Fund and since it's launch in January 1987, it has produced an average annual growth rate of over 19%.
However this cannot be used as a guide to future performance as investments can go down as well as up.
HOW DO I KNOW FAMILY ASSURANCE SOCIETY IS A SECURE HOME FOR MY SAVINGS?
There are more than 380,000 people for whom Family Assurance Society already look after over £320m worth of savings.
It is Britain's largest, tax-exempt Friendly Society and is owned by its members — people like you.
It is registered under the 1974 Friendly Societies Act (Reg.
No. 939F) and reports to the Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies.
Family Assurance Society is a member of LAUTRO, the Life Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory Organisation.
WHERE DO MY SAVINGS GO?
Contributions paid towards the Family Bond are invested in the Performance Fund.
Between 20% and 25% will be invested in ‘fixed interest stocks’.
These include gilts, and can also include loan stocks of leading UK companies.
Each pays a fixed guarantee rate of return, which we receive TAX-FREE.
The balance will be invested in property and shares of carefully selected major companies, both home and abroad, which our Investment Managers believe hold the best potential for long term capital growth.
HOW LONG DO I INVEST FOR?
The initial investment is for ten years.
However, if you wish, you can extend this for further periods of ten years, to provide an even longer term for your tax-free savings.
You make this choice in the tenth year.
Once premiums cease after 10 years, you can then leave your fund to continue accumulating and you can cash it in, at anytime, prior to your 85th birthday.
WHAT HAPPENS AFTER TEN YEARS?
In ten years' time you can choose to do the following:
1) You can take a cheque for the full amount — tax-free.
2) You can leave your money to enjoy continued tax-free growth and you can cash it in, tax-free, at any time before your 85th birthday.
3) Or, by encashing units, you may draw a tax-free income, leaving the balance of your fund to continue accumulating tax-free.
4) Finally, once your contributions cease under one policy, you may continue to take advantage of the Society's tax exemption by taking out a new Bond.
HOW CAN I APPLY?
All you have to do is complete the Application Form, Declaration and Direct Debiting Instruction and return them to National Westminster Insurance Services Ltd. in the reply-paid-envelope provided.
And don't forget that you can double your return if both husband and wife invest.
If you decide within one month of the issue of your Family Bond that you no longer wish to continue with the contract, you may return your Bond document to the Society who will refund your contributions.
This does not affect your statutory rights imposed by law, which will allow you to cancel your policy within 14 days.
NOMINATION OF BENEFICIARY
If you complete this section of the Application Form we can pay the life assurance benefit, subject to a maximum of £5,000, to your nominated beneficiary provided he or she is over age 18, immediately we receive official evidence of your death.
This avoids any delays involved in waiting for Letters of Administration and Grant of Probate.
You can change your nomination at any time simply by writing to the Society.
WHO IS ALLOWED TO INVEST?
Anyone between the ages of 18 and 70 can invest in the Family Bond, provided they do not already have a tax-exempt Friendly Society policy where premiums are still being paid.
THIS IS BECAUSE THE INLAND REVENUE RESTRICTS THE MANY BENEFITS TO ONE PLAN PER PERSON, BUT REMEMBER A HUSBAND AND WIFE CAN HAVE ONE EACH.
HOW WILL I KNOW WHAT'S HAPPENING TO MY BOND?
Your investment purchases units that are linked to the Performance Fund.
Units are valued on the last working day of each month and are allocated on the first day of the following month, after the receipt of your premium.
The current values of units are published daily in the Financial Times and each year you will be sent a statement showing the progress of your Bond.
PRODUCT PARTICULARS
WHAT IS THE FAMILY BOND?
The Family Bond is a tax-exempt, unit-linked, endowment policy, with contributions payable for 10 years only.
Because the tax benefits make this investment so attractive, the law LIMITS IT TO ONE PER ADULT.
The only monthly investment is £9.
A husband and wife can take out a separate plan.
HERE'S WHAT YOU COULD RECEIVE
In order to provide an indication of the possible benefits that might be paid under this policy, LAUTRO (the regulatory authority for the marketing of life assurance and unit trusts) has made rules which lay down two bases on which future benefits may be illustrated.
The figures quoted in these illustrations comply with the rates of return (and other factors) as set out on the LAUTRO bases, the higher illustration representing a future rate of return of 13% per annum and the lower illustration representing a future rate of return of 8 ½%; per annum.
These two amounts do not represent the upper and lower limits of the possible amount of the benefit.
What is actually payable will depend on the future movement in unit prices, which can go down as well as up (and the effect of charges applicable to the policy).
These illustrations should not be used as a basis for comparing similar policies issued by other life assurance companies or Friendly Societies.
If a husband and wife continue to maintain their investments for further 10 year periods, their £18 per month could be worth:
ALL FREE OF PERSONAL TAXES UNDER CURRENT LEGISLATION.
NOTES ON LIFE ASSURANCE
Take a look at the Application Form and if you can complete it — without qualification — Family Assurance Society guarantee to accept your application and assure your life for £750 immediately on receipt of your completed Application Form and Direct Debiting Instruction.
If you are aged over 55, Family Assurance Society will reduce the sum assured by £20 for each year above 55.
If you cannot complete the declaration without qualification, the sum assured may also have to be reduced under your Bond.
But, in either case, the investment advantages will not be reduced in any way.
To achieve fairness between investors of all ages, the modest cost of life assurance is recovered by the encashment of some units.
The amount of each encashment will depend upon your age at that time and the amount of life assurance.
The actual cost of your life assurance will normally diminish as the difference reduces between the minimum guaranteed sum assured and the value of your fund.
When the value of your fund exceeds the guaranteed sum assured deductions will cease.
MANAGEMENT CHARGES
Your only commitment is £9 per month from which management charges are deducted automatically.
The first 65% of your first year's contribution covers the initial set-up charges of the policy.
100% of each subsequent year's contribution, net of the monthly handling charge, will be invested in the Performance Fund.
There is a management charge of 5% represented by the spread between the offer and the bid price, the price at which the units are bought and sold.
There is also an annual charge (collected monthly) of currently ¾%; of the value of the funds.
Monthly contributions include a handling charge of 30p per month.
Family Assurance Society may vary these charges if so advised by their actuary.
ABOUT EARLY ENCASHMENT
After the payment of one full year's contribution you may encash your Bond at any time.
However, it must be pointed out that there will be an early encashment charge if you do so before you have paid six full years' contributions.
If you have paid six full years' contributions before you cease payments, the Society will make your policy paid-up, leaving the units purchased to remain invested until such time you make a request to encash them.
The table below details specimen surrender values which would be applicable if the Bond was surrendered in the first five years, and are based on a monthly premium of £9.
The figures are calculated on an assumed growth rate of 10.75% and are therefore not guaranteed, as unit prices can fall as well as rise.
The maximum early encashment payment within the first 10 years of your Bond is restricted by law to a return of your contributions.
EFFECTS OF INFLATION
The value of your eventual cash sum and monthly premiums depends on the rate of inflation over the period of the Plan.
By way of illustration the following table shows what £1000 will be worth in today's money at the end of the periods shown, if annual rates of inflation over the period are as shown.
Note: The information given in this leaflet is based on Family Assurance Society's understanding of current legislation.
LIMITED — ONLY ONE PER PERSON
Just £9 Per Month
The Family Bond
A Tax-Free Investment Everyone Can Afford
National Westminster Bank PLC
The Family Bond — the ultimate tax-free investment
Dear Customer,
You may have heard about the Family Bond before, but I'd like to remind you how attractive this investment plan really is.
This form of investment, limited by the law because of its DOUBLE TAX-FREE BENEFITS, is certainly worth considering.
The facts are these:
A Friendly Society like Family Assurance Society can invest money for you TAX-FREE.
What is more, when you take the proceeds, you receive them FREE OF ALL TAXATION, under current legislation.
It's because of this DOUBLE TAX-FREE BENEFIT that the Inland Revenue has limited such investments to one per adult.
Therefore, because such an investment is strictly limited, it is vital that you make maximum use of your entitlement.
That is why National Westminster Insurance Services Ltd., the Bank's independent and impartial insurance broking Company, has selected the Family Bond from Family Assurance — Britain's largest tax-exempt Friendly Society.
How Much Can I Invest?
The only monthly investment is £9.
Of course, to take full advantage of the Family Bond, a husband and wife could each take out this investment, ie £18 in total.
continued overleaf
Excellent Past Performance
When you take out the Family Bond the investment will be linked to the Family Assurance Performance Fund, which since its launch in January 1987 has achieved an average annual growth rate of over 19% as at 28th February 1990.
However, this cannot be used as a guide to future fund performance, as unit prices can fall as well as rise.
How Can I Apply?
The first step is to read the brochure, then complete the Application Form supplied and return it using the pre-paid envelope provided.
A Free Gift
All applications received will qualify for a free carriage clock which you will receive once your application has been accepted.
So please do not delay returning your application.
Your gift will despatched within 28 days.
We sincerely believe this is an opportunity you won't want to miss.
If you have any queries, please ring the NatWest Insurance Services Helpline on Bristol (0272) 263723 during normal business hours.
Simon Davis or one of his colleagues will be there to answer your questions.
SO ACT TODAY, and MAKE YOUR INVESTMENT REALLY PAY.
Yours sincerely,
R.W. Saxton Head of Personal Banking Services
Your Questions Answered By NatWest Insurance Services
NatWest Insurance Services, the Bank's independent insurance broking Company, and Sun Alliance have worked hand-in-hand to bring you this attractive insurance policy.
The NatWest Hospital Income Plan gives you real financial security when you or a member of your family are hospitalised — and at a very affordable premium.
Once you've read all about the scheme, we're confident you'll feel it merits your careful consideration.
This leaflet answers some of the most common questions people ask when they're thinking of taking out a policy:
Q: What makes this offer so special?
A: NatWest Insurance Services has negotiated with Sun Alliance to bring the Hospital Income Plan to NatWest Bank Customers — with the specially added benefit of double cover if you're admitted to hospital as the result of an accident.
Extra benefits include cash payments of up to £13,000 for certain permanent injuries and £2,500 left to your estate following accidental death.
Q: Can I protect my family?
A: You can take out a policy from as little as £4.50 per month, covering only yourself in the event of hospitalisation.
If you wish, you can also insure your Spouse and pay a joint premium starting from £7.90.
With a further payment of just £2.50 per month, you will also receive half the stated benefits for all your eligible children in the event of their hospitalisation.
Q: How does the Hospital Income Plan differ from private medical insurance?
A: The Hospital Income Plan pays cash direct to you, to use however you wish.
Private medical insurance normally covers your private hospital fees only — so it's quite different.
Q: Is there any limit to the number of times I can claim?
A: You can claim daily benefits for the duration of any hospital stay, up to a maximum of one year at any time, as long as your premiums are paid up to date, and as long as the circumstances of your hospitalisation are not mentioned under the exclusions clause below.
Q: Would I be able to cancel my cover if I changed my mind?
A: Yes — at any time, if you feel you no longer need the security of the Hospital Income Plan.
But once you've experienced the peace of mind that this insurance gives you, we're confident you'll want to continue with your valuable protection.
Q: Can I take out this Plan if I already have a Hospital Income Plan with Sun Alliance?
A: If you already have a Sun Alliance Hospital Income policy, which was also offered to you with a guaranteed acceptance, you will not be able to claim benefits under both policies.
However, if you feel that the specially negotiated benefits of the NatWest Hospital Income Plan are more suited to your needs, you may take advantage of this offer and cancel your existing policy.
Q: Are there any Exclusions?
A: Only the usual things…war risks, self-inflicted injuries, alcohol or drug abuse, mental disease or disorder, pregnancy or childbirth.
Additionally, if you have received treatment or advice for a medical condition during the 2 years before taking up the Hospital Income Plan, your cover for the condition commences after you have been insured for 24 months or if you are admitted to hospital for that condition during this period then as soon after the 24 months as you have been free of in-patient treatment for 12 months.
New medical conditions are, of course, covered from the day the policy is taken out.
We hope this leaflet has been helpful in answering your questions.
However, if there is anything else you wish to discuss, please don't hesitate to call Mark Elliott or one of his colleagues at NatWest Insurance Services on:
BRISTOL (0272) 263723
YOUR SAFEGUARD
Only the Policy Document, written in plain English, tells you everything about what is and is not covered (Sun Alliance will provide you with a copy of the Policy if you wish).
Home Improvement Loans
NatWest Home Improvement Loans — For a new slant on living!
A NatWest Home Improvement Loan could give you a new slant on living!
Making your home a more comfortable place to live in may seem expensive, but home improvements are sometimes the only way to create the lifestyle that you want to lead.
So if you're thinking of building an extension, refitting the kitchen, improving the bathroom or starting some other permanent home improvement project, why not ask NatWest for a Home Improvement Loan to spread the cost?
And if you're thinking of doing several improvement projects in your home, NatWest can arrange one loan to cover all of them and monthly repayments will be fixed throughout the term of the loan so you'll always be able to budget for the cost.
And now it's even easier to apply!
If you apply for a loan with NatWest, we keep the formalities to a minimum.
And now, applying for a NatWest loan is even easier.
We have more than 200 branches open on Saturdays from 9.30 am–12.30 pm, so you can call in and discuss your needs if you can't manage it during the working week.
And if you're already a NatWest customer, agreement to Home Improvement Loans up to £5,000 unsecured can be given on the spot.
You don't need to visit the branch that holds your account either — any of our NatWest branches will be happy to help you.
So you're not kept waiting for a decision.
Who can apply?
Providing you have reached the age of majority and can show that the monthly repayments are within your means, you can apply with confidence.
If you don't already bank with NatWest, take your completed form along to any of our branches, where our staff will be happy to talk to you about opening an account and discuss your loan application.
Are there any special conditions?
A NatWest Home Improvement Loan can be taken out in sole or joint names and unless you're thinking of borrowing more than £5,000 we would not normally ask for security.
However, we will expect you to fund a proportion of the cost of the project from your own resources; if you need advice regarding the amount of your own contribution, your local NatWest branch will be pleased to discuss this with you.
How do I apply for a loan?
As a first step, complete the application form in the booklet and return it to us.
For joint borrowers, all parties are required to complete the formalities.
Normally, there is no need for you to see the Bank Manager unless you wish to do so — we can give you the ‘OK’ from the information on the form.
Once the loan has been approved, we'll send a formal agreement for you to sign and return to us, then your Current Account will be credited in due course.
If you do decide to call in at your own NatWest branch, our staff will normally be able to complete all the formalities on the spot and to discuss any particular aspects of the project.
How much could I borrow?
NatWest Home Improvement Loans are available for amounts from £500 to £30,000 covering any period from one to ten years.
And, under current Government regulations, provided that your total borrowing for house purchase and home improvements doesn't exceed £30,000 the interest on your Home Improvement Loan may qualify for tax relief.
Some improvements — such as replacing soft furnishings or general decorations — don't qualify for tax relief, so it's always worth checking with your local tax office.
Once you've decided on the amount you need to borrow, you can get an indication of what the gross monthly repayments are likely to be from the tables provided in this booklet for amounts up to £5,000.
For amounts in excess of £5,000 please ask at your local NatWest branch for current rates and repayments for the loan you require.
The net repayments, which take into account any tax relief you may be allowed, will depend on your own individual circumstances.
If you would like some advice on the amount you could borrow for a particular home improvement project that you have in mind, ask your local NatWest branch, as our staff will be pleased to help you.
Before you begin…
A home improvement project can change your lifestyle for the better, but if it's a big project that goes wrong, the result can be a nightmare.
Here are some easy rules to remember before you embark on a major scheme:
Before you begin, make sure you know exactly what you want done and consider taking professional advice from an architect or surveyor — a little money spent at this stage could save you a lot later on;
Do check whether you will need planning permission or building regulations approval from your local authority.
Your project may even qualify for a local authority grant!
Don't be persuaded to rush into the project.
Compare costs and standards of service by getting estimates from at least two firms.
Ask if they have carried out a similar job for someone else and whether you can contact the customer to check if the job was satisfactory.
It makes sense to get a second opinion!
Make sure that the contract is in writing.
Ensure that it gives full details of prices, cancellation rights, a timetable for the work, any Guarantee which will apply to the work or materials and for what period of time.
Check whether any part of the job is to be subcontracted and who will be liable if problems occur.
Be very careful about any payments that are asked for in advance or payment of large deposits.
Always question any increase in price and ask for good reasons why it was not included in the original estimate.
If problems do arise during a large project, don't hesitate to deal with them firmly and immediately.
Do get the advice of the Citizen's Advice Bureau or your local Trading Standards Department.
More peace of mind with NatWest!
Even a relatively modest home improvement project can mean quite a large commitment.
With NatWest, you get the valuable option of the NatWest Home Improvement Loan Protector to give you extra peace of mind.
This is a special safeguard for NatWest borrowers which covers your monthly repayments in the event of sickness or accident — and should you die during the period of the loan, it will be repaid in full.
For the small extra monthly payment, we believe it is well worth having the peace of mind provided for you and your dependents.
NatWest Home Improvement Loan Protector is automatically arranged for you unless you indicate otherwise on your loan application form; there are no complicated proposal forms or medical examination.
The principal benefits and conditions are outlined on the application form and we will be happy to provide further details if required — ask your local NatWest branch if you would like more information.
As soon as your Home Improvement Loan arrangements have been completed, we will forward your Insurance Certificate.
If, for any reason, you then decide that you do not want the cover, you may return the Certificate within 14 days for cancellation without any charge.
…
And don't forget!
With a NatWest Home Improvement Loan, you can:
Make your home a more comfortable place to live in and change your lifestyle for you and your family.
Budget the cost through fixed monthly payments and — depending on the project — offset some of the cost through tax relief;
Have the flexibility of being able to shop around for the best possible deals and get the best professional advice;
Through the valuable option of the NatWest Home Improvement Loan Protector, you can have peace of mind and protect yourself and your dependents against unforeseen circumstances.
NatWest has a flexible approach so that loans are also available for other purchases that you may have in mind, whether for furnishings, Hi-Fi, other domestic equipment, a new car, or a holiday to get away from it all.
And, don't forget that if you make substantial improvements to your home, it may increase its value.
It makes sense to check that you have sufficient insurance cover for building and contents — your local NatWest branch can obtain competitive quotations on your behalf from National Westminster Insurance Services Limited.
Ask NatWest — you can be sure we will understand your needs and we'll be pleased to help you!
NatWest Home Improvement Loan Protector Information
NatWest Home Improvement Loan Protector is administered by National Westminster Insurance Services Limited, who will deal with any claims that you may make under the policy.
It is underwritten by Excess Insurance Company Limited and Ambassador Life Assurance Company Limited.
The insurance companies anticipate maintaining the premium rates at current levels but they retain the right to review them from time to time, subject to giving each insured person 60 days notice of any change.
A specimen Certificate of Insurance will be made available.
The following is a summary of the principal conditions of the Loan Protector policy and is provided for general information purposes only:
Eligibility
All Home Improvement Loan borrowers who are resident in the UK, in employment and who will be under the age of 65 when the loan expires are eligible.
If you are disabled by illness or injury at the time that you enter the agreement, cover will not begin until you return to full time work.
Benefits
If you are unable to work as a result of sickness or accident for a period of more than 14 consecutive days, then your monthly Home Improvement Loan repayments will be made for you, until you are fit enough to return to work.
Should you die during the period of the loan, the balance outstanding will be paid off.
The policy takes effect as soon as the Home Improvement Loan has been set up and covers repayments up to £750 per month and an overall total of £30,000.
For joint borrowers, protection is available for the first named party to the account — usually the main earner — but cover is available for both.
Contact NatWest for more details.
All benefits and cover cease upon reaching the originally agreed termination date of the loan.
Exclusions
The policy does not cover war risks, self-inflicted injuries or disabilities caused by pregnancy, alcoholism or drug abuse.
Cancellation
If you decide to take the option of Home Improvement Loan Protector, an Insurance Certificate will be forwarded to you as soon as the loan arrangements have been completed.
If, for any reason, you then decide that you do not want Home Improvement Loan Protector cover, you may return your Certificate to NatWest within 14 days for cancellation without charge.
Further information
Further information on Home Improvement Loan Protector is available from NatWest and details will be provided on request.
The terms and conditions of the policy are set out on the Certificate of Insurance.
Please read them with care, so that you will fully understand the benefits and conditions of the policy.
Home Improvement Loans
NO FORMALITY.
NO FUSS.
NatWest The Action Bank
Credit Service
Thinking about making more
…of your kitchen, building an extension, improving your bathroom — but need a loan?
Let NatWest help with a Home Improvement Loan.
Simple, straightforward finance that's easy to arrange.
Puts you in the position to negotiate the best possible price.
Fixed interest rate and monthly repayments for easy budgeting.
Optional life and disability Protector cover for peace of mind.
Want to know more about it?
NatWest's Home Improvement Loans are available for amounts from £500 to £30,000 covering any period from one to ten years.
Loans can be for double glazing, cavity wall insulation, loft conversion, central heating — permanent improvements that make your home more comfortable to live in — and if you're thinking of more than one improvement, a loan can be arranged to cover this.
Once you have decided how much you wish to borrow, look at the repayment tables to see how much it will cost.
Monthly repayments are fixed throughout the term of the loan so there is no need to worry about a change in interest rates!
And…
Interest on borrowing for improvements to your home can qualify for tax relief providing your total house purchase/home improvement borrowing together does not exceed £30,000 under current Government regulations.
If you've undertaken improvements which include replacement of soft furnishings — general decorations it is best to check with your local tax office to ensure you are eligible for relief as by themselves, these items do not normally qualify.
Where loans are eligible, effective monthly repayments can be reduced accordingly in the same way as most Bank or Building Society mortgages operate, giving you the benefits of tax relief straight away.
Can anyone apply?
Yes, providing you are over 18 years of age, and can show that the monthly repayments are within your means, then you can apply with confidence.
We would recommend you protect your loan with suitable life cover and for larger loans this would normally be a requirement.
Choice of the insurer is yours and an existing policy can be considered, although in such cases it may require depositing with the bank as security.
Loans can be in sole or joint names and unless you are thinking of borrowing above £5000, we would not usually ask for security.
Simply fill in the application form and return it to your branch.
In many cases there will be no need for an interview and the matter can be dealt with by return of post.
Of course, if you prefer to talk to someone then an interview can be easily arranged.
If you are not yet a NatWest customer but would like a loan simply fill in the application form and call in at the branch of your choice where the staff will be pleased to discuss your needs.
HOME IMPROVEMENT PROTECTOR COVER.
If you would like the benefit of safeguarding your monthly payments, NatWest can offer a valuable optional protection incorporating sickness and accident cover as well as death benefit.
For a small extra monthly payment you can have peace of mind for you and your family.
Who is eligible?
Any employed Home Improvement borrower, including self-employed, who will not have reached 65 years of age when their Improvement Loan expires, will qualify.
There are no health questions to be answered or medical examinations required but if you are disabled by illness or injury when you enter the agreement, cover will not begin until you return to full-time work.
What are the benefits?
If you are unable to work as a result of sickness or accident for any period of more than 14 consecutive days, then the cover will pay your monthly loan repayments for you, until you are fit enough to return to work.
Should you die during the term of the cover, the balance owing on your Home Improvement Loan account will be repaid.
The Insurance begins as soon as your Home Improvement Loan has been set up and covers all repayments up to £750 per month and an overall total of £30,000.
Joint borrowers enjoy protection on the first named party to the account, usually the main earner, but cover is available on both at additional cost — please ask your branch for details.
Are there any exclusions?
Just a few.
War risks, suicide and self-inflicted injuries are excluded together with any disability caused by pregnancy.
Alcoholism and drug abuse are also excluded.
However, ailments other than the above, that have troubled you in the past are covered.
How much does it cost?
Very little, given the security and peace of mind the benefits give you.
The repayment tables detail the full cost but as a rule of thumb for every £1000 borrowed the monthly premium costs just £1.80.
How do I apply?
Simply indicate on the loan application form that you require cover.
There are no other forms to complete and no medical examination is necessary.
Your Insurance Certificate will be forwarded to you as soon as the Home Improvement Loan arrangements have been completed but if for any reason, you then decide you do not want the cover, you may return your Certificate within 14 days for cancellation without any charge.
Anything else I should know?
Home Improvement Loan Protector is administered by National Westminster Insurance Services Ltd. who will deal with any claims you make and is underwritten by Excess Insurance Company Limited/Ambassador Life Assurance Company Limited.
The Insurance Companies anticipate maintaining the premium rates at current levels but they retain the right to review them from time to time, subject to giving each insured person 60 days notice of any change.
A specimen Insurance Certificate is available on request.
Golden Rules:
Remember these ‘golden’ rules before embarking on major home improvements:
Before you start, decide exactly what you want done.
For those larger jobs, consider getting professional advice from an architect or surveyor.
Ask your local authority if you need planning permission or building regulations approval.
You may even qualify for a local authority grant!
Don't be rushed into things.
Get estimates and quotations in writing from at least two firms.
Find out as much as you can about the firm you decide on.
Make sure it is competent to carry out the work.
If in doubt, get a second opinion.
Make sure your contract is in writing and that it gives full details of prices, cancellation rights, guarantees — how long they last and when the work will be finished.
Check whether subcontractors are being used and who is liable if things go wrong.
Be careful about parting with money in advance or paying excessive deposits.
Always question any increase in price and ask why it was not included in the original estimates.
If any problems arise get advice from the Citizen's Advice Bureau or Trading Standards Department.
Don't Forget…
A NatWest Home Improvement Loan lets you:
Shop around for the best possible deals and the best service.
Budget ahead to meet fixed monthly repayments.
Make your home more comfortable to live in.
Take advantage of the Home Improvement Loan Protector for peace of mind.
NatWest understands your needs and is pleased to help.
Keep this brochure handy and return the completed application form when you need a loan.
The NatWest Hospital Income Plan
Financial Security When You Need It Most
If you've never had a day's illness in your life, it's hard to imagine the financial disruption that can be caused by sudden hospitalisation.
Yet it's something that many thousands of people face every year — without the protection that a Hospital Income Plan provides.
If you were admitted to hospital and your employers stopped paying your full salary, you could end up relying on Statutory Sick Pay and trying to manage on £52.10* per week — which may well not be enough to even begin to cover your household overheads.
And it isn't just a case of falling ill.
An accident could hospitalise you tomorrow — and your life could be turned upside down for months.
So if you're hospitalised without protection against loss of income, or you're faced with expenses when a member of your family is in hospital, you could have a problem — unless you do something about it now.
*Figure correct at time of going to press.
Why you need our Hospital Income Plan now
Protecting yourself against loss of income and the expenses incurred during hospitalisation is an important step towards safeguarding your standard of living.
Even if you have private medical insurance, the Hospital Income Plan is the perfect complement — that's because it pays cash direct to you, while private medical insurance pays only your hospital fees.
With the NatWest Hospital Income Plan, you can spend the money in whatever way you please.
While you're in hospital, a guaranteed additional daily income will go a long way to ensuring that you don't come out of hospital with financial worries.
That's exactly what the NatWest Hospital Income Plan is all about.
By providing a daily income for the duration of your stay in hospital, plus a Convalescence Benefit payable after longer stays, the Plan can help you meet your overheads while you're out of circulation — and add financial comfort while you're getting back on your feet.
How it works
The NatWest Hospital Income Plan covers you in the event of hospitalisation and pays out from the first day you're admitted.
You receive a daily allowance of £40, tax-free, and if you're hospitalised as the result of an accident, these benefits are doubled to £80 each day.
Also, if you and your Spouse are both covered by the Plan and are hospitalised at the same time, your cover will again be doubled — giving you £160 each, if hospitalised at the same time following an accident.
You're also entitled to a lump sum for convalescence following stays of 21 days or more, plus further lump sums for certain permanent injuries.
Benefits are paid for up to a full year following hospitalisation.
The table in this leaflet will give you full details.
You and your Spouse can be covered from just £7.90 per month depending on age, a saving on individual rates.
All your children will cost you only a further £2.50 per month.
You'll see that you pay a monthly premium which is determined by your age when applying, not your medical history.
The premium is then fixed for as long as you continue the Plan, even when you cross into other age bands, and no matter how times you claim against it.
And if you apply before the close date, your acceptance into the NatWest Hospital Income Plan is guaranteed.
How the NatWest Hospital Income Plan helps — by giving you cash to use however you please
This affordable scheme not only covers you for loss of income, but is useful for the unforeseen expenses as well.
Claims of this type from existing Policyholders show it pays to take out a NatWest Hospital Income Plan:
£40 per day if you're hospitalised as the result of illness.
If you had a two week spell in hospital due to illness, and you worried about keeping your household running smoothly, the £280 weekly payments would let you employ home help without straining your finances.
Think how much better you and your family could cope.
£80 per day if you're hospitalised as the result of an accident.
£560 if you were hospitalised for a week after being involved in an accident as the NatWest Hospital Income Plan would pay you DOUBLE the normal rate for hospitalisation.
With the extra money, especially if you were far away from home, your family could visit you in hospital, without some of the worry of travel and accommodation expenses.
£20 per day Convalescence Benefit if you stay in hospital 21 days or more.
After surgery, you could be in hospital for a considerable time — and if you were missing overtime pay or sales bonuses because you were unable to work, you could have financial difficulties.
It would be a great relief to know that after a three week hospital stay, you'd have £420 on top of your daily benefit of £840, payable on your discharge.
The NatWest Hospital Income Plan — up to £1,200 per month Tax-Free income throughout your stay in hospital
Please refer to ‘Your Questions Answered’ leaflet for further information.
adverts from FLYER
Contact another pilot…
If your problem is aircraft insurance.
Does your insurance company think a downwind leg is something to do with cricket?
If so, it might be an idea to talk to the people who not only insure aeroplanes, but fly them as well!
So if you're a pilot who's looking for insurance, why not talk to another pilot who can supply just what you want?
Contact Carol Taylor on Thirsk (0845) 23018 — 24hr.
Ansaphone Service
Or write to:
MOWBRAY VALE INSURANCE 
FLIGHTCARE
MECHANICAL BREAKDOWN INSURANCE AERO-ENGINES
Have you budgeted for an ENGINE BREAKDOWN?
CAN YOU AFFORD IT?
YOU CAN NOW!
FLIGHTCARE OFFERS PEACE OF MIND…
WE TAKE CARE OF THE HEART OF YOUR AIRCRAFT
Free — a comprehensive assessment of your financial affairs
Allied Dunbar has developed a method of clarifying your personal financial position.
It's called Personal Financial Planning.
It works by analysing your present financial position and identifying any problem areas or gaps.
I can then produce a programme that provides a framework to meet your future financial plans using Allied Dunbar products.
The service I provide is free and there is no obligation on you to buy anything.
If you would like to know more about this ‘Financial Health Check’ write to me at the address below or call me on 0204 31627.
ALLIED DUNBAR PERSONAL FINANCIAL GUIDANCE
Aviation Insurers…who know about flying
With Brian Kirkland and Colin Matthews' 35 years combined experience in the aviation insurance business and over 2,000 hours at private and commercial pilot level it is clear that you are dealing with people who know the business from both sides.
Add to this the strength of Polygon Insurance Company with major shareholders being KLM, SAS and SWISSAIR and the facts speak for themselves.
So speak to Brian Kirland or Colin Matthews, or write to:
Polygon INSURANCE COMPANY  
ARE YOU DEVELOPING OR OPERATING GOLF OR LEISURE FACILITIES?
?
Are Your Calculations Correct
?
Have You Considered The Full Potential
?
Have You Minimised The Pay Back Period
?
Are You Using The Best Range Of Facilities
?
Will The Financial Institutions Understand Your Proposals
?
Is Your Marketing Plan Fully Developed
?
How Are The Facilities To Be Operated
?
Is Your Development Budget On Target
?
Is Your Design Satisfactory
IF THESE ARE YOUR QUESTIONS…
K.J.L LTD.
HAVE THE ANSWERS.
K.J.L. Can provide detailed feasibility studies
K.J.L. Would prepare full financial appraisals
K.J.L. Can arrange comprehensive marketing reports
K.J.L. Design optimum range of facilities
K.J.L. Prepare detailed operational structures
K.J.L. Will troubleshoot existing centres
K.J.L. Can provide a full development package
WE EAGERLY AWAIT YOUR CALL!
CHEAPER MOTOR INSURANCE
It doesn't matter if you are 17–70, drive an A30 or a Porsche, if you have a maximum no claim bonus or a string of unfortunate ‘incidents’.
Contact Chartwell — you will receive friendly and helpful advice plus the best value for money quotation possible.
CHARTWELL INSURANCE BROKERS
adverts from Yachting World
THE INSURANCE GROUP WITH A DEPTH OF EXPERIENCE IN YACHTING
Groves, John & Westrup (Underwriting) Limited is a wholly owned specialist subsidiary of Sphere Drake Insurance Group plc, which has shareholders funds of just under £60 million.
The company is a leader in yacht insurance in the UK, covering everything from small dinghies to large luxury yachts.
Combining innovative technology with a unique depth of experience, Groves, John & Westrup offers efficient and speedy claims handling, helpful documentation and a clear focus on its client needs.
Sphere Drake with Groves, John & Westrup — strength to depend on.
To understand why Bachmann & Co Ltd are a leading agency in BRITISH FLAG YACHT REGISTRATION you have to read the small print…
Bachmann & Co Ltd are leading international marine consultants, specialising in corporate yacht ownership, providing professional legal and technical services for clients worldwide.
Working in close association with designers, builders, brokers, agencies and banks to fulfil our clients' most exacting requirements.
Our marine department services include Company Formations, Yacht and Ship Registration, Marine Consultancy Services, Marine Finance, Marine Insurance, International Marine Radio Accounting Services and Satellite Communications Services.
Please contact us for further detailed information.
BRITISH FLAG YACHT REGISTRATION
The use of British registration for your yacht gives you access to the privileges, benefits, and protection of the British flag.
When combined with offshore corporate ownership you can enjoy additional financial advantages.
Our many years of experience, together with established offices in all the major offshore financial, and yachting, centres enables us to give the best possible services to our clients of all nationalities.
For further details of the full range of our confidential facilities including finance, insurance and radio accounting please apply for our explanatory brochure.
MARINE INVESTMENTS LIMITED
‘Have you considered all the advantages of corporate yacht ownership?’
Sarnia Ship Registrations Limited, established in the British Channel Island of Guernsey, specialises in the incorporation of companies to own yachts and ships to be registered under the British flag — one of the world's most respected maritime flags.
Individual circumstances differ but corporate ownership of major capital assets may provide worthwhile advantages.
The principles of corporate ownership are set out in multi-lingual editions of our detailed brochure available on request.
For your complimentary copy please telephone, fax or use the reply coupon below.
SARNIA SHIP Registrations
Corporate Yacht Ownership explained…essential reading for owners and intended owners.
Subjects covered — Yacht registration under the British flag, the benefits of corporate ownership; company and trust formation and administration; marine insurance; marine finance and other banking services.
NEW!
TAX RELIEF FOR OVER 60's!
NOW WE CAN AFFORD PRIVATE HEALTH TOO
Now that the Government is giving tax relief on private health insurance we took a fresh look at all the schemes which qualify.
We found one the best value by far for us — The Exeter Hospital Aid Society.
Not only do you get full tax relief with the Exeter, they also do not raise subscription rates just because you're older.
This little difference adds up to a large saving.
Furthermore, the Exeter guarantees renewal up to any age regardless of size or number of claims made.
The Exeter also accepts new members over 65 and under 75 years old for a once-only additional joining premium (also with tax relief).
Thereafter normal rates apply and coverage continues up to any age.
For free brochure write or telephone giving age of eldest person to be included.
IMMEDIATE SAVINGS OF 25% (40% FOR HIGHER RATE TAX PAYERS)
10% DISCOUNT NOW AVAILABLE TO NATIONAL TRUST MEMBERS Proof of membership required
SaverPlus 2001
An opportunity to profit from this excellent Savings Plan and benefit from growing financial protection for your family
Start the 21st Century with a Cash Sum
Make the most of your savings with SaverPlus 2001
Clerical Medical has designed this Plan to help you to make the most of the profit from your savings over the next 10 years.
And start the 21st Century with a substantial cash sum, which is yours to spend any way you wish — on improvements to your home, a new car, a special holiday.
The choice is yours — and under current legislation, it's free from personal taxation.
(Clerical Medical will have paid any taxes due on its life fund.)
Why choose SaverPlus 2001?
Quite simple.
We have an excellent record of investment success.
Since 1824, Clerical Medical has paid bonuses to their with-profits policyholders for every year without a break.
(It should be noted that past performance is not necessarily a guide to the future.)
Now SaverPlus 2001 allows you to benefit from this profitable record from as little as £10 per month.
And you could collect a substantial cash sum free of personal taxation under current legislation in the year 2001.
Plus — family protection for the rest of this century automatically built-in…
Saver-Plus 2001 offers you not only excellent growth potential for your savings, you enjoy financial security as well, right from the start.
First, choose how much you wish to save.
You're then guaranteed an initial sum, and each year Clerical Medical may apply an annual bonus — your share in the investment performance of Clerical Medical.
And in line with the growth in value of your Plan, your built-in life assurance grows too.
So your family enjoy increasing protection all the time you're saving with SaverPlus 2001.
And when you finish your Plan in the year 2001, you receive the full accumulated value — completely free of personal taxation under current legislation.
Plus…you may receive a final bonus — increasing your cash sum and making your SaverPlus 2001 even more profitable.
Give your partner the savings potential of SaverPlus 2001
As a couple, you could increase your cash benefits when your partner takes out his or her own Plan.
And, of course, increase your family life assurance protection.
It's so easy to apply…
Starting your SaverPlus 2001 Plan is easy.
Just complete the straightforward Application Form enclosed, and return it to NatWest Insurance Services in the reply-paid envelope provided.
Don't forget to complete the Direct Debit Instruction — it ensures your Plan contributions are paid regularly.
How will you spend your cash in the 21st Century?…
SaverPlus 2001 is a Savings Plan with low risk and excellent growth potential for your savings — plus increasing protection for your family.
This savings opportunity comes from Clerical Medical — one of the country's leading life offices.
And with an unbroken record of bonus payments to with-profits policyholders for every year since 1824.
An century and a half of expertise and experience has gone into SaverPlus 2001.
So you'll enjoy —
Benefits free of personal taxation (under current legislation)
Guaranteed life cover
An opportunity for your partner to benefit also
Choice of savings options
Ease of application
And you'll enjoy peace of mind.
Because even after you've applied and your policy has been issued you still have 14 days to return it to us with no financial obligation.
SaverPlus 2001
Arranged by: National Westminster Insurance Services Limited and underwritten by Clerical Medical Investment Group, Investments Pensions Life Assurance
Why choose Clerical Medical?
Clerical Medical is renowned for consistency and value for money.
A background of professional investment management, coupled with a tradition of over 160 years successful investment performance, provides the key to the continuing success of the Clerical Medical Investment Group.
(The Group comprises Clerical, Medical and General Life Assurance Society and its subsidiaries.)
As experts in specialist investment, pensions and life assurance this continuing success has meant that Clerical Medical has paid bonuses to its with-profits policyholders for every year since 1824.
Clerical Medical's record of consistent performance has been highlighted in many independent surveys and has attracted much favourable comment.
Each year the authoritative magazine Money Management evaluates with-profits endowment policies taken out 10, 15 and 25 years ago.
The survey covers over 53 insurance companies, and includes a ‘top-ten’ table listing the leading performers for each term.
Since the tables were begun on the current basis 22 years ago, Clerical Medical has appeared in the ‘top-ten’, in the listing, no fewer than 51 times out of a possible 66.
This is more than ANY other office.
Please remember though that past performance is not necessarily a guide to the future.
An Opportunity to Share in Clerical Medical's Excellent Investment Performance
See How Much You Could Have Received If You Had Started Investing 10 Years Ago
A Personal Illustration, specifically prepared for A J Jacks Esq
* Age: 28 (* see note 4)
The table shows the actual performance of a Clerical Medical with-profits endowment plan over the 10 years to 1991.
As you can see, Clerical Medical's past performance record is excellent.
Indeed, each year the authoritative magazine Money Management evaluates with-profits endowment policies taken out 10, 15 and 25 years ago.
The survey covers 53 insurance companies, and includes a ‘top-ten’ table listing the leading performers for each term.
Since the table began on the current basis 22 years ago, Clerical Medical has appeared in the top-ten no fewer than 51 times out of a possible 66.
This is more than any other office.
Notes to tables:
1.
The amounts shown above include regular and final bonuses achieved during a period where at times rates of interest and capital appreciation have been high.
Future investment conditions may not be the same.
2.
Past results are not necessarily an indication of future performance.
The actual benefits you will receive depend on the actual investment returns Clerical Medical receives in the future.
3.
Benefits shown above are for lives assured at normal rates.
4.
The figures assume that the age shown was your age at the start of the policy.
YOUR PERSONAL ILLUSTRATION — SEE HOW MUCH GUARANTEED LIFE COVER SAVERPLUS 2001 COULD GIVE YOU IF YOU APPLY NOW 
Four Excellent Reasons To Invest In SaverPlus 2001
Clerical Medical is renowned throughout the financial market as offering consistency and value for money for professional investment management.
With a strong tradition of over 160 years successful investment performance, Clerical Medical has the experience and knowledge to make your savings produce an excellent balance between profits and security.
As experts in specialist investment, pensions and life assurance, this continuing success has meant that Clerical Medical has paid bonuses to its with-profits policyholders since 1824.
Although it should be remembered that past performance is not necessarily a guide to future performance.
Each year the authoritative magazine Money Management evaluates with-profits endowment policies such as SaverPlus 2001 which were taken out 10, 15 and 25 years ago.
The survey covers 53 companies and includes a ‘top-ten’ table listing the leading performers for each term.
Since tables began on the current basis 22 years ago, Clerical Medical has appeared in this listing now fewer than 51 times out of 66.
THAT'S MORE THAN ANY OTHER OFFICE.
SaverPlus 2001
Arranged by: National Westminster Insurance Services Limited
Registered Number: 1101902.
Registered Office: 41 Lothbury, London EC2P 2BP.
Investment Business is Regulated by the SIB and underwritten by: Clerical Medical Investment Group, Investments Pensions Life Assurance
Clerical, Medical and General Life Assurance Society
Incorporated in England by Act of Parliament with Limited Liability No.
Z193
Principal Office: 15 St. James's Square, London SW1Y 4LQ
Enquiries to: Bristol Head Office, Narrow Plain, Bristol BS2 0JH
A member of Lautro
Clerical Medical Investment Group comprises Clerical, Medical and General Life Assurance Society and its subsidiaries.
Important Information
Surrender Values
A life assurance contract is designed to give the best return if the investment is maintained for the full term.
However, should it be necessary to cash the policy in early, a surrender value may be available.
The tables below show the possible cash values of various premium levels for this 10 year endowment plan at the end of the first 5 years.
The surrender values set out in these tables have been calculated according to the rules prescribed by Lautro.
Clerical, Medical and General Life Assurance Society does not guarantee that the amount to be paid if the contract is terminated at one of the durations specified will be as high as the amount indicated.
The amount actually payable will depend on the bonuses added to the policy and the surrender basis in force at the time.
The above reduction in yield table refers to expenses which are expected to be made in respect of this contract and has been calculated on the basis laid down by Lautro.
Assuming that the contract is not terminated before the end of the contract period and the rate at which charges or expenses will be made in respect of the contract continues unchanged during that period, the deductions to be made in respect of those charges or expenses may be expected to reduce the investment return by an amount approximately equal to that reduction in yield figure.
Taxation Of Benefits
If present law is still in force when the policy matures, the benefits from a qualifying policy will usually be free of all personal taxes including capital gains tax.
If you are, or are close to being, a higher-rate tax payer, and you discontinue your policy during the first 7–1/2 years, you may have to pay tax on the amount by which the surrender value exceeds the sum of the premiums paid.
Clerical Medical is liable to United Kingdom tax on the income and certain gains arising from the assets backing this policy.
Income on any overseas assets backing this policy may be paid subject to a local withholding tax.
All statements regarding taxation are based on Clerical Medical's understanding of current law.
The laws relating to taxation may be subject to changes which cannot be foreseen.
Cessation Of Premiums
If premium payments are stopped, the policy may be made paid-up for a reduced guaranteed sum assured.
Provided death has not occurred, the policy may be reinstated at any time during the following twelve months on payment of all unpaid premiums together with an addition for late payment.
Alternatively the policy may be terminated and any surrender value taken.
Commission
Clerical, Medical and General Life Assurance Society will pay commission to National Westminster Insurance Services Limited who are remunerated on this basis.
Details of the scale of commission payable in respect of this contract will be sent to you shortly after a firm application is made on your behalf.
Statement Of The Effect Of Inflation
Both the purchasing power of the ultimate benefit and the real cost of any future premiums/investments payable will depend on the rate of inflation over the period of the contract.
By way of illustration the following table shows what £1,000 will be worth in today's money at the end of the periods shown, if the annual rate of inflation over the period is as shown.
Bonuses
The policy is with-profits and it is entitled to receive a share of the profits of Clerical, Medical and General Life Assurance Society's life fund in the form of bonuses.
Clerical Medical is a mutual office which has no shareholders and all distributable profits are available to participating policyholders.
The calculation of the total profit and the payment of any bonus will be decided by Clerical Medical.
These are currently two types of bonus.
‘Reversionary’ bonus is added over the term of the policy and once added becomes part of the guaranteed benefits and cannot be taken away by Clerical Medical provided the policy is maintained in full force until the end of the term.
This type of bonus is not payable at fact value until the policy becomes a claim.
In addition a ‘terminal’ bonus may be payable when a policy becomes a claim by death or maturity; the level of this bonus may be reviewed at any time without notice to reflect changes in the value of the assets of the life fund.
It would not normally be expected to change more than twice a year.
The assets are actively managed and represent a wide spread of fixed interest stocks, UK and overseas equity shares and property.
Your Personal Illustration
In order to provide an indication of the possible benefits that might be paid under this policy, Lautro (the regulatory authority for the marketing of life assurance and unit trusts) has made rules which lay down two bases on which future benefits may be illustrated.
The figures quoted in these illustration comply with the rates of return and other factors set out in the Lautro bases, the higher illustration representing a future rate of return of 10.5% per annum and the lower illustration representing a future rate of return of 7% per annum.
These two amounts do not represent the upper and lower limits of the possible amount of the benefit.
What is actually paid will depend on the bonuses added to the guaranteed benefits under the policy.
These illustrations should not be used as a basis for comparing similar policies issued bo other life assurance companies or friendly societies.
The figures in the table are based on the assumption that you are acceptable at the ordinary rates of premium.
The illustration should not be taken as a forecast, and the actual policy proceeds may be higher or lower than the amounts illustrated, depending on future investment conditions.
Each year, Clerical Medical announces the rate of annual bonus to be added to each eligible policy.
Once added, the amount cannot be taken away by Clerical Medical provided the policy remains in full force until the end of the term.
Notice of Your Statutory Rights Under the Access to Medical Reports Act 1988
If we require medical information from your doctor, you have certain rights under the Access to Medical Reports Act 1988.
Your consent is required before we can apply for a report and you may see the report before it is returned to us.
If you indicate that you wish to see the report, you will be advised if one is requested.
We will tell your doctor that you wish to see the report and you will then have 21 days to contract him to make arrangements for seeing it.
If you disagree with the contents of the report or consider it misleading you may ask the doctor to amend it; if he disagrees, you may add your own written comments.
The doctor may withhold all or part of the report from you if he thinks that it would be in your interest, or that of others, to do so.
At no time will the report be sent to us without your consent, but without the report we would be unable to proceed with your application.
Please amend the declaration on your Application if you wish to see any report before it is sent to us.
Please note:
If you are not permanently resident in the U.K. or you work or reside overseas you may not be eligible for this offer.
Please complete the enclosed application giving details as appropriate.
On the receipt of your application, we will advise you further.
Barclays Business Buildings Guides
2 Loans and Finance
BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONALS WANTING LOANS AND OTHER FINANCE TO ACQUIRE ASSETS , OR FOR WORKING CAPITAL , NEED THE RIGHT COMBINATION OF FLEXIBILITY, SERVICE AND INTEREST RATES.
WITH BARCLAYS IT'S PLAIN SAILING .
BANKING FOR BUSINESS BARCLAYS
FINDING THE MOST CONVENIENT AND COST-EFFECTIVE FORM OF FINANCE CAN HELP YOUR BUSINESS GROW WHILE MINIMISING STRAIN ON YOUR CASHFLOW AND PROFITS.
SPEED CAN BE VITAL BECAUSE DELAY MAY COST YOU AN OPPORTUNITY.
This brochure sets out how Barclays can help you build your business by providing the finance you need for development and to cope with cashflow problems.
It describes the service we offer and the different types of funding.
It is intended for businesses of all sizes and the professions.
For businesses who want to raise large amounts of capital, Barclays has great experience in arranging rights issues, syndicated loans and multi-option facilities, and in the issuing of bonds, Euro-notes and commercial paper.
Surveys of the performance and reputation of London's banks consistently place Barclays — and our investment banking subsidiary Barclays de Zoete Wedd Ltd. — among the leaders in these fields.
For businesses considering leasing, Barclays Mercantile Business Finance Ltd. is one of Europe's leading leasing specialists.
Farmers should ask for our special Finance for Farming information pack.
For further information ask your local branch or Business Centre, or request a Fact Sheet.
Many people think of a bank manager as instinctively wanting to say ‘No’ to any request for finance.
At Barclays nothing could be further from the truth.
The origins of Barclays go back some 250 years and we have only grown by saying ‘Yes’.
Today we have over one million business accounts , from sole traders to the largest corporations, with the great majority of them receiving financial help from us in one form or another — from a simple overdraft to extremely complex arrangements .
Another popular misconception is to assume that the types of funding and service offered by different lenders are virtually identical — all you have to do is discover who is willing to lend you money and then compare interest rates.
Whereas the least you should expect is that any type of funding should be tailor-made for you.
Sometimes this may mean taking advantage of options offered by just one type of finance, sometimes it may mean combining different types of finance.
‘As a growing company, we have found the flexibility vital for our expansion.
With three different purposes, we wanted three different repayment schedules.
We borrowed one sum to modernise our premises, which we are paying back long-term.
Another to acquire new machinery, structuring the borrowing to meet the supplier's payment schedule.
And a third for working capital, which we're repaying short-term.
We only pay interest on what we have actually borrowed so we are keeping our outgoings down till our new production facilities come on stream.’
Rights issues, acquisitions, mergers and disposals — for advice and a complete service, talk to Barclays de Zoete Wedd Ltd. our investment banking subsidiary.
At Barclays we have a wide range of finance facilities,each with its own options — plus enormous experience of working with businesses of all kinds.
How can you achieve the finance you need at the cheapest cost?
Is a loan definitely your best option or should you increase your overdraft?
If a loan, what period of repayment should you go for?
A fixed or floating interest rate?
A capital repayment holiday at the start?
Or no capital repayment until the end.
Would leasing be a better option?
Would factoring release money tied up in your sales ledger?
If you are engaged in foreign trade, would loans or an overdraft in foreign currency help you?
We can help you find the cost-effective solution,whether it is one method of funding or the clever combination of different methods .
Finally, we know how often you need a quick decision before an opportunity disappears.
We are geared for speed .
Application is made extremely simple for you .
And most of our decision-making is local , so valuable time isn't lost through referring decisions ‘upwards’.
Medium and long-term finance — Businessloan and Flexible Businessloan pages 6–9
Short-term finance — Managed Rate Facility, Acceptance Credits, and Money Market Loans pages 10–13
Commercial Mortgages pages 14–17
Franchise Loans pages 18–19
Pension Loans for Professionals pages 20–23
Factoring and Invoice Discounting, to release cash tied up in your sales ledger pages 24–27
Basis Loans and Equity Capital, to provide an injection of finance in return for Barclays taking a minority shareholding in your business pages 28–31
Barclays range of business services page 32 and the inside back cover.
‘In the course of converting our two shops into one, although we were still profitable we ran out of cash.
To re-finance ourselves in order to finish the task, we arranged a Flexible Businessloan with a two year capital repayment holiday which gave us the breathing space we needed.
MEDIUM AND LONG-TERM FINANCE.
If you need up to £15,000 to purchase any item of equipment — like a new vehicle, a phone system, or machinery — or for working capital, a Businessloan is the answer.
You borrow at a fixed rate of interest and repay the loan over a number of years.
To apply, you need only fill in one simple form.
In many circumstances the loan can be unsecured .
The fixed interest rate means you know exactly your commitment each month , which saves problems with forecasting your cashflow.
You can pay off the loan early , at any time,without any penalty .
A Flexible Businessloan is a simple way to borrow over £15,000, whether for buying assets, purchasing a business, providing working capital, or any other business use.
You have a variety of options, which means it can be tailor-made to your needs.
You can borrow a single lump sum or borrow sums in stages as you need them.
(You only pay interest on what you have borrowed.)
Businessloan:
— minimum £1,000, maximum £15,000
fixed interest rate
unsecured loans available in some circumstances
monthly repayments
early repayment possible.
Flexible Businessloan:
borrow any amount over £15,000
drawdown in stages if required
term 1–20 years
fixed or variable interest rate, with opportunity to switch
repayments quarterly or monthly
initial two year capital repayment holiday available
early repayment possible with no penalty
loans can be unsecured
endowment repayment option.
Many types of government and EC grants provide funds on excellent terms — to find out if you qualify, ask your local branch or Business Centre to put you in touch with our Grants Advisory Service.
You can choose either a fixed or a floating interest rate at the start and can switch between them during your loan.
You thus have plenty of opportunity to achieve the keenest interest rate and save money .
Repayments can be monthly or quarterly, and spread over one to 20 years, which gives you the ability to fix an appropriate level.
If it suits you, you can repay your loan early without penalty .
At the outset, a ‘capital repayment holiday’of up to two years can be arranged — this means that for two years you only repay interest,reducing pressure on your cashflow .
An endowment linked option is available.
With this, during the period of the loan, you only pay interest while paying premiums into an endowment savings plan — at maturity the proceeds of this are used to repay the capital you have borrowed.
While we may request security for your loan, it can be unsecured.
In cases where you may require even greater flexibility, than our Flexible Businessloan can provide, we can often engineer financial packages to meet your needs.
If your business is located in an area where coal or steel works have been closed, you could be eligible for the substantial benefits of a European Coal and Steel Community Job Creation Loan.
These offer special concessions to help you build your business and so create jobs to replace those that have been lost in mines and steelworks.
They are available to businesses of all sizes — and for many different uses.
While, for a time, they were available only to manufacturing companies or allied service industries, these restrictions have been relaxed to include most types of business.
Provided various criteria are satisfied, you can arrange loans on exceptional terms, including: rebates of interest on portions of loans, exceptionally low rates of interest on the balance, and four year capital repayments holidays.
High technology companies face special problems in development.
We have specialised High Technology branches to provide advice and help.
Ask your local branch or Business Centre to put you in touch with them.
‘With the volatility of interest rates,we split our loan into two.
One loan with a fixed rate of interest,the other floating.
This way, if base rate goes down we gain on the floating rate — if base rate goes up, we're protected on the fixed half.’
Small Firms Loan Guarantee Scheme
Some small and new businesses have the problem of satisfying normal requirements for receiving finance, most commonly through lack of capital and/or appropriate security or because available security has already been exhausted in guaranteeing existing finance.
In certain cases, the Government will guarantee most of a loan, which makes it possible for us to lend in circumstances where we would ordinarily not do so.
If you are a small business which meets certain criteria laid down by the Department of Employment, the Scheme can enable you to acquire finance otherwise denied to you.
It can be for starting up trading, expanding your business, sustaining cashflow, or improving efficiency.
Rural Businessloan
If you have a new or existing business located in a rural area and employ fewer than 20 people, you may be eligible to benefit from a Rural Businessloan.
These are available to sole traders, partnerships and limited companies — though not those engaged in agriculture or horticulture.
They offer special terms on loans, including reduced interest rates and lending fees.
Your application must be supported by the Rural Development Commission.
SHORT-TERM FINANCE.
A practical way to provide sums of more than £250,000 for larger businesses over short periods of time, more cheaply than with an overdraft, is Barclays Managed Rate Facility.
This can be used either as a stand-alone facility or in combination with an overdraft and other loans .
Barclays was the first British bank to introduce a Managed Rate Facility in 1987.
Before then, companies seeking short-term finance faced a choice between overdraft and the Money Market.
An overdraft offered more flexibility but higher cost.
The Money Market — like Acceptance Credits and commercial paper — offered lower cost but less flexibility because credit was for a fixed term.
Barclays Managed Rate Facility:
minimum facility £250,000
up to £10 million can be drawn on any one day by giving notice by 12 noon, higher amounts by arrangement
unspecified borrowing period
funds are transferred to a designated account at any Barclays branch or another branch
repayment can be arranged by phone up to 12 noon on any working day
each individual amount drawn must be held for at least three working days
competitive interest rate which is calculated separately on each separate amount drawn
notification of change of rate by phone.
The Barclays Managed Rate Facility gives you the best of both worlds : it offers much of the flexibility of an overdraft both with an interest rate comparable to Money Market rates.
Your drawing is open-ended , no time limit for repayment is specified at drawdown.
The rate will be in the main, substantially below base rate.
You can thus save money compared with an overdraft — and save the effort of shopping around in the Money Market for credit which is anyway less flexible.
Another time-saving aspect is, that only brief and simple documentation is required .
If you are involved in foreign trade, you can benefit from a foreign currency overdraft or loan.
These:
provide you with cash on tap in the appropriate currency, which can give you an edge in negotiations
protect you against exchange and interest rate fluctuations
give you an opportunity to achieve lower interest rates than on sterling
and save you much time and problems on administration.
ACCEPTANCE CREDITS are a way for larger businesses to raise sums over £500,000, more cheaply than by overdraft.
You arrange to draw Bills of Exchange up to an agreed limit payable at a stipulated future date — the minimum for each individual bill is £50,000.
We accept these Bills of Exchange and arrange for them to be discounted on the Discount Market.
They can be used either alone or in combination with an overdraft and other loans .
While usually available for 30, 60 or 90 days, Acceptance Credits can be arranged for any period from seven to 187 days.
Acceptance Credits are easy to arrange and simple to operate .
While not as flexible as an overdraft or the Managed Rate Facility, they offer the advantages of:cheaper borrowing,especially as adding Barclays name to a bill provides you with the finest rates available on the Discount Market.
And certainty of cost,because you know the exact cost of your borrowing at the outset since you will be told our acceptance commission and the discount you can obtain.
Acceptance Credit:
minimum facility £500,000
available on revolving basis for 7–187 days
foreign exchange facility provides wide range of foreign currencies
discount rate and acceptance commission known at outset to give certainty of costs.
While not offering the flexibility of repayment of an overdraft or Managed Rate Facility, since new bills may be used to replace those maturing, they can provide a continuous source of funds.
The simple addition of a foreign exchange facility to the agreement will provide funds in a wide variety of foreign currencies .
Money Market Loans are available for larger businesses, for fixed terms ranging from one day to a year (usually at the shorter end of that range).
The interest rate is fixed at drawdown and related to Money Market rates so can be cheaper than an overdraft .
Committed and uncommitted facilities can be arranged.
‘We bought a greenfield site to build a new set of studios.
It was a phased development, with different parts being built at different times.
We were able to draw down sums as we needed them.
We only paid interest on what we had borrowed, which saved us a fortune in interest charges.’
A COMMERCIAL MORTGAGE is a practical way to borrow any sum over £15,000 to purchase commercial land and/or buildings for owner occupation.
It provides you with a range of options which means your mortgage can be custom-built for you.
You can borrow a lump sum or you can borrow money in stages as you need.
(You only pay interest on what you have actually borrowed).
This may suit you, for example, if you are buying land in sections, or are acquiring premises in advance of refurbishing them.
Your repayments can be spread over one to 25 years, which gives you plenty of scope to achieve a level of repayments which suits you .
You can choose either a fixed or a floating interest rate at the start and can switch between them during the loan.
You thus have plenty of opportunity to achieve the keenest interest rates .
At the outset, a ‘capital repayment holiday’of up to two years can be arranged — for two years you only repay interest, further reducing pressure on your cashflow .
Barclays Commercial Mortgage:
borrow any amount over £15,000
drawdown in stages if desired
term 1–25 years
fixed or variable interest rate, with opportunity to switch
repayments quarterly or monthly
initial two year capital repayment holiday available
early repayment possible
endowment and pension plan repayment options.
Popular options are repayment linked to either an endowment policy or a pension plan.
With these, during the period of the loan you only pay interest on it.
You also pay premiums into an endowment savings plan or pension plan — the proceeds of the endowment plan when it matures, or the cash sum at retirement from the pension plan, are used to pay off the capital at the end of the loan.
This too can take pressure off your cashflow — and the pension plan option makes excellent use of available tax relief on premiums and on the cash sum at retirement which is tax free .
Whatever method of repayment you choose, you can repay your loan early .
‘We had outgrown our present building when the opportunity came up to purchase the adjoining freehold.
But we had a competitor and we had to act fast.
We saw three banks but Barclays left the others standing at the post.
They had the terms already pre-printed for us and we had agreed them and secured our new property before we even received terms from the others.’
FRANCHISE AND LICENSING LOANS.
If you are considering taking up a franchise you need good advice — and the right financing package.
Franchising is growing fast — and an increasing number of companies are expected to franchise their operations in the years ahead rather than expand in traditional ways.
At Barclays we have responded by creating a specialist team to give expert advice and assistance to people interested in franchising — whether you are already a Barclays customer or not.
We believe we have more experience in helping franchisees and franchisors than any other clearing bank .
A vital part of our service is, that we can provide advice on how to arrange finance for your franchising package and for stock, fixtures and fittings.
We offer a specially designed Franchise Loan which can be tailor-made to suit your needs .
You can borrow from £1,000 upwards.
Loans under £15,000 are for up to five years and have a fixed interest rate to help you predict your outgoings .
With larger amounts you will have a choice of fixed or floating rates, which you can switch between to suit your development, while your repayment period can be up to 20 years.
You can also ease initial strain on your cashflow by taking advantage of a two year ‘capital repayment holiday’,during which you only pay interest on the loan and make no capital repayments.
The backing of Barclays, with our track record in helping franchisees, can help to give you credibility in negotiations with franchisors.
We also have extensive experience in the rapidly growing field of licensing.
If you wish to market a new or existing product or service, you can benefit from our specialist advice.
‘After buying into the practice, it was very important to me to keep my outgoings as low as possible while my earnings built up.
The Pension Loan was ideal for this.’
A PENSION LOAN FOR PROFESSIONALS is an excellent way to take care of two major sets of needs at the same time.
You can borrow money on excellent terms for purposes like buying a practice, or a share in a practice, acquiring equipment and furnishings, and extending your business.
And you can provide for your retirement.
(If you already have a pension plan, you can usually use this for obtaining the loan).
The Pension Loan takes advantage of the fact that your pension plan can provide a cash lump sum at retirement (as well as a regular income).
This cash can be used to pay off the loan.
In the intervening years, you need make no capital repayments — you only pay interest on whatever you have borrowed plus the premiums for your pension plan.
This reduces pressure on your income or cashflow .
However, you will also be able to repay whatever you borrow in other ways — for example, by selling your business, or your share in a practice — and keep the lump sum from your pension plan yourself, so it could support your standard of living in retirement .
Pension Loan for Professionals:
loans of over £15,000
option to drawdown in stages
interest and pension premiums only paid during period of loan
capital repayment from lump sum provided by pension plan at retirement
repayment also possible in other ways, including sale of practice or share
can use existing or new pension plan from any major insurance company
if lump sum from your present pension plan will not be enough to repay loan, size of your plan can be increased
takes full advantage of valuable tax concessions
Additional security for your loan may be required (written requirements are available from your local branch or Business Centre).
You can repay your loan at any time , ahead of schedule — for example, if you sell your practice or share in a practice — and can do this in instalments if it suits you.
A Pension Loan for Professionals is an extremely practical and cost-effective way of raising finance,because you reduce your outgoings over many years — and you take advantage of available tax concessions .
Your premiums get tax relief at the highest rate of tax you pay (so a gross premium of £1,000 will cost you only £600 net if you are a 40% taxpayer), and your lump sum at retirement is tax free .
You can draw down the full amount arranged for your loan all at once, or can take the money in stages .
This can be very convenient if, for example, you need successive sums for buying into a practice, then refurbishing, then re-equipping.
You will only pay interest on what you have actually borrowed .
‘When I took over my father's practice, I wanted to refurbish the waiting room and surgery and install new furniture and equipment.
A Pension Loan was the answer.
I was able to draw money as I needed to meet stage payments on the building and decorating, then to buy the furniture and equipment, which kept costs down.
I killed two birds with one stone — I had a pension and the premises I needed.’
Commercial Mortgages for those in the medical professions.
These are primarily to help buy, extend or renovate a surgery or consulting rooms.
You can borrow any sum over £15,000.
If your project benefits from Cost Rent or Market Rent subsidy, 100% of the cost may be advanced, otherwise normally 80%.
You have several options to give yourself flexibility, including a choice of methods of repayment, and a fixed or floating interest rate.
‘In our line of business, late paying by buyers in an unfortunate tradition.
They'll delay till they are virtually at the doors of the courthouse.
The more we expanded, the worse our cashflow got till, in the end, our very success threatened us with bankruptcy.
The simple answer is Factoring.
We get paid up front, we've got credit protection, and we save a huge amount of work chasing payments.’
FACTORING AND INVOICE DISCOUNTING.
You may have a lot of money tied up in your sales ledger in unpaid bills — which can strain your cashflow and leave you short of cash to develop your business.
Factoring or Invoice Discounting are ways to release this money for you.
Barclays Commercial Services Ltd. is a leader in the field with over 25 years experience in UK and export sales ledger financing.
With Domestic Factoring,we purchase your book debts on a continuous basis and provide four basic services : an immediate advance of up to 80% of the value of invoices;credit management and sales ledger administration — we take over the time-consuming chores of sending out statements and chasing late payers;credit protection — we can, if required, take 100% of the credit risk on agreed customers; and facility for growth — our service can expand as your company grows.
We also offer International Factoring, which allows you to sell on open account terms, in sterling or foreign currency, and so can help your competitive position.
Ask your local branch or Business Centre for information, or see our International Trade Services brochure in this series.
This gives you the advantages of: improved cashflow, more certain financial forecasting because of greater certainty of receipts, 100% credit cover (if required), minimal bad debt risk, reductions of staff costs and administrative overheads.
This means that you will no longer need to offer cash discounts for early payment, but gain from increased flexibility in offering credit terms to improve your competitiveness , and increased ability to accept large orders without excessive pressure on your cashflow.
Invoice Discounting offers many of the advantages of Factoring, the main difference being that Barclays does not provide sales ledger administration, credit management, or debt collection, which remain your responsibility.
To cope with the needs of different kinds of company , we offer an extremely flexible service which includes handling: all invoices to all customers, or all invoices to agreed customers, or selected invoices to selected customers.
You have a choice of whether or not to disclose our involvement .
‘Our business is hiring out technical staff to companies.
We often had a cashflow problem because we had to pay them before we got paid.
Despite our growth our financial problems became acute when we bought a computer, we needed to handle all our administration, and began running up against our overdraft limit.
This was secured by company assets and personal guaranteed by the directors, which we were reluctant to increase.
The answer was Invoice Discounting.
This gives us 75% prepayment for every invoice to customers.
It sustains our cashflow,it has cut our overdraft, and it has released some of the directors’ personal guarantees.
And since we still run the sales ledger, we can maintain our good relationships with our customers.’
‘After a time demand just kept growing and growing and we didn't have the finance to boost production to keep pace with it.
We often reached our overdraft limit because of a sticky cashflow — and after taking on a large mortgage to pay for a new factory we couldn't raise any further borrowing for the second production line we needed much sooner than expected.
Our customers gave us a really hard time and our sales staff spent all their time apologising.
The answer turned out to be an injection of Equity Capital.
Barclays subscribed cash for preference shares and ordinary shares representing 20% of our equity, enabling us to buy the equipment.
We can still develop the business our own way, and we've got a hotline to our financial backers when we need advice.’
BASIS LOANS AND EQUITY CAPITAL.
These can be an excellent idea in a number of circumstances, most notably:to finance management buy-outs .
To enable a business to buy in the shares of retiring directors or other shareholders who wish to realise their holding.
Or to provide development capital where your expansion may be limited by the fact that you are nearing the limit of what you can raise by other conventional means.
Put simply, the necessary finance can be made available to you in return for Barclays taking a minority shareholding in your business .
Basis Loans and Equity Capital are similar in principle.
Both offer a mixture of long-term funding and an equity subscription by Barclays Development Capital Ltd. or the Barclays Baronsmead Fund .
Basis Loans range from £150,000 upwards, normally repayable over five to 10 years, with a high degree of flexibility so that any loan can be tailor-made for you .
At the same time, Barclays Development Capital Ltd. subscribes for a proportion of your ordinary equity which provides an additional injection of capital.
Equity Capital is available in amounts from £100,000 and normally consists of a mix of preference share capital and ordinary equity.
With a Basis Loan our proportion of the equity is normally 10–20% — and Barclays will not expect board representation.
With Equity Capital,where larger amounts of finance are normally involved, the proportion of the ordinary equity will usually by 15–40% and a member of Barclays Development Capital Ltd. or the Barclays Baronsmead Fund may be appointed as a non-executive director.
Since this finance is available to provide long-term support,the terms are tailor-made to suit your forecasts of profit and cashflow .
Although shareholders, we do not expect you to alter your currently successful business strategy.
Nor will we expect to interfere with your day to day management of your business.
Our main role will be to assist in an advisory capacity in the development of future business plans and to give financial guidance .
‘When our family shareholders decided the time had come to sell the company, they offered to sell it to the management team if we could match the price a trade bidder could pay.
As individuals we could only raise a fraction of the figure from our personal resources, but Barclays were able to provide a Basis Loan,which together with conventional bank facilities, was enough to fund the purchase.
We ended up with 80% of the company, as well as operational freedom and a sympathetic external shareholder.’
Barclays offers a COMPLETE RANGE OF PRODUCTS AND SERVICES FOR BUSINESSES AND PROFESSIONAL ADVISERS.
These include:
Interest-Earning Accounts.
Are you making the most of your credit surpluses?
The extra return from our range of interest-earning accounts can help your cashflow and boost profits.
We can show you how to wake up ‘lazy money’ which is lying uninvested, and how to restructure investment to make it more productive.
Money Transmission and Information Services.
Ways of paying, collecting and managing your money, we can help keep you up-to-date on your financial position, cut paperwork and reduce costs, deploy your cash resources more effectively, and avoid cashflow problems.
International Trade Services.
Without the right kind of help foreign business can mean major headaches.
Barclays is one of the world's major international banks, with offices in over 70 countries.
We offer: advice about trading partners, finance shaped to your requirements and highly efficient payment and collection systems.
For more complex or specialised enquiries, your local branch or Business Centre will put you in touch with specialists including those in the column on the right.
Leasing
— for advice on all types of leasing, which can provide the equipment you need without any capital commitment, contact Barclays Mercantile Business Finance who were pioneers of leasing in the UK and are now one of Europe's leading lessors.
Flotations, acquisitions, disposals, share issues, and swaps
— please contact Barclays de Zoete Wedd, our investment banking subsidiary, which is among the most respected companies in the City.
Franchising
— please ask your local branch or Business Centre to put you in touch with our specialist unit.
Pensions and Insurance.
The right pension planning will help you maintain your quality of life after you stop working.
The right insurance protects you against misfortune.
Our specialist staff can give you impartial advice on how to meet your pension needs in the most cost-effective way — while Barclays own insurance policies represent excellent value for money.
Risk Management.
Sudden movements in exchange and interest rates can erode profit margins, strain your cashflow and shrink overall profits.
Many businesses think they can do nothing to protect themselves — but Barclays offers well-proven ways to limit damage which no business can afford to ignore.
Specialist advice.
You may need advice on subjects not covered in this brochure or mentioned above.
The business specialists in our branches, the teams in our network of 327 Business Centres throughout the UK, and in our International Service Branches, are well-equipped to deal with your enquiries.
Grants
— for information and advice on government and EEC grants to help you develop your business, please contact our Grants Advisory Service via your local branch or Business Centre.
High technology
— businesses in this field should contact our High Technology branches for advice on the special problems facing them.
Please ask your local branch or Business Centre to put you in touch.
Share registration
— Barclays can look over the burden of looking after your share register.
Small Businesses
— ask for our special Small Business Pack.
Farming
— ask for our special Farming Pack.
The case studies in this brochure are based on meetings with businesses, and research, conducted by Barclays in recent years.
The words printed are not always the actual words spoken or written to us.
Some statements have been edited for clarity.
Barclays Business Building Guides
5 Pensions and Insurance
RIGHT PENSIONS AND INSURANCE POLICIES CAN HELP YOU PROTECT YOUR BUSINESS AGAINST MISFORTUNE AND MAINTAIN YOUR STANDARD OF LIVING AFTER YOU STOP WORKING.
PLAN AHEAD WITH BARCLAYS.
TAKING ACCOUNT OF ALL YOUR BUSINESS NEEDS AND PERSONAL AIMS,OUR SPECIALIST ADVISERS WILL RECOMMEND APPROPRIATE AND COST-EFFECTIVE SOLUTIONS FOR YOU.
This brochure is about:how individual company directors, partners, self-employed businessmen, and people in the professions can provide for the time when they stop working.
How groups of directors can set up a pension scheme for themselves.
How companies can set up a group pension scheme for their employees.
How to avoid the problems which a business can encounter following the sudden death or disablement of a director or key employee ; and the insurance cover every business needs — or is legally obliged to have — against common accidents and other perils.
PENSIONS FOR DIRECTORS AND THE SELF-EMPLOYED.
If you do not have a pension plan, when you eventually stop working your income will drop — perhaps dramatically.
But your expenses won't conveniently drop by a corresponding amount.
You — and your wife or husband or other dependents — will still need to pay every day expenses.
In some ways,your need for money may actually increase.
With more time on your hands you may have to find more things to occupy your time: day trips, hobbies, societies.
Then there's the unexpected, like major repairs to your home or car.
And today's generation is living longer than previous generations.
The average man who retires at 60 will live another 18 years, till 78.
And the average women even longer.
You need a strategy designed to provide the money for what many see as ‘the longest holiday of your life’.
Without it, not only will your standard of living suffer.
You may lost your independence and your health,— worry about money can be a major cause of illness in retired people.
You will also lack freedom of manoeuvre .
You may not be able to retire when it would be most convenient.
You may want to wind down your workload as you get older — but without a second income to replace your lost earnings, your options will be restricted.
You simply may not be able to afford to retire, however much you may want to.
The corner-stone of your strategy should be a pension plan — because of the tremendous financial advantages pension plans enjoy.
After all, what is your alternative?
No other comparable investment enjoys the same tax concessions — so few if any other similar investments can match the returns from a pension plan.
You may plan to sell your business, or your share in a business or practice.
But who knows what shape a business or practice will be in 10 or 20 years time?
Better by far to invest while the going is good,to guarantee yourself an income,rather than rely on an uncertain future.
THE BENEFITS OF A GOOD PENSION PLAN
Successive Chancellors of the Exchequer have striven to encourage people to invest in pension plans by favouring them with tax concessions — to the point at which they are one of the most attractive and tax-efficient investments you can make.
If you are self-employed, or in a partnership, you will naturally make all the contributions yourself to a pension plan.
If you are employed by a company, you can make the contributions yourself, the company can make them, or they can be shared.
Whichever route is chosen,the tax relief currently available offers a tremendous incentive to investment .
Individuals can get tax relief on contributions at the highest rate of tax they pay.
So, for example, for a 40% taxpayer, £1,000 of investment effectively costs only £600.
Company contributions are fully deductible as a business allowance against Corporation Tax.
The income and growth arising from investments made by a pension fund are entirely free of UK taxes.
Also, when you retire, you are allowed to exchange part of your expected pension for a lump sum — and this too is tax-free under present law.
At the same time, you have a lot of flexibility.
The benefits can be tailor-made to your needs.
As well as a pension (and tax-free lump sum) for you, you can arrange life assurance and a pension for your husband or wife or other dependents .
You can vary the amount you pay into a plan — more when you can afford it, less when you have less available.
And you have the freedom of manoeuvre you need.
You can normally retire at any age after 50.
Or keep working past 65 and postpone drawing your pension.
Or you may be able to partially retire and start drawing part of your pension — then draw your full pension when you stop work completely.
And, if you find yourself short of capital at any time, you may be able to take a loan which you can repay using the tax-free cash sum available at retirement.
All in all, a good pension plan can provide the income you need to continue to live comfortably and maintain your quality of life when you stop work.
It will help you preserve your independence.
It will give you the flexibility to arrange your withdrawal from working to suit yourself.
And it will do all this in a highly cost-effective way.
Providing the income you will need after you stop work can take a load off your mind.
And the sooner you start investing, the greater that income — and other benefits — can be.
Pension Loans for Professionals
If you are a professional, you can take care of two major sets of needs at the same time.
You can borrow money on excellent terms for purposes like buying a practice, or a share in a practice, acquiring equipment and furnishings, and extending your business.
And you can provide for your retirement.
A pension loan takes advantage of the cash lump sum your pension plan will provide at retirement.
This can be used to pay back the capital you borrow now.
In the intervening years, you need make no capital repayments — you only pay interest on whatever you have borrowed plus the premiums for your pension plan.
In some circumstances, security is not required for a loan — written requirements regarding security are available from your local branch.
For more information ask your local branch or Business Centre, or request a Fact Sheet.
SMALL SELF-ADMINISTERED PENSION SCHEMES offer major attractions for director-controlled companies because they can do much more than provide directors' pensions .
The reason many directors resist starting a pension scheme is simply that it takes money out of the business for example, for expansion.
Small Self-Administered Pension Schemes can overcome the problem of tying your money up.
Your business can borrow money from your pension fund on normal commercial terms.
The interest payments you make to the fund are effectively paid back to the members of the Scheme as pensions later.
You can use money from the fund to purchase premises or assets, which can be leased to your company.
Usually, the fund buys your existing premises, or new premises for you, and you pay rent into the fund (returned as a pension later).
The payment of rent is fully deductible for Corporation Tax .
The members of a Scheme will be the shareholding directors of a company, with a maximum of 12.
Contributions are usually made entirely by the company, and can be varied from year to year.
‘We knew we needed to ‘do something’ about retirement planning and we wanted to cut our increasing tax bills.
But our expansion plans involved new machinery which we needed quickly.
We set up a Small Self-Administered Scheme with a £50,000 contribution which cut our tax bill by £12,500, bought the machinery with a £25,000 from the pension fund and the loan repayments go back into our fund to increase our pensions.
Once we have cleared the loan we will look at ways to buy our own premises with the help of our Small Self-Administered Scheme, so our Corporate and Pensions Planning go hand in hand.’
The Small Self-Administered Pension Scheme profits from three kinds of tax relief:
investment by the company is wholly deductible for Corporation Tax.
So a £100,000 investment immediately reduces taxable profit by £100,000.
You are thus investing money for retirement much of which would only otherwise have been paid to the taxman
investment by a member gets tax relief at the highest rate he or she pays.
So every £1,000 costs a 40% taxpayer only £600 net
the growth of the fund is entirely free of UK taxes.
You remain in effective control of investment.
The nature of investment is decided by the fund's trustees, who normally include the Scheme's members.
There are a number of different ways in which self-administered arrangements can be set up.
The method selected will depend on individual circumstances and needs.
Our specialist staff will explain the different approaches and help you select the most appropriate for your needs.
GROUP PENSION SCHEMES.
A new pension environment has been created in recent years by legislation designed to encourage individuals to arrange their own pensions.
But a good company pension scheme remains a potent weapon when it comes to attracting and keeping staff .
Individuals are now being encouraged to provide their own pensions, as the provisions of the State Earnings Related Pensions Scheme are being diminished.
Many individuals stand to do better by leaving SERPS and entering a private pension arrangement into which part of their National Insurance contributions and those of the employer are invested.
But it still remains a heavy burden for people on ordinary wages and salaries to provide an adequate pension for themselves.
If your business is not able to contribute to a group pension scheme, a scheme can still mean substantial cost savings for scheme members compared with providing pensions individually.
Furthermore you can establish a company pension scheme based solely upon the investment of the National Insurance contributions for no extra cost to the employer or employees.
If you can contribute, the extra contribution will make a big difference to your employees' retirement, and constitutes a valuable reward for loyalty.
Most companies choose to contribute a sum equivalent to a percentage of each person's earnings.
These contributions are fully deductible against Corporation Tax .
As awareness of the importance of pensions continues to grow, particularly among older employees who are likely to be most valuable to you, a good pension scheme becomes a big help in a competitive labour market.
We can help you devise the scheme you need to meet your needs in the most cost-effective way, to reward your employees without overstraining your cashflow or profits , and our specialists will come and explain everything to your employees.
It is a subject most of us would prefer not to think about.
But the health of a company can be adversely affected by THE DEATH OR DISABLEMENT OF KEY PERSONNEL.
The damage done can be much worse than from a fire — while the chances of it happening are much higher.
Statistics show that one in every three company directors aged 40 will die before reaching age 65.
Many more will be victims of ill-health or injury.
When this happens it can dramatically slash profits — and can even threaten a business with extinction.
It can create problems over the ownership and control of the business.
And it can reduce the business's ability to meet its commitments .
But the good news is, that it's possible to arrange insurance which can provide cash to help you avoid these problems.
In the next few pages we explain more about the difficulties which can occur — and how you can protect your business against them.
KEY PERSON INSURANCE.
Imagine for a moment that one of the people who is the real driving force behind your business is removed tomorrow.
It might be you.
And imagine how difficult it would be to find a replacement with the same level of knowledge, experience, ability, authority or reputation.
Your business would probably soon begin to struggle , as the search for a replacement proceeded.
The remaining people would become overburdened trying to plug the gaps.
Existing business would be threatened.
Winning new business would be very difficult.
The confidence of buyers or investors or creditors would be eroded.
In the end,profits would fall .
In many businesses, one or two — sometimes more — people make an outstanding contribution to success.
It may be through their particular knowledge, abilities, experience, or contacts — or all of these.
Or through their charisma, reputation, energy, or sheer popularity — qualities which help win business and motivate staff.
In small businesses such key persons will usually be owners or directors.
In larger businesses, they may also include specialist staff like designers, research and development leaders, sales directors and project managers.
In every case, they are people whose sudden loss would substantially reduce profits, who are difficult to replace, and whose loss would hinder business development.
It is vital to protect yourself against the loss of such a key person .
The solution is Key Person Insurance.
Quite simply,this guarantees you money which you will certainly need if a key person dies, or is too ill or too injured to work.
The money will keep you in business; compensate you for lost profits; give you breathing space while you reorganise and/or find a suitable replacement; and save you from having to find a new credit line at a difficult time.
A variety of Key Person policies are available, and can be tailor-made for your particular needs.
Our specialists can advise you on the type of cover you need — and our experience and understanding of business gives us a big advantage when it comes to identifying key persons and assessing the size and type of cover necessary.
‘Ours was the kind of business where the major assets walked out of the door each evening and went home.
We always knew how difficult it would be to replace any of us — people with our kinds of specialisation don't grow on trees!
When Moira died we had terrible problems.
We had to withdraw from two major contracts.
We couldn't tender for new business.
We lost her contacts.
The rest of us were dreadfully overworked.
Worst of all, we lost the special chemistry we'd had with her there.
Our profits dipped 30%.
But our Key Person policy compensated us, which kept our backers and creditors happy, and eventually we managed to recruit new people,reorganise and get back on the rails again.’
DIRECTORS SHARE PROTECTION.
How would you like an uninvited stranger on your board of directors?
Someone who knows little about your business, and cares less than you do?
It's not impossible.
When a director dies,without a legally binding agreement his or her shares will not automatically to the surviving directors .
The shares will normally pass by will or intestacy to the spouse, children, or possibly other beneficiaries.
The beneficiaries may be willing to sell the shares to the surviving directors — but they may choose not to do so.
They could sell the shares to a stranger — who might decide he or she has a lot to contribute to the business.
Or to a business rival.
And if the deceased director owned a majority shareholding, the surviving directors could suddenly find themselves with a new boss .
To avert all this, you could find yourselves involved in prolonged negotiation, and even litigation, which would diminish your ability to run the business and swallow resources .
That is why you need a legally binding agreement which entitles the surviving directors to buy the shares of a director who dies.
But even then the surviving directors will need sufficient money to buy the shares — at the market rate.
It is hardly fair to expect a widow, for instance, to sell at a discount because you can't find the cash to meet a fair valuation.
If you cannot find the cash, the beneficiaries can sell the shares to whoever they like — and, again, you could find yourself with an outsider on the board.
Even if you have the cash, paying it over could be a severe strain on your resources.
Fortunately, there is an easy solution to the problem.
Life assurance can provide the cash you need — at the right time.
Many of the above difficulties apply equally to the retirement of a shareholding director .
Some types of life assurance provide a cash payment on a director's retirement to buyout his or her shareholding.
Share protection requirements should be carefully judged.
They will depend on many factors including the characteristics of your business, ages of directors, and the size of their shareholdings .
We can assess all the relevant factors for you, and produce the right amount of cash at the appropriate time.
Directors Share Protection provides for the shares of a director who dies to pass into the right hands.
It makes sure that the family of the deceased director receive fair payment for his or her shares, which saves them from the problem of having to find an alternative buyer.
It can help avoid expensive and protracted litigation.
It protects cashflow and profits.
Partnerships can experience similar problems, and our specialists can provide advice and arrange a suitable life assurance plan to avoid the undue strain on the surviving partner's resources.
‘As the two younger partners, we were particularly concerned about the death of our senior partner, who was much older.
Since he was the majority shareholder, this would have meant his family getting hold of the business — and much as we liked them, this wasn't a prospect we exactly relished.
Or they could have sold that controlling interest to someone else — heaven help us!
So we took out a Share Protection policy — and when our senior partner did die, we were both secure.
We acquired the shares without any hassle and were able to devote our energies to reorganising the business.’
LOAN PROTECTION.
Many businesses are dependent on loans for working capital, or to acquire premises or equipment.
But what would happen about that loan if you were unable to meet the repayments?
This may happen for many reasons beside business failure — for example, simple bad luck in the shape of injury, illness or death to someone who is vital to the business's continuing success.
Many businesses have obtained loans on the personal security of directors, often a house.
If the business cannot continue to meet the loan repayments,the lender is entitled to seize the security .
This would obviously be a nightmare for the directors concerned — and their families.
If the loan is secured by company assets, the seizure of these could severely damage the business's prospects .
The way to avoid such problems is by arranging life assurance and disability insurance.
Quite simply, this will ensure that the loan repayments are protected if you are unable to meet them due to the death, illness or injury of specified members of your business.
Adequate insurance cover gives you the peace of mind of knowing that your business's ability to continue trading has been preserved, and that the personal assets of directors are not at risk.
LOAN PROTECTION FOR SELF-EMPLOYED BUSINESSMEN AND WOMEN AND PEOPLE IN THE PROFESSIONS.
Many self-employed businessmen and those in the professions are dependent on loans for working capital or for acquiring premises or equipment.
But what would happen about that loan if you were unable to meet the repayments?
This may happen not because of any business failure but because of simple bad luck in the shape of injury, illness or death.
Most of us know someone who had the misfortune to suffer a bad car crash, or a heart attack, or a breakdown.
The consequences depend in part if your loan is secured or not.
If it is secured by assets — usually a house — then if your other resources are insufficient for repayment,the lender is entitled to seize your home .
This is the last thing you will want following major surgery or illness or the last thing your family will want following your death.
If your loan is unsecured , again your lender may seize assets — which, in practice, again, could mean your home.
The way to avoid such problems, protect your family, and guarantee your peace of mind, is Loan Protection.
Quite simply, this will ensure that the loan is repaid if you are unable to meet repayments due to death, illness or injury.
Loan Protection can be tailor-made for your particular needs.
For example, you may want to cover only part of the loan, in order to keep down premiums.
There are various types of life assurance policy to choose from.
Some can include an element of investment so you have the prospect of a cash sum at the end of your policy term.
We can help you achieve this protection in the most convenient and cost-effective way for you personally, taking full account of your loan, your assets, the nature of your business or profession, your personal circumstances, and your business aims.
GENERAL INSURANCE.
If you are self-employed or own a business you need to protect your livelihood with insurance .
Having worked so hard to start a business, it would be heartbreaking to see it all collapse due to some unexpected misfortune such as an accident, fire or theft .
Every business operation involves potential liability to customers and the general public .
Public Liability Insurance can help protect you against this sort of worry and possible loss.
If you employ anyone in a full, part-time, or even casual basis , you are legally obliged to have Employers Liability Insurance.
You also need to protect your buildings, contents, machinery and stock.
Whether you have a shop, office, hotel, factory or other business premises there are many things to consider.
While there are similarities between the cover required for an office, a shop and a hotel,each has special needs .
This is why Barclays has developed a range of insurance products and services designed to meet the needs of independent businesses.
Public Liability Insurance
If you make, sell or repair products, you could be liable for any damage they may cause.
The sort of liability that can arise is often unforeseeable and can be expensive.
Public Liability Insurance can help protect you.
Working from home
If you are self-employed and working from home, the Barclays Solo Policy is for you.
It provides cover for public and products liability.
You can also add cover for employers liability, ‘all risks’ on tools and other business equipment, motor cover for cars or commercial vehicles, extra expenses and personal accident.
If you are renting out residential property or holiday cottages, you need cover for buildings, property owners liability, employers liability and loss of rent.
The Barclays Residential Buildings Policy covers all these and you can add cover for contents of furnished property.
For those running a shop, cafe, take-away restaurant the Barclays Shop Policy is a package of essential insurances with a wide range of optional extras.
For those working from an office or surgery Barclays Office and Surgery Protection Policy covers accidental loss or damage to business contents and glass, additional expenses following loss or damage to contents, loss of money, assault, employers and public liability.
You can also add buildings,loss of income and book debts.
If you are running a factory or owning commercial property the Barclays Commercial Policy offers a flexible package of insurances to cover your needs .
You simply choose any combination of the following and they will all be covered under the one policy: buildings, contents, money, assault, glass, deterioration of stock, business interruption, employers liability, public liability, goods in transit, book debts and personal accident.
If you are running a hotel, guest house, pub, wine bar or large restaurant the Barclays Hotel Policy is a package of essential insurances with a wide range of optional extras available.
For those running a residential care or nursing home special cover is needed for this type of business.
The Barclays Nursing and Rest Homes Policy is a package of essential insurances with optional extras some of which are not readily available elsewhere.
Commercial insurances for larger businesses
If your business is large, your requirements may be complicated and therefore need discussion and planning.
We have four specialist Fire and Accident Insurance Centres based in Birmingham, Leeds, London and Southampton.
Our staff are experienced in the general insurance needs of businesses and will be able to recommend the most suitable policies for you.
Cashflow is very important to a business, particularly in its early years.
This is why all our insurance policies are designed so that premiums are payable monthly.
As a bank, we have long experience of businesses and their needs,which is essential when it comes to providing pensions for directors and people who are self-employed and insurance cover.
We are sensitive to a business's overall financial needs and so can integrate pensions and insurance into them.
We also want to enjoy a long-term relationship with you.
We do not seek a quick ‘one-off’ sale, after which we shall disappear from your life for ever.
The Financial Services Act requires insurance advisers either to be tied to a single insurance company, or to be entirely independent .
The tied adviser may offer the products of only one company.
The independent adviser is obliged to offer the most suitable products on the market.
With Barclays you get the best of both worlds.
We can offer you our own high quality life assurance and pension plans and insurance policies issued by Barclays Life Assurance Company Ltd.
Or you can take advantage of independent advice from Barclays Insurance Services Company Ltd.
The latter is a registered insurance broker and a member of the British Insurance and Investment Brokers Association.
Both companies are regulated in the conduct of investment business by the Securities and Investments Board.