

The Development of Green Awareness
Jonathon Porritt
This conference is a very important initiative.
The RSPCA has brought together representatives of, and people interested in, two profound movements which I believe will have a great influence on the way the human species evolves.
I cannot go into detail on the issues which members of one of those movements — the environmentalists — hold to be most vital.
If I started on a catalogue of what is going wrong with the world, let alone what we might do to put it right, there would be no end.
I would like instead to consider some of the attitudes and concerns that underlie those issues.
I shall take as my starting point a television programme I imagine many of you will have seen recently.
This featured the Worldwide Fund for Nature and claimed to reveal degrees of incompetence, if not corruption, within that organisation, which made it no longer worthy of the support of the Great British and international public.
It was a disgraceful piece of television, in as much as it failed completely to set one point of view against another so that genuine truth could emerge.
It was simplistic, it was an insult to many of those people taking part, it was ruthlessly edited and — it was fascinating!
But what Roger Cook and his researchers entirely failed to do was to use the interesting current developments within WWF to highlight a crucial debate of which we are all a part — namely the values that should now guide the work we do in our respective movements, and how to make those values germane and relevant to people the world over.
Joan Felthouse indicated in her introductory comments that many members of the Animal Welfare Movement dislike being referred to as ‘bunny huggers’.
And yet, of course, that derogatory, throw-away term of abuse does sum up a position that some people choose to adopt in defence of the natural world and its species.
On the other hand, there are those who are hopelessly compromised who believe that the only means by which we can achieve successful conservation is by bringing on board local people, and working together with them to achieve the most harmonious interaction between humans and wildlife.
I shall come back to those value-laden questions later.
The Worldwide Fund for Nature is, of course, just one part of a huge international Green Movement, in which we have seen massive increases in the number of supporters over the past few years.
In trying to sum up what this Green Movement is you need to distinguish between two important polarities, or tendencies.
The first is the ‘light green’ tendency.
The light greens by and large believe that the system of which we are all a part is perfectible, that it could be reformed in such a way as to create a sustainable, environmentally friendly way of living.
At the other end of the spectrum are the ‘dark greens’, who believe essentially that the system is inherently corrupt and unsustainable, and that any attempts to ameliorate its impact on the natural world are utterly forlorn.
What they advocate is the wholesale transformation of the system so that something quite different can emerge.
These two directions or shades of opinion are not necessarily as starkly polarised as may appear.
Indeed the interesting thing about the Green Movement is its continuity — the fact that all the different shades of opinion are linked in a single green swathe.
The light-greens themselves are variegated, ranging from respectable Establishment bodies like the National Trust and the RSPB at one end to the more radical organisations like Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth at the other.
And then the dark-greens are by no means united in forming a simple statement of what it is to be an out-and-out green.
Some feel that politics is the best route, others that politics is completely irrelevant and that we need instead a spiritual revolution.
I suspect that as I map out some of those tendencies they will sound familiar to many people, for in some respects the distinction between light-greens and dark-greens is a mirror image of the distinction between animal welfare activists and animal rights activists.
Essentially light-greens and welfarists are in the business of compromising, and compromising with pride, as they feel that this is the most effective way of making progress in our society.
Those on the dark green or rights side of the debate voice varying degrees of absolutism with an equal amount of pride, because they feel that the stating of and defence of those absolutes is the only means by which to reform the system.
Yet, despite such similarities, the Environment Movement and the Animal Welfare Movement remain quite separate in the way they proceed.
It was not really until the emergence of a more holistic Green politics four or five years ago that we began to see how powerful are the connections between those two apparently separate sets of concerns.
It is probably fair to say that some environmentalists have been careful not to over-identify with those involved in the animal welfare or animal rights movements.
On many occasions I have heard environmentalists say that they do not wish to be ‘tarred by the same brush’ which has so comprehensively covered some extremists in the Animal Rights Movement and which has brought that movement into disrepute.
I have also heard many environmentalists argue with passion that the cause of animal rights is subsidiary to the cause of protecting the environment, and that one will only follow from the other.
I have also heard people involved in the Animal Rights Movement argue exactly the same thing the other way round!
But fundamentally, of course, there is a massive overlap between the two movements in terms both of the issues and of the values and philosophical concerns that give our work any meaning at all .
And both movements are in the throes of similar internal debates between those who believe that a step-by-step, incremental approach to reform is the best means to make progress and those who believe in a far more absolutist confrontational approach.
At the root of the debate there lies one real question that every organisation in either movement has to confront: does gradualism genuinely mitigate the damaging behaviour of society, or does it subtly and insidiously reinforce that  behaviour by subscribing to its basic value?
To what extent is co-operation with the system compromised within the system?
To what extent are recent developments indicators of a fundamental betrayal of a different value system?
The success of the Green Movement over the last few years has left that rather uncomfortable question hanging in the air.
Very few environmentalists would choose to engage in a debate about the extent to which they had either succeeded or sold out.
Most of them are riding high on a feeling that all politicians and most of the media now put the environment at or near the top of the political agenda.
Most of them do feel that they have succeeded in bringing on board the majority of people in a country such as this to support their claims.
Let us look a little more closely at how that success has been achieved and examine the standards by which it can be judged.
The first significant point is that over the last decade environmentalists have learnt how to use science much more authoritatively, to bring a new professional competence to their campaigns.
It is extremely rare now to find environmental organisations out-manoeuvred by scientists, or by corporate or other interests using science as a weapon against them.
That has made a huge difference, and in terms of the response to the issues among so-called ‘decision-makers’ it is this increasing ability on the part of the environmental organisations to marshal good accurate evidence behind them that has begun to tilt the balance of opinion in their favour.
Secondly, environmentalists are now extremely nimble at arguing the whole notion of self-interest as the strongest justification for environmental protection; indeed it has become something of an art form to demonstrate that measures to protect the environment are essentially of value to human beings and that this is the best reason for their implementation that there could possibly be.
But we need to look closely at such a rhetorical tool.
It brings us back to the old calculus of human happiness, back to the rationalisations by which different measures and patterns of investment are justified purely in terms of their direct or indirect benefit to ourselves .
Environmental organisations have worked that one to the hilt.
If you look, for example, at the case that has been made for the protection of the rainforest, you will find that it is peppered with every conceivable argument.
But eventually the  arguments all boil down to the fact that it is more economic to harvest the rainforest sustainably than clear-fell it in the idiotic way we have been doing until now, and that this is of immense benefit to us, the human species, because of the maintenance of that genetic diversity which will cure all sorts of dreadful diseases in the future.
The rainforest is also held to be useful to us because it will help to mitigate the worst impacts of global warming.
Unapologetic utilitarianism of the old kind.
Save the rainforest because it is good for us.
The ‘rational’ and utilitarian planks of the success of the Green Movement are also interesting because of the burden they place on the importance of good science.
Environmentalists have ceased to feel any degree of confidence in talking about emotion.
Indeed the notion that one has emotions is now deeply suspect!
The idea that we might feel, that we might be angry, that we might care, that we might even have what are disparagingly known as ‘gut feelings’ rather than hard scientific evidence, is held to be something of a problem if you are an environmentalist on the road to success.
Instead we have quite enthusiastically lapsed into a chronic dualism where the whole emotional side of the human psyche has been suppressed.
We have simultaneously slipped back into a compromising embrace with the very form of instrumental utilitarianism which got the world into such a mess in the first place: that things are of value because they are of value to us, not because they are of value in themselves.
I have come to believe that the dualism and utilitarianism that now lie behind what many environmentalists are doing today poses a threat that most environmentalists don't even begin to understand.
The problem is that it has the effect of actually reinforcing alienation, leaving room for that disjunction from the natural world which allows certain scientists to behave with inconceivable cruelty in their laboratories, which allows workers in slaughter houses to treat animals as if they simply had no rights or feelings at all, which allows people to justify all manner of exploitation, as if there were no moral obligations or injunctions upon us whatsoever.
That, I think, explains so much of the anger and the deep sense of hurt that many people in the Animal Rights Movement and the Environment Movement feel.
They see those practitioners of cruelty in their laboratories, those operators in the slaughter  houses, as only the most extreme example of an omnipresent form of alienation which unfortunately embraces almost all human beings today.
To me, therefore, the most exciting thing about the Environment Movement at this point is the ethical, moral and spiritual challenge it is raising up against those old utilitarian and dualistic values.
We see this in the increasing influence of the new Ecology Movement, in the power of the Gaia theory, in the efforts of established religions to come to terms with their part in dealing with these issues; and much more humbly, but much more universally, we see it in the increased attention that so many of us are now paying to the ways we celebrate the beauty and diversity of life on Earth.
That spiritual dimension I believe to be of pivotal importance; indeed I believe it to be the soul of the Green Movement today.
And here we come to the crunch — the core of the paradox.
In order to allow that spiritual dimension to breathe, in order to allow it to work its healing, transformative way, we have no option but to operate in the world as it is, and to operate as gradualists.
I reach that sorry conclusion after years of involvement in one environmental organisation or another, and I defend such a position for two reasons.
The first is unavoidable pragmatism.
That, essentially, is how the system works.
It is boring to have to say that (it actually makes me twitch even as I do!), but it is no good pretending that it works in any other way, because it simply doesn't.
That does not mean that we have to throw the baby out with the bath water.
Within the Environmental Movement there is a useful, indeed a symbiotic, relationship between the absolutists and the pragmatists.
But we do all recognise that without that balance, in certain instances, absolutism can easily spill over into extremism.
At that point, extremism almost always tends to become counter-productive.
When anger turns to violence we can see people actually withdrawing, actually pulling back, from a sense of involvement in the ideas and values that we are putting forward.
In very few cases should human beings be tempted to fight violence with violence.
The utter incongruity of seeking to protect the natural world, both creatures and habitat, by threatening the well-being or life of one part of that natural world in the name of another is mind-boggling; such violence is foolish, cowardly and morally indefensible.
The second reason why I feel that gradualism is the only means by which we shall achieve any kind of new vision for society and for the natural world has everything to do with the workings of democracy.
You cannot force people to protect trees, wetlands, top soil, water or indeed other species.
You can only encourage and teach and cajole and provide incentives and gradually open the closed minds of the dominant species on Earth today.
One can, in short, only enhance the evolution of the human spirit to the point where such a vision is genuinely embraced.
If we accept that as a precondition of change, we have to accept that those changes must come about democratically.
If we accept that , we have to accept the slow, tortuous, frustrating business of working and being effective within that democracy, however inadequate it may be.
Now this, I think, is where approaches to the issues begin to diverge, and where the debate about tactics begins to take over.
For my part, I have said that I think it is possible to justify gradualist, incremental tactics as a means of bringing about lasting change.
But the really pertinent question is why are we engaging in gradualistic, incremental tactics, or indeed any tactics at all?
What is the motivation behind our involvement?
It is in the answer to that question, I believe, that the solution to the paradox can be found.
The debate should not endlessly be about tactics, it becomes self-defeating to go on and on and on wrangling about tactics when it is the motivation behind those tactics that holds the key.
It is here that the goal of developing a different vision , for locating a different set of values, becomes pre-eminent — because with that different vision, with a determination to create a new set of values which recognises intrinsic value in all living creatures, we can properly inform and inspire a programme that works, albeit a gradualist one!
Without that vision, you can guarantee that every single environmental and animal welfare organisation will be bought off and co-opted by a system that does not care a jot about the natural world and its creatures.
Without those different values, without that recognition of intrinsic value, without a different approach to an interpretation of stewardship, without a truly spiritual understanding of our relationship with the rest of life on Earth, both the Environment Movement and the Animal Welfare Movement are, in my opinion, condemned to irrelevance.
That of course puts a heavy burden on all of us, constrained as we are by having to work in underfunded, hard-pressed organisations pitted against monstrously powerful vested interests, and struggling often against ignorance and indifference at the same time.
But I think it is reasonable as well as constructive to allude to the possibility that the human spirit is indeed evolving, that we are gradually ‘widening the circle of compassion’, moving away from the narrower, more self-interested, more aggressive forms of social organisation to embrace the concept of one world in which we do indeed see ourselves as members of one human family.
But then, of course, there is one step beyond that which most people would find an even greater challenge: to widen the circle so that we see ourselves not only as one part of one human family, but of the family of all life on Earth.
And that is also, I believe, where the challenge to this conference really lies.
How can we actually articulate that sense of a broader vision?
How can we bring that message home in such a way that more and more people can locate their own individual efforts within it?
The Human Impact on Wildlife and the Environment
Ian Swingland
Since the beginning, humans have used the available natural resources for their survival; to feed and house their family, and to keep warm.
As human populations increased villagers had to go further afield in search of food.
This was undoubtedly one of the stimuli for the development of agriculture, selected agricultural cultivars, and the keeping of domestic stock.
The wear on horses' teeth from thirty thousand years ago clearly shows signs commensurate with what we know as crib-biting and confirms that they were domesticated even then.
With the exponential explosion of human populations in the last hundred years the natural resources on which such societies traditionally depended have been under increasing pressure both from the indigenous people and from foreigners who had little thought or concern for practising sustainable harvesting.
The foreigners were preoccupied with profit and getting as much as they could as quickly as possible.
These transient colonialists dictated their needs, and the local populations in general complied.
For many indigenes this meant that their once dependable resources were whittled away to the point of non-sustainability.
Even after the departure of the foreigners, resources which were still in plentiful supply at that time were under increasing pressure from the by now much increased local populations and the new way of doing things inherited from their colonial masters.
The profit incentive was instilled in what used to be purely a   subsistence mentality of only taking what was needed.
Development and international aid are frequently misguided in inception, disastrous in execution and catastrophic for the local people.
Zambians in the Kafue National Park take fry from the tributaries of the Kafue River using Government-issued mosquito nets because they can't fish the main river for adult fish as the new Lake created by the hydro-electric dam did not have the standing trees removed before flooding.
Images of NIMBY and the national interest versus the local interest arise.
It would be more acceptable if the dam made electricity, but it is silted up because the water analysis got muddled up and the river is much siltier than was originally expected.
Today the rate of increase in food production has exceeded the rate of increase in the total world population.
But in the developing world the rate of increase in food production has been exceeded by the rate of increase of the population, and now there is not enough food being produced in the developing world for the local population.
All the excess food is in the wrong places or in the wrong hands.
The locals are turning back to wildlife and natural resources to survive.
Most significantly, attitudes to animal welfare and conservation have changed radically in the last forty years to the point that they are among the most important six issues for the future and will dominate debate.
What are the other five?
They are:
health & pollution
food
continuing education
economic exploitation
and an individual's integrity and quality of life
The Victorians parcelled up Africa with the help of the other Europeans.
Straight lines were drawn on maps by Whitehall bureaucrats to represent the borders of countries, and concerns for the disappearing wildlife were manifest in the establishment of National Parks and reserves to protect wildlife and in the expulsion of the villagers from their traditional homes to be re-settled outside the borders of a park.
Divested of their natural homes and hunting grounds, cut off  from the renewable natural resources on which they depended, observing the continuing slaughter by visitors licensed to kill and construct, and disinherited from the financial or other benefits of these exercises, they became party to the most misguided and cynical game this century: the over-exploitation and destruction of the natural environment for the benefit of a few.
What is the point of only taking what you need and looking after your resources for the future, if they are simply going to be swiped by somebody else?
Why not join in while the going is good and take the remaining few animals or trees whatever the cost, because you will never reinherit your traditional grounds.
So poaching and over-utilisation of the forests and conservation areas began in earnest.
There is money to be made from ivory worth an average family's income for years at the risk of six months in gaol at no expense to you.
Rhino horn as a homeopathic rheumatism cure is all the rage in the East (and some nearer to us here like to use it for adornment as dagger handles) and the cost of collecting this cure was infinitesimal compared to the poacher's gain — so the black and wide-lipped rhino are threatened.
Westerners have a bizarre trait of liking pets.
Large numbers of tropical and exotic pets, together with tons of plants (orchids, cacti, and bulbs) are therefore forcibly removed from their natural environment and shipped daily from around the world to adorn the homes and egos of those with money.
Most often the owners do not know how to care for these exotic pets, and care even less that tremendous suffering is involved.
Six years ago we successfully brought about a European-wide ban on the bulk trade in tortoises where the UK alone was importing at the height of the trade 250,000 a year of which 80 per cent were dead within two years.
The trade in birds (such as parrots), where animal welfare interests and conservation are similar, as in so many other cases, shows that in 1988 the UK imported 185,000 exotic specimens.
5,000 were dead on arrival and 21,000 in quarantine.
How many more died in the exporting country or after the quarantine?
Even in Europe and many other countries in the so-called developed world, where sense and sensibility should abound, people pursue practices and habits which are destructive and expensive; which harm animals and plants — domestic, livestock  and wildlife.
The complaints, cautions and convictions for offences relating to animals in the UK are horrifying, and are as much a reflection of the relative toughness of our laws as the number of predominantly domestic pets kept per capita.
It is noteworthy that while complaints and cautions have increased since 1984 convictions have not.
Is this perhaps a comment on the inadequacy of the law and the difficulty of policing and getting convictions?
Mention that a species is rare and the world wants it on its mantelpiece or in its collection.
Today the locations of many rare or endangered species are closely guarded secrets.
The Smithsonian in Washington will omit locations on their database for the sake of conservation and security.
I and others hesitate even to mention that a particular species is rare in case it causes a demand to develop, even among our colleagues.
Very rare species have been known to be eliminated precisely because they are rare and would, in the collector's opinion, be better off in a bottle in a museum for posterity.
Humans are also prone to excuse their habits by hi jacking what they believe to be scientific objectivity and fact, or retrospectively to justify their ambitions by some gobbledygook about making a contribution to nature.
Remove a fox from its territory and another will soon take its place — so where is fox-hunting's defence that it controls foxes?
Circuses which use animals do so for profit, and there is no satisfactory scientific evidence that animals benefit in any way from their experiences in such an establishment — they cannot educate the public in the artificial environment of performing tricks, they only serve to entertain.
Zoos, botanical gardens and some circuses claim they are serving conservation by breeding animals or plants in captivity.
But, until such establishments successfully reestablish wild populations which have become extinct or depleted in their natural homes, that claim is not entirely true.
This requires massive investment in maintaining the habitat while the species is propagated in captivity and then a difficult and extensive period of re-introduction, re-stocking or translocation.
Few projects have ever been successful.
But we need zoos and botanical gardens to conserve species, because they are disappearing daily with dwindling habitats and  pollution threatening the integrity of ecosystems,—and to educate the public, although there is no clear evidence that it works .
Many species are having to be brought into captivity merely as an emergency measure because we cannot act fast enough, or effectively enough, in the wild and we do not know enough about most plants and animals to conserve them.
Zoos and botanical gardens the world over have to be conscious of their ‘gate’, the main source of income, and of course there is a temptation to become an entertainment rather than a serious zoo.
To remove the fly-by-night and seasonal aquaria, and the bad zoos, the RSPCA was instrumental in bringing forward the Zoo Licensing Act which has dramatically improved the standard of zoos and the welfare of wild animals in captivity.
We are lucky in this country that we have some of the better zoos, and indeed host what is widely recognised as the best, Jersey.
Captive propagation is one of the most important tools for the future of species.
However, genetic changes occur in captive groups which can be counter-productive to conservation aims.
Inbreeding depression can result when individuals which are too closely related reproduce and this diminishes survival of the young.
In a study of 102 scimitar-horned oryx juvenile survival rates were shown to be inversely related to the degree of inbreeding.
The breeding plan for this species is designed to minimise inbreeding.
Moreover it is important to identify genetically suitable animals for reintroduction from zoos, where analysis can reveal which animals carry the under-represented founder oryx's genes and would therefore be good candidates.
In maintaining captive breeding groups the aim must be to retain, if possible, the inbreeding coefficient of wild groups, and this is hampered not only by the limited captive stock available among the world's zoos but also our ignorance of the coefficient in the wild.
Recently the  RSPCA helped to fund a behavioural enrichment study at Regent's Park which aims to improve the lot of captive animals by diminishing their stereotypical and aberrant behaviour patterns, and providing more stimulating and natural surroundings for the animals and a better educational experience for the public.
When mealworms were given to a group of meerkats by means of a cleverly designed  dispenser their activity increased enormously and the pattern was on a par with that of the wild populations; without such a dispenser they showed more lethargic, passive and atypical behaviour patterns.
I wish our widespread concern for captive animals and indeed plants extended to what is happening in the wild with the same intensity.
Swans suffer from lead poisoning that comes from anglers' weights.
After a scientific study the Society was instrumental in bringing about legislation (Control of Pollution (Anglers' Lead Weights) Regulations 1986 — effective 1 January 1987) prohibiting the importation and supply of lead weights for anglers.
Recently we have learnt that the development of an effective, non-lead, ‘green’ shotgun cartridge is moving ahead.
In 1988 there was a seal epidemic when thousands of common seals died from phocine distemper virus.
The RSPCA and Greenpeace did what they could to alleviate suffering and collected detailed scientific information.
While the population now is holding its own, and antibodies are prevalent in all breeding adults, the mortality in the more polluted areas of the coast was significantly higher than elsewhere, provoking speculation that the pollution caused the epidemic.
While the outbreak directed media attention to pollution in the North Sea, ascribing the guilt to pollution was premature.
At least it has sparked off some serious research in determining whether organochlorides and PCBs, which do have an immunosuppressive effect and would make the seals vulnerable to viral attack, are the guilty parties.
Apart from the obvious welfare problems with snares, there is a wider perspective with regard to the number of badgers and other animals that get caught.
During 1987 the Nature Conservancy Council reviewed Parts 1 and 2 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 and reported to the Department of the Environment.
But this has not been published.
However, a summary states: ‘We also drew attention to problems such as…deaths of significant numbers of protected mammals in snares used for rabbit and fox control.’
In 1981, during the Committee stage of the Bill, the Under-Secretary of State for the Environment said: ‘For the purposes of pest control, especially control of foxes and rabbits, there is no practical alternative to a snare well set by an experienced person and regularly inspected.’
In addition to the serious and much publicised problem of  badger baiting and digging, much of which occurs in my own county, and sett stopping, there is the appalling road-kill statistic of some 47,500 badgers a year.
The RSPCA has produced a detailed manual to help Badger Groups, conservation officers and county trusts deal with problems and advise on road schemes.
We have also backed scientific research into rehabilitation schemes and their effectiveness.
We are concerned that rehabilitation may face the same problems as re-introduction or re-stocking in conservation — difficult, expensive, and the results often uncertain.
However, there is no question that Wildlife Health centres are needed to improve our knowledge and ability to be effective in conserving and managing wildlife, and to improve its welfare.
So what is the way forward?
How do we prevent this rapid slide into environmental devastation and the destruction of our wildlife?
Because, have no doubt, it is our problem, since, to quote an old saying, ‘If you aren't part of the solution you're part of the problem.’
Can we reduce population growth non-catastrophically?
To date, that has been the only way — mass starvation, disease, AIDS, wars and insurrection, enforced transmigration and so on.
Can we stabilise production where it is most needed, in the developing countries, or will their local political struggles always frustrate the establishment of a reliable and sustainable agricultural and natural resource-dependent plan?
Can we provide the means and technical expertise to help peoples avoid the need to destroy systems which may be their only lifeline?
Can we develop simple and cheap alternatives to over-exploitation?
In 1,402 sets of pelagic drift nets in the Pacific there were 208 fur seals, 914 dolphins, 22 turtles, 539 albatrosses, 8,536 shearwaters, 25 puffins and 17 storm petrels.
Here, perhaps, green consumerism can try to get us to eat tuna that has been caught in a wildlife-friendly way!
Gallup recently found that scientists are seen as responsible for environmental problems, although industrialists and politicians are regarded as even more responsible.
Can we avoid some of the worst aspects of the new game of the last decade of this century — the Green Game?
The cynical exploitation of the latest political discovery, the environment —because there are real problems out there in Banbury, Bangladesh and Basutoland which can't wait, and they don't  really care about our deliberating the issues and producing yet more paper, probably from their trees.
If we are to succeed we must have the best information possible from scientists, economists and other professionals.
Which means more directed research to solve real problems; more scientific conservation, distinguishable from what has gone before; a better and more professional attitude towards animal welfare and conservation, and a greater willingness by academics and others to get involved professionally; a greater realisation by charities and other funders, even research councils, that research in conservation and welfare is vital and is often good, original research — without it no advances in society's legislation are possible.
We must embrace and involve the local peoples not just in Lusaka, or any capital city, but in Luangwa, in the countryside.
The disenfranchised local people have a vested interest in their land and their animals and plants — something President Barco of Colombia recognised recently when he gave the Indians back their forests.
We must allow and support the ethnic rights of local people to use their traditional resources, however distasteful it is to our urban and Western prejudices.
If the local people are being manipulated by others for their gain then of course the situation is different.
Many projects in Zimbabwe, Zambia, Indonesia and other places are now embracing the local people in the development of wildlife-oriented management programmes where they will, once again, be party to the decision-making and benefit from the activity.
It is not reinventing the wheel, but adapting past methods to modern conditions and techniques, and reinvolving the true investors without whom conservation will not work — has not worked.
Even in Europe it is necessary.
For instance, until we did a NERC-funded project on tortoises in southern France the locals were not involved.
Now, ten years later, the tortoise conservation project is self-funding, the toast of the local businessmen, embraced by the local people, forging ahead as one of the most influential conservation outfits in the area, exporting its expertise to other countries, and espoused by the local and national politicians.
It is Franco-British co-operation at its best.
By manipulating the fungi which exist around the roots of all plants we can make the plant more efficient at taking up  nutrients and make it grow quicker.
This simple and inexpensive technique allows us to take the pressure off enlarged extended families with limited fields and enables them to grow more without fertilizers or more land.
It also takes the pressure off the local forest or other local natural resources which do not have to be destroyed for short-term gains.
It also helps us restore habitats quickly for conservation — for re-introduction programmes, for instance.
We are trying to restore the deserts in the Middle East with indigenous species of plants by using another characteristic of mycorrhiza, namely the ability to make plants more drought-resistant and thus easier to establish.
We have a few difficulties at the moment because the fungus does not impart resistance to wear, particularly from heavy armoured vehicles!
In Ujong Kulon, Indonesia, we are looking at novel microorganisms which might be useful to man.
Indeed, they may provide an alternative to timber in justifying the economic sense of allowing forests to stay put, because without such a reason they will be chopped down.
Countries, particularly developing countries, need the income, and unless the income is replaced by the international community they must seek the economic worth of their resources.
Of course, where the wealth goes is a problem, since it often ends up in a few hands.
We are also developing a technique which allows us to identify individuals, their sex and age, from dung, and this will be invaluable in conserving rare and secretive animals, such as the Javan rhino, using real data rather than the statistical guessing used at present.
Other strategies which recognise the new sense and the new possibilities are the wildlife/domestic stock village systems developing in Central Africa — systems not dissimilar to the self-sufficient, low-input philosophy that Gandhi was promoting before India became a monolithic Civil Service with centralised control which destroyed village integrity: the same problem that has caused thousands of Africans to return to their villages in the last twenty years, giving up their Government jobs for which they were never paid or even got their rations.
Even in Europe we are setting aside whole farms for conservation because we don't need the food and it rationalises the subsidy system.
But it causes rural unemployment unless some considerable thought is put into the change.
We must persuade industry not merely to give away their tax-  deductible loot as a sop to worthy environmental causes and charities but actually to find ways of integrating environmental capital into their accounts, as part of their business — a kind of natural account — a problem we are researching at the moment.
We can make laws and regulations about pollution or wildlife trade until we are blue in the face, but without enough money for enforcement they will not be effective.
In animal welfare and conservation the problem is international and immense.
Banning importation, for example, often creates a market and demand for something else.
We need to expunge the demand.
It would be more effective to involve people by education, by making them part of the system so that they gain from helping, to give them a vested interest in maintaining the integrity of the ecosystem and the wildlife around them — very much cheaper than a law force, WWF and CITES secretariats.
It works in Central America with green iguana which are no longer poached but protected by the people and the ex-poachers who are being trained to farm them.
It is clear that the issues of animal welfare and the environment are the issues of the late twentieth and the twenty-first centuries and that increasing knowledge and the application of appropriate methods together with the involvement of all the people will improve the plight of our beleaguered natural world.
Animal Protection and Environmentalism: The Background
James Serpell
Few people can fail to be impressed by the rate of growth of both the animal protection and environmental movements in the last twenty years, or by the extraordinary change in public attitudes with which this growth has been associated.
But while this explosion of concern for the plight of animals, species and natural habitats may seem new and unprecedented, it is perhaps reassuring to discover that the basic issues involved belong to an ancient tradition.
In the majority of pre-agricultural, hunting and gathering societies, for example, respect for nature — in the broad sense — and respect for the feelings of individual animals are incorporated together into religious ideologies in the form of strict rules and prohibitions regarding the killing of animals and the exploitation of natural resources.
Some of the central tenets of these belief systems are as follows:
1.
Animals possess thoughts, feelings and social systems which are analogous, if not identical, to those of humans.
2.
Animals (and, to a lesser extent, plants and natural phenomena) possess souls, spirits or essences which are effectively immortal and endowed with supernatural powers.
3.
Animals willingly submit to being killed if they approve of the hunter or his actions.
4.
The animal's essence (or the Spirits of Nature) will seek  redress or retribution against the hunter, his family or social group if it is killed without prior approval or proper conduct.
5.
Retribution can take a variety of forms: members of the same species may become generally scarce; the hunter may have bad luck in future hunting, and/or he or a member of his family or social group may be afflicted with injury, illness, madness or even death.
Note the environmental connotations of the idea of game becoming scarce as the result of human misconduct; the notion that human transgressions can upset the overall balance of nature (see Nelson, 1986).
Because of these belief systems, subsistence hunters go to considerable lengths to win the animal's prior approval and avoid inciting its posthumous revenge.
Typical examples of the kinds of ritual practices that are commonly observed include:(i) dietary and sexual abstinence before hunting,(ii) visionary experiences induced by drugs or fasting,(iii) ritual purification of hunter and weapons before hunting,(iv) offering of formal apology/excuse to the slain animal — blame-shifting,(v) offering of tokens of appeasement — food, tobacco, etc. — to the slain animal,(vi) ceremonial treatment of carcass — verbal flattery and solemnity,(vii) rules determining who may eat animals' flesh (which may include abstention by hunter and/or his entire kin group),(viii) avoidance of waste,(ix) avoidance of boasting,(x) ritual disposal of uneatable or unusable remains, and (xi) post-hunting purification of the hunter and/or his weapons (see e.g. Frazer, 1922; Hallowell, 1926; Benedict, 1929; Speck, 1977; Campbell, 1984; Serpell, 1986).
Note again, the environmental implications of the idea of avoiding waste; never killing or exploiting natural resources in excess of one's needs (Nelson, 1986).
Thus, in their interactions with nature and with individual animals, traditional hunters face a difficult dilemma; a dilemma which is best expressed in their own words; for example, in the following statement by an Iglulik Eskimo:
The greatest peril in life lies in the fact that human food consists entirely of souls.
All the creatures that we have to kill and eat, all those that we have to strike down and destroy to make  clothes for ourselves, have souls, like we have, souls that do not perish with the body, and which must therefore be propitiated lest they should avenge themselves on us for taking away their bodies (see Rasmussen, 1929).
Evidence from prehistoric ritual sites, such as the painted caves of western and central Europe, suggest that the same or similar traditions of behaviour towards animals and nature existed during the Palaeolithic some 20,000 years ago (Levine, 1971).
Anthropologists have spent the best part of a century debating the meaning and significance of these fascinating beliefs and rituals.
Although no clear consensus has emerged from these discussions, one idea in particular has acquired a sizeable following.
The theory, articulated formally by Malinowski (1954), states that these practices constitute a form of magical insurance policy against normal catastrophic events, such as accidents, sickness, hunting failure or famine.
While they may not alter the actual risks that something will happen, they at least inspire the feeling that such events are not entirely outside the hunter's control.
In other words, they make him feel less helpless in the face of adversity.
Although not explicit in Malinowski's theory, it is apparent that hunter-gatherer belief systems also express a strong feeling of anxiety or guilt about killing and exploiting non-human-animals, hence the notion that punishment can only be avoided by behaving in a respectful way towards individual animals and nature in general.
The hunter is thus motivated primarily by self-interest and pragmatism — the fear of possible retribution — even if he expresses these motives in religious and moral terms.
The Neolithic advent of farming about 10,000 years ago seems to have produced a fundamental shift in attitudes to animals and the natural world.
According to the hunter-gatherer worldview, humans are bound by an elaborate mystical contract with the non-human world, and nature is seen as either neutral or benevolent as long as the terms of the contract — all the rules, rituals and prohibitions — are upheld.
In post-Neolithic religious ideologies, however, attitudes to nature and to animal suffering became dissociated, and nature — in the sense of wilderness — came to be seen as fundamentally  antagonistic to human interests; a source of weeds, pests, predators and the dark forces of chaos.
In all of the ancient agrarian civilisations, the original spirits of nature were depicted in increasingly ruthless, capricious and anthropomorphic terms.
Eventually they acquired the status of gods and goddesses whose periodic tantrums brought epidemics, famines and other disasters raining down on the heads of long-suffering humanity.
In classical Greece and Rome, wild nature was still regarded as a fearsome opponent, populated in folklore by an array of monstrous ogres, demons and other equally menacing supernatural beings.
They included the forest god, Pan, who was believed to engender intense fear or ‘panic’ in those who were foolish enough to venture into remote and desolate places.
Literary celebrations of nature at this time invariably referred to cultivated, pastoral landscapes (Serpell, 1986).
Areas of true wilderness were maintained solely as hunting preserves for the ruling élite, whose sporting exploits were commonly used to illustrate their potency as rulers and conquerors (MacKenzie, 1989).
Once again this attitude to the natural environment was essentially pragmatic; farming involves replacing complex, natural biological communities with simplified, artificial systems dominated by only a handful of species.
It is, by nature, expansionist because declining soil fertility on cultivated land necessitates a continual process of encroachment into previously undisturbed areas.
Negative perceptions of wilderness helped to reinforce this process of agricultural expansion by, in effect, making a virtue out of necessity — by turning cultivation and agriculture into a form of semi-religious crusade (Thomas, 1983; Serpell, 1986).
Similar attitudes to the natural world persisted until very recently, and are still prevalent in many parts of the world, especially in rural areas.
In northern Europe, however, factors such as population growth, urbanisation and industrialisation during the latter half of the nineteenth century produced a gradual change of heart, although the initial move towards the idea of protecting natural wilderness was encouraged primarily by European sportsmen who became concerned by the diminishing herds of game animals in the colonies (MacKenzie, 1989).
The modern environmental movement began to emerge during the post-war period, although its initial emphasis was still on protection rather than conservation, and most of the effort was directed towards preserving large animals and their habitats in the Third World.
However, post-war industrialisation and the alarming rate of scientific and technological progress (particularly the discovery and use of atomic weapons) created a shift in public opinion that became increasingly evident during the 1950s and 60s, and culminated in the formation of various national and international groups dedicated to campaigning on behalf of the environment.
Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring which highlighted the dangers of industrial and agrochemical pollution back in 1962, was enormously influential, as were the writings of Paul Ehrlich in the early 1970s which helped to inspire the establishment of the Green movement.
Doom-laden economic and environmental forecasts, such as The Ecologist's Blueprint for Survival (1970) and the Club of Rome's Limits to Growth (1972) also had an important impact by adding scientific credibility to the environmental debate.
In spite of these developments, however, the rate of growth of the environmental movement in Europe remained fairly slow until 1986 when it suddenly accelerated, apparently in response to environmental disasters such as the explosion at the Chernobyl reactor in April of the same year.
Since then, growth rates appear to have been exponential (see Figs 1–4).
Despite these apparently uniform trends throughout the movement, the environmental community is not entirely at one with itself.
Many areas of disagreement over policy and philosophy exist both within and between organisations although, broadly speaking, opponents in the debate fall into two camps.
One camp is occupied by the ‘pragmatists’ who emphasise conservation in association with human development and the sustainable use of natural resources — in effect, an exercise in damage limitation.
This theme is clearly articulated in the IUCN's World Conservation Strategy (formulated in 1980).
To quote from an IUCN brochure:
Sustainable development — action that alters the environment so that it caters more effectively for human needs, without depleting renewable resources — is essential if the world is to be free from poverty and squalor…
Within that development we have to find room for wild nature, which is a spiritual enrichment as well as, in a very practical sense, the foundation of our existence.
It is the processes of wild nature that renew the oxygen in the air, maintain the cycles of essential elements, sustain the fertility of the land, and regulate the flow of rivers.
We turn to wild nature for new crops and new drugs, as well as for the beauty that enriches our lives.
The World Conservation Strategy emphasises that conservation and sustainable development are not enemies, but are inseparably one.
This somewhat anthropocentric, ‘managerial’ approach to nature is in sharp contrast to that of the ‘idealists’in the environmental movement who tend to advocate total protection for threatened species and habitats, de-industrialisation, and a return to non-intensive methods of food production.
In other words, a new and revolutionary moral order.
The idealists also include extremists who are prepared to break laws and commit acts of industrial sabotage (or ecotage) in order to further their aims.
A good example of this militant approach is provided by the North American organisation Earth First! whose campaign motto is ‘No compromise in defense of Mother Earth.’
Environmental idealism is also increasingly bound up with semi-mystical New Age concepts such as‘Deep Ecology’ and the personification of the planet itself as ‘Gaia’.
In contrast to perceptions of nature, the issue of animal suffering has been a periodic cause for concern throughout recorded history.
Among the ancient civilisations of North Africa and Asia, the slaughter of domestic animals was almost invariably accompanied by elaborate sacrificial rituals in which, surprisingly, the emphasis was on causing the minimum amount of suffering and distress.
Not uncommonly, the priest who performed the slaughter would beg the animal's forgiveness.
Many Greek and Roman philosophers and writers also advocated moral responsibilities towards animals, as did several major oriental religions and a number of early Christian sects (Serpell, 1986, Ryder, 1989).
In Europe, such ideas were suppressed during the Middle  Ages and the Renaissance mainly in adherence to the views of St. Thomas Aquinas.
According to the medieval interpretation of Genesis, animals were created by God purely to serve the interests of humans, and Aquinas argued from this that humans had no direct moral responsibilities towards animals at all.
In his Summa Theologiae he proposed that:
If in Holy Scripture there are found some injunctions forbidding the infliction of some cruelty towards brute animals…this is either for removing a man's mind from exercising cruelty towards other men…or because the injury inflicted on animals turns to a temporal loss for some man…
God's purpose in recommending kind treatment of brute creation is to dispose men to pity and tenderness towards one another.
The idea that humans had no direct moral responsibilities or duties to safeguard the welfare of animals was further reinforced in the seventeenth century by René Descartes' mechanistic proposition that only humans possessed rational souls and feelings, and that animals were essentially automata devoid of conscious sensation.
Judging from the contents of a letter he wrote to a colleague, Descartes was well aware of the moral and practical implications of his theory.
He wrote that it was ‘not cruel to animals but, rather, indulgent to men…since it absolves them of the suspicion of crime when they eat or kill animals’.
Once again, an air of pragmatism pervades this statement.
In a society where animals were being exploited with increasing intensity, self-justifying proposals of this kind allowed their suffering to be accepted with a clear conscience (Thomas, 1983).
Fortunately for animals, the views of this brilliant and eminent Frenchman were never popular in Britain, and it was in Britain towards the end of the eighteenth century that serious concerns about the welfare of animals eventually resurfaced.
The leading light of this humane revival was Jeremy Bentham, whose Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation contained the now famous statement to the effect that it was morally irrelevant whether animals were incapable of speech or conscious reasoning.
The crucial question, according to Bentham, was: ‘Can they suffer?’
Ironically, the evidence provided by Cartesian vivisectors, who  had already demonstrated the anatomical and physiological similarities between humans and non-humans, gave Bentham and his followers sufficient grounds for believing that animals could indeed experience pain and pleasure (Serpell, 1986; Ryder, 1989).
During the early part of the nineteenth century a spate of humane legislation was enacted and the SPCA (which later received royal patronage) was founded.
Much of the early attention, however, was focused on curbing or banning the recreational pursuits of the working classes which included such activities as bull-baiting, badger-baiting, dog-fighting and cock-fighting.
Middle- and upper-class sporting activities, such as fox-hunting and shooting, were effectively ignored (Ritvo, 1988).
The anti-vivisection movement also emerged in England in the late nineteenth century but, again, it consisted mainly of middle- and upper-class pet-lovers, and much of their outrage was directed at foreign, rather than home-grown, scientists.
In other words, the nineteenth century animal protection movement was largely class-oriented, and riddled with moral inconsistencies and complex ulterior motives.
Despite its early success and its many influential supporters and advocates, the animal protection movement was largely smothered by the onset of the First World War (Ryder, 1989).
It appears that human preoccupations and concerns once again took precedence over the interests of non-human animals.
The recent revival of the movement began during the 1960s.
According to Richard Ryder (1989) it was initiated by a division within the RSPCA over its persistent failure to oppose bloodsports.
Ruth Harrison's attack on intensive farming practices in her book Animal Machines (1964)— with a foreword by Rachel Carson — was influential, as were the writings of Brigid Brophy and many others, including Ryder himself.
The movement was given a further lift by the publication of Peter Singer's Animal Liberation (1975)— the first major philosophical discourse on the subject of animal rights — and this was soon followed by a number of other excellent works on the same theme.
Now, like environmentalism, the animal protection movement appears to be split between pragmatic and idealistic factions.
The former advocate continued animal use tempered by improvements in their welfare (a form of damage limitation), while the latter propose equal rights for animals  and an end to their harmful exploitation (a new moral order).
The idealistic arm of animal protectionism also includes its fair share of extremists, such as the now infamous Animal Liberation Front.
While it is convenient to categorise the divisions within the animal protection and environmental movements as either pragmatic or idealistic, it is important to remember that both are underpinned by, and financially dependent upon, a large reserve of grassroot supporters who, more often than not, have little knowledge or understanding of the complex practical and moral issues involved.
How these people choose to allocate their support will ultimately determine the future of both movements.
Until very recently, supporters of animal protection or environmental causes appear to have been motivated primarily by feelings of empathy, sympathy or personal identification with animals, especially large, appealing and anthropomorphic animals.
For this reason, environmental and conservation organisations have commonly resorted to using ‘protectionist’ images of animal suffering — slaughtered whales, poached and mutilated elephants, or endangered pandas — as fund-raising devices.
Indeed, the Worldwide Fund for Nature has recently been criticised in the tabloid press for allegedly misleading its supporters for this reason.
This traditional situation may now, however, be changing.
Recent incidents and events on the environmental stage — beginning, at least in Europe, with the explosion at the Chernobyl reactor — seem to have reawakened that ancient fear of nature's retribution that so haunted our hunting and gathering ancestors.
Virtually every week we are warned in the media of further devastating environmental effects of our own past excesses; effects that threaten human as much as non-human life and livelihood.
Judging from the trends illustrated in Figs. 1–4, environmental organisations have prospered greatly from this apparently self-interested shift in public opinion.
But the lessons of history would suggest that the animal protection movement, with its emphasis on the welfare of individual animals, may experience some corresponding loss of support.
More  than anything else, however, the eventual outcome of such trends will depend on the rate and severity of environmental deterioration in future years.
If this deterioration continues or, indeed, accelerates, as the vast majority of scientists think it will, then the animal protection movement must surely join forces with the ‘Greens’ and, as far as possible, endorse their aims.
For if the environmental movement fails in its objectives, we risk sinking into a post-industrial Dark Age in which human interests will, once again, eclipse those of other species.
Already, at the grassroots level, the principles of ‘deep ecology’ and ‘animal rights’appear to be merging and hybridising.
But it remains to be seen whether this somewhat confused mixture of ideologies represents a realistic and coherent guiding force for the type of global change in human values that is so urgently needed at this time.
Animal Protection and Environmentalism: Science
Sidney Holt
I will begin by telling you that I now live on a farm close to a beautiful little town in Umbria, the region of St Francis.
It is about the same size as Rye.
We are happy that our streets are clean, that daily life is well-ordered, that our markets still sell locally home-produced produce and that we recycle our glass and our paper and our spent batteries.
The self-employed mechanic who services my car — I am sometimes ashamed to say that I have a car — also sharpens sickles, sells strimmers and repairs motor cultivators.
He is an active member of the World Wildlife Fund, completely untouched by Central Television's exposure a few weeks ago, and he carefully disposes of his old sump oil.
In the surrounding countryside farming continues in a way that is very little different from what was left to us by the Romans, though sunflowers have recently begun to replace some of the olive trees.
The feudal tenure system was only dismantled in the 1950s.
And within the memory of my neighbours fields were ploughed by oxen.
Now they use tractors, some pesticides, some inorganic fertilisers, but nevertheless most of the people of Umbria voted a few weeks ago in favour of a referendum which would have severely restricted the sale, and therefore the consumption, of pesticides.
Still, at present we are lucky.
Our well water is plentiful and drinkable.
But I live in a transition society.
Most of my neighbours love children, and they are kind to animals, though they are not averse to eating their pet pigeons   sometimes and wild pheasants.
They don't talk much about the need to cull wild boar even though the boar do some damage.
It is the hunters from the city who talk about that and also those who sell those hunters guns, ammunition and fancy uniforms.
Nevertheless my neighbours like to eat salami with their olives and smoked ham with their figs, and so do most other Italians.
Just up the hill from us is a small pig-raising factory which has just been built and, as the sun sets behind the hills of our old enemy Tuscany, across the valley, we can hear the squeals of feeding time and, we fear, of transport and slaughter time.
We worry about the rotten lives of those pigs, which are among the most intelligent and sensitive of animals.
We worry about the downhill movement of the slurry through our groundwater and into the pool at the bottom of the hill where the herons and frogs live.
And we read that frogs are becoming very rare in Europe.
And we wonder where all the feed for those pigs is coming from and what land devastation has been used to produce it.
We are intensely conscious of the environmental and animal welfare issues in that one place.
In the Po Valley our future problems are multiplied more than a thousandfold.
It is said that more pigs are reared there than there are people in the entire country.
Italy now exports a lot of salami.
The run-off from the pig factories is so high in nutrients and so voluminous that in warm summers the entire Adriatic stinks of rotting algae and dead fish.
Summer resorts along the coast in the last two years have lost hundreds of millions of pounds in revenue.
Italy has an active and highly visible environmental movement.
World Wildlife Fund Italia has broader interests than most WWF groups; it is more radical in its approach to problems.
Greenpeace is newly established but expanding rapidly.
An entirely homegrown product, the League for the Environment, is one of the most effective of all environmental groups in Europe.
They have even launched a national daily newspaper.
But they will all have to work hard together, and cleverly, if they are to save the Adriatic Sea and the coastal economy of the North East part of Italy.
Unfortunately the animal welfare movement in Italy is still weak and fragmented.
Intensive indoor rearing of livestock is relatively new and people are only just beginning to realise what it means for the animals.
It may be some time before the  movement is strong enough to help the environmentalists in any significant way, both to save the Adriatic and to reinstitute sustainable and more human agriculture in the Po Valley.
But I am convinced that lasting success in this will only come when both movements are strong.
Modern whaling was invented by Norwegians late in the nineteenth century.
It involved using a cannon to fire a harpoon carrying an explosive grenade.
Boats have since got more powerful.
They now have equipment to make locating whales and chasing them more efficient, but otherwise the method has changed little in a hundred years.
Concern about the inherent cruelty of this hardly appears in literature until after the Second World War.
Efforts to control whaling between the wars was said to be for the purposes of resource conservation; that they were really concerned with managing the flow of whale oil through international markets.
Interestingly enough, concern both about resource conservation and cruelty was embodied in the immediate post-war years in one man, a Scotsman, Dr Harry Lillie.
Lillie was the doctor on the British whaling factory, the Southern Harvester , in the Antarctic in 1946/47.
According to the classic history of modern whaling by two Norwegian historians, Lillie ‘had been so shocked by what the cruelty to whales involved that he tirelessly championed electric killing, which in his opinion would be more humane’.
He persuaded the major animal protection societies, especially the University Federation for Animal Welfare, to campaign vigorously against the explosive grenade.
I would say too that Lillie was a pioneer in using visual aids to get his point over, as Greenpeace and others now do so effectively with video cameras.
He took his fairly primitive, but hardly portable, cine-camera and got, I am told, unique film of the whaling operations.
I would like to trace that film, but I don't know where it is and where we could now see it.
Anyway, British companies undertook development studies to find a better method: that is, a more humane method.
But they gave up when they failed to obtain financial assistance from the British government.
According to the historians, the Norwegian companies also did experiments at about the same time.
But their aims were clearly quite different from those of the British.
The Norwegians were simply concerned ‘with  discovering more effective catching methods’.
In 1956 Japanese companies experimented in the Antarctic with electrical equipment, but they found that the electric current impeded the blood circulation and this lowered the quality of the whale meat.
Since the Japanese are interested in meat, not oil, as the Norwegians and British were then, that was a severe disadvantage and they abandoned their experiments.
Moving forward a little, in 1958 Lillie attended the first UN Conference on the Law of the Sea.
He was an observer there for the World Federation for the Protection of Animals.
He worked with others for a strong resolution against cruelty to marine animals, but with only modest success.
The conference adopted a resolution which requested states ‘to prescribe such methods for the catching of living creatures in the sea, particularly seal and whale, as to spare them as much suffering as possible’.
Now I have been in this business for a long time, and I was at that conference, and I have to say that I had forgotten the resolution until I was reading things again in preparing for this talk.
That resolution clearly withered on the vine.
Lillie next appears in the story addressing the 1965 meeting of the International Whaling Commission which had taken an intermittent and desultory interest in so-called humane killing of whales.
The IWC is not required to work for more humane killing methods, but it can do so by virtue of the fact that it can recommend particular catching methods that are better than others.
But Lillie's theme in 1965 was conservation, so he was working on both topics simultaneously.
Apparently he got to hear about a particularly tricky deal prepared by three Japanese whaling companies to come with quota proposals, and he knew that one of the companies was taking a very different view from the other two, and he hoped that there could be a divide-and-rule situation set up.
He found, for example, that one company was realising that the whaling situation had been allowed to become a terrible indictment of all those involved in the industry, the Governments concerned and the International Whaling Commission, but I am afraid to say that it was the attitudes of the other two companies that prevailed in Japan for the ensuing years.
In 1972 the United Nations called for a ten-year moratorium on all commercial whaling to be enacted through the IWC.
The next ten years of international arguments about whaling are  best known as the period in which many more countries joined or rejoined the IWC, when the Indian Ocean was designated as a whale sanctuary and when the sperm whale was effectively protected after 200 years of exploitation.
But it was also the decade in which, successively year after year, proposals for a general moratorium were rejected by the Commission.
That was finally adopted, as many people will know, in 1982.
It was supposed to come into effect in 1985.
In fact it came into effect only in 1988.
So, during the period 1972 to 1979, the issue of humane killing practically disappeared from the IWC agenda.
But in 1980 the IWC co-sponsored a meeting on cetacean behaviour and intelligence and the ethics of killing cetaceans.
Although nothing became of this beyond an agreement that there were widely different views on the matter, that same year the Government of Australia proposed that the so called cull grenade should be banned.
I have to explain a little about this.
The cull grenade is the old Norwegian method but without the explosive in the bomb; and the Spanish, Icelandic and Korean whalers had removed the explosive because the explosions were spoiling too much of the meat, which was a major export product to the Japanese market.
Therefore the Australian move to make whaling more humane was in fact a move to get back to the way it had been after a serious deterioration.
In fact the Minke whale, the smallest species, has always been hunted with a non-explosive grenade.
The role of Australia in all this is particularly important, as was its role in the successful campaign eventually to get a moratorium.
Australia had been a whaling country until 1978 when an official enquiry, which was supported by all political parties, concluded that the public wished to see an end to whaling.
Whaling in Australia was stopped.
But the Australian Government went further and instructed its delegation to the IWC to work for a permanent global ban — not a moratorium, a ban — and at the same time to press for humane measures while any whaling continued.
Then the bans on the cull grenade, released at the same time, came into effect for all species of whales.
However, Norway and Japan, after the moratorium, continued so-called scientific whaling, which they were allowed to do by a little loophole slipped into the convention under which the IWC operates.
They can still  use, and have been using, cull grenades in the cause of science, even though they are banned for commercial purposes.
Iceland says that when it resumes commercial whaling, as it intends to do, it will withdraw its objections to the cull grenade ban.
But Iceland and Norway have also said that if we don't let them start whaling next year, they will leave the International Whaling Commission.
If they carried out their threat this would mean that neither the IWC's conservation measures nor the already weak and inhumane killing regulations would apply to them.
But the success of the Australian move is quite important in a very concrete legal sense.
We now here have, in the convention of the IWC, not only a possibility to enact regulations which would make whaling more humane, but the enactment of very specific regulations which establish a precedent that the Whaling Commission is formally involved in animal welfare issues.
Of course, it is required not to challenge whaling in principle as such.
We also have a few little phrases in the UN's so-called Global Plan of Action for Marine Mammals which give us a small hook on which to hang international actions for the benefits of both whales and seals.
One of the basic long-term objectives of the plan is to ensure that any exploitative use of a marine mammal population is conducted in a humane manner.
This year we successfully resisted enormous pressure from Iceland, Norway and Japan to lift the moratorium.
But we do face a real possibility that some commercial whaling will be allowed to resume in 1992.
So this is the time when some Governments are having to rethink their position and many non-governmental organisations to rethink their strategies.
We have, as it were, gained time through talking about science and conservation.
We will gain more time by trying to institute better policing, making improvements in the control of any future whaling.
But ultimately we shall have to face the facts about whether or not whaling is acceptable to the peoples of the world or not.
And of course the peoples of the world are intensely divided on the issue.
So our achievements are significant, but they are fragile, and I want to conclude by outlining what I think are the principal features of our work that have bought some success.
First, there has been a high degree of parallel and interactive effort by scientific, political and public information  initiative over the last ten years.
In public information I include Greenpeace-style actions, briefings to MPs, publications, briefings to the media, everything of that kind.
At the same time, scientific research that is relevant has been supportive, and political lobbying through IWC delegations, primarily, and through their superiors in Government, has been intense and continuous.
The second feature of this modest success is that differences of opinion about tactics and ecology have, generally, been submerged in working towards clearly identified goals which have always been attached to a limited and defined time frame.
Step by step.
The strongest ecological difference is that between those who can accept whaling in principle so long as it is properly regulated and those who do not accept whaling in principle at all.
And between these extremes there is a range of attitudes including the position of those who can accept whaling in principle if it can be made more humane in practice.
But, of course, others insist that it could never be humane in practice because the essence of the cruelty is not only in causing a painful and prolonged death but, rather, in the harrowing chase of the animal, and moreover, of an animal which has not evolved with the typical biological characteristics of a prey species.
So where do we go from here?
There are good reasons for continuing to support the moratorium.
Greenpeace, the World Wildlife Fund and the International Fund for Animal Welfare are the three international organisations, the prime organisations, which have worked closely together for ten years, but with help from many local and national bodies.
I think we are all agreed that we should aim at keeping the moratorium in place, at least until the year 2000 — I won't go into the reasons for that choice — and that meanwhile we don't necessarily have to try to resolve the ideological problems.
If we can do that and if we can hold the dam, as it were, for a few more years, that will give us time to assemble the ethical arguments against whaling, and to get them diffused further in the world.
Many people say generally that ‘there should be no whaling for ethical reasons’, but when you try to pin them down to a formulation of those ethics, you find it exceedingly difficult and, I am afraid to say, probably unconvincing to most people of the nations of the world.
So those are the kinds of things that exercise our minds now.
There are many details.
For example, we like the idea of benign scientific research, as we call it, to counter the whalers who say they will kill whales for science.
On the other hand, the question has come up, should we support benign scientific research if its purposes are to find information that will simply make the management of future whaling more efficient?
These are the sort of questions we face.
We also face demands for the culling of whales, as we face demands for the culling of seals and wild boar in Italy, because they eat things we want.
Japan has an interesting theory about this.
The Minke whales, which are numerous, should be culled because they are impeding the recovery of the endangered Blue Whale.
The Icelanders and the Norwegians simply say, ‘Let's kill the whales anyway because they are eating our fish’.
There is not the slightest scientific evidence to support such arguments.
But, at the same time, they are arguments which are extremely plausible to most people who don't think too deeply about it.
So one of the things we have learned — and the lesson must be carried forward — is that, even if scientists, scientific activities, political activities, legal activities and public awareness activities go ahead in concert, all the groups of people involved simply must learn to talk to one another.
This has been a difficult thing to bring about.
We are still not there.
We don't think, if I may say so, that the philosophers are yet talking to us in a language that we understand, although some of us are beginning to grasp it.
We have a lot to do in communications among ourselves and between the different disciplines and different complementary approaches.
Moreover, the species involved, as everyone acknowledges, are rather special.
They are special in international law, very special.
We have, however, established the effectiveness of combined operations in science, politics and public information.
We have established the multiplying effect of environmental and animal welfare organisations working together.
In the environmental movement the comparable issue is the rights of future generations of humans.
That captures the essence of the long-term approach to environmental problems.
Not just our rights but those of our descendants.
Neither future generations nor the animals can speak for themselves or  defend themselves.
They have to be defended by proxy, and they are both in the same boat.
If we can work together to achieve both sets of rights in the next ten years or so, we will have done, I think, a fantastic job.
We face what I call the conservationist fallacy in much of our debate between animal welfare people and environmentalists.
Environmentalists as well as scientists have been afraid to admit to having emotions or sentiments.
There has been too much diversion of activity towards the idea of maintaining simple diversity in the living systems of the planet.
This can too easily move into saving endangered species and not caring for the Minke whales, the Harp seals, or the East African mammals.
They are in their hundreds of thousands or millions.
Animals have to be cared for because they are important in the world, not just because they are being driven to extinction.
I get very impatient when I hear arguments about whether the whales are going to extinction, with the implication that, if you say ‘no, they aren't’, then to hell with them.
And the last lesson I think we have learnt is that we have to operate globally and internationally.
We have to, for that is the nature of the world we are in.
This is not to disparage local and national work — that's the basis of everything.
But we can't solve our problems, and we certainly can't solve the problems of the whales, unless we work on the global scale.
Animal Rights: What's in a Name?
Tom Regan
Organised efforts to protect other animals are at an historic crossroads.
Never before have so many joined in the struggle to bring significant improvements to their lives.
Our numbers and shared values are making a difference in the political process, in the marketplace, in the classroom, even — on some occasions, thanks in large part to the indefatigable work of Andrew Linzey — in places of worship.
Truly, we are a force to be reckoned with.
This reckoning sometimes takes bitter forms.
Especially among those who make a living off the backs of other animals, whether this be in the name of science, commerce in flesh, or entertainment, for example, we are being ‘reckoned with’ with a vengeance.
Steadily increasing amounts of their time, energy and money are being devoted to reckoning with us, not on the merits of the issues involved for the most part, but instead with a view to destroying our movement by discrediting those who comprise it.
The old rhetoric of disdainful dismissal, the one that grouped all of us together as ‘cranks’, ‘lunatics’, ‘freaks’, or simple-minded members of an addled army of ‘little old ladies in tennis shoes’— this old rhetoric is dead, or dying.
In its place is a new rhetoric, an incendiary rhetoric, a rhetoric of vitriolic accusation.
Today we are ‘fanatics’, ‘extremists’, or — the most frequently used verbal bomb, the one favoured even by the highest ranking public health official in the United States, Health and Human Services Secretary Louis Sullivan —‘terrorists’.
While it is important that we take stock of and combat the   fraudulent ways in which we are being described by those who oppose us, we should not be unmindful or insensitive to what we are saying about ourselves, of how we are describing who-we-are.
For the plain fact is, we are saying many different things.
We are against cruelty.
We stand for animal welfare, for animal protection, for compassion, for human responsibility to the other animals.
Our goal is animal liberation.
We are part of a progressive social movement — the Animal Rights Movement.
Are we all these things?
Can we be?
In the remarks that follow I offer some answers to these questions, make some scattered observations about how these answers relate to concerns about the environment, and indicate where my own sympathies lie.
Why anti-cruelty is not enough
We do well to remember that societal opposition to cruelty to animals, especially opposition that has the force of law, is a comparatively recent development.
In England we can date its beginning with the passage, on 22 June 1822, of the Ill-Treatment of Cattle Act, while in the United States we may point to the passage of anti-cruelty legislation by several of the states, beginning with New York in 1828.
Sad to say, there are many countries in which no such laws exist, even to this day.
Laws without strong enforcement are words without deeds, and the tragic truth is that courts in both England and the United States have displayed a general unwillingness to mete out harsh punishment to those found guilty of cruelty to animals and an even greater reluctance to render guilty verdicts in the first place.
In no small measure this is due to the concept of cruelty with which the judicial system has operated.
Historically, to prohibit cruelty to animals has amounted to prohibiting the infliction of unnecessary pain, or unjustified pain, especially when the pain is substantial and the human agent has acted wantonly or maliciously , and with intent .
A man who, for the sheer fun of it, intentionally torments and then sets fire to a cat, knowing full well what he is doing, is a paradigm example of what legal and moral opposition to cruelty to animals has meant historically.
Few there are who would speak in favour of cruelty to animals, as thus understood, and I take it that, whatever else  our differences might be, at least we all agree that cruelty to other animals is morally vile, and morally vile for the same reasons as cruelty to human children, for example.
Indeed I believe we can go further and state that this is a judgment in which the vast majority of British and American citizens agree.
But this consensus conceals important differences, especially those that concern when cruelty occurs.
To be told that animals are treated cruelly when they are caused unnecessary or unjustified pain is of little use unless we are told what counts as unnecessary or unjustified pain.
Not surprisingly, different people count differently.
A case in point is the use of the steel-jawed leghold trap by commercial trappers still common in the United States.
For decades people have opposed the use of this trap on grounds of its cruelty, and among those who have done so many have called for the development and utilisation of what are called ‘more humane methods’ of trapping.
For these people use of the steel-jawed leghold trap by commercial trappers is wrong because it causes too much pain, whereas other, ‘more humane methods’ of trapping would be permissible because the pain they cause, though real enough, is not excessive.
Stated in these simple terms, the anti-cruelty position's most obvious weakness is that it assumes that we already know that trapping wild animals is justified, if only it is done ‘as humanely as possible’.
However, since this very question — the question whether commercial trapping is morally justified — is open to serious debate, the anti-cruelty position, in its simple form, is question-begging at best, mistaken at worst .
This same observation can be applied to other ways in which we are describing ourselves.
People who say they stand for animal protection, for compassion, for human responsibility towards the other animals, speak well and truly, as far as these descriptions go.
The problem is, it often is not clear how far this is.
If these descriptions assume that the only moral prohibition we must honour is the prohibition against cruelty, then they assume that it is sometimes morally permissible to cause animals pain, even substantial pain.
Since whether this is permissible proves to be a widely disputed proposition, the position that animal protection, or compassion for animals, or our human responsibility to other animals are exhausted by the prohibition against cruelty also are question-begging at best, mistaken at worst .
In addition to these defects, there is another reason why merely being against cruelty to animals is not enough.
In the end, all that the prohibition against cruelty forbids is that we unnecessarily or unjustifiably visit evil, in the form of pain, upon another animal.
What this prohibition therefore fails to address or account for, is the obligation to promote the good of other animals.
Perhaps no one sees this point better than St. Francis.
Recall his observation: ‘Not to hurt our humble brethren is our first duty to them, but to stop there is not enough.
We have a higher mission — to be of service to them wherever they require it.’
The limits of animal welfare
If understood in a particular way, this Franciscan insight captures, I believe, the essence of those who stand for the promotion of animal welfare.
To be for animal welfare, as distinct from merely being against animal cruelty, is to believe that we have a duty to improve the quality of animal life, by ensuring — so far as this is possible — that other animals are the beneficiaries of what is good for them, not merely that we should avoid being cruel to them.
The difference between these two views can be illustrated by considering the case of endangered species.
Animal welfarists, because they are committed to promoting the good of these and other animals, seem to have an intelligible basis on which to rest their call for the preservation of natural habitat.
After all, one does not promote the good of elephants and chimpanzees, for example, by destroying their natural homes.
Those who limit animal protection to the prohibition against cruelty, by contrast, seem to have a less intelligible basis for preserving natural habitat.
If they believe (as they often do) that human needs and interests are more important than the needs and interests of nonhuman animals, then they can — and, in fact, they often do — believe that we are justified in causing significant pain to animals, even if they belong to endangered species.
Granting this much, these same  people can — and they often do — believe that the destruction of natural habitat is not wrong.
Though the two viewpoints differ in important ways, animal  welfarists, I believe, have the same strong public support as those who oppose cruelty to animals.
I believe, that is, that most British and American people accept the proposition that we have a positive duty to help other animals when they are in need of it.
Moreover, I believe that few people in this room will step forward to denounce the idea of animal welfare, as if it is a matter of indifference whether an animal's life is good or bad.
There is, then,something in the idea of being for animal welfare we all can accept, just as there is something in the ideas of being against cruelty and for human responsibility and animal protection.
Nevertheless, as was true in the case of the anti-cruelty position, the pro-welfare stance is not free from serious problems.
I shall comment on only one.
Even if all informed people could agree concerning what animal welfare is, and how well various animals are faring — and these are large assumptions — the animal welfarist's position would remain controversial because of how it answers the question ‘What may be done in the name of, or in pursuit of, animal welfare?’
Historically, those who would describe themselves as ‘animal welfarists’ have answered this question in the following way.
‘The welfare of nonhuman animals is important.
But it is not the only thing that is important.
Human interests and preferences also are important and, frequently, more important than the interests and preferences of other animals.
For example, many people have a serious economic interest in the commercial exploitation of marine life; in addition , many others enjoy eating these animals.
These people should be supportive of animal welfare, of course, but with the understanding that being in support of animal welfare is perfectly consistent with utilising animals for human preferences and interests.
‘There is no question,’ this view continues, ‘that when animals in the sea are harvested we shorten their life.
But — and this is an important ‘but’— ending the life of animals is not contrary to supporting animal welfare.
If animals in the sea have fared well, all considered, up to the point when they are harvested, and if they are harvested humanely, then we do nothing wrong when we kill them.
‘ Moreover , it is important to realise that a commitment to animal welfare is consistent with striving to improve the  overall condition of those individuals who have a welfare, both humans and other animals, even if this means decreasing the welfare of some.
Such circumstances often arise — in utilising nonhuman animals in biomedical research, for example, or in keeping members of endangered species in zoos.
This is regrettable, certainly, and everything should be done to make the lives of these animals as good as practicable.
In the end, however, to diminish the welfare of some animals is a price we must be willing to pay for making the world better for others, both human and nonhuman.’
I hope it is clear, from what I have said, that animal welfarists are people who attempt to serve two demanding moral masters.
First, there is the demand that individual animals have a life that fares well, all considered.
This is the demand that leads animal welfarists to call for improved living conditions for animals in laboratories or on the farm, for example.
But, secondly, there is the demand that animal (including human) welfare be improved in general ; and it is this demand that leads animal welfarists to permit the death of some animals, sometimes large numbers of them, and even to permit the agony of some, so that others might benefit.
When viewed in this light it should not be surprising that the loudest, most powerful voices being heard in the name of animal welfare — at least in the United States — are those who have a vested interest in the perpetuation of animal exploitation.
By this I mean that those who identify themselves with the cause of animal welfare are increasingly those who speak for the commercial animal agriculture community, the bio-medical community, the hunting and trapping communities, and so on.
In the United States, it is fair to say, these people have usurped the idea of animal welfare from the animal welfare societies that historically have helped police them.
And how can traditional advocates of animal welfare prove that these new champions of the welfare of animals must be mistaken?
Will it be said that animals raised on close confinement systems, for example, do not fare well, all considered?
Well, people who stake their opposition to factory-farming on this kind of consideration should be prepared for a long, heated debate, with one set of ‘experts’ declaring that thus-and-so is true, while another declares that it is not.
But even if the critics are right, and the quality of life for these  animals can be improved, this will not change the system in any fundamental way.
True, some more space might be provided; perhaps better ventilation; maybe a change in diet or exercise opportunities.
The system of utilisation, that is, might be reformed, with a view to improving the welfare of the animals being utilised.
Nevertheless the philosophy of animal welfare by its very nature permits utilising other animals for human purposes, even if this means (as it always does) that most of these animals will experience pain, frustration and other harms, and even if it means, as it almost always does, that these animals will have their life terminated prematurely.
This is what I mean by saying that reforms within the system of utilisation will not change the system in any fundamental way.
Animal rights
Advocates of animal rights believe that more than reform of the system is needed.
When a system is unjust to the core, abolition, not reform, is what respect for justice demands.
There is, then, a fundamental moral difference between advocates of anti-cruelty, animal welfare and animal rights.
Although the first two positions are committed to the view that we are sometimes justified in causing nonhuman animals significant pain, in pursuit of institutionalised human interests, animal rightists deny that we are ever justified in doing this.
The true objective for which animal advocates should work, according to this view, is not to provide nonhuman animals with larger cages and stalls, but to empty them.
If we describe ourselves as advocates of animal rights, therefore, it is quite different from saying that we rest our case with anti-cruelty or pro-welfare.
We are abolitionists, not reformists.
In my view, for reasons I have set forth at length elsewhere, I believe that the philosophy of animal rights is the right philosophy.
Am I right to adopt this stance?
By my own lights, I think I am.
The arguments for the abolitionist position are the best arguments, all considered.
Or so I believe, and thus have I argued on numerous occasions in the past.
You will be relieved to hear that I shall spare you the details of these arguments on this occasion.
My interest here concerns how  people who share my views should describe themselves.
Not in terms of anti-cruelty.
And not in terms of pro-welfare.
I hope that is clear.
But how, then?
Understanding ‘animal liberation'
People who share my views can, and often do, describe themselves as being in favour of Animal Liberation.
I believe this is an appropriate description.
But I also believe it can be misunderstood.
One possible basis for Animal Liberation is an egalitarian interpretation of interests.
On this view the interests of everyone affected by what we do must be taken into account, and equal interests must be counted equally.
If only we would do this, we are to suppose, animals would be liberated.
This understanding of liberation is profoundly mistaken.
To make this clearer, consider the case of human slavery.
There is no question that the interests of slaves were often totally ignored, or that, when they were considered, they often were not counted equitably.
This much granted, someone might maintain that the fundamental basis for the call to liberate slaves amounted to the dual demand that, first, their interests not be ignored, and, secondly, their interests be counted equitably.
This is not true.
Merely to count the interests of slaves equitably is not equivalent to liberating them.
Why?
Because slaves can have their interests counted equitably and still remain in bondage.
Why?
Because there is no guarantee that, once their interests are counted equitably, they should be liberated (this will depend on adding up all the minuses, and all the pluses, for both slaves and those who profit from slavery).
Moreover — and more fundamentally — this way of thinking about Human Liberation has got things backwards.
It is not that, in the face of a system of  chattel slavery, we first insist on counting everyone's interests equitably and then see if slaves should be liberated; it is that we first recognise the moral imperative to liberate them, on grounds other than counting equal interests equally.
Put another way,after human slaves have been liberated,then one might attempt to argue that a fair way to decide between competing social policies is to count  everyone's interests and count equal interests equally.
But it is mistaken to the point of being morally grotesque to argue that,before we can decide whether human slaves should be liberated, we first need to count everyone's interests, both slaves’ and slave owners' alike, and count equal interests equally.
The interests of those who profit from slavery should play no role whatsoever in deciding to abolish the institution from which they profit.
The fact that the interests of slaves are not counted equitably by their oppressors proves to be a symptom, not the underlying reason, of the great evil human slaves are made to endure.
This great evil is rooted in systematic injustice.
It is the right of slaves to be free , their right not to be treated as another's property , their right not to be used as a mere means to another's end — it is these basic moral rights that a system of  chattel slavery systematically violates, not the principle that we must count equal interests equally.
The very concept of liberation makes sense only if it is viewed against the backdrop of unjust oppression, and while the notion of unjust oppression no doubt assumes many guises, it is incomprehensible to me how we might understand it apart from the idea of the violation of basic moral rights.
There is, then, I believe, a much better way in which we can understand Animal Liberation than the way provided by an egalitarian interpretation of interests.
It takes its cue from other kinds of liberation, and rests the call for Animal Liberation on the recognition of the rights of nonhuman animals, including in particular their right not to be treated as mere means to human ends.
When viewed in this light, Animal Liberation is the goal for which the philosophy of animal rights is the philosophy.
The two — Animal Liberation and Animal Rights — go together, like a hand in a glove.
Sources of resistance
Resistance to the philosophy of animal rights takes many forms, from the incredulous (‘You can't be serious!’) to the superficial (‘What about carrots?’), and from the arrogant (as in the increasingly heard boast of American researchers, ‘I'm a speciesist and proud of it!’) to the deep.
While most objections are to serious thinking what veneer is to seasoned wood, some  — I have in mind objections that some feminists bring against the idea of animal rights in particular and the notion of rights in general— deserve a serious hearing and patient exploration.
I listen to, and patiently explore, the feminist challenge in a forthcoming book, and will again spare you an airing of my own views on this occasion.
A second serious challenge, however, needs our attention here.
This challenge is the one emanating from environmentalists, especially so-called ‘deep ecologists’.
The fundamental focus of value, according to these thinkers, is the whole, not the part — the ecosystem, not the individuals who comprise it.
A healthy ecosystem is one that is diverse, sustainable, and balanced; an unhealthy one is one that lacks one or another of these characteristics.
Within a healthy ecosystem, individuals are expendable.
Deer can be hunted, for example, whatever the reason, and nothing wrong is done so long as they are not overhunted.
If that happens, then the ecosystem is thrown out of balance, diversity is diminished, and the community of life loses its sustainability.
Sensitive wildlife management programmes, by contrast, developed on the basis of maximum sustainable yields — of seals or whales, deer or quail, or any species of wildlife, for that matter — promote the health of the overall life community.
Here, then, in the deep ecologist's environmental philosophy, the philosophy of animal rights finds a serious (and I dare say powerful) adversary.
Notice, moreover, that this philosophy appears to be in harmony, at least in principle, with that of animal welfare and, adding certain plausible assumptions, anti-cruelty.
The animal welfarist's position, like the deep ecologist's, is committed to permitting the sacrifice of some individuals for the greater good, and even the deep ecologists, notwithstanding their glorification of sport hunting (I have in mind such legendary figures as Aldo Leopold, Ortega y Gasset and the poet Gary Snyder), might agree that more humane forms of hunting and trapping are preferable to more barbaric ones.
In the confrontation with deep ecology, it is the animal rights philosophy, not that of pro-welfare or anti-cruelty, that is the odd position out.
None of this is very surprising, actually.
Despite their many differences, deep ecology, animal welfare, and anti-cruelty have some fundamental similarities, the most important of  which is that individuals are morally expendable — expendable for the deep ecologist as long as the good of the biotic community is sustained or promoted, expendable for the animal welfarist as long as the welfare of others is protected or advanced, and expendable for those who accept the anti-cruelty position, as long as worthy ends are not obtained by means that cause excessive suffering.
Not so the philosophy of animal rights.
This philosophy regards the individual's right to be treated with respect as inviolate.
The rights of the individual are not to be violated in the name of some collective good, whether that good be the good of the ecosystem or the good of sentient life (both human and nonhuman), and independently of whether these rights are violated ‘humanely’ or otherwise.
Thus, as I say, it is hardly surprising that, among those who wish to forge alliances with environmentalists, those who, like myself, work for the goal of animal liberation are likely to find the going rougher than those who are pro-welfare or anti-cruelty.
Even so, there are possible points of agreement — if not in principle, then at least in practice.
The most obvious one is commercial animal agriculture in its dominant form.
I mean factory-farming, of course.
But I also have in mind the massive destruction of delicate, irreplaceable ecosystems (the rain forests of the world are the most obvious example), the massive pollution of the waters of the earth, the massive loss of top soil, the massive contribution to the greenhouse effect, and — lest we forget — the massive assault on human health that can be attributed directly and indirectly to the massive production and consumption of so-called ‘food’ animals that characterise our times.
Unquestionably, this pattern of massive production and consumption is bad for the earth, bad for humans, and bad for the other animals.
There is no serious argument against these findings.
Only sophistry.
Here, then, we have the most obvious, the most important, opportunity for bridge-building, so obvious and important in fact that, in my view — and here I echo a judgment of Stephen Clark's which in times past I fiercely denied — an individual's or organisation's position on ‘meat-eating’, so-called, should be regarded as the decisive litmus test of their moral credibility.
To the extent that individuals and organisations still support or tolerate meat consumption, to that extent they are part of the  moral problem, not part of the moral solution.
By all means, then, I think bridges should be built between the environmental movement and the partisans of anti-cruelty, animal welfare, and animal rights.
At the same time, however, I do not think that advocates of animal rights should be willing to sell their soul in order to build a bridge.
If part of the deep ecologist's rationale for saving wilderness is so that future generations of humans can savour the orgiastic blood of the hunt (as Ortega y Gasset describes the recreational slaughter of wild animals), animal liberationists can and should unashamedly applaud the efforts to preserve, but not the reasons for doing so.
Aside from these sorts of problems, I believe all of us who presume to speak on behalf of the other animals should worry, not a little but a lot, about the possibility of the Goliath of contemporary environmental concerns co-opting the David of animal protection.
Quite apart from questions of environmental impact, there is a distinctive animal-issue agenda we all can share and work on, whether we are pro-welfare, say, or animal rightists.
Unless or until we codify this agenda and give it meaning through our cooperative efforts, those of us who care about what is happening to the other animals will remain individual, separate gears that do not mesh.
Here are some concrete examples of what I have in mind.
The list that follows is hardly exhaustive.
All of you will be able to add to it.
The philosophy of animal rights calls for an end to the use of animals in cosmetic-testing in particular and product-testing in general.
The philosophy of animal rights calls for an end to the coercive use of any animal in military research, or in such research topics as the deleterious effects of smoking, maternal deprivation and drug addiction.
The philosophy of animal rights calls for an end to the traditions of ‘sport’ hunting and trapping of wildlife.
The philosophy of animal rights calls for an end to the commerce in the skins of other animals for purposes of human vanity.
The philosophy of animal rights calls for an end to the capture and training of wild animals, for purposes of entertainment.
Now, unless I am mistaken, those partisans of anti-cruelty or pro-welfare who are gathered here also accept these same aspirations.
Partisans of these  philosophies , in other words, as well as those who prefer to speak in the language of compassion or human responsibility or animal protection, share some of the same goals as animal rightists.
Granted, the reasons each gives in support of these goals differ; and granted, there are some goals on the respective agendas of the competing philosophies that are not shared by the others.
What is not to be granted is the pessimistic conviction that points of agreement cannot be found.
I conclude, then, not with stirring words of praise for the philosophy of animal rights, or with caustic words of censure for the other philosophies I have mentioned.
Rather, I conclude by inviting all of us whose activism is shaped by our concern for what is happening to the other animals to make a renewed, conscientious, patient and determined effort to come together and forge a common agenda, even as we work, both as individuals and organisations, on projects that are uniquely our own.
I call upon everyone to begin to work to create such an agenda in the coming months, mindful that each of us may have to make some compromises along the way if we are to end with something in which we all can believe.
For the present, what is needed most is more cooperative work, and less competitive philosophising.
A Problem of Concern
Mary Midgley
I was glad to be given for this talk a problem question — animals and the environment.
I take that to be a request for the difficulties and I am going to go in to those.
My topic, I take it, is whether there is a necessary clash between concern for animals and concern for the environment as a whole.
I am going to say that at the deep level there is not but at the ordinary, everyday level there often is and we need to take it quite seriously.
As most of us know, in the public perception these causes have often been seen as clashing.
Twenty years ago when both these causes were beginning to gain wide support, many people saw them as clashing.
There were some quite sharp interchanges which unfortunately are still there in the literature and I fear are not doing an awful lot of good.
At that time deep ecologists tended to emphasise the value of the whole so exclusively that they seemed to rule out altogether any value for its parts and particularly for individuals, whether human or animal.
On the other side, extreme animal liberationists for their part were occupied with extending the very demanding current conception of individual human rights to cover individual animals.
And if you were to try to extend that very demanding conception over the dandelions and the tapeworms as well, you would be in trouble.
It sometimes seemed to me that animal rights must always prevail over every other claim, however strong, including claims from the environment.
Each party tended to see its own central ideal and to look at the others concerned as a perverse distraction from it.
Since that time I think that there has been   great progress towards reconciliation and this has largely flowed from common sense and from a better understanding of the facts.
As Tom Regan has pointed out, there is a convergence between these causes over a great deal of the range.
People have begun to notice how much in practice the two converge.
Animals and plants need each other.
The whole environment cannot be served except through its parts, and that has always meant that the ecological talk was unreal because one needed to say where should we start and you have to start somewhere.
Most threatened animals still live in the wild where their chances of surviving at all depend on their habitat.
Equally the plants and rivers and so forth often need their accustomed animals.
Obvious examples are pollinating creatures, insects, birds and bats, insectivorous creatures to keep the plant-destroying insects under control and creatures such as beavers in swamps which really are essential factors in the landscape.
On the other side, the ill-treatment of captive animals often has direct bad effects on the environment.
Factory-farming makes pollution, excessive meat-eating upsets the ecological balance, trapping and hunting can injure habitat, and so on.
At the pragmatic level then, the rivalry has come to seem a lot less fierce than it did.
The causes look less competitive and more convergent.
The gradual perception of this has gone with the still more necessary shift by which people have at last gradually begun to realise that human welfare too converges very considerably with both these things.
Tom Regan having said a bit about that, I will not say too much more.
People have begun to notice that the biosphere is not just a theme park to take the children to on Saturday afternoon but a very necessary thing for human survival.
No environment means no people, a dismal distorted environment means dismal distorted people.
Slowly these are being seen gradually as not competitive but converging.
So there is some general practical convergence between all these causes, and in particular between those of animals and the environment.
But, of course, we need rather more than that.
We need to think out the principles involved.
We would need to do this anyway because one ought to have one's ideas in some kind of order, even if the rough convergence that we have did not leave plenty of clashes remaining which, of course, it does.
But we need to get our moral thinking clear on this matter all the more because in the first stages of unbridled conflict both sides seem to be suggesting that there really was no moral problem at all because the principle that they were obsessed with was the only one that mattered.
To each the other stand seemed an irrelevance: a perverse trivialisation, a distraction from what was obviously the only serious moral question arising.
That kind of moral position can be described, I think quite rightly, as fanaticism.
I am glad Tom Regan mentioned this word, because it is often used in the wrong sense, as he implied, simply for anyone whose ideals are rather extreme.
What makes a fanatic is not having strong and extreme ideals oneself but taking no notice of other people's — not seeing the considerations that other people are concerned about.
And in order to get in to that state of mind one does not have to be a complete lifelong fanatic, one only has to be completely absorbed for the moment by a particular cause, and that kind of absorption is of course something which good causes often do seem to demand.
All the same, nobody can afford to get stuck in that way of thinking.
There is no single moral principle which is sole and supreme and can never conflict with any other.
They can all conflict.
So they have to be seen as part of a larger whole within which they can somehow be related.
The impression that a simple one-sided morality is of itself nobler and more clear-headed than a complex one is false.
We can always see this when we see somebody else doing it, but we have to do it ourselves as well.
Any sane and workable approach to life obviously has to contain both an attitude to individuals and an attitude towards the whole.
These cannot be in competition.
They must be parts of a united attitude.
Unluckily our moral life is too complex for any single moral principle to be a despot over all the others.
We are forced, somehow, to reconcile complementary principles and duties.
This is hard enough in our own lives but it is doubly hard in public work where it calls on people devoted to different ideals to work together in mutual acceptance, and that means not just tolerating one another but respecting and understanding what the other is talking about.
Now, it is not at all surprising that in the 70s both the deep ecologists and the animal liberationists were slow to see that need.
Both causes were of the utmost importance.
Both had been disgracefully neglected  till then.
Tunnel vision and mutual incomprehension were natural reactions.
But since then there has been increasing realisation that the two causes must somehow be brought together.
We are beginning to see that concern for the whole and concern for individuals are not alternatives, rivals between which we have to choose, but at a deep level belong together.
The attempt to choose between them is an unreal project.
Neither moral integrity nor logical consistency compels us to attempt it.
The two concerns are complementary.
When they compete locally, they do so in the same way as other moral considerations which we know we have to reconcile somehow.
This is nothing new.
We are used to clashes between, for instance, justice and mercy on the human scene, between duties to those near us and to those further away, between all our duties to others and the claims of our own development and so forth .
We know that in these cases we often do face a real choice of evils and we have to find some way of deciding which of these evils is the worst.
So, as far as general principles go, I think the issue between animals and the rest of the environment has become much easier in the last twenty years, and thank goodness for that.
But there is still a lot of detailed work to do on genuine local clashes.
There are plenty of these and we are not likely to get rid of them.
I shall discuss only one type, but I think it is fairly widespread and will probably serve as an example: the kind that arises when a population of herbivores — deer, elephants, rabbits, monkeys — begins to damage its habitat seriously by overgrazing.
Now, most often of course, this begins to happen because of earlier human actions.
People have encroached on the habitat, they have removed the predators or they have introduced the herbivores in the first place.
But being aware of that guilt does not answer the question of what to do next.
These past actions often cannot be undone; we have to think what we shall do.
In cases where, after considering all alternatives, serious and disinterested ecologists and the like say that culling the herbivores seems to be the only practical cure, is that legitimate or ought we to ban all killing?
Now I guess that is a real problem for those present.
I want to say very generally that we have to avoid thinking about that sort of clash as an impossible dilemma, a blank, unintelligible conflict, a tribal  row between unrelated moral principles each espoused by a separate group — a dispute that can only be settled by tribal warfare.
Both the values involved here are surely recognisable to all of us.
There is a real clash of evils.
To leave a habitat to degenerate and perhaps be destroyed is to injure all its animals, including of course the species concerned.
It may be to destroy them all and there are situations where that can happen.
To legitimise culling is itself an evil, and it may risk encouraging other, much less justifiable, slaughter.
There is a real difficulty.
But some sort of compromise does have to be reached.
I am going to point out the arguments for culling.
The central point I want to make is the general one, not just about culling: namely, that there really are arguments on both sides and we have to do justice to the complexity of the problem.
In such hard cases, as also in the ones where either of these interests conflicts with the interests of humans, we need to proceed by careful study of all the local factors and not by general principles.
And we must avoid dismissing a particular policy wholesale simply because the pretence of it has sometimes been used to justify iniquity.
Culling is a good example here.
It is the excuse given now for all hunting, but the misuse of a concept of a practice like that proves nothing about whether it is itself legitimate.
The name of every decent practice gets used from time to time to justify something indecent.
I am not talking about hunting being given the name of culling, I am talking about situations where culling does really look to be the only way to save the vegetation.
It seems to me of first importance to confront this kind of question realistically and not to discredit one's cause by refusing to admit that the clash exists.
At a conference in San Francisco not so long ago, I encountered some people who want to deal with all these problems by contraception.
They particularly recommend this for deer.
Now just think for a minute what that involves.
Contraceptives do not grow on trees in doses of which only one would be taken by each deer each year.
To do that job you would have to take in all the deer in every year, weigh and measure them and give them their dose, and feed them while you did it.
By the time you had let them out you would have domesticated deer who are no longer likely to be able to fend for and defend themselves as they previously did.
You would have a lot of hinds who lived without  having any fawns, and nobody quite knows what effect that would have.
You have interfered in the situation in a way which may be — I don't necessarily say it is — very dangerous and you have to think out in detail how that is going to work.
I have to say that they were also apparently making this suggestion for rats and mice.
I did not hear them say this, but I am told that they do, and if you think what that would mean, I guess, whether you agree about the deer or not, that this is not a sensible suggestion.
I am not saying that one might not come out with some new and splendid solution which was neither culling nor letting the environment go to pieces.
I am very much in favour of doing that and I guess that since this conference has got the environment on its agenda we may hope to hear bright new suggestions of how to avoid dilemmas of that kind.
What I am saying is not that culling is necessarily the right thing, but that these are genuine detailed practicable problems which must not be dismissed, as if they were easy, by solutions of the kind that I have just suggested.
Anyway, these must not be dismissed with hasty suggestions; it is extremely important to my mind not to discredit the zoophile cause by sounding idiotic and to take great notice of the knowledgeable people who are concerned with managing these creatures even if one does not like their attitudes.
One thing that struck me about this contraceptive suggestion was that it was being made by people who totally disapproved of all experimentation on animals.
How would you get the contraceptives?
I am sorry to be awkward, but I think you will see that these questions must be answered and if we are going to take extreme positions then we would have to do double the home work that the people do who don't want to.
In conclusion, I am sorry if what I have said seems to be one more version of ‘on the one hand’ and on the other'.
I don't think I am taking this line merely because I have been corrupted by a philosophical training and cannot come off the fence.
I think I am only saying that anyone who has followed the history of this controversy over the last twenty years will already see reason to think that the friction produced by quarrelling among good causes is enormous and it is a luxury that we simply cannot afford.
None of us has a monopoly of moral insight and we have no choice but to work together somehow.
The Arrogance Of Humanism
Andrew Linzey
The SPCA was founded in 1824 by a little-known London clergyman, Arthur Broome.
He called the first meeting together, served (unpaid) as the Society's first secretary, and ended up in prison paying for the Society's debts.
Broome penned the ‘First Prospectus of the SPCA’ which spoke specifically of the need to extend Christian compassion to the whole world of ‘animate beings’.
The first minute-book declared that the Society was based specifically on the Christian faith and on Christian principles.
Contrast this example of Christian compassion with the recent debate of the General Synod of the Church of England meeting last July at York.
A motion opposing cruelty and wanton killing and asking the Church Commissioners to ‘critically review’ hunting for sport and intensive farming on church-owned land failed overwhelmingly — 175 Synod members actually voted against discussing the motion at all.
How can we explain this ascendancy of Christian indifference over Christian compassion?
One answer is that historically Christianity has shown precious little compassion for animals anyway.
In the middle of the nineteenth century, for example, Pope Pius IX forbad the opening of an animal protection office in Rome on the grounds that humans had no duties to animals.
Readers of my books will be only too aware of this negative tradition within Christianity which denies that animals have minds, reason, souls, sentience or status.
Pervasive though this negative tradition is, it doesn't quite answer why it is that in a post-Christian society there should continue to be so much indifference to the claims of animals.
I suggest that it is humanism — both religious and secular — that is the dominant philosophical adversary.
By ‘humanism, I am not referring to people who don't believe in God.
Nor do I mean people who are generally in favour of human happiness, welfare, dignity and rights, as indeed I am myself.
I mean, rather, humanism defined as the ‘religion of humanity’, comprising that ancient notion that ‘man is the measure of all things’.
From this view it is a short step to ‘man as the master of all things’ too.
Human interests become absolute.
Animals are made — not for the glory of God — but for us.
The upshot of deifying humanity is this: animals are ours, animals are our property, animals are resources for us, animals are our tasters, animals are our tools.
Animals are means to human ends.
The prospect offered to us is clear: ever-increasing human management, dominance and control of the earth.
Some of us contemplate this prospect with horror.
It occasions perhaps the greatest spiritual crisis in our world today.
‘Man's fundamental desire,’ wrote Jean Paul Sartre, ‘is to be God.’
In one sense Christians have only themselves to blame.
They have allowed their ancient texts, in particular the first chapter of Genesis, to be read in a way that supports, if not requires, human despotism.
In fact the text suggests something quite different.
Follow the sequence: humans are made in the image of God, given dominion, and then told to follow a vegetarian diet (Gen. 1:29).
Herb-eating dominion is not despotism.
We need a conception of ourselves in the universe not as the master species but as the servant species: as the one being given responsibility for the whole and for the good of the whole.
We must move from the idea that the animals were given to us and made for us, to the idea that we were made for creation, to serve it and ensure its continuance.
This actually is little more than the theology of Genesis chapter two.
The garden is made beautiful and abounds with life; humans are created specifically to ‘take care of it’(Gen. 2:15).
According to Hazlitt, ‘Man is the only species who can laugh or cry because he is the only being who knows the difference  between what is and what should be’.
This may be another example of the human species claiming too much for itself, but the moral point remains.
We are the species now responsible for the global garden.
With the power of technology we hold the earth in our hands.
Along with our new view of ourselves should go a new credo altogether.
A fundamental part of it has to be this recognition:animals have the right to be left alone .
Of course it is true that sometimes humans have to intervene in order to prevent the worst from happening — almost always the result of previous human intervention.
But as a general principle the right of animals to be animals, to live in their space on God's good earth, is a moral principle I commend as a rule of thumb.
‘Letting go’ and ‘letting be’should be the catchwords of this new credo.
In order to realise this new imperative we need three paradigm shifts in our thinking.
The first concerns interrelationship.
In the past we have thought of nature as simply ‘out there’ for our use.
We are now beginning to realise that we are not just part of nature, we are inextricably related to nature.
We must shift to realising that the destruction of nature is our destruction too.
The second concerns responsibility.
Historically it goes without saying that we have used all kinds of nature, and especially animals, for human benefit.
We hunt, ride, shoot, fish, eat, wear, trap, exhibit, factory-farm and experiment upon billions every year.
We must shift from viewing animals as made for our benefit to thinking that we must be of benefit to them.
We must move the debate about animals from how much harm we should inflict to the more fundamental issue of how much good we should do.
The third concerns cost.
In the past animals have borne the cost of human ‘progress’— whatever we conceive that to be.
In the slaughter house, in the laboratory, in the factory farm, animals have paid the price of human wants.
Now we must shift from thinking that human interests always come first to the idea that humans themselves should bear the cost of whatever progress there should be in the world today.
I do not see the theological basis on which we can go on saying that the human species is of such overwhelming and unique and colossal significance that it justifies as a matter of course the  institutional exploitation of billions of other species.
In one sense, we are not worth it.
If this sounds a strange gospel coming from a theologian, let me say immediately that there is so much in the Bible about the awfulness, the cruelty and the unfaithfulness of human kind that we may be sometimes justified in wondering why God continues to love us at all.
We do well to remember that, after all the violence that humans had created on the earth, God surveyed the debris and said ‘he was sorry he made man’(Gen.6:7).
It is a point of view for which now and then I have some sympathy.
I commend the Christian doctrine of costly service.
None of us is pure as far as animal exploitation is concerned.
We are all party to exploitation, whether through the food we eat, the products we buy, or the taxes we pay.
Nevertheless we need to hold before ourselves the vision of the peaceable kingdom.
We should want a world in which there will be no injury, no suffering, no wanton killing.
To this end we all need to be engaged in a programme of progressive disengagement from injury to animals.
It is not enough to talk generally about reverence and respect any longer.
We have to mean business, and this means taking on those people who, as a matter of business and commerce, profit from the exploitation of animals whether that exploitation takes place in the circus, the zoo, the slaughterhouse, or the trade in exotic species or so-called ‘food animals’.
As consumers in a capitalist society we have great power to bring pressure to bear.
If you had asked cosmetic companies ten years ago to stop experimenting on animals they would have replied, ‘No alternative.’
Now, thanks to hundreds, perhaps thousands of such requests, plus one or two boycotts, producers of cosmetics are learning the hard way that necessity is the mother of invention.
But it is not only to the institutionalised abuse of animals that we must turn if we are progressively to disengage ourselves.
We have to examine our own personal lifestyle.
In case there are any reading this who have still not seen the vision, allow me to spell it out in moral advice: If you attend zoos and circuses — find other entertainment; if you are engaged in intensive ‘livestock’ farming — throw away the systems of close confinement; if you are engaged in animal  experimentation — find alternatives; and if you still eat meat — give it up.
Meat-eating in particular is morally indefensible.
It may have been necessary for Jesus to have eaten a few fishes in order to survive in first-century Palestine, but it is not now necessary to feast on the bodies of dead animals in order to be healthy.
We can have an adequate, even advantageous, diet without recourse to flesh.
Taste is an insufficient moral basis for killing.
This moral challenge often comes hardest to those who think of themselves as environmentalists in particular.
But it is difficult to see how we can have sensitivity to plants and rivers, trees and ecosystems if we have no sensitivity to the caged animal, or the animal undergoing product-testing or about to be slaughtered.
I do not know what it means to talk about conservation while idling away one's leisure time in the killing of pheasants, foxes, deer and hares.
True conservation and shooting (and hunting) for sport are a contradiction in terms.
Finally, let us rekindle that vision in Isaiah 11 where the lion does not eat the lamb but lies down in a symbiotic relationship with it.
For those of you who judge this too visionary, let me remind you of the line from the Psalmist: ‘Where there is no vision,the people perish.’
Animal Welfare and the Environment: Are they always Compatible?
David Wilkins
The title of this chapter poses the question whether a straightforward animal welfare approach is necessarily compatible with the concept of protecting our environment.
I make no apologies for concentrating on issues which in environmental terms could be considered as being relatively minor compared with some of the major problems facing us today.
In posing these questions I am not necessarily wanting to provide the answers, and it may be that there are no simple answers to some of these questions.
Protecting the environment means different things to different people, but in most cases it is the individual's own perception of what he or she wants from the environment.
In other words it is a selfish conception and it is based on the individual's own experience.
To some it will be an urban environment that they are looking to and within that concept will be the requirement for clean streets, no noise and fumes from traffic, no aircraft noise, access to local parks or open spaces, etc.
To others it will be a rural environment which they are looking to protect.
This might include a desire to see wild flowers and animals in a natural setting, possibly to see sheep and cattle grazing in fields, to have access to woodlands, country walks, to be able to climb hills and even mountains and to go down pot-holes.
While it is right, and of some urgency, to look at the global environment and to be involved in discussions regarding pollution of our oceans, the greenhouse effect, the destruction of rain forests in South America and so on, we should not lose sight of what is primarily the concern of the individual: that is , the local environment.
The RSPCA was founded on the concept of preventing cruelty, promoting kindness and alleviating suffering in animals.
It follows, therefore, that our priorities are based on protecting the welfare not only of individual animals but of groups of animals, and this priority has to be followed even in circumstances where to carry out that protection might conceivably have an adverse effect on the environment.
In examining some of the questions posed, we have to accept that within the UK, and for that matter in most of the rest of the world, there is no such thing as a natural environment.
The environment has been created as a result of natural evolution plus man's interference.
Man's ownership of animals has contributed to a great degree towards the creation of this semi-natural environment, at least within the world's land mass.
It must follow, therefore, that the way man keeps animals contributes significantly to the environment and has a consequential effect on wild flora and fauna.
The husbandry of domesticated animals should ensure that their physiological and ethological needs are fulfilled.
Two of the essential needs of animals are to have freedom of movement and to be able to perform most if not all natural behaviour patterns.
Another is the company of other animals, particularly of like kind.
These are important conditions for keeping both farm and companion animals.
In arguing that companion animals, particularly dogs and cats, require freedom of movement and the company of other animals, one has to accept that allowing cats to roam freely and dogs to have a period of exercise off the lead is necessary to ensure good animal welfare.
However, the consequences of allowing cats to roam freely can be environmentally significant.
A study was carried out in a Bedfordshire village, i.e. a semi-rural environment, of predation by domestic cats over a one-year period and the results were published in a zoological  journal in 1987.
An assessment was made of the numbers and species of animals caught and killed by cats in and around this particular village.
The quantity of animals killed was quite dramatic, and if one interpolates these figures into the nation
as a whole one is talking about something like 70 million small mammals and birds killed by domestic cats every year.
Some 20 million of these would be birds.
It is argued, by many people, that this is an unacceptable price to pay for allowing our domestic cats to roam freely.
On the other hand, could it also be argued that without this form of population control there might be an over-population of some wild species and that nature would have to find some other way of correcting it?
From the cats' point of view, they were simply fulfilling their need for exercise and their natural hunting instinct.
The alternative would be to keep cats indoors even though this would curtail some of their freedom of movement and all their natural hunting behaviour.
However, many cats are already kept in this way in apartments and in most cases are apparently healthy and happy.
Another consequence of keeping cats in this restricted way would be that you would prevent them from acting as predators of some anti-social species, e.g. rats and mice.
Might it not follow that other steps would need to be taken to help curb local unacceptable populations of rats and mice?
One could anticipate far more poisons being put down, and such activities must have a detrimental effect on the environment.
Companion animals provide a great benefit for a large number of people.
There are some 7½ million dogs and 6½ million cats in the UK.
It is important, therefore, to ask these questions even though the answers are not simple.
Although it is perceived by local authorities to be an environmental problem, dog-fouling is not necessarily harmful to the environment but of course is resented by humans for physical, visual, olfactory, health and aesthetic reasons.
If one supports the view that dogs need a degree of freedom of movement, the opportunity to meet other dogs and to engage in natural behaviour, then this means that responsible owners would be justified in taking them to places where they can be let off the lead and allowed to run loose.
While this may not be a problem in public parks and other open areas, it could be harmful to the environment if a dog were running loose in  woodland, for example.
Disturbance of nesting birds and all the other consequences of such free-roaming could reach significant proportions.
A dog running loose which is not in the control of its owner can wreak havoc among sheep and cattle grazing in fields, particularly when two or more dogs come together and follow their natural pack-hunting instinct.
Some breeds of dogs would be quite happy being exercised on a lead with the occasional contact with other dogs.
However, such restrictive exercise would not satisfy the ethological requirements of breeds such as dalmatians, dobermanns and collies.
Is the answer not to keep such breeds of dogs, or to accept that in doing so there is going to be a consequence of damage to the environment, albeit localised and perhaps, in terms of our global worries, extremely small?
The RSPCA advocates less intensive farming and, consequently, moves towards more extensive farming.
Such farming practices will inevitably mean that more animals will be pastured out of doors, even though some of the livestock production methods could be described as semi-intensive.
However, even the keeping of cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry in fields requires a degree of restraint in the form of fencing.
In an ideal world, such fencing would be entirely of natural hedgerows and ditches, but we know that it is inevitable that artificial fencing will provide the bulk of such restraint for cattle and for sheep.
According to the Council for the Protection of Rural England, some 120,000 miles of hedgerow have been lost since 1947 and this accelerated during the 1980s and there is no evidence that this rate of loss has slowed down (in spite of the continued popularity of fox hunting).
Barbed wire might well become more common than it is at the moment.
Such fencing can interfere, as it does in many other parts of the world, with the natural movement of wildlife and can be directly responsible for injuries to animals like deer.
There are areas, such as the New Forest, Dartmoor and Exmoor, where ponies and sheep, and to a lesser extent cattle, are allowed to roam over a considerable amount of acreage in a relatively unrestricted way.
In managing these open areas of moorland and forest there is often a conflict of interest between conservationists, environmentalists and those who wish to ensure the best conditions for the farm animals.
Demands for more grass, less bracken, greater access to water are often  objected to.
A combination of lack of food and over-stocking can lead to poor conditions and sometimes death, particularly for the native ponies.
The question of hedgerows, maintaining natural areas of woodland, etc. leads me to look at another area which causes concern not just to the RSPCA but many other animal welfare groups.
This is the question of field or blood sports.
From an animal welfare point of view the chasing of a fox or a deer round the countryside with dogs and followed by men either on foot or mounted on horses is a cruel practice which cannot be justified.
However, one of the arguments put forward by those who support all forms of field sports is that the landowners over whose land foxes and deer are being hunted and game birds shot, will maintain a more natural environment than if such activities did not take place.
Even if there were some truth in such an argument it hardly justifies such an unacceptable form of activity.
It is relevant to note that the RSPB recently reported that some managers of grouse moors were deliberately killing one of Britain's rarest birds of prey — the Hen Harrier.
Only 25 per cent of nests on managed grouse moors were successful compared with 75 per cent on unmanaged moors.
Ever since the RSPCA established a Working Party to look at the implications of fishing, we have been concerned about one of its conclusions, which is that fish should be given the benefit of the doubt with regard to their ability to experience pain.
by no means has this matter been scientifically proved, but there is enough evidence to justify concern that fishing could cause pain to fish.
The RSPCA's policy has been to recommend changes in many fishing practices in order to reduce the possibility of pain.
We have also totally opposed some practices such as the use of live bait.
It may be that, as more scientific information is gathered on fish physiology, the evidence for believing that fish feel pain might become overwhelming and the Society may have to come out firmly against this sport.
In defence of fishing it has been alleged that, were it not for fishermen on our rivers, accidental or deliberate pollution would not be detected so quickly.
The fisherman on the bank could be the first person to notice that fish were dying or other water creatures were being affected by the pollutant that had  suddenly appeared.
Such a statement may be justified because the penalties imposed on industrial and agricultural concerns for discharging poisons into our rivers are still ridiculously low.
The possibility of accidental or deliberate pollution of our rivers is always going to be present therefore, and unless some sophisticated measuring device is installed in all our rivers which can quickly detect pollution and hence lead to urgent action, this argument about allowing fishermen to continue to carry out their sport is quite a strong one from an environmental point of view.
On the other hand one must also accept that fishing has a harmful environmental effect: the contamination of our inland waters with discarded line and fishing hooks.
Such debris from the practice of fishing leads to great suffering among wildlife and also among domesticated animals.
Our Inspectorate have to attend regularly to cases of swans and other waterfowl entangled in line or swallowing hooks.
It should also be remembered that, until legislation was introduced which prohibited the use of most lead fishing weights, the number of swans dying from lead poisoning had reached critical proportions.
This problem of lead poisoning in waterfowl is still present as lead is introduced into the environment in vast quantities each year by those who shoot, whether they are shooting birds or clay pigeons.
Wildfowling can cause particular problems.
It appears that cases of poisoning in the United Kingdom from this form of lead are as statistically significant as were those involving lead fishing weights, and in some parts of Europe there is increasing concern.
In Denmark a study has revealed that 20 per cent of mallard ducks at post mortem had died of lead poisoning from lead shot pellets.
In Holland about 400 tons of lead shot are scattered every year.
7 per cent of Bewick swans and 48 per cent of Whooper swans were found at post mortem to have died from lead shot poisoning.
I believe it is quite possible that within the next few years we might see European legislation which will not only follow that of the UK in prohibiting lead fishing weights but also outlaw the use of lead in cartridges.
The RSPCA concerns itself, as I have said before, with the individual as well as groups of animals.
Never more so than in the case of those which are sick and injured, including wild  animals.
The Society has its own wildlife hospitals but there are many others in the UK, some run by individuals, some by organisations.
The standards in many of them are excellent, but in others they can be low.
However, that discussion will have to wait for another day.
The main point I want to make is that the only justification for treating the sick and injured wild animal is to be able eventually to restore it to its wild existence.
But could it not be argued that the RSPCA, and others who carry out such a praiseworthy activity, are interfering with the natural selection process?
In nature's terms it is the fittest that survive and therefore maintain the health of the population.
Sickness and injury, from whatever cause, are frequently the natural method of eliminating the weak and maintaining genetic strength in a population.
As a veterinary surgeon I would never turn my back on a sick or injured animal.
Nor would, or should, the RSPCA.
Nevertheless I believe the question should be debated.
To end this chapter I would like to return to the question of livestock farming and take a further look at the balance that has to be drawn between animal welfare, conservation and protecting the environment.
It is regrettable that there is pressure on Europe's farmers to take agricultural land out of production, even to let it lie fallow.
While there are problems if cattle and sheep are allowed to overgraze pasture, there would appear to be ample evidence to suggest that grazing cattle and sheep on natural grassland can be beneficial to maintaining an ecological balance.
At the same time one must also recognise the importance of recreating other habitats such as wooded areas and ponds.
Grasslands provide more scope for combining conservation and good livestock husbandry.
However, the growing number of vegetarians encourages the production of ‘new’ vegetable crops, and hence variety, while also reducing the demand for beef and lamb, and hence grass.
It has been argued by a former Chief Advisory Officer of the Nature Conservancy Council that the implications for wildlife conservation may be considerable.
Getting the balance right is always going to be difficult, but it should not be impossible.
In our efforts to promote extensification of livestock production, it is right that we should question whether  livestock production should be allowed unrestricted use of technology in order to produce maximum output from the minimum amount of land.
In Europe there are already signs that more and more people are taking this matter seriously, hence the EC ban on hormones for growth promotion and the opposition to BST.
Extensive farming will also mean that some of the land will have to be farmed at below-optimum intensity leading to consequent lower profitability.
Farmers will need to receive financial compensation to operate many extensive livestock production systems.
We must recognise that it will have to be the consumer who pays, and it is up to animal welfare organisations such as the RSPCA to ensure that the increased price for food will be seen to be acceptable because of an improvement both in animal welfare and environmental protection.
Finally, we must not ignore the fact that research and careful planning is needed in order to devise extensive husbandry systems that are humane, commercially feasible and protective of the environment.
I am quite certain that this can be achieved.
It will be decades before most countries outside Western Europe allow themselves the luxury of being nice to animals, but the earlier we lay the technical foundation the earlier that day may come.
Husbandry Regained: Animals in Sustainable Agriculture
John Webster
It was easy, when we were predominantly discussing philosophy, to link farm animal welfare and protection of the environment, in so far as they are both concerned with what qualifies us to consider ourselves to be good people.
Today, we are dealing with what I unashamedly and unapologetically call Utilitarian — the strictly pragmatic link, or otherwise, between these two elements.
It is too simple just to link the protection of the environment and the protection of animals, as it is equally simple to impose blanket condemnation on modern intensive agriculture, especially on the factory-farming of animals.
It is perfectly true that modern factory-farming can sometimes be accused of engendering cruelty, waste, pollution and unsafe foods.
But blanket condemnation, or the overall linking of good things like the environment and animal welfare, does lay us open to the charge of thinking in a way that is, at best , wishful and, at worst , woolly.
I must, therefore, introduce some rather harsh facts of life which we may choose to ignore but from which we cannot escape.
The title of this chapter is an optimistic one.
But before proceeding to optimism I have to introduce some harsh truths.
The first is that nature  itself is an omnivore.
All life-forms exist ultimately to be eaten or otherwise consumed by animals: by predators, for example,(you can include man), by microbes or by auto-digestion.
Our huggable bunny may well be eaten by a fox, it may well be eaten by us, or it may start to be eaten by   micro-organisms, die and be finished off by other microorganisms.
The same more or less applies to us.
We probably escape those first fates rather more than the rabbit.
But we have a greater probability that we shall self-destruct.
The malignant cells in our bodies will start the process of digesting us before we die and then the micro-organisms can take over later.
This all looks very tidy, and everything is recycled.
It ensures that life goes on.
The death of the individual is essential to the survival of the biosphere.
Now individual humans may honourably choose not to kill and or eat certain species of animals.
This is a perfectly honourable aim but it does not escape the issue.
It does not protect the animal from consumption and death.
It merely adjusts the methods.
The second thing we cannot escape is that man has dominion over the animals, whether we like it or not.
I think it was Bertrand Russell who said that ‘all species have inclinations towards totalitarianism’.
That is to say, all species have tried to convert the whole world in to themselves if they possibly can.
The fact is that we are rather more successful at it than other species.
Wherever the earth will support life for man, it is man who decides the nature, the extent and the policy of the habitat and life for other species.
Now we may be baddies and decide to erect a battery-house for laying hens, or we may be goodies and decide to create a wilderness park for wildlife.
But in each case the decision has been ours, not theirs.
The third point you are going to like better.
That is that industrialised agriculture in its current form is neither sustainable nor exportable to the Third World.
There are a number of reasons for this which could take all day to expound, but the main reason and the one I shall elaborate is that industrialised agriculture nearly always consumes more energy than it produces and is living off capital in the form of fossil fuels.
This capital is running out, and if we export industrial agriculture to the Third World it will run out faster.
Let us examine the evolution of animal husbandry in the light of these three great, if harsh, truths.
In the beginning, as man developed agriculture and agriculture begat civilisation, animals were economically and ecologically essential parts of the overall enterprise.
Sheep and goats grazed the plains, the common land, as they do now in Africa.
This was inefficient, it seems, according to modern animal scientists, but they were  corralled at night and brought fertiliser home to the cultivated land around the farmstead.
In that it was very efficient.
Pigs and poultry scavenged for food around the farm.
All this minimised waste and thus ensured that each party contributed its fair share to the society.
In a sentence: for six months the farmer fed the pig, and for the next six months the pig fed the farmer, which is fair.
The system was sustainable, without need for ethics.
Men cared for animals in proportion to their value.
And man, lacking such things as machinery, petroleum, pesticides, etc, did not greatly disturb the environment.
Man was not more ethical then.
He was simply less powerful and, therefore, less dangerous.
But it was a sustainable, though not very efficient, society.
The industrialisation of animal production has been a phenomenon of the last fifty years, which is not very long in recorded history.
Its rise can be attributed mainly to increased productivity of cereals and grasses from increased mechanisation and fertilisers, both of which depend on fossil fuel, therefore using capital to grow more cereals and grasses.
This has created more food for everybody and, therefore, created more food that is available to feed animals.
The second thing is largely due to the veterinary profession: the control of infectious disease by vaccination and by antibiotics.
This has made it possible to keep much greater numbers of animals in much greater stocking densities in intensive housing, and it is this that has made factory-farming possible.
The final point is that internationally increasing wealth has increased the demand for animal produce.
Generally speaking, as one proceeds from total poverty throughout the world over most of recorded history, increasing wealth has increased demand for animal produce.
Let us digress slightly to talk about efficiency in agriculture, comparing fairly modern production of wheat, which is a very efficient crop in the USA, with production of wheat from bullock-power in India.
The first thing to say is that this is one of those things that can disappoint us.
Bullock power to produce wheat is very inefficient.
Not only does it not produce much wheat, as we well know, but, in fact, it is not creating as much energy output as energy input going in to the system.
It only works, in fact, partly because people do not eat very much  and partly because most of the work, the energy needed to fire the bullock, is not coming from wheat, it is coming from food that is not directly available to man.
Mechanisation of the USA has got wheat production to 44 per cent more output than input, but a substantial amount of this is fossil fuel and that is at the farm gate.
By the time we get it spread, we only have a 10 per cent gain in terms of the total energetics of the system, and if you put in fossil fuel for machinery and for fertilisers we are running at a loss.
I am going to criticise modern farming methods, I promise you, but before I do it is also worth remembering that the primary beneficiary has been the consumer.
Food is cheaper in real terms, I think we have also agreed.
What we do not tend to agree about, and what I should reassure you about, is that food is also safer than it was.
I am not going to go in to all the details, but I give you one example.
BSE is creating panic to a certain extent, but BTB used to kill an awful lot of children.
At the beginning of the 1920s TB of bovine origin from cattle was killing over 3,000 people a year in the United Kingdom.
This is a pretty staggering statistic which we should remember when we are considering the relative risk, then and now.
There is a risk in eating animal produce, there has always been a risk in eating animal produce, but it is not statistically getting worse.
My main criticism of intensive agricultural production, and of animal farming in particular, is that it has been locked for too long into a model-T-Ford-type philosophy, geared to produce a standard commodity as cheaply as possible.
This narrow thinking combined with a short-term expediency of the free market has, in fact, driven farmers into an unsustainable position by over-consumption of resources, by pollution and by standards of animal care that are increasingly out of touch with consumer demand.
Criticisms of factory farming have been rehearsed often enough.
I do not intend to go through them here.
What I hope to do from now on is to offer constructive suggestions as to how we might go forward.
Having, in our society, achieved a quantity of food to meet our needs, we can now afford to seek more quality.
Ideally, this implies food that is wholesome, tasty and safe, from husbandry systems that abuse neither farm animals nor the environment.
However, we have to decide for ourselves.
It is our decision, how much quality we can afford.
Starving people in the  sub-Sahara cannot afford much quality, though it is fair to say that their problems are more political than strictly agricultural.
Closer to home we have to decide whether, for example, to recognise that an increase in food prices imposed as a result of welfare standards demanded by the middle classes would be rather like the poll tax.
It would impose an unfair burden on the poor.
Another thing we have to consider is that we cannot afford to dispense with farm animals altogether.
And this is the point made by David Wilkins.
It is absolutely true that many forms of modern, intensive livestock production are extremely inefficient.
Here we are looking at the same argument using the energy input in absolute terms.
Meat production is obviously inefficient for all sorts of reasons and meat production from beef reared intensively is really wasteful by all sorts of criteria; it is very expensive on fossil fuel, it is not very productive in terms of food energy and the animals are obviously having to be killed in the process.
But the use of range cattle, though the yield is lower and we are talking now about extensification, is sustainable, largely because it can be sustained with minimal input from fossil fuel.
Extensification for meat production purposes is therefore an option that is consistent with sustainable agriculture.
The other thing one can do is once again increasingly to use food that we, ourselves, cannot or will not use, and the imposition of quotas which has put a degree of extensification on dairy production, has in fact encouraged this trend.
Consider some simple examples from the University Farm at Bristol of how we fed our cows before and after the imposition of quotas.
We have a pretty typical farm.
Before quotas, about 50 per cent of the food energy going in to our dairy cows was in the form of cereals: food that could be directly used by man, because in those days it was cost-effective to get as much milk as possible out of individual cows.
That gave one the best financial returns.
Now, when the output is fixed, there are far greater incentives to go for lower cost inputs.
That is the pathway we have gone down, and in consequence we have reduced the amount of food that is given to our cows that could be eaten by man from 50 per cent to 14 per cent by getting the input from grass and porridge oats: food that would otherwise be wasted in a system that is not using these animals to pick it  up on the way.
I would say, incidentally, without elaborating, that this is potentially beneficial to the health of the cows, because we do know that the major problems of ill health in cows are the production diseases associated with very high yields.
We can't dispense with animals altogether.
Another suggestion one tends to hear is that animals should live on our farms but not be killed, only providing us with milk, wool and manure.
Now this state is approachable in the extreme pastoral communities — the Indians with their bullocks — but it is not very efficient.
It is also approachable at the other end of the spectrum, which is filled by the middle-class peasant or designer-green who has a few pet animals to fit in with a rural lifestyle.
In this case the animals get quite a good deal, but in neither case do they contribute much to wealth.
As a general rule, whatever we may like to think, the less wealth generated by an animal as an individual the less attention is paid to its welfare, such as Merino sheep in Australia and Angora goats in South Africa existing only to produce wool; the individual battery hen in Britain, too, has very little cash value, and therefore very little attention is paid to her welfare.
The implication of this is that well-meaning attempts to avoid killing animals, can, in fact, be injurious to their health.
We cannot wash our hands of this.
Environmental pressures give us no option but to exploit animals.
Having accepted that, we then have the obligation to recognise them not as mere units of production but as beings with rights to a reasonable quality of life and a gentle death.
The quality of life that we can afford to give them will depend, whether we like it or not, on the value of their contribution to us.
I have defined quality of life for farm animals, or welfare for farm animals elsewhere.
We need to know something of an animal's mind.
If we observe, for example, a sow confined to a stall we cannot simply conclude that she is distressed without asking her rather more subtle questions.
For example, how does the quality of her environment, as she perceives it, now come up to her initial expectations?
And has it got better or worse?
These may in fact sound like rather subtle questions to ask a pig, but they are well within the scope of modern animal psychology.
Indeed, as experimental psychology of animals evolves from simple  behaviourism — the simple response experiments of Skinner — to the more complex information-theory of positive science, it becomes ever clearer that the minds of animals — and I use the word advisedly, meaning their capacity to reason from stored information — are extremely complex, and this imposes a greater responsibility on us.
It is just that, until recently, we never thought, or did not know how, to ask.
Now, as we learn to ask animals the right questions, we can avoid doing more harm than good through well-meaning concepts of what constitutes a happy life.
For example, if we were to enforce so-called free-range systems for laying hens that increased the incidence of death, infectious disease, aggression, pain and fear, it might make us feel fairly good, but it would not do a lot of good for the hens.
There are various ways of improving the lot of hens but we do need to ask the hens themselves rather than make up their minds for them.
There is little doubt now that we can go forward.
We are beginning to look in the right direction, and there is a genuine urgency.
The very fact that we are considering aspects of animal welfare suggests that we are now heading in the right direction.
These are the sort of avenues by which we should approach proper research as to the quality of the environment as perceived by the animal, proper use of education to disseminate that knowledge and minimal legislation where necessary.
There is no doubt whatsoever that the European Community will improve minimum standards for farm animals by legislation.
Inevitably, there is less agreement as to what these standards should be.
I have argued before, and shall again, that the farming industry has nothing to fear from such legislation so long as it is fairly enforced.
And indeed it would help restore pride in animal husbandry without bankrupting farmers in the process.
One effect of this legislation will be to stimulate some degree of intensification.
This should be environmentally friendly.
Some of the main diseases of intensification — metabolic disorders in dairy cows, bone disorders in poultry — could be reduced.
This is good for welfare.
However, the costs of production will increase as farmers are made to invest more time and money in each animal, and these costs must be met by the consumer.
However, the effects of legislation will, inevitably, be small relative to the impact of economic sources  which we cannot ignore.
And these will themselves be determined by developments in such things as personal wealth, attitudes to livestock which are wealth-related, environmental deterioration, fuel costs, pressures on land.
We cannot neglect these things, but neither can we control or even forecast them with any certainty.
They are in the mainstream of evolution, and we shall be swept along in the current, but we can at least try to spare the floods.
Merely staying afloat is a fairly modest ambition and one which recognises the Dyer theory, which I think Jonathon Porritt really gets wrong in his chapter.
This theory is the most ultimately utilitarian theory of all.
It talks about the confident assumption that life on earth will exist in some form however much we manage to foul things up for our own species and those close to us.
So we are not really talking about the survival of the earth, we are talking about the survival of the sort of earth we want.
Our limited ambition can, therefore, only be to sustain a reasonable quality of life for ourselves and for those animals that serve us.
So the new animal husbandry should be broad in its understanding but modest in its application, and I would cite three things that are required.
One is thrift.
Intensification is a good thing, perhaps overdoing it, but it is a good thing.
Animals should therefore be used to reduce waste not to create it.
This can be done, and I have given you one example, and that is feeding whole crops and by-products to ruminants such as cattle.
It could equally be achieved by attaching pig units to supermarkets to harvest the foods that have passed their sell-by date.
An equally efficient use of resource.
Point two — compassion.
We all have our own personal philosophy as to the rights of animals, but whatever that may be there is now sufficient scientific evidence to demonstrate that all the major farm species have sufficient cognitive powers to recognise quality in life.
We are obliged, therefore, to provide, so far as possible, quality and again, so far as possible, quality as perceived by them and not by us.
Final point — realism.
Improvements to animal welfare and the environment can only come about if they are perceived by us to have added value, and this means that the animals must continue to work for their living and we must accept the short-term economic consequences of working towards  explainable, more humane, agriculture.
I began by suggesting that, perhaps in practical terms, animal welfare and the protection of the environment have little in common.
In fact, as I have developed this chapter, I realise that within the definition I am using they are exactly the same thing.
Again without apology to Jonathon Porritt, I would say we are defining animal welfare as the quality of environment as perceived by the animal and we are defining environment protection as the quality of environment as perceived by us.
We are, therefore, concerned with self-interests.
However, I would argue that working to ensure quality for our families and other animals may be mere self-interest, but it is enlightened self-interest.
Welfare and Conservation
Donald M. Broom
My plan is to consider inter-relations between welfare improvement and the safeguarding of the environment, but first I want to talk about what the term ‘welfare’ means, and how we can use it in a scientific way.
As a consequence of biological functioning animals have a variety of needs.
These needs are met by obtaining a particular resource or by responding to a particular environmental or bodily stimulus.
Clearly we need to understand these needs and, in order to do this and in order to understand the responses of animals (and I include man when I say animals) to the difficulties that are encountered during life, we have to understand motivational processes.
We have to know about the various behavioural and physiological changes which occur in difficult situations, and we have to understand adverse effects on body condition, growth, reproduction and so on.
Animals have a range of methods of trying to cope and there are various consequences of failure to cope.
These are things that we can measure; we can make measurements of the welfare of an animal; the term ‘welfare’ refers to its state, and its state in particular in respect of its attempts to cope with its environment.
One or two points about this concept.
The first is that welfare is a characteristic of an individual; it is not something which is given to it by somebody else.
The second is that it can obviously vary from very poor to very good, and an individual's welfare will be different at different times.
Thirdly, as I said, it can be measured, and it is important that it should be measured in a way that is independent of moral   considerations.
We have to be able to make measurements of welfare; when we have done that, and discovered how good or poor the welfare is, ethical decisions have to be taken, and individuals will have their own ideas about what is acceptable.
The measures which we can use include indications that the animal is failing to cope with its environment (with the difficulties which it encounters) and measures of how hard it is for that individual to cope with the difficulties.
So measures of poor welfare include finding that, because of the way an animal is kept or treated, it is not able to live as long or finding that it is not able to grow or is not able to breed.
These I think are self-evident; that you can make these measurements and that they are relevant to assessing the welfare of the animal.
Measurements of body damage; for example, if you find that keeping chickens in a particular way results in a large number having broken bones before they die, that is important in assessing the effect of that condition on the welfare of the animal.
Measurements of disease-incidence; the welfare of diseased individuals is clearly not as good as that of healthy individuals.
The susceptibility of individuals to disease; if animals are kept or treated in such a way that their immune system does not work very well, that in itself tells you that their welfare is less good than it might be.
So increased susceptibility to disease is a measure of poor welfare.
Then there is a range of measurements of the functioning of the physiological systems of the animal; we can make measurements which tell us how hard a time the animal is having trying to cope with the conditions which are imposed upon it.
There is a range of behavioural methods which animals use to try to cope with the conditions, and again we can make measurements of how much they are having to use these.
There are changes in behaviour which are a consequence of the conditions which the animal is having to deal with.
A final possibility is that individuals sometimes cope with difficulties by self-narcotising; this is something that is done on a fairly wide scale by man.
We would generally feel that the welfare of people who need to knock themselves out with some kind of drug and need to spend a large part of their lives thus self-narcotised is less good than that of people who do not need  to.
There are indications that self-narcotisation is a method which animals can use to cope with difficulties using endogenous opioids.
It may be that in various painful and other unpleasant conditions animals deal with them by an increased usage of endogenous opioids.
If so, and if we can measure it (though it is not easy to do so), that again tells us something about their welfare.
Crib-biting is shown a great deal by stabled horses.
Pigs often lie down and chew on nothing; they may consume their food in ten minutes during the day.
Pigs normally spend a large amount of their day searching for food and consuming food, and pigs which have no food for a long period often exhibit sham-chewing.
Pigs which are kept in a fairly barren environment, except for the presence of other pigs, want to chew things, they want to root, but there is nothing to chew on or root so they chew on the tails of other pigs.
You can measure the frequency of these sorts of behavioural anomalies.
We can also get some information on how good welfare is by investigating the preferences of animals.
We can set up situations — as noted by John Webster — in which we try to find out what is important to the animal by looking at what it prefers and trying to assess how much it will work for something; how important that particular resource is to the animal.
Or we look at how strongly animals avoid things, and again that tells us something about how unpleasant the thing is to the animal.
So we can use that information as well in assessing how good the welfare of animals is.
I must emphasise, however, that poor welfare and suffering are not exactly synonymous; it is important, I think, to distinguish them in order to understand the concept.
They often occur together, but welfare is a wider term than suffering.
Marion Dawkins has referred to suffering as ‘involving unpleasant subjective feeling’.
Now when you have unpleasant subjective feelings there will often be an effect on your state, as regards your attempts to cope with your environment.
Unpleasant subjective feelings will be associated with poor welfare.
However, it is quite possible for the state of the animal to be affected without there being suffering.
For example, an animal may be injured and it may be under anaesthetic; now the welfare of an individual which is under anaesthetic because of the injury — because of the damage to it  or perhaps of the reduced life-expectancy — is less good than that of an individual which is not injured.
I think that most people would feel that is the right way to use the word, and yet if the animal is anaesthetised it is not suffering.
It does not actually feel it, it has not got unpleasant subjective feelings.
Another example is where the immune system is not functioning adequately; suppose we keep animals in a condition which is such that their immune system does not work properly.
Now I would say the welfare of those animals is less good because of that; even if they are not being challenged by a disease.
If they are, they may suffer directly because of the disease and its effects, but the welfare is less good if the immune system is not working properly.
Suppose we think of conditions which lead to impaired reproduction or increased likelihood of mortality.
There will be a period where the individual is affected by the condition, but it is not yet suffering.
But the welfare has started to decline before the suffering occurs.
Suppose we think of individuals which are reared throughout their lives in a situation where there is sensory deprivation.
It may be that that individual does not function normally as a consequence of the sensory deprivation.
It may be that its functioning is impaired in various ways; perhaps the extent to which it can suffer is impaired by the sensory deprivation.
But if there is a substantial enough change in the functioning of the animal we might say that its welfare is poor, even if the animal itself does not detect that its welfare is poor.
Finally, if an animal is coping with extremely adverse conditions by self-narcotisation, I would say that its welfare is poor but the effect of the narcotic may mean that it is not suffering.
What is the welfare of the drug addict, under the influence of the drug?
I would say that, if his life is such that he has to use a drug, the welfare is poor, even if at the moment of using the drug there is no unpleasant subjective feeling.
So I would emphasise that it is very valuable to measure suffering; suffering is associated with poor welfare but there can be poor welfare in the absence of suffering.
Now let me consider some of the situations which lead to poor welfare; these have a variety of different effects on animals and I will go over them rapidly.
First of all pain; pain is one effect of a situation or an environment on an animal which results in poor welfare.
Another is a situation which  leads to fear.
Again, a situation in which the animal detects that there is danger, or suspects that there might be danger, is something which we need to take account of in considering the welfare of animals.
Then we have a range of measurements where the conflict control systems of animals are not able to work properly; for example, where the animal wants to do something but cannot, or is frustrated.
There are situations where an important stimulus is absent and the animal cannot find it; for example, a young animal looking for a teat when there is no teat around.
Long periods of insufficient stimulation — extreme boredom, if you like — can result in poor welfare.
Over-stimulation, too much unpredictability in the environment, too complex a world which you cannot deal with — that again can be associated with poor welfare.
Having said something about welfare I want now to consider what concern about animal welfare has in common with concern about the environment.
The general link has been mentioned several times.
There is a basic idea of a moral obligation which we have; a moral obligation towards individual animals with which we come into contact.
We have such a moral obligation; most people believe that.
We also have moral obligations towards our environment, and there is then this common thread of the feeling of the moral obligation.
There is an unselfish element in thinking about this, and we can compare this idea of moral obligation with many of the factors influencing what people do and how they vote.
People spend a lot of time thinking about things which are beneficial to themselves; consideration of welfare and the environment has a much larger element of unselfishness in it.
Now, if we think about actions which might have a beneficial effect on welfare or on conservation, there are some which benefit both at the same time.
Some of our present laws, some laws which could be passed in the future, are also doubly beneficial in this sense.
Here are some examples to start with of actions or laws which improve both animal welfare and the quality of our environment.
We have laws which prevent the killing of some wild animals; we have the Badgers Act, we have the Protection of Birds Act.
These acts make it an offence to kill these wild animals and they have an obvious effect on conservation; that  these animals are not being killed — at least if the law is being obeyed.
Also, any attempts to kill wild animals, or almost all attempts, do result in a large amount of suffering.
When an animal is shot or caught in a snare, or chased and caught, it has a great deal of suffering.
So the welfare of wild animals which are killed is generally rather poor until they die.
A second example is keeping wild animals as pets.
If you take any wild animal and keep it in captivity (I would have to say most wild animals; some insects might be taken into captivity without any suffering, but if you take vertebrates into captivity there is certainly going to be suffering), sometimes the animals will die very quickly after being brought into captivity, and again there is often an effect on the functioning of the immune system because they often succumb to diseases which would not otherwise have killed them.
So, there is suffering when wild animals are brought into captivity.
Collecting animals from the wild and using them as pets has consequences, in many cases which are relevant to conservation.
Many wild animals, such as rare parrots, are rare because they are being taken and used as pets.
Now in the UK we have laws which prevent most wild birds from being taken and put in a cage.
However, many wild animals are caught in other countries and brought into Britain which can then be legally kept.
So there is a legal problem here; that we treat our own species in a different way from the way we treat imported wild animals.
Generally speaking, this is an area where conservation and welfare tend to go, in most cases, in the same direction.
Another example, and it is a simple one, is using straw on farms.
If you use straw as bedding for farm animals, generally speaking you improve the welfare of those animals.
Farm animals which are kept in bare pens are generally worse off than farm animals which are kept in pens with straw, both because straw can be used as bedding and because straw is a material which the animal can manipulate.
It substantially increases the complexity of the environment of the animal.
So using straw can have beneficial effects for our farm animals; burning straw has some direct effects on the environment which are, for the most part, bad as far as conservation is concerned.
So straw-burning rather than using straw for animals is something which is bad for the environment and for welfare.
Another example of an issue which has a welfare component  and a conservation component is one which is less important here but very important in many tropical countries: the problem of stray dogs.
If dogs are put out from people's houses and left to stray, there is a welfare problem.
If dogs survive in the wild, they often have effects on the flora and fauna; so that has a conservation effect and perhaps other effects on species in the environment.
Collecting stray dogs is an important measure in relation to conservation, welfare and reducing the spread of human disease.
The welfare point is a little complicated, because of course you have to catch up the dogs, and many of those dogs will be killed, but the dogs can be treated well during the time they are held.
There are, then, examples of actions which benefit both welfare and conservation.
However, you have heard already of some examples of areas where there is conflict between these two objectives.
What one has to do where this conflict is between a welfare aim and a conservation aim is to weigh up all the evidence carefully and decide what is, morally, the right thing to do.
It is not realistic to say, ‘I'm always going to support anything which improves welfare’, or, ‘I'm always going to support anything which improves conservation’.
You do have to think about both aspects, and many people who are concerned with one area tend to think less about the other area.
So, the first example is hunting; animals have been hunted, especially for the purposes of shooting, for many years in this country and there is no doubt that there are large areas of countryside which have been preserved as a consequence of hunting.
In other words, conservation has benefited from the existence of hunting.
However, there is also no doubt that if you hunt animals — let's say by shooting them — a high proportion of the animals which are hunted will not die instantaneously.
If that happens, if animals are shot and die instantaneously, there is not a welfare problem; there is no interval when the -animal is suffering.
It is something that many people would not like to see, but there is no question that a high proportion of animals which are shot will carry lead shot for a while, will die after a long period — in many cases days or weeks — and there is a substantial amount of suffering when this happens.
The day before yesterday I was in France and I saw people shooting ducks on a lake.
A fair proportion of the ducks were obviously  hit but carried on and got to a point where the hunters could not pick them up, so a lot of those animals died slowly and in a great deal of pain.
This emphasises the point that hunting has adverse effects on the welfare of animals but beneficial effects on conservation, and here there is a conflict of interest.
My feeling is that what we ought to do is preserve areas of countryside without having to have this excuse for doing it.
There is now a sufficient body of opinion that areas should be conserved without the need for hunting.
However, we have to acknowledge the considerable benefits that have accrued in the past because people have hunted — benefits to conservation in general, not to the individual animals being hunted.
Another example is breeding endangered species in zoos.
There is no doubt that certain species have been successfully bred in zoos and released in the wild.
The number is not that large but there are certainly cases.
Captive breeding of rare species is a skill which is developing and which, in the long run, is likely to have a substantial effect on which species do survive.
That is something which most people concerned about conservation regard as laudable; it is a worthwhile thing to do.
I think the bulk of the British public would say that it is a worthwhile thing to do.
However, there is a certain welfare problem when you keep animals in a zoo.
The extent of the problem varies a great deal from one species to another.
For example, there are species which cannot be bred at all .
Quite a number of species cannot breed in captivity, and clearly the welfare of an animal which cannot breed in captivity is by definition not good.
So there is an area of conflict here.
What is the solution to it?
I think the solution is certainly to breed animals in zoos but, if it is done, a great deal of effort must be made to ensure the conditions in which the animals are kept are good, and there are some zoos now which are successful in keeping animals so that their welfare is good.
There are many zoos around the world which keep animals in conditions which are very poor, and where there are substantial adverse effects on welfare.
Another problem is the cat.
If you have a cat and you let it walk around the countryside rather than confine it in your house; what is the consequence?
Well, in many cases the consequence is that the cat chases large numbers of wild creatures; catches, kills and tortures a certain number depending on how  efficient it is.
So, doing the best you can for the welfare of your cat can have severe adverse effects on the welfare of wild animals.
In certain areas, particularly on islands and in places where there are species which are not at all adapted to cope with cats as predators (and that includes the whole of Australia), there have been dramatic adverse effects on populations of a variety of species of small animals because cats are allowed to roam around.
In my view, what should happen here is that cats should not be allowed to roam around in places where they could have a dramatic adverse effect on populations of animals, even though it is better for the cat.
Also, if you have a cat and you want to let it out, you could at least provided some sort of warning for the prey, so that the prey has a better chance of escaping; such as a bell around the neck for example.
This may be frustrating for the cat — maybe not so good for the welfare of the cat — but it might help to save a fair number of wild animals.
Here is another difficult area which has been mentioned already: housing farm animals.
Generally speaking, it is better for farm animals to give them a lot more space and a lot more variety in their environment.
However, if we took our present population of farm animals and provided them with free-range conditions, this would have a severe effect on conservation in Britain.
We would have to cut down a lot of woodland, we would have to alter our environment substantially, and that is something that people have to bear in mind when advocating free-range.
Of course you could say that we do not need all the animals anyway, but at the moment we have got them, so there is a conflict here.
For many of these species it is possible to keep them indoors in conditions which are very much better than the average conditions that are used now.
Another area is farming rare species.
Crocodiles are being preserved in some parts of the world by farming them, because that means that it is not so worthwhile to go out and kill the wild ones.
On the other hand it means the crocodiles have to live on a farm.
Elephants: if you actually shoot elephants in a controlled way you may in fact preserve the species, and that is something that has been done, though it is less important if everybody avoids using ivory and it is not worth killing the elephants at all.
So for farming rare species: it depends how it is done; avoid it if you can but in some cases it may be necessary.
Finally, I want to say a few words about the problems with our present laws, especially in relation to welfare.
I cannot cover all the laws.
I thought I would pick out just a few.
The major problem with legislation concerning animals is that it is from a human perspective.
There ought to be consideration of the animal's perspective when formulating laws; almost all the laws are to protect a certain kind of human interest.
They are not designed basically to protect animals and, as has already been mentioned, they depend a great deal upon the use of the animal.
The legislation regarding rabbits is extremely different according to whether the rabbit is in a laboratory, is a pet, is being kept for meat or is wild.
We have completely different legislation, the rabbits are protected to a completely different extent, according to those circumstances.
That is illogical.
We ought to have laws which consider the animal as an animal and not just as something that we use in one of fifteen different ways.
The other factor, mentioned by John Webster, is the question of numbers of animals.
We have laws in this country about cruelty.
Now suppose one considers a farmer who has dairy cows.
One of these dairy cows develops severe leg problems to the point where it cannot walk.
It collapses onto the ground, which happens to be a deep pile of manure, and it lies there until it is trampled to death by the other cows which are milling continually around it.
Now if that happens, the farmer would probably be prosecuted, and yet it is the case that many chickens die in that way every day.
We need to modify the way chickens are kept so that this is something which at least is extremely rare; we should try to prevent it completely.
The attitudes to the animals are quite different according to the numbers.
The reason for that is partly the attitude of the people involved; they will identify with individual cows and know them.
The people looking after chickens do not identify with individual chickens and, as has been said already, very large numbers of animals should not be being looked after by very small numbers of people who have no incentive to treat them as individuals.
So, finally, some specific suggestions of changes which could occur in the law:
1.
Keeping wild animals as pets.
There should be a law that states that no wild-caught animal should be kept as a pet.
That would include animals which are wild coming from other countries.
There are difficulties in working out whether the animal is wild or not, but I think we should have a law of that kind.
Pets, in other words, should be captive-bred, but you might allow animals which were wild to be brought into a captive-breeding scheme for pet ownership.
Wild animals should not be kept as pets at all.
2.
The second change concerns cruelty to wild animals.
The Protection of Animals Act does not include wild animals.
It is quite legal to go out into the countryside, find a hedgehog and pull off its legs one by one.
If a policeman observes you doing that he cannot do anything about it because we have no law which makes it illegal to be deliberately cruel to a wild animal.
The reason for that is principally to protect people who are hunting; I think that is unreasonable.
We should have a law which prevents deliberate cruelty to animals even if those animals are wild.
3.
There should be better laws requiring that housing conditions are provided which are sufficient for animals' needs.
Animals on farms, in laboratories, in zoos, those kept as pets; there ought to be tighter laws saying what conditions are acceptable.
In all those cases there are animals kept in very poor conditions where their needs are not met.
4.
At the moment anyone can decide to be a farmer and look after 300 pigs.
Nobody can stop someone who knows nothing about pigs from becoming a pig farmer.
I think that is wrong; it should be necessary for someone to have a licence in order to keep animals, including keeping animals on farms.
That would very much encourage education, the sort of courses which are run by universities, the agricultural colleges, the Agriculture Training Board.
These sorts of courses are needed by anyone who keeps animals, and you ought not to be allowed to keep animals unless you have attended such a course.
Also, it would be possible to remove a licence from someone who had not looked after animals properly.
5.
This point concerns slaughter, which has been mentioned already; however, I would just mention that as far as religious slaughter is concerned, recent research makes it absolutely clear that animals which are killed by cutting   their throats can go for between 15 and 120 seconds able to detect what is going on around them.
It is therefore quite unreasonable to allow this; the animals should be stunned at the time the throat is cut.
There are various other painful procedures that should be prevented; some laboratory tests on animals, some farm operations etc.
We have more information on these now.
It should be acted upon, and a number of these practices should be banned.
It is not just a matter of making laws.
There has to be better enforcement, and most of all there needs to be better education; everybody in the country needs to hear more about animal welfare and animal conservation from an early age so that they are less likely to do things that have serious adverse effects on animals or the environment.
New Thinking is Indivisible
P. D. Wall
When the RSPCA was founded 150 years ago, the abuse of animals was so extreme and obscene that the issues must have appeared simple to the founders.
It was not only that animals were suffering to their detriment, but their abusers were themselves brutalised in the process.
It must have seemed utterly reasonable to extend the golden rule of the Sermon on the Mount to animals so that animals deserved the same treatment which the human expected from other humans.
In a more modern and subtle way, Singer has proposed the same extension of a recognition of interest to animals so that sentient animals share a community of interests with humans.
As children, we grow up with the lovely stories in which animals really are people:The Wind in the Willows ,Just so Stories ,Watership Down .
As adults, we face the fact that our charming sympathetic introduction to animals becomes more complicated and that we are not fair to ourselves or to the animals if we identify with them.
I wish to explore the progress from 1840, with its clear problems and answers, to the present in which we must incorporate much subtler considerations about our relationship with animals and with plants and with the inanimate world about us.
I will do so by asking a series of questions.
In what factual sense are we the same as animals?
By factual I mean to question those aspects of us which no longer involve philosophical and theological questions which   occupied our ancestors.
The first of those facts is that animals and humans are made up of almost identical bits and pieces.
We share more than the same atoms and molecules.
Individual nerve cells, muscle cells and secreting cells operate on such precisely similar principles that knowledge from one species can be transferred to all others.
I know of no religion so fundamentalist as to dispute the facts up to this point.
Even beyond this, cells communicate with each other by the same general mechanisms in all animals and plants and even slime moulds.
The specific individuality of the species does not appear in their molecules or cells or even in the ability of the cells to communicate with each other during development or in adult life.
Individuality resides in the assembly of cells into systems and the precise way in which these systems respond to the world about them.
Predators and prey separate in this way.
Hawks and pigeons share 99.99 per cent identical components of their cells and of their genetic orders, but the way in which these components are assembled separates the two groups into individual and antagonistic needs and behaviours.
Hawks, pigeons and I share an astonishingly similar set of components and mechanisms and we share the same world.
I cannot accept that I should adopt a live-and-let-live neutral attitude to hawks and pigeons even though I accept the fact that we share very similar body mechanisms and an identical world.
Nor can I accept that it is my duty to reform hawks and pigeons so that they become well-behaved social humans where the hawks stop grabbing baby pigeons and the pigeons stop nicking my peas.
How then am I to resolve the morass of conflicting needs and interests of myself and my fellow animals?
At a minimum it would seem reasonable to return to the stark simplicity of the RSPCA 150 years ago and agree not to inflict pain on my fellow creatures because pain helps no one and the infliction of it brutalises me.
To follow this basic tenet, it would first be necessary to answer an apparently obvious question to which I have devoted much of my life.
How does one recognise pain in an adult human with whom one can speak?
Definition:Judging by the acres of print devoted to a definition of pain, one suspects both an obsession and a difficulty.
Humans often make statements about their awareness of their own internal body state as in ‘I am tired; thirsty; hungry; nauseated; drunk; sleepy etc.’
These purely subjective announcements do not provoke a debate in which the speaker and listener are challenged to give a precise meaning to the words.
Why then do we not take the same laid-back attitude if someone says ‘I am in pain…’?
I believe the reason is not just that the statement is more dramatic but the nature of the drama.
The one who suffers is asking for help.
In fact he is asking for two kinds of help: aid to stop ongoing injury and aid to recover from the damage.
This call for help provokes a specific urgent reaction and interaction in the listener.
For the physician, it is a demand to identify the objective source of the tissue damage which provoked the subjective awareness.
Supposing the physician can find no tissue damage or that there is an inappropriate relation between objective fact and subjective complaint.
This situation leads to a search for a definition of pain which incorporates the patient's meaning and the physician's ability to respond.
The International Association for the Study of Pain set up a Taxonomy Committee whose first job was to generate an agreed definition of pain.
[10]They wrote as follows: ‘Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage, or described in terms of such damage.’
What a weird sentence!
This diligent group of doctors and scientists had searched through two thousand years of definitions, added their own considerable experience and had generated a new definition.
In an important subscript, they add: ‘Pain is always subjective…’
By their definition they had achieved three important end results:(1) the patient is allowed to define the nature of his feelings,(2) the doctor is relieved of the responsibility of finding tissue damage,(3) there is no conceivable way in which a baby or an animal could tell you that it was having an ‘unpleasant sensory and emotional experience’.
However, since it is proposed that there may be an association between pain and tissue damage, let us examine the facts.
The association of pain in adult man with tissue damage
A very precise lawful and repeated fixed relationship between stimulus and response can be shown in the laboratory.
Trained   volunteer subjects who have experienced the stimuli many times and therefore know that no harm will come to them, can give reliable measures of the strength of the stimulus in terms of the strength of their pain perception.
Is this not proof that the pain felt by normal subjects mirrors the nature, intensity and location of tissue damage?
No!
For example there is a local, laboratory, personal, cultural, peer group, arbitrary criterion established for what constitutes a tolerable, i.e. not dangerous, maximal stimulus and response.
Therefore these scales vary wildly from laboratory to laboratory.
[11]Turning from the laboratory to real life, there is a widely believed myth that battle injuries are not necessarily painful but that injury is always painful in ordinary circumstances.
We examined an unselected group of 150 civilians who had suffered accidents sufficiently serious for their admission to hospital.
[9]Forty per cent had felt no pain at the time of the accident.
They expressed their surprise since they, like the doctors who treated them, associated obvious injury with obvious pain.
They were not ‘in shock’ or confused.
A tearful girl with a bomb-shattered leg said, ‘Who is going to marry me now’, but said she was not in pain.
This group were aware of the injury and described it in neutral terms of sensation.
They had analgesia precisely localised to the injury.
In other words, there was something about the situation in which these people failed to perceive pain in spite of obvious injury whose nature they understood.
This group contrasted completely with another 40 per cent who perceived severe pain from the instant of injury and where the severity surprised them and those who treated them.
This left only 20 per cent who reported a degree of pain which seemed appropriate to the nature and amount of their injury.
We simply do not understand the origin of this hugely variable relation between injury and pain.
We may never fully understand the causal circumstances which produce this bizarre unpredictable relation between abrupt accidents and perceived pain because no one is going to carry out experimental manipulations.
We do not need such unthinkable experiments because we are surrounded by thousands of only slightly less dramatic examples of the lack of a fixed relationship between tissue damage and pain.
Patients with osteoarthritis have a progressive destruction of joint tissue which can be exactly quantified.
They too complain of  pain whose severity bears little or no relationship to the tissue destruction.
Low back pain patients.
‘describe their pain in terms of tissue damage’ although, in some 80 per cent of cases, no such damage can be detected by the most careful diagnostic tests.
This could be explained away by the inadequacy of the diagnosis but that would not restore belief in a fixed relation between pain and damage since we are faced with very large numbers of patients with overt chronic damage and little or no pain.
In summary, we can make no general statement on the relation of tissue damage to pain in conscious, sensible adult humans.
Pain measurements by non-verbal methods
Given the wild variability of verbal reports in apparently similar circumstances even when aided by gadgets and gimmicks to translate the words into numbers, there has been an elaborate ongoing search for ‘reliable’, ‘objective’ non-verbal measures.
Much of this ambition is directed by a simplistic Cartesian dualism with a separated mind from body.
Melzack and I and others have written about this extensively.
[8]It is classically imagined that there exists direct and reliable neural machinery which detects events in the tissue and transmits the information to a centre where the sensation of pain is generated.
The pain centre is observed by the mind which receives the sensory message, minimises or magnifies it, dresses it with memories, significance and emotion, and generates perception with all its quirky infuriating individuality.
This simple two-stage process is still the basis of thinking of most of the medical profession and those members of the population who still listen to them.
It is the ambition of those who seek a ‘real pain'-measuring machine that they should be able to bypass the mind and discover some measuring instrument, a dolorimeter, the equivalent of a thermometer, which could be dipped into the body to measure the true level of pain without reference to that unreliable but verbal witness, the mind.
Enormous ingenuity has been mobilised to capture this ‘pot of gold’.
The rationale of this Cartesian-Kantian dualism would depend on the following stages of observation:
1.
Injury or tissue damage stimulates nerve impulses in specialised sensory fibres.
2.
The nerve impulses in these specialised fibres enter the central nervous system and provoke: A. Local reflexes in muscles.
B. Autonomic reflexes affecting blood pressure, heart rate, respiration etc.
C. Endocrine responses in pituitary, adrenal medulla and cortex etc.
D. Ascending afferent volleys to thalamus and cortex.
3.
The arrival of nerve impulses in thalamus and cortex provoke a ‘pure sensation’ of pain.
4.
The mind assesses the meaning of the pure sensation in terms of the past, present and future and provokes speech and behaviour.
5.
Medical treatment reduces the pain.
These five stages are the topic of a huge search by doctors and scientists and are the basis of the rapidly developing new medical speciality of pain diagnosis and management.
Unfortunately none of the five provide us with the expected objective measure of pain which we could apply with confidence to adults or to babies or to animals.
The basis of the fundamental problem is that most people predict a fixed inevitable hard-wired connection between stimulus and response, between injury and pain.
This prediction fails because all of us, humans and animals, are subtle creatures who react to overall situations.
Humans are not puppets reacting inevitably to the pulling of one string.
Mice are not clockwork mice running around on a course which is the predictable inevitable consequence of some internal machinery.
Perhaps the most surprising of these five failures to find an objective measure of pain is the last.
It would seem so reasonable to define pain as that verbal response or any other sign which disappears if an adequate dose of morphine is administered.
This sounds like a good workmanlike, no-nonsense definition which involves no philosophical meanderings.
It could be extended to include any other form of powerful therapy.
For example, if surgery were performed to remove all nerves supplying the part from which the complaint originated, this could be used as a test to decide if the word  pain could be used to describe the condition which disappeared after the operation.
Similarly, cutting pain pathways in the spinal cord or the brain could be utilised as the test procedure which would simply bypass other elaborate ways of defining pain.
Unfortunately, there are two huge problems which modify the useful applicability of this pragmatic approach.
Morphine and its related narcotics have proved extremely useful in their ability to control pain.
It would seem reasonable to define pain and to measure its intensity in terms of the amount of morphine which a patient freely chooses to take in order to restore his own comfort.
I would completely agree provided that this measure applied only to responding patients.
It is a great tragedy that there are types of pain which fail to respond to narcotics even when they are given in large repeated doses.
These are the truly intractable pains and they are called intractable because they respond to no known form of therapy.
They are almost entirely produced by damage to peripheral nerves or to roots or to the central nervous system.
In summary, response to therapy may be incorporated in a definition when it works but failure requires other ways of thinking.
How does this paradox apply to animals?
Of course, if we observe injury or disease in a human, we attempt to cure it.
Of course, if we hear a fellow human complain of pain, we attempt to help.
The problem is that many injury and disease states are not apparent to the physician or the patient.
Furthermore many serious injury and disease states are not accompanied by inevitable pain.
If we have such problems with adult humans with whom we can talk, let us ask the next question.
How does one recognise pain in a newborn baby to whom one cannot speak?
Mothers become great experts in detecting unusual behaviour patterns in their babies.
They do not indulge in philosophical debate on pain or the meaning of a cry.
They move immediately to the pragmatic therapeutic approach and try to find what action restores the child to normal.
The cry of a baby may be associated with hunger, cold, wetness, noise, loneliness, disease and so on.
The mother cycles experimentally through her repertoire of restorative therapies such as food, warming, nappy change, lullabies, and cuddling.
If these fail and she suspects disease she now incorporates the age-old universal remedies such as massage, heat, cooling, gripe water, aspirin, distraction, and, if those do not succeed, she turns in the West to the doctor.
Until very recently the paediatricians did not concern themselves with pain as such but adopted the direct approach of seeking to locate diseased tissue and to restore that tissue.
Now the situation is changing and for the first time two excellent books have appeared on pain in children.
[6,7]They naturally concentrate on older children who begin to use words but who need translators and guides so that their words and behaviour are understood by adults and so that the actions of well-intentioned doctors and nurses can be made less threatening to the child.
A third book is about to appear dealing with pain specifically in the neonate including premature babies.
[1]Here the problem is magnified hugely not only because there are no words but because the behavioural repertoire of the newborn is very limited.
This is even more exaggerated in the poorly baby, especially the restricted catheterised premature child in intensive care.
Babies who might be in severe pain soon after birth are certain to be severely diseased babies.
In the 1980s, among an entire group of paediatric anaesthetists, a substantial fraction believed that newborn children did not feel pain and therefore they did not give analgesics to newborn babies.
I believe these conclusions are based on three erroneous and illogical but well-meaning ways of thinking.
First, they were treating babies as adults, that is to say, by a direct attack on the origin of disease with no distraction being permitted to treat symptoms.
Symptoms were regarded as mere signposts pointing at the real target.
Secondly, they were treating babies as not yet formed adults since their nervous system did not yet contain all the adult structures which they imagined, without any evidence, would be necessary before one could have an unpleasant emotional experience.
Thirdly, they had a fearful respect for the dangers of such drugs as morphine and worried that they might kill children who were already desperately sick.
No amount of philosophising or, for that matter, sentimentalising will resolve such issues.
It is time for direct action, test and  observation and I will give two examples which promise a rational future.
When a foot is damaged, the volley of nerve impulses produced by the damage and arriving in the spinal cord sets up a long lasting increase of excitability which shows up as an exaggerated flexion reflex, among other changes.
[4]Premature babies are routinely subjected to heel lancing in order to obtain blood samples which are needed for crucial reasons.
The lanced foot has a grossly exaggerated flexion reflex for days.
If a local anaesthetic is rubbed into the skin before the injury, the flexion reflex does not develop its prolonged exaggeration.
This very important observation says nothing about whether the baby feels pain.
It does show that even a 26-week gestation baby has, at least within its spinal cord, a mechanism which is associated with tenderness in adults.
A more serious investigation was carried out on blue babies who required surgery soon after birth to correct congenital heart defects.
[2]The outcome was compared in babies operated on with the traditional light general anaesthesia and in those who received analgesics before, during and after the operation.
The result was that the babies with analgesia had much reduced postoperative endocrine changes, fewer complications and earlier recovery.
In summary, we do not know and perhaps we can never know if babies experience pain as the word is understood by adults.
However, if babies suffer tissue damage for whatever reason, they show fewer behavioural disturbances and recover more quickly if they receive medicine which limits the effect of injury signals.
Therefore is the phrase ‘pain in animals’ useful?
What have we learnt about the non-verbal correlates of pain in man and babies which might be relevant to animals?
(1) The components
There are those who wish to mechanise man and to assign pain to the operation of a specific Cartesian mechanism whose job is to detect injury and inevitably provoke the pain response.
The first component in this classical stimulus-response link is specific injury-detecting nerve fibres, the nociceptors.
Therefore some would say that if an animal has no nociceptors, it cannot feel pain.
This is not only simplistic but it is even ignorant of pain-provoking peripheral nerve fibres now known to exist in man.
There are those who say that for man to feel pain he must have certain parts of his brain intact such as the spinothalamic tract or the limbic system or the cingulate gyrus etc.
Even this is not true.
If it were, it would be possible to abolish pain in man by neurosurgical removal of one or more of these structures.
This has been the basis of destructive neurosurgery for pain which is now largely abandoned because the pain recurs after some time.
The idea that a specific area in the brain is crucial for pain seems no longer valid.
Pain in man requires the presence of distributed neuronal circuits rather than a single locus.
Even if the possession of essential components was crucial to man, which it is not, would it be justified to say that an animal which does not have these components could not feel pain?
We have seen that argument applied to babies.
I believe such a statement would involve an outdated phrenological approach which implied that the brain was a collection of specifically labelled boxes.
The function of nerve fibres is to transmit coded information from one place to the other.
As humans we can transmit messages to each other by speaking, writing, morse code, semaphore and smoke signals.
There is every reason to believe that nerve fibres can also transmit messages from cell to cell with different codes.
Therefore, if we cannot detect a particular coded message in an animal, there is no reason to say that they are not transmitting the particular message by some other means.
Similarly, nerve cells with their dendrites and synapses are logic units.
These can modify their operation to detect temporal and spatial patterns of inputs.
Certainly a cockroach has enough such components to detect the relatively simple set of circumstances we call painful.
(2) The reflexes
We have seen that the reflexes in man whether muscular, autonomic or endocrine are components of our reaction to injury.
They are usually coupled with pain but that correlation is too loose for reliability.
Furthermore they show the same variation of response in relation to injury which is also seen  in general behaviour and in verbal declarations of pain.
(3) Behaviour
‘Sentient animals’ is a favourite phrase of those who wish us to extend our obligations beyond our fellow men to include animals.
I consider this phrase an anthropomorphic trap.
The intent is to define some wide group of animals — say, mammals or vertebrates — as sentient and therefore capable of feeling pain.
I am not comfortable with these arbitrary limits.
I strongly suspect the limits are set by social empathy in interactions with animals.
Beyond the vertebrates, I confess to my own failure to have social relations with snails but to my deep and, I suspect, mutual respect for the octopus which is a close relation of the snail.
The role of social relations is obvious in the massive US Animal Welfare Act 1966 which applies to warm-blooded animals, thereby excluding my friend the octopus.
However, by 1977 this act was further amended by excluding rats, mice, birds, horses and farm animals from the definition of animal.
Well, well!
It would seem that there are two types of warm-blooded animal.
One lot live on farms and the rest deserve welfare.
By 1989, the City Council of Cambridge, Mass., extended protection to all vertebrates.
One suspects the farm lobby is pretty weak in Cambridge, but so is the invertebrate lobby.
What about the ‘Sensitive Mimosa’ which has its own version of the flexion reflex so that flicking one leaf collapses all the leaves on that branch?
Why is that not sentient?
I find all this uncomfortably arbitrary.
Am I to base my ethical values on the warmth and nature of my social relations?
That did not work too well for blacks, slaves and even women.
Why should I require animals to join me in some mutual admiration society or even make them honorary members?
Perhaps like Groucho Marx they have other views about exclusive clubs.
Groucho said, ‘Any club that would accept me as a member, I wouldn't want to join.’
Beyond the issue of the meaning of sentience, we have seen that the relation of injury to pain and its associated behaviours is highly variable in man.
If one were to follow Descartes and attribute that variability to the mind, then animals who were mindless in the opinion of Descartes and Kant would react reliably and predictably to injury.
If this were so, an  examination of an animal for pain-related behaviour would be as good as asking the animal if it was in pain.
Furthermore, the observation of pain-related behaviour would be a reliable indication of injury or tissue damage in such a mechanical, mindless animal.
That this is not so is very apparent from any number of reports which cannot be dismissed as anecdotage.
The 1980 Epsom Derby was won in fast time by the horse Henbit.
Three hundred metres from the end of the race, the horse stumbled and fractured its right fore cannon bone.
It then accelerated out of the pack and passed the finishing post placing full weight on the fractured leg in a perfect gallop gait.
When a pack of fox hounds in full bay pour through a barbed wire fence, they leave long bleeding lacerations on their sides.
The injured dogs' behaviour cannot be differentiated from that of their uninjured pack mates.
I have described elsewhere similar behaviour in wounded deer.
[12]Most dog owners have had the misfortune to see it in their own pets in a dog fight.
The variable response to acute injury in such animals is reminiscent of the variability we have described for humans.
The similarity continues if people or animals are examined at a later stage.
Henbit would never approach the winning speed again.
Wounded deer by the next day separate from the herd and fail to groom or eat or move.
Dogs lie ‘doggo’.
In summary, pain-related behaviours in animals and in humans may be triggered by injury, but the intensity and latency of these behaviours depends on many circumstances other than injury.
A characteristic of human verbal expression of pain is that it contains a mixture of private suffering and public display.
There is no reason to doubt that such mixtures of behaviour would not occur in social animals.
It could be threatening to the group or at least bad manners for a lion or a wolf or a hyena to yelp and limp on twisting an ankle during a communal stalk.
Normally noisy monkeys are unusually quiet during childbirth, perhaps because they are particularly vulnerable to predators when in labour.
[5]It would seem highly probable that animals like humans would take into account the presence of other animals when displaying signs of tissue damage.
If you watch the jamboree of the many species which gathers at a lion kill, you observe that each animal changes its normal behaviour.
Normally obsessionally dignified storks become instant hooligans.
Nowhere is this shift of behaviour  more dramatic than in courting rituals.
It is my contention, by analogy with man, that the sensory world of these animals will shift as they move from one item to another in their behavioural repertoire.
If this were so, it would be as meaningless to make general statements about what a mouse or a cock or a cobra feels as it is to generalise about human behaviour.
It would be necessary to understand the particular animal's relation to its environment at the particular time.
(4) Response to analgesic therapy
We have seen how useful it can be to define human pain as that state which disappears if the human is treated for pain.
It would seem reasonable to call a drug an analgesic for a rat if it delays the time when the rat licks its feet when parked on a hot plate.
In a real disease state rather than an artificial provocation, it is necessary to examine very carefully the animal's disease behaviour and then its response to treatment.
For example, in a rat-form of rheumatoid arthritis a very careful study of the ameliorating effect of narcotics showed that the animal's scratching was the most strongly affected abnormal behaviour.
[3]Without that careful study, scratching would not normally be considered a sign associated with arthritis.
In assessing the effect of an anti-pain therapy, it is obviously important but difficult to be certain that the treatment has not simply prevented the animal from displaying the sign.
The extreme example of this would be to paralyse the animal, which would increase the pain and terror of a man even though he was unable to display any sign of pain.
We must be aware that paralysis of sign could occur in a more subtle fashion.
For example, it is common veterinary practice to section the nerves to the hoof of a limping horse.
This is not done in man because it leads to Charcot joints and a deafferentation phantom, two signs the horse may not be able to display.
Therapy is not a guaranteed test in humans because there are intractable pains which fail to respond to any known therapy.
There is no reason to think that similar conditions would not exist in animals.
Furthermore, because of the differing neurotransmitters and structures and behavioural repertoires, it could be that effective analgesics for humans are  not necessarily effective in all animals.
Finally, we have seen in humans that the assessment of specific therapies is always complicated by the presence of the placebo response.
It is true that, for us, this is usually a highly sophisticated learnt response.
We grow up to believe that doctors in white coats prescribe effective pain-relieving tablets and if the situation is serious they give intravenous injections.
The consequence is that we have placebo responses to blank tablets and much stronger placebo responses to intravenous injections of saline which we are told is some new wonder drug.
Obviously, animals have no such sophistication and, just as babies, fail to respond to these placebos.
However, there is no reason to believe that behaviour cannot be switched by simpler means such as false cues.
For example, we know that rats respond to ‘nocebos’.
If a rat is placed in a marked box and given an injection of apomorphine, it sits still for half an hour with its hair erect and shivering.
If, six months later, it is placed in the same box and given an injection of saline, it displays the identical behaviour as when given the drug.
By false cues and by real cues lumped under the general title ‘distraction’, we may shift the behaviour of adults, babies and animals.
In summary, the assessment of pain in babies and animals is so much more difficult than in adult humans that we must face the likelihood that we often get it wrong.
The difficulty extends far beyond the lack of verbal language for four reasons.
First, we have no reason to associate pain with the possession of any one neural component.
Secondly, reflex responses are parts of overall behavioural responses and may be uncoupled in particular situations.
Thirdly, overall behavioural responses require for their observation an intimate familiarity with each species which is rarely achieved and could be unachievable.
Lastly, animal response to analgesic therapy designed for humans can be an excellent criterion when the animal responds but the failures which mark the intractable pains of man could be more common in animals.
An alternative approach
I trust I have provided enough reasons to show that the use of the phrase ‘pain in animals’ is so indefinable that it is meaningless to animals and to those who have the well-being  of animals at heart.
The misunderstandings of ‘pain in animals’ can work to the severe detriment of the animals by attempting to assign to them specifically human values.
What might be a set of values which could be useful?
For the individual animal within itself, we could propose, with Claude Bernard, that each individual seeks to regulate its internal environment which is a crucial condition for its free life.
Instead of agonising over an indefinable concept of pain, why do we not simply study the individual's efforts to stabilise its internal environment and then aid it or, at least, not intrude on those efforts without good reason?
But the animal also lives in an external environment and we have here a fundamental new set of ethical values being developed by the ecologists and ‘green’ people.
We are now beginning new ways of thinking about whether to feed mice or kill them, plant trees or chop them down which require new balances of conflict of interest.
Rodents have a value on the world scene, but is that value sufficient to give them permission to eat 20 per cent of the grain harvest of India?
Snakes, locusts, bacteria and viruses are welcome to occupy their valuable niches in our world but they do go over the top on occasions.
It is our human duty and pleasure to understand the locust as a locust but we are equally morally compelled to find ways to control their self-destructive rampages.
I firmly believe that if we study animals as animals including their struggles with their internal and external environments, we can liberate them and ourselves from the obfuscation of terms such as pain and turn instead to definable values.
A search for those values will not only permit deep thought and research, it will demand and support it.