

When Will Your Job End?
Looking ahead
From the time it is first offered to you, it makes sense to plan for the day when your job may end.
This may sound like putting the cart before the horse and being unnecessarily pessimistic.
The simple truth is, though, that you will never be in a better position to arrange suitable contract safeguards than during the period when a company is anxious to secure your services.
Failure to protect yourself adequately could prove costly.
In later chapters, we shall look in more depth at the various job security rights that employees have gained through laws enacted in the past 25 years or so.
But the fact remains that, for many business executives, the rights they have under their contract remain more valuable — certainly in hard cash terms.
You need, therefore, to anticipate both when your job might finish and how that might happen.
Unless there are exceptional circumstances which render you liable to be sacked straight away(a few examples are set out in Clause 9 in the sample agreement in Appendix 1), you will be entitled to notice.
The length of notice to which business executives are due varies greatly from company to company.
Some otherwise generous companies offer even senior directors no more than three months' notice; at the other end of the scale, notice periods of three or even five years are by no means rare.
Subject to limited minimum rights laid down by statute, which are explained below, there is often plenty of scope for negotiation.
You should aim to strike a deal with your employers that gives you real peace of mind.
Retirement
Written contracts of employment sometimes do not deal with retirement.
One reason is that there is often a well-established understanding that all jobs come to an end when their holders attain a certain age.
The Sex Discrimination Act 1986 made it unlawful for an employer to discriminate between men and women as regards retirement age.
Nevertheless, it will eliminate the risk of misunderstanding if you and your employer discuss retirement specifically.
During such talks, remember to look at any implications that the company's proposals may have for your pension.
A contractual agreement about retirement could also affect your statutory rights.
For example, you cannot claim unfair dismissal if on or before the date when your job ends:
1.
you have reached the normal retiring age for an employee holding the position which you held; or, if there is no normal retiring age,
2.
you have reached the age of 65 (whether you are a man or woman).
When there is a contractual retiring age for all or nearly all employees in a particular job, that is presumed to be the normal retiring age.
This presumption can be rebutted by evidence that there is in practice some higher age at which employees in that job are regularly retired and which they have reasonably come to regard as their normal retiring age.
In the context of unfair dismissal it is not your personal situation that is to be considered, but that of an employee in your category.
If there is a normal retiring age for employees in your category, it cannot be displaced by an agreement to extend the retirement age in your own case.
So if you are dismissed before the agreed age, you might have a claim for breach of contract, but not for unfair dismissal if you are over the normal retiring age for colleagues in your class of work.
Notice
Either your employer or yourself will normally be able to bring your job to an end by giving notice.
As a business executive, your notice entitlement is an immensely significant part of your overall job rights.
It is not legally necessary for the same notice entitlement to apply to both you and your employer.
Ideally, you will be due a  lengthy period of notice if your employer wishes you to leave.
On the other hand, you will probably not wish to be subject to a correspondingly onerous commitment if you are the one who is keen to go.
Saying this is, of course, much easier than persuading an employer to agree to it.
Minimum notice
Your minimum notice rights are laid down by the Consolidation Act, which in this respect covers almost all UK-based executives, although some classes of employee, including some part-timers, are excluded.
The minimum notice period is geared to length of service:
Period of continuous employment
Minimum notice
At least four weeks and less than two years
one week
At least two years and less than twelve years
One week for each year of continuous employment
At least twelve years
Twelve weeks
The minimum notice that you must give your employer is one week, regardless of your length of service.
You cannot ‘contract out’ of these rights.
So if you enter into an agreement which provides for less than the statutory minimum notice, the above rules will still apply.
You can, however, waive your right to notice should you wish to do so, and naturally you can agree with your employer to receive a payment in lieu of notice, if that suits you both.
Reasonable notice
If nothing is agreed about notice, the common law implies a term into the contract that it can be brought to an end if ‘reasonable notice’ is given.
The problem is, what is reasonable in your particular case?
So much depends upon individual circumstances that little would be gained from cataloguing here the many court cases on this subject over the past century or so.
Despite that, one can suggest a few guidelines.
Your seniority will often be a key factor, as will the degree of responsibility entrusted to you and, perhaps, your length of service.
A court might also take into account your salary level, skill and qualifications, together with, possibly, the difficulty that you would have in finding another suitable post.
This last point could assume importance if, say, you were over the age of 50 or working in a field where the supply of skills exceeds demand.
Despite the disadvantages of uncertainty, you might be willing to leave the question of notice rights unresolved if you have strong grounds for suspecting that your employer would only agree to statutory minimum notice because that it is company policy.
This could leave you a little room to argue, should the need ever arise, that reasonable notice in your case was a longer period, such as six or 12 months.
That kind of approach is, however, very much second best in comparison to a negotiated deal which provides you with genuine job security.
Fixed-term contracts
Fixed-term contracts are popular with many employers.
They involve an agreement that the job will last for a specified period of time, although often provisions are included to enable the contract to be renewed if so desired.
Although fixed terms allow for the job to end through a ‘natural break’, the expiry of a fixed period of employment still counts as a dismissal for some legal purposes, such as the right to claim unfair dismissal or redundancy pay.
Excluding statutory rights
Having said that, one notable attraction of fixed terms from an employer's point of view is that they offer a possible means of cutting out statutory rights, if a number of conditions are met.
Thus:
1.
a fixed-term contract for one year or more entered into from 1 October 1980 can include an agreement in writing by you to exclude any claim that you may have for unfair dismissal, where your dismissal consists only of the expiry of the term;
2.
a fixed-term contract for two years or more entered into from 6 December 1965 can include an agreement in writing by you to exclude any claim that you may have for state redundancy pay, where your dismissal consists only of the expiry of the term.
Such exclusions need not be contained in the original contract document, but you must agree to them in writing before the term expires for them to be legally effective.
In any event, they only relate to non-renewal of the contract when it runs out.
They do not apply if your  employment is terminated during the term or if you are constructively dismissed.
You may be presented with a service agreement which covers many pages and which, you are told, offers the attractive guarantee of a long working period.
It goes without saying that you should study it with the utmost care.
Towards the back, you may find exclusions of statutory rights which have never been mentioned in your discussions with management.
Think before you sign.
Is it really  necessary for you to have no claim if you are indeed made redundant or treated unjustly at the time when the contract finishes?
It is seldom unreasonable to ask for the exclusions to be deleted.
Directors' service agreements
The Companies Act 1985 provides that, if a company director's service agreement is to last for more than five years, it must be approved by the shareholders.
If this applies to you, make sure that the necessary resolution is passed before the agreement is signed.
Failure to do so will mean that your efforts in negotiating long-term security of tenure might be in vain, as you could eventually find the shareholders deciding to bring your contract to a premature end and discover that you are unable to claim compensation for the full period during which you expected to work.
Fixed-term or rolling contract?
When discussing terms with your employer, you may be asked to consider whether you prefer a fixed-term agreement or a ‘rolling’ contract, ie one which rolls on until the required period of notice is given.
There is no magic answer to this question.
You simply have to weigh up your personal circumstances and what you are looking for from the job, keeping in mind any long-term plans that you may have for your future career development.
Does it suit you to have a specific initial commitment, culminating in a natural break when you can leave and pursue other interests?
Or would you rather have the security of knowing that, whenever in the years to come your employer may decide, for whatever reason, that you should go, you will be cushioned by a generous notice period which allows you to look for something else without the fear that very shortly the money will be running out?
You are the best judge.
A court might also take into account your salary level, skill and qualifications, together with, possibly, the difficulty that you would have in finding another suitable post.
This last point could assume importance if, say, you were over the age of 50 or working in a field where the supply of skills exceeds demand.
Despite the disadvantages of uncertainty, you might be willing to leave the question of notice rights unresolved if you have strong grounds for suspecting that your employer would only agree to statutory minimum notice because that is company policy.
This could leave you a little room to argue, should the need ever arise, that reasonable notice in your case was a longer period, such as six or 12 months.
That kind of approach is, however, very much second best in comparison to a negotiated deal which provides you with genuine job security.
Fixed-term contracts
Fixed-term contracts are popular with many employers.
They involve an agreement that the job will last for a specified period of time, although often provisions are included to enable the contract to be renewed if so desired.
Although fixed terms allow for the job to end through a ‘natural break’, the expiry of a fixed period of employment still counts as a dismissal for some legal purposes, such as the right to claim unfair dismissal or redundancy pay.
Excluding statutory rights
Having said that, one notable attraction of fixed terms from an employer's point of view is that they offer a possible means of cutting out statutory rights, if a number of conditions are met.
Thus:
1.
a fixed-term contract for one year or more entered into from 1 October 1980 can include an agreement in writing by you to exclude any claim that you may have for unfair dismissal, where your dismissal consists only of the expiry of the term;
2.
a fixed-term contract for two years or more entered into from 6 December 1965 can include an agreement in writing by you to exclude any claim that you may have for state redundancy pay, where your dismissal consists only of the expiry of the term.
Such exclusions need not be contained in the original contract document, but you must agree to them in writing before the term expires for them to be legally effective.
In any event, they only relate to non-renewal of the contract when it runs out.
They do not apply if your 
Working Overseas
Special problems
The prospect of working overseas is attractive to many people.
Before you accept a seemingly glamorous offer of a job abroad, however, it is important to pay careful attention to a number of legal and practical points.
In particular you need to face up to the reality that you are likely to have fewer employment rights than a colleague based in the UK.
The rights that you do possess may be tricky to enforce.
If difficulties do arise during your time abroad, you may feel isolated and vulnerable to pressure both from local management and head office.
Your aim should be to make sure that your agreed deal addresses the questions that are most likely to arise.
But you have to be realistic.
There is a big difference between the terms that you may be able to negotiate with, say, a US company seeking to recruit you to work in the Middle East and those offered by, say, a West German company offering a job at their headquarters, for which you are competing with a West German national.
In the latter case, if you try to drive too hard a bargain, you may find that the offer is withdrawn.
Which legal system applies?
A well-drafted agreement will normally include a provision, known as a ‘proper law’ or ‘governing law’, which is along the following lines: ‘This agreement shall be interpreted and enforced in accordance with the Laws of England.’
Normally, this stipulation is tucked away towards the end of the contract.
The wording may look innocuous, but it is of vital importance.
If your agreement is to be interpreted in accordance with English law, you will be able to take advice on its contents from your English lawyer.
If the law of an overseas country applies, however, you would be wise to consult a lawyer familiar with the legal system of that country.
The guidance given in this book applies to contracts governed by English law.
If the contract does not specify the ‘proper law’, tricky questions can arise.
The basic principle under English law is that the law which the parties intend to apply will govern the agreement.
In assessing that intention, the courts will take into account the connection that the contract and the parties have with a particular country.
Even so, the mere fact that an employee is English, his contract is written in English and his salary is payable in pounds sterling will not always be decisive.
These factors were present in the agreement considered in the case of Sayers v International Drilling Co NV (1971).
However, the employer was a Dutch company which used the same form of contract to employ Europeans of various nationalities for work outside the UK.
The court decided that Dutch law applied.
The only safe course, therefore, is to make sure that the contract clearly states which legal regime applies to your employment.
Do you lose your statutory rights?
A majority of overseas workers are disqualified from the employment protection rights laid down in UK legislation.
The precise formula for working out who is eligible depends upon the legal entitlement in question.
The most important is the right not to be unfairly dismissed, from which employees who ordinarily work outside Great Britain are excluded.
But what does ‘ordinarily’ mean?
The difficulties of interpreting the law are shown by a number of cases that have arisen.
In Wilson v Maynard Ship Building Consultants AB (1977) a staff consultant was employed by a Swedish company from July 1973 until his dismissal in September 1975.
He had a written employment contract, but it did not refer to his place of work.
It had been agreed that in effect he was to work as required in any country in which his employers had contracts.
The evidence was that he had worked in the UK for 40 weeks and in Italy for 50 weeks.
The Court of Appeal rejected the view that had previously held sway, namely that it was possible for any employee to work both ordinarily in Great Britain and outside it.
It must, said the judges, be one or the other.
A number of principles for ascertaining where an employee ‘ordinarily’ works were suggested.
First, you should examine what the terms of your contract require rather than what actually happened during the existence of that contract.
Suppose, for example, you are employed for three years, of which the first is to be spent abroad and the other two in Great Britain.
If you are dismissed at the end of your first year, concentrating on the terms of the contract leads to the conclusion that you ordinarily worked in Great Britain, whereas looking at what actually happened leads to the opposite conclusion.
Second, if your employer has discretion as to where you should work, the usual approach in law is to ask what your base is, as indicated by the contract terms.
In the absence of special factors, the base is likely to be the place where you ordinarily work, even though in fact you spend more time away from your base than you do there.
Finally, in determining your base, all relevant contractual terms should be examined.
These might include terms defining your headquarters, indicating where travel involved in your job begins and ends, where and in what currency you are to be paid and whether or not you are obliged to pay UK National Insurance contributions.
These general principles were subsequently considered in Todd v British Midland Airways Ltd (1978).
The employee was an airline pilot employed by a company established in Great Britain, but he spent just over half his flying days outside Great Britain.
Following the approach suggested in the Wilson case, the Court of Appeal held that the pilot was eligible for unfair dismissal rights.
However, it was said that looking at the employee's base was not the be-all and end-all.
The base was merely one of the factors which should normally be considered.
Lord Denning expressed the view that, in any event, in ascertaining where the base was, the contract terms were often of little help and ‘you have to go by the conduct of the parties and the way they have been operating the contract’.
A third Court of Appeal decision,Janata Bank v Ahmed (1981), has also suggested that the question of one's base should not assume overriding importance.
Mr Ahmed commenced work in Bangladesh in 1972.
He was soon posted to England and then for a short period to Brussels before leaving the Bank in 1975.
The Court of Appeal concluded that he ordinarily worked outside Great Britain and was therefore unable to pursue an unfair dismissal claim.
Despite the fact that he had worked for most of the period of his contract in England, lived in England, was paid in English currency and paid National Insurance contributions in the UK, he was at all times liable to be recalled to Dhaka.
Nevertheless, it is still useful to ask what your base is.
And even if you lose your statutory job rights for a period while working abroad, you may regain them if you return to work in this country.
This possibility arises from the complex statutory definition of your period of ‘continuous employment’.
Almost certainly, you will benefit from taking expert professional advice on the extent of your statutory rights, should you wish to attempt to take advantage of them.
Protecting your position
If you are planning to work overseas for an organisation with which you are not very familiar, it makes sense to check that they are a bona fide , reputable organisation with a good track record of treating executive employees fairly.
Even if that is confirmed, it is often unwise not to seek additional safeguards in your contract.
The kind of protection that you may require depends to some extent on the status of your employer.
There are three main possibilities:
1.
you may be employed by a UK company to work abroad;
2.
you may work for an overseas subsidiary of a UK company;
3.
your employer may be based principally or wholly overseas.
Parent company guarantees
Joining an overseas subsidiary, for example, carries potential risks.
The business might one day be sold off, wound up or nationalised by the host government.
The danger is that your rights of legal redress in such cases will be limited or non-existent in practice.
When your job ends, you may have to return to the UK.
Even if the subsidiary is still in existence, you will find that conducting litigation from a distance is extremely troublesome, however viable your claim appears to be on paper.
With this in mind, it is often worth seeking some form of guarantee from the parent company.
Naturally, some parent companies are reluctant to give sweeping guarantees, but the arguments in favour of them are strong from the expatriate's point of view, especially if he is being asked to transfer from the parent to a less substantial overseas subsidiary.
If a guarantee is to be given, the best approach is for the parent company to become a party to your contract and it is desirable for the document to be under seal.
Naturally, the form of guarantee that is appropriate varies from case to case.
A typical formula provides that the parent company  will indemnify an expatriate against any loss or expense he may suffer as a result of a breach of contract by the subsidiary, for instance if the employment is terminated before the expiry of a specified fixed term.
The guarantee should provide the expatriate with a direct claim against the parent which is enforceable in the most convenient (usually English) courts.
Again, it is essential to seek legal advice on the precise wording to be used.
Repatriation provisions
Clearly, you may face serious difficulties if your employment overseas is brought to an end before the anticipated date.
The tax consequences, for instance, may prove disastrous.
Ideally, your contract will provide that you will be guaranteed receipt of the same sum net of UK tax if you unexpectedly have to pay that tax.
Realistically, however, only a limited number of employers are likely to agree to a potentially costly and open-ended liability of that sort.
Less ambitiously, you might ask your employer to agree to repatriate you, together with your family and possessions, free of charge, if your job ends prematurely for any reason, except perhaps if you have been dismissed for misconduct.
A problem arises with some deals of this kind.
If your employment ends because of, say, revolution overseas, the contract may be regarded as frustrated, ie completely brought to an end by operation of law, because it is no longer possible for the contractual duties to be performed as you and your employer originally envisaged.
In that event, an obligation to repatriate could be legally nullified.
One imaginative solution is for a UK-based parent or associate of the overseas employer to guarantee repatriation as a separate and binding legal obligation.
Miscellaneous provisions
A wide range of other matters needs to be considered.
While it is not possible to provide an exhaustive check-list, the following matters are especially relevant.
Salary, taxation etc
Your contract should clearly state the currency in which your salary is to be calculated and also the currency and place of pay.
You will need to consider whether the suggested currency is strong enough in the context of anticipated fluctuations in the exchange rate.
You must also take into account any local exchange control regulations, the effect of which may make it sensible for the contract to stipulate that part of your salary shall be credited to you elsewhere.
You need to check on the tax position.
A major attraction of working overseas may be the chance to escape from UK income tax.
To achieve this, you have to serve a qualifying period overseas.
Does the agreement cover this adequately?
You should also bear in mind that social security payments might be higher abroad.
If so, will your employer reimburse you?
Relocation
If you have to sell your present home, it is worth asking for your relocation costs, including estate agency fees and legal expenses, to be borne by your employer.
Some employers insist that if an employee leaves the job for any reason within a specified time limit after moving overseas, all or part of the relocation expenses must be repaid.
You need to give careful thought to any such stipulation before accepting it.
Your travel expenses, and those of your spouse and children if appropriate, should normally be borne by your employer.
If you are to live in rented accommodation or a hotel while finding somewhere more permanent to live in your new domicile, your employer may be willing to be responsible for those costs.
Complete reimbursement is obviously more attractive than a contribution of a fixed amount.
Ongoing expenses
You are likely to incur a variety of additional expenses by virtue of your move overseas.
You may therefore wish your employer to agree to pay some or all of the following:
1.
travel home at agreed intervals for yourself, your spouse and your children;
2.
additional school fees if your children have to remain in the UK
3.
costs of medical and dental treatment overseas;
4.
costs of air-conditioning and other utilities in your accommodation;
5.
language tuition, if necessary.
What is appropriate will, naturally, vary from job to job and from country to country.
Your overall objective should be to ensure that a deal that at first sight looks attractive is not, in the long run, undermined because you have to expend significant additional sums in order to maintain a reasonable life-style abroad and fulfil your duties adequately.
Coping with Change
The need for flexibility
So much is at stake when you start a job that you owe it to yourself to think all the implications through.
Is the deal right?
Has it been accurately recorded?
The easy option, of course, is to sign whatever ‘company standard’ agreement is put before you.
It takes nerve to haggle over the small print if you are told that your new colleagues have worked under similar terms for years without batting an eyelid.
Even so, at the very least you ought to make sure that you understand fully what you are committing yourself to before deciding whether you can afford not to press for the document to be amended.
Try gazing into your crystal ball.
What problems might arise in the future?
The preceding chapters have outlined many of the likely areas of difficulty.
Once you have identified the points that are going to be crucial in your particular job, you may have to be persuasive if you want improved safeguards built into your agreement.
How successful you are in sorting matters out to your satisfaction will depend partly on your bargaining strength.
Naturally, the company's resources will be greater than yours.
Merely by having a contract designed to protect the interests of the business already prepared, your employer may seize the initiative in any negotiations.
But if you can offer talents that are in short supply, you may be better able to extract concessions than you suppose.
Once suitable terms have been settled and, one hopes, clearly and concisely set out in a signed agreement, you will be in a position to give the job your undivided attention, secure in the knowledge that you have created the right conditions for job survival.
Above all, it is a fundamental principle of English law that a contract cannot be varied unilaterally.
Consent to change is required.
It would be a mistake, though, to be complacent once the deal has finally been done.
You still need to be prepared to cope with crises arising in the years to come.
Industry does not stand still and the trend nowadays is for employers to expect their employees to respond positively to the demands of the enterprise.
If you are intransigent, or are determined to stick to the letter of your contract come what may, you could be in for a rude awakening.
The reality is that having a comprehensive and fairly-balanced service agreement is a tremendous advantage to any executive, but it is not in itself enough.
Ultimately, your personal qualities are most important.
If job security is what you seek, then besides setting your agreement down in black and white, you should strive to be well organised, willing to discuss your grievances rather than bottling them up and prepared to react flexibly if circumstances change.
Keeping a job file
Your employer will have a personnel file containing a potted history of your career with the company.
Why not do likewise and build up your own record of your progress within the organisation?
What goes into that file is up to you.
It is useful to start with a copy of the advertisement which originally caught your eye, for the reasons mentioned in Chapter 1.
Your application, CV, letter of appointment and job description all deserve to be kept, as well as any document containing contract terms or rules and procedures which affect you directly or indirectly.
For later reference, preserve any written job appraisal forms.
It is even a good idea to hold on to congratulatory memos (perhaps appended to slips telling you of pay increases) or any other correspondence which might at some distant date help you to defend yourself against unfair criticisms of your capabilities.
It might also be prudent to make notes of any conversations which have a major bearing on your status or prospects and retain them in your job file.
Even if you just use them as memory joggers, they could prove invaluable if there is ever a quarrel about who actually said what and when.
Constructive dismissal cases (examined in Chapter 15) provide a good example of situations in which it is vital to have evidence of conduct on your employer's part which you find objectionable.
Executives who can produce a reliable ‘diary of events’ to a court or tribunal often fare better than those who cannot.
But do not go too far.
Some executives think it is a good idea to make secret tape recordings of sensitive discussions with managers  whom they are reluctant to trust.
Occasionally — leaving any ethical questions aside — taped evidence can help to settle a point in dispute.
On the whole, though, the cases in which covert taping of conversations plays a decisive part are few.
Taping — secret or not — is very much a last resort.
Talking about problems
There is plenty of truth in the cliche that a trouble shared is a trouble halved.
It may help to get an apparently overwhelming worry into perspective if you feel that you can talk about it to your superiors.
The thinking behind the requirement that a statutory statement of terms should include a note dealing with the in-house grievance procedure is that many hiccups in the working relationship are best cured through level-headed discussion.
If you fall foul of your immediate superior for some reason, you may find that if you raise the matter with his boss, the problem can be resolved.
In a well-run company there will be no question of simply rubber-stamping management decisions when a grievance or appeal is pursued.
All the same, it would be naive not to recognize that there are cases where executives are not going to achieve much without the assistance of detached yet sympathetic support from someone based outside the organisation.
If the problem is serious or you feel you cannot be confident of an impartial assessment of your complaint from the key men in the corporate hierarchy, you will probably need to turn elsewhere.
Advice is available from many quarters.
A solicitor well versed in employment law or a freelance personnel expert may be able to help, although you will be charged for their services and you need to be sure that they have a feet-on-the-ground approach in addition to technical competence.
There is an increasing tendency for cautious executives to obtain legal expenses insurance so that cost will not prove an obstacle if they ever need to call upon professional help.
There are a number of good policies on the market nowadays and several insurance companies offer a hot-line consultancy service by way of practical support.
But taking out your own cover may not be necessary if you belong to a trade association which offers its members the benefit of confidential advice if they run into difficulties at work.
You may also be able to exchange ideas with fellow members who have, perhaps, encountered similar problems in the past.
Making use of government-funded resources may be worth considering.
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) offers practical assistance and you may find that a telephone call is enough to set your mind at rest.
Although a branch of the Civil Service, ACAS aims for a pragmatic, not bureaucratic approach, and a number of ACAS officers have spent time working in industry.
If you think that you have suffered as a result of sex or race discrimination, the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Commission for Racial Equality are in a position not only to advise but also, if appropriate, to give financial backing if there is no viable alternative to mounting a legal challenge to your employer's behaviour.
Changes within the scope of your contract
No deal lasts for ever and not even the most skilful draftsman can cater for every eventuality when drawing up a service contract.
If you are at some stage asked to undertake tasks with which you are unfamiliar, your starting point should be to ascertain whether you are, impliedly , obliged to do what is wanted.
For example, the question could be prompted by the introduction of new technology.
The computer revolution may have a significant effect upon the way in which you are able to perform your job.
The courts do not encourage Luddism.
Inland Revenue employees discovered this when they took a claim — that the Revenue's requirement that they transfer from manual methods to using a computerised system was in breach of contract — to the High Court.
Although the content of some of the jobs in question had altered considerably, the degree of that alteration was not sufficient to fall outside the original description of the proper function of the grade concerned.
The judgment in this case,Cresswell and others v Board of Inland Revenue (1984), contained robust comment on the need to move with the times:
There really can be no doubt as to the fact than an  employee is expected to adapt himself to new methods and techniques introduced in the course of his employment…
Of course in a proper case the employer must provide any necessary training…
It will, in all cases, be a question of pure fact as to whether the re-training involves the acquisition of such esoteric skills that it would not be reasonable to expect the employee to acquire them.
.. It can  hardly be considered that to ask an employee to acquire basic skills as to retrieving information from a computer…is something in the slightest esoteric or even, nowadays, unusual.
Refusing to change
If your employer's requirements do involve a change in the terms of your employment contract, you should think carefully before declining to agree.
Although you cannot be forced to accept a variation in the agreement, your job may be at risk if you stand on your rights.
This is because it is possible to dismiss fairly for a refusal to accept change.
The case of R S Components Ltd v Irwin (1974) affords a classic example of how that may occur.
The company manufactured electrical components and suffered serious competition from ex-employees who set up in business themselves and poached the company's customers.
Profits declined and salesmen's commission dropped.
The company therefore said that salesmen must agree to a new restrictive covenant which barred them from soliciting customers for up to a year after leaving.
Mr Irwin and three of his colleagues would not agree and were sacked.
Their unfair dismissal claims failed.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal considered that there was a potentially fair reason for the dismissals and that the employer had in fact handled the matter fairly, adding:
…it is not difficult to imagine a case where it would be essential for employers embarking for example on a new technical process to invite existing employees to agree to some reasonable restriction on their use of the knowledge they acquire of the new technique; and where it would be essential for the employer to terminate, by due notice, the services of an employee who was unwilling to accept such a restriction.
Thus it is clear that if the change is a realistic one and the company is justifiably convinced that it must be imposed, you will be extremely vulnerable if you do not fall in line.
As a result, you may have little practical alternative but to agree to increased working hours or to work in a different area, despite the fact that the contract does not provide for such things, if they are commercially necessary from the point of view of the business.
Indeed, there have been decisions in which management's right to reorganise in a way contrary to the explicit terms of employee's contracts has been interpreted even more liberally.
This was so in Hollister v National Farmers' Union (1979).
The Union reorganised at the request of, and for the benefit of, its employees.
Nevertheless, Mr Hollister resisted because, although his remuneration was improved, his previous rights were reduced.
He was therefore sacked.
The Court of Appeal held that his dismissal was fair and that it was not vitiated by a failure to consult him over the reorganisation.
Even if a failure to implement the reorganisation would not bring the business to a standstill, dismissal for a failure to conform with it might be fair if there was ‘some sound, good business reason for the reorganisation’.
Such a principle can apply equally to a constructive dismissal; see Chapter 15.
Fortunately, tribunals do not altogether ignore the interests of the affected employee when adjudicating upon the fairness or otherwise of a company's actions.
Whether or not the advantages to the business of imposing a change outweigh the disadvantages to the employee is one of the factors which should be taken into account.
It seems, though, that even if you are being reasonable in refusing to agree to a change, that does not necessarily mean that it is unfair to push the change through and dismiss you because of your reluctance to go along with it.
A tribunal will look at all the relevant facts before making up its mind.
So you need to be well aware of the possible implications of continued resistance.
A change of employer
The arrival of new management can create tensions within any work-force.
Chapter 9 looks at the familiar problem of personality clashes.
Even more serious may be the effect of a take-over of the business that you work for.
We saw in Chapter 3 that the law now offers you some protection if there is a ‘transfer of undertaking’, although not if there is a mere sale of shareholding control.
Instead of being made redundant when the ownership of your employer changes hands, you are nowadays automatically transferred to work for the purchaser.
Nevertheless, you may still lose your job because of the take-over or for a reason connected with it.
If so, whether you work for the buyer or the seller, you will be able to complain of unfair dismissal, subject to the normal eligibility rule outlined in Chapter 20.
If the only or main reason for your being sacked was an ‘economic, technical or organisational’ one, entailing changes in the work-force — the vague Euro-jargon of the 1981 Regulations is a  reminder that they were inspired by an EC Directive — your claim will not succeed if you have been treated in a reasonable manner.
Otherwise, the dismissal will, under special rules, be regarded as automatically unfair.
Suffice it to say that such is the complexity of this area of the law that one case on the subject, discussed in Chapter 13, has already reached the House of Lords; it is unlikely to be the last.
Personality Clashes and Discrimination
Conflicts at work
Unless you are very easy-going and also fortunate, you are bound sooner or later to meet someone through your job whom you find it impossible to like.
Normally, you will be able to agree to disagree when necessary, but if conflicting attitudes spill over into lasting antagonism, then you are heading for trouble.
You should bend over backwards to avoid bitter personal rows and the holding of grudges.
Whether your clash is with a colleague, superior or customer, allowing it to develop into a trial of strength could in the end seriously jeopardise your career.
Sometimes, alas, you will have little control over the matter.
In particular, you may gain the impression that you are being victimised because of what you are, rather than because of who you are.
Even in these supposedly progressive times, you might be passed over for promotion or unkindly treated because of your sex or racial origins.
If that happens, you may wish to exercise the rights that Parliament has granted to victims of discrimination to make a complaint to an industrial tribunal.
There is often much to be said for trying to sort the matter out by pursuing your rights under your company's grievance procedure.
If it is possible to put your point of view frankly to an impartial and sympathetic individual, it may be that the difficulties that have arisen can be resolved without the need for drastic action on anyone's part.
Incompatible individuals
Fellow employees
If you fall out with someone in your own office or factory, the working  atmosphere may become intolerable, not just for the two of you, but also for your colleagues.
You should not let a rift with a subordinate widen to such an extent; to do so will probably call your managerial qualities into question.
Conversely, if you have a serious disagreement with your boss, it could so adversely affect your standing in the firm that you may decide you would be better off elsewhere.
If your superiors get wind that you are feuding with a fellow employee, they may intervene in the hope of sorting the problem out.
Obviously, it is sensible to co-operate with them.
The ultimate sanction may be for them to sack the person whom they regard as being mainly to blame.
For this to be fair, they should investigate the conflict in depth, trying to persuade the parties to bury the hatchet and work constructively together.
In short, a mere breakdown in a working relationship does not in itself justify dismissal unless, after a reasonable attempt to effect a reconciliation, it is found to be beyond remedy.
Outsiders
It would be galling to lose your job because of a dispute with a customer or client, when your employer regards you as a capable performer, but this can occur if somehow you offend a person or organisation whose business is valuable to your company.
Again, a fair employer should look thoroughly into the background and, by way of discussion, try to achieve an amicable solution.
Yet if the customer is adamant that you must go and you cannot be fitted into another niche where you would have no contact with him, you may be vulnerable to dismissal.
For action of this kind to be fair, the risk that you may suffer an injustice should be considered before a final decision is taken.
So said the Court of Appeal in Dobie v Burns International Security Services (UK) Ltd (1984), a case in which the employer's services were governed by a contract with a local authority that gave the council the right ‘to approve or otherwise the employment or continued employment of any member of the company’.
Mr Dobie was dismissed at the behest of an agent of the council.
The Court of Appeal indicated that, in circumstances like these, factors to be taken into account include:
1.
your length of service;
2.
whether your job performance and attitude have been satisfactory over the years;
3.
the difficulties that you may encounter in obtaining alternative employment.
Sexual harassment
Until a few years ago, the existence of sexual harassment as a genuine problem in many businesses was scarcely acknowledged.
In 1977, though, Lord Justice Lawton included in a list of examples of conduct that could amount to constructive dismissal ‘persistent and unwanted amorous advances by an employer to a female employee’.
One bizarre early case that reached the law reports concerned the lesbian harassment of a young woman by her employer's wife.
More recently, there has been a flood of more conventional sexual harassment claims brought by women, including women occupying executive roles in large companies; this is by no means exclusively a problem of women on the factory floor or in the typing pool who have reacted adversely to what their male colleagues and superiors may have tried to excuse as ‘a bit of harmless fun’.
No one has yet formulated an entirely comprehensive definition of sexual harassment, but the key components of such conduct are that it is sexual in nature and unwanted.
A victim (and in theory he could be male, although no man has yet, apparently, pursued a sexual harassment claim through the courts) can leave and complain of unfair constructive dismissal but will often prefer to keep the option of staying on in the job and bringing a sex discrimination claim instead.
Furthermore, a claim of discrimination can be brought by someone who lacks the necessary qualifying service for unfair dismissal rights.
Such an action succeeded in Strathclyde Regional Council v Porcelli (1986).
A female employee was offensively treated by two male colleagues, but at first her claim was rejected because the industrial tribunal felt that, had she been a man, she would still have been harassed, although the specific nature of the unpleasantness might have been different.
Rejecting that conclusion, the Scottish Court of Session said that if the unfavourable treatment included a significant sexual element to which a person of the opposite sex would not have been vulnerable, that amounted to discrimination.
Sex and race discrimination
More than a decade after the introduction of legislation against sex or race discrimination, it remains true that only a minority of senior  business executives are women or members of racial minority groups.
There are no doubt many reasons for this; one of them is that unspoken, perhaps sometimes subconscious, prejudice remains deeply ingrained in many management structures.
Despite that, surprisingly few complaints about discrimination are made to industrial tribunals each year.
Even fewer succeed and the average level of compensation in those cases is just a few hundred pounds.
Small wonder, perhaps, that claims are seldom made by people who enjoy executive status.
Nevertheless, the topic is undeniably an important one and it is worth sketching in the legal rules.
Discrimination on the basis of sex or race may be direct or indirect.
You are directly discriminated against if treated less favourably than a person of the opposite sex is or would be treated, or if you are treated less favourably on racial grounds.
Indirect sex discrimination occurs where you have to comply with a requirement which is, or would be, applied equally to a person of the opposite sex, but:
1.
which is such that the proportion of members of your sex who can comply is considerably smaller than the corresponding proportion of members of the opposite sex;
2.
which is to your detriment because you cannot comply with it; and
3.
which cannot be shown to be justifiable irrespective of the person to whom it is applied.
Similarly, indirect race discrimination occurs when a person applies a requirement which he applies or would apply to persons of a different racial group but:
(a)
which is such that the proportion of people of the victim's racial group who can comply is considerably smaller than the proportion of the people not of that group who can comply;
(b)
which is to the detriment of the victim because he or she cannot comply with it; and
(c)
which cannot be shown to be justifiable irrespective of the colour, race, nationality or ethnic origins of the person to whom it is applied.
The statutory framework is supported by Codes of Practice issued by the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Commission for Racial Equality.
If you feel that you have been discriminated against, it may be a good idea to contact whichever of those two bodies is appropriate for further guidance.
Criticisms of Your Job Performance
Is anything wrong?
Judging one's own strengths and weaknesses is far from easy.
However self-critical you may be — and some executives set themselves standards of achievement which are unrealistically high, rather than too low — there is usually much to be gained from learning the views of others about your capabilities.
Listening to a balanced, impartial opinion, even if it contains an element of constructive criticism of certain aspects of your work, should help you to make the most of your potential.
Many companies operate regular job appraisals, often on an annual basis.
An endless variety of approaches is adopted.
Assessment methods range from the formal and sophisticated to the haphazard.
Large organisations with substantial personnel management resources tend to grade employees each year, arranging in-depth discussions and permitting appeals against adverse markings.
They see this as a way of helping to ensure that their employees do not get a raw deal — for example, when candidates for promotion are being compared.
You may be encouraged to formulate a job plan which goes beyond the scope of your basic job description, itemising a series of personal objectives for the year ahead.
This is often a useful exercise, although there is occasionally a risk that the emphasis upon paperwork becomes so great that everyone loses sight of what was originally intended.
It is best to concentrate upon essentials and for forms to be used mainly as aides-mémoire .
In smaller businesses, job reviews may only take place when the time comes to decide on salary increases and there might be little consultation with the majority of members of staff.
An extreme  example of hit-or-miss judgment on performance occurred in Payne v Spook Erection Ltd (1984) where a company established a weekly ‘merit table’ in which workers were assessed largely by guesswork.
A foreman who became disenchanted with this system and reluctant to apply it was fired; predictably, his unfair dismissal claim succeeded.
An effective method of appraisal will benefit both you and the business.
It gives everyone an opportunity to take stock.
If you can be confident that the person in charge is both perceptive and fair, the review meeting should be something to welcome, not to dread.
You have nothing to gain from staying in the dark about what your superiors really think of your job performance.
On the contrary, a company that does not keep an eye on how its employees are functioning is probably itself being badly run.
A worthwhile appraisal will involve more than a mere pronouncement on the quality of your recent work, a pat on the head or a kick on the backside as the case may be.
There ought to be scope for feedback, a chance for you to express whatever thoughts or concerns you may have at the time.
Dialogue, not a monologue, is called for.
You should, of course, be judged in relation to what you are employed, and reasonably expected, to do, not by any other touchstone.
So, to take one illustration from the law reports, if you are the company's assistant accountant, it could be unfair to dismiss you for alleged lack of management ability if that has no real bearing on your daily tasks.
You need to know what is required of you.
Once again, the desirability of clear terms of contract, coupled perhaps with an unambiguous job description, is plain.
Complaints
Any significant criticisms made of you deserve careful attention.
You may, for example, have a powerful defence to a vague statement that your work leaves something to be desired.
What evidence is there that you are not living up to the appropriate standards?
Of course, the quality of an executive is not always easily defined.
But a mere ‘gut feeling’ on the part of your superiors that you fall short of what is expected, when they cannot put their fingers on what is wrong, is not really good enough.
Executives sometimes find that, on close inspection, the complaints made against them are misconceived.
In a simple case, a salesman's failure to achieve normal and apparently realistic targets might be due to a change in the size or nature of his territory or other factors which are entirely beyond his personal control.
A finance director challenged about the emergence of unexpected  cash flow problems may be able to point out that they are due to invoicing delays caused by the breakdown of a new computer system, purchased and installed without sufficient thought and against his advice.
Difficulties may arise if your company has recently undergone a change in top management, perhaps following a take-over of the business.
If, after a previously unblemished career, you are taken to task, it may be that your superiors' requirements are unrealistic or that you have not yet been given sufficient time to adjust to the style of the new regime.
Another possibility is that you may be treated inconsistently.
It may be extremely hard for your employer to justify a poor grading at assessment time when earlier in the year you received a letter from the chairman specifically thanking and praising you for your efforts.
You may also be able to refer back to a recent rise in merit pay or bonus in your response.
Baffling contradictions in the attitude of management happen more often that one might imagine.
When they occur, you will be glad that you kept a record of your continuing achievements in your job file.
Even when there is a grain or more of truth in a criticism, you may not be wholly or, indeed, mainly to blame.
In order to give of your best, you need:
1.
adequate training in up-to-date working practices;
2.
wholehearted co-operation from your colleagues;
3.
consistent support from your superiors.
If one or more of these features is missing from your working life, you should make it known and strive to ensure that management is committed to improving matters.
Opportunities to improve
Employees who perform poorly can be fairly dismissed.
An employer should not, however, react excessively or too soon if you make a mistake.
Giving you a fair deal means that he should follow a reasonable procedure before taking a final decision that you must part company.
This means that, having discussed the problems with you, he should make you aware of the consequences of a continuing failure to live up to expectations and give you an opportunity to demonstrate an improvement.
While what he says may not add up to a warning in the strict disciplinary sense, you should be left in no doubt about where you stand.
It is impossible to lay down hard and fast rules as to what constitutes a realistic improvement period.
No case is likely to be identical in all respects with another.
Relevant factors will include:
1.
the nature of your job;
2.
your length of service;
3.
your seniority;
4.
your past record.
Useful guidance of a general nature can be found in the ACAS handbook Discipline at Work , and the law reports provide numerous examples of the way in which the courts and tribunals have dealt with specific cases.
About 15 years ago, three months was considered to be sufficient time for a sales director with two years' service to convince his company of his competence.
Yet not too long afterwards, it was suggested that for a salesman with 20 years' continuous employment, three years was an appropriate improvement period; many would think that to be erring on the high side.
Whatever length of time is given, though, it will be difficult for an employer to justify dismissing you on the grounds of lack of skills or basic ability within that time unless something exceptional happens.
One curious issue is the different view taken by different courts of the significance of an employee's seniority.
One judge has said that:
those employed in senior management may by the nature of their jobs be fully aware of what is required of them and fully capable of judging for themselves whether they are achieving that requirement.
In such circumstances the need for warning and an opportunity to improve are much less apparent.
This contrasts with the statement in another case that:
when you have a man…in a managerial capacity, there is a greater obligation on the employer to take preliminary steps to bring to the manager's notice that he, the employer, is contemplating a possible dismissal.
There is unanimity, though, that normally you must understand that your job is in jeopardy and have the chance to improve your standards before it will be fair to sack you.
Special problems
Gross negligence
If your inadequacy is so serious that, to use one phrase from the case law, there is an ‘irredeemable incapability’, so that being given a  warning and an opportunity to mend your ways would simply be a waste of time and might put the business at risk, it may be just to dismiss you as soon as the full extent of your failings comes to light.
In practice, this principle should not often be relevant in the case of experienced executives.
If you were so evidently inept, why did the company see fit to give you the job in the first place?
Disastrous errors
There are some high-risk jobs in which an employer dare not continue to employ a person who makes a mistake because the effect of a repetition could be horrific.
In this connection, it has been pointed out that:
The passenger-carrying airline pilot, the scientist operating the nuclear reactor, the chemist in charge of research into the possible effects of, for example, Thalidomide, the driver of the Manchester to London express, the driver of an articulated lorry full of sulphuric acid, are all in a position in which one failure to maintain the proper standard of professional skill can bring about a major disaster.
The illustrations can, of course, be multiplied, but it is important to bear in mind that such cases are exceptional.
Most errors have much less dramatic consequences.
Intransigence
An employer complaining about your performance ought to behave reasonably.
Similarly, you should react in a sensible manner.
If you feel upset by an apparent unfairness, pursue the matter through the grievance procedure.
At all costs avoid adopting a pig-headed attitude.
If you are unnecessarily intransigent, you may be jeopardising your career.
Lord Denning is among those who have emphasised that fair play may not always require that you be given a warning and time to improve if you refuse to acknowledge blatant fault on your part:
In some cases, it may be proper and reasonable to dismiss at once, especially with a man who is determined to go his own way.
Foolish pride can carry a high price tag.
Over-promotion
Laurence J Peter's famous Principle states that:
In a hierarchy every employee tends to rise to his level of incompetence... in time every post tends to be occupied by an employee who is incompetent to carry out its duties.
While that may be an exaggeration, there is no doubt that some promotions do fail to work out, even where there is no shortage of training, supervision and support.
If you are unfortunate enough not to make the grade in a new and elevated position, you do not have an automatic right to return to your old job, although in a minority of cases you may be able to negotiate an agreement that this should happen.
You should, of course, still be treated fairly and this may entail your employer looking round his organisation, perhaps even the whole corporate group of which he is part, to see if you can be fitted in elsewhere at an appropriate level, before finally deciding to terminate your employment.
You may well, in the circumstances, be willing to take a step backwards rather than lose your job.
Can you be sued?
If a mistake on your part costs your employer money, could he seek to recover his losses by taking you to court?
The Court of Appeal made it clear in Janata Bank v Ahmed (1981) that this is certainly a possibility.
Even if nothing is said specifically, there is an implied term in your employment contract that you owe a duty to exercise reasonable care and skill in carrying out your job.
A High Court judgment ordering Mr Ahmed, a former assistant general manager of a bank, to compensate his former employers to the tune of more than £30,000 in respect of losses caused by his negligence, was therefore upheld.
Before you have too many sleepless nights, it is worth noting Lord Justice Ackner's comment that, in practice, employers are more likely to use the sanction of dismissal than a High Court writ.
He added:
There is after all no point in throwing good money after bad, and the need to maintain harmonious industrial relations is likely to be considered of greater importance than achieving a barren judgment.
Sickness and Absence From Work
The risks
Many employers keep a close eye on absence levels.
If you are away from work for a lengthy period, or for short spells at frequent intervals, your job may be at risk.
If you suffer from ill health, your prospects for a speedy recovery could be harmed by added worry about your employment position.
So it helps to know where you stand legally.
Check your contract; it may have something to say on the subject of absence.
Service agreements sometimes include a provision entitling the company to dismiss in the event of long-term incapacity.
Clause 9(d) in the sample agreement in Appendix 1 is a typical example.
But even if the contract specifically caters for termination in defined circumstances, you should still be vigilant to ensure that you are given a fair deal.
The ACAS handbook Discipline at Work again gives helpful guidance.
The terms of any company sick pay scheme also need to be considered.
It is not, however, automatically unfair to dismiss an employee while he remains eligible for sick pay under the rules of the scheme.
Nor is it inevitably fair to dismiss someone once his rights pursuant to any such scheme are exhausted.
Occasionally, employers argue that a prolonged illness ‘frustrates’ the contract, so that the job comes to an end through operation of the law as a result of the unforeseen occurrence of the sickness, without there being a dismissal.
Guidelines in this area were laid down in the case of Marshall v Harland & Wolff Ltd (1972).
The following points are likely to be relevant:
1.
the terms of your contract;
2.
how long the employment was going to last in the absence of  sickness (a short-term contract is more likely to be frustrated than a job expected to last for the foreseeable future);
3.
the nature of the job — if it is a key post, frustration is more of a risk;
4.
the nature of the illness or injury, how long it has already continued and your prospects for recovery;
5.
your length of service.
A court or tribunal will be reluctant to conclude that your contract has been frustrated.
This is just as well, since such a decision will deprive you of the legal rights that you would have if you were dismissed.
Special cases
Disability
If you are registered as a disabled person, you are entitled to special consideration from your employer.
It will not be easy for him to justify dismissing you because of any lack of capability on your part where that could have been anticipated when you were originally offered the job.
The Disabled Persons Registration Act 1944 provides that a disabled person cannot be dismissed (unless there is ‘reasonable cause’ for so doing) if that would reduce the number of disabled workers in the business to below the fixed quota of 3 per cent.
The quota is ignored too often in British industry, but this stipulation does at least give you some extra security.
If, nevertheless, your job does come under threat, perhaps because you suffer disablement which makes fulfilling your original job description very difficult, it may be worth urging your employer to consider whether your duties can be revised so that you can cope and continue to make a worthwhile contribution to the success of the business.
The local Disablement Resettlement Officer may also be able to help with constructive advice.
Work-related ill health
Some working environments can cause or exacerbate illness or injury.
Fortunately, this is rare in the case of employees of executive status.
If such a problem does arise there is naturally a heavy onus on the company to rectify the adverse conditions, and dismissal for sickness absence should only be a last resort.
On the other hand, it might occasionally be fair to dismiss even if illness is just a risk.
This could happen in a high-stress job where the executive concerned has a history of heart trouble.
But in order to justify termination of your services on this basis, the employer would certainly have to go to great lengths to treat you in a caring and reasonable manner.
Pregnancy
It is unfair (and may also be sex discrimination) to dismiss a woman because she is pregnant, or for any other reason connected with her pregnancy, unless:
1.
at the dismissal date she is incapable because of her pregnancy of doing the work which she is employed to do; or
2.
she cannot after that date, and because of her pregnancy, continue to do that work without contravening a statute.
The law does not provide a definition of the phrase ‘any other reason connected with pregnancy’.
It is wide enough to be liberally interpreted and would cover pregnancy-related illness, miscarriages and abortions.
Even if one of the two exceptions applies, dismissal will still be unfair if at the time of the dismissal there was a suitable alternative vacancy which was not offered in accordance with the detailed requirements of the employment protection legislation.
Consultation and investigation
Having your say
Employers should avoid making snap decisions in cases of sickness absence.
If you are ultimately dismissed and present a claim to the industrial tribunal, the basic question will be whether, in all the circumstances, the employer could have been expected to wait any longer before taking positive action.
In order to strike a fair balance between protecting the company's commercial interests and behaving responsibly towards an unwell member of staff, management must obtain sufficient information about the medical position.
You should therefore be asked directly about your state of health.
Over the years, courts and tribunals have fought shy of laying down detailed procedural guidance.
They have pointed out that the correct approach will depend upon the particular facts involved.
The general underlying principle was stated by the Employment Appeal Tribunal in East Lindsay District Council v Daubney (1977):
Discussion and consultation will often bring to light facts…of which the employers were unaware, and which will throw new light on the problem.
Or the employee may wish to seek medical advice on his own account, which, brought to the notice of the employers' medical advisers, will cause them to change their opinion.
There are many possibilities.
Only one thing is certain, and that is that if the employee is not consulted, and given an opportunity to state his case, an injustice may be done.
Take advantage of any chance for discussion, especially if you are able to give your employer a date in the not too distant future when you realistically expect to be fit enough to resume work.
Medical opinions
Neither you nor your employer is likely to be a medical expert.
Yet while the ultimate decision on your future involves a fair assessment of the industrial realities rather than a precise medical diagnosis, the quotation above shows the importance of seeking a doctor's prognosis.
The answer that a doctor gives may depend upon the way in which the question is framed.
He might justifiably refuse to guarantee a full return to health in the near future yet still be prepared, if asked, to express a reasonable degree of confidence about your recovery prospects which should be enough to satisfy many employers.
You may lack confidence in the company doctor and, equally, the management may be sceptical about an encouraging report from your own GP.
The solution could be to arrange an independent examination.
In some cases, it may be necessary to call in a specialist.
No one can force you to undergo a medical examination (although if the contract provides for one, you will risk serious disciplinary action by refusing to comply with an order to go for a check-up).
Your employer should also explain to you your rights under the Access to Medical Reports Act 1988 — which include the right to refuse to allow disclosure of the report to him.
But before deciding not to co-operate, you should bear in mind that this could mean the company has to reach a decision on the basis of inadequate information.
You may suffer unnecessarily as a result if, for example, you are fairly dismissed on the available data when a thorough examination might have revealed that you would soon be fit again.
Inevitably, there are times when professionals disagree among themselves.
Your employer may be faced with conflicting advice if, for instance, the company doctor and your own take different views  of your condition.
Unfortunately, it may be legitimate for a company to make its decision on the strength of the opinion which is less favourable to you.
In such a case, the degree of risk involved in retaining you, both to the business and yourself, will be an important factor.
The decision
Your employer's reaction to your ill health will be governed by a variety of considerations, such as:
1.
the type of illness;
2.
how it was caused;
3.
its expected duration;
4.
the nature of your job;
5.
whether replacing you is an urgent commercial necessity;
6.
the effect of your absence on other employees;
7.
your length of service.
Because there are so many variables in the equation, it is inevitable that management has some discretion as to how much weight it attaches to any point in a particular case.
Even if it is not possible for you to return to your original duties in the near future, there may still be a part that you can usefully play in the organisation.
One practical point that might be worth talking over during the consultation process is whether there are any alternative posts for which you are suitable.
If retirement is not too far away, you might actually welcome the prospect of an easing of the pressure, while still contributing your experience and business know-how in a modified role.
Although companies are not expected to go to unreasonable lengths to accommodate someone who is not able to carry out his job to the full extent, an employer who disregards altogether the possibility of finding you some other position and is unwilling to consider any other form of compromise may be vulnerable to an unfair dismissal claim.
Persistent intermittent absenteeism
Where there is no chronic medical problem, poor attendance is less of a problem with executives than it is with junior employees.
It is worth mentioning, all the same, that a time will come when a frequent absentee can be fairly dismissed and that a failure to consult him at the time of dismissal will not necessarily mean that the company will be powerless to resist an unfair dismissal claim.
A clear statement of the key factors was made by the Employment Appeal Tribunal in International Sports Co Ltd v Thomson (1980):
It would be placing too heavy a burden on an employer to require him to carry out a formal medical investigation and, even if he did, such an investigation would rarely be fruitful because of the transient nature of the employee's symptoms and complaints.
What is required…is, firstly, that there should be a fair review by the employer of the attendance record and the reasons for it; and, secondly, appropriate warnings, after the employee has been given an opportunity to make representations.
If then there is no adequate improvement in the attendance record, it is likely that in most cases the employer will be justified in treating the persistent absences as a sufficient reason for dismissing the employee.
Maternity leave
A woman who has at least two years' service as at the beginning of the eleventh week prior to the expected week of confinement qualifies for maternity leave.
She must, however, comply with a number of detailed (and by no means straightforward) requirements contained within the Consolidation Act, which also stipulates precisely how she must exercise her right to return to work after the baby is born.
Suffice it to say here that the law in this area has been roundly condemned by the courts as being of ‘inordinate complexity exceeding the worst excesses of a taxing statute’.
An employer must allow a woman who has complied with the statutory procedures to return to her original job on terms and conditions no less favourable than those which would have applied if she had not been absent.
It need not be exactly the same work but must be of the same nature and capacity and at the same place.
If, as is becoming increasingly common, the contract gives a female executive maternity leave rights which are more generous than the minimum legal requirement, the employer must of course comply with those terms.
Maternity leave does not break one's period of continuous employment and indeed it counts as part of that period.
Thus the absence does not reduce accrued rights to redundancy pay or to notice entitlement.
A company which does not allow a woman to return to work after maternity leave is regarded (save in a few exceptional circumstances described in the small print of the legislation) as having dismissed her.
Such a dismissal is not automatically unfair, but in practice it will usually be so.
Disciplinary Complaints
The problem
Nothing is more likely to damage your career than an accusation of misconduct.
The best policy is to try not to be placed in a position where you risk serious criticism on account of your behaviour.
Familiarising yourself with your contractual duties and the company's rules and regulations is therefore an essential first step in the survival process.
It would be naive, though, to think that every disciplinary complaint is avoidable.
You may find yourself in dispute with management on what seems to you to be a fundamental point of principle.
Perhaps even worse, you might be subjected to a disciplinary inquiry when you believe that you have done nothing wrong.
If this happens, your job could still be just as much in jeopardy in the long run as that of an employee who has clearly and inexcusably committed an offence.
The law helps — at least up to a point — to make sure you get a fair deal if a disciplinary problem does arise.
Courts and tribunals acknowledge that you are entitled to ‘natural justice’, ie that:
1.
you should be told the details of the complaint against you;
2.
you should be given a chance to state your case
3.
your employer should act in good faith.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has said that it is impossible to itemise every circumstance that amounts to a breach of natural justice, while making it clear that, for example, a manager should not normally act both as ‘witness and judge’ in the procedure leading to a decision to dismiss.
Again, there is likely to be a serious breach of natural justice if a  manager, after hearing an employee's case at a disciplinary interview or appeal meeting, has a private discussion with the person who presented the case on behalf of the company, or with a witness, before reaching his decision.
To act in such a way is wrong because the employee may be denied a full opportunity to respond to every point being made against him.
Practical guidelines on the way in which an allegation of misconduct ought to be handled are available in the ACAS Code of Practice on disciplinary and other employment procedures, and in the handbook Discipline at Work .
The Code says, for instance, that:
When a disciplinary matter arises, the supervisor or manager should first establish the facts promptly before recollections fade, taking into account the statements of any available witness.
In serious cases, consideration should be given to a brief period of suspension while the case is investigated and this suspension should be with pay.
It is equally important that disciplinary proceedings should not become unduly protracted.
In extreme cases, unjustified delay can render a dismissal unfair even in a case where a similar penalty would have been legitimate had management not dragged its feet.
While the recommendations of the Code may not have to be followed in every case, tribunals hearing unfair dismissal claims are entitled to take note of any breach of the Code.
Certainly, a fair-minded employer should not ignore the ACAS recommendations without good reason.
Disobedience
Suppose you object to carrying out a particular management order.
What can you do and will defiance cost you your job?
The law is clear.
You are obliged to obey a reasonable instruction given by an authorised superior.
This is made explicit in most sets of disciplinary rules, but is in any event a term built in to your contract by the common law.
Blatant disobedience is normally classed as gross misconduct justifying summary dismissal, ie without notice.
When a confrontation occurs, the first question is whether the instruction is reasonable.
Arguments about what exactly you can be required to do may be resolved by careful study of the small print of your contract.
Remember that it is not only a refusal to perform your normal duties which can amount to gross misconduct.
If your employer has the right, for example, to insist that you undertake certain  other tasks or to move you to another department, your job will be at risk if you dig in your heels and disobey.
Although the terms of your contract are therefore highly relevant, you should be careful about relying too heavily on what has been agreed in the past as grounds for objecting to a new order.
Tribunals accept that an employee can sometimes be fairly dismissed for declining to do something which falls outside the scope of his existing contract, for example if, without good cause, he refuses during a business emergency to help out when it was realistic to ask him to do so.
The company should not act too hastily, however, and should make clear the consequences of continued intransigence.
Conversely, you may be entitled to disobey an instruction which management ostensibly has the power to give.
You cannot be compelled to commit, or be a party to, a criminal offence or to undertake any other unlawful act (such as, in one reported case, procuring prostitutes for the firm's customers), nor can you be forced to put yourself in immediate physical danger.
When the Irish troubles peaked in the 1970s, it was suggested that an employee based in England might be able to decline to go to Belfast on company business, even though his contract provided for that.
Equally, you may have a right of redress if you are dismissed for failure to comply with an unjust order.
The classic case in this area,Payne v Spook Erection Ltd (1984), involved a foreman who was ‘fully justified in law’ in declining to implement a bizarre and patently unfair scheme for monitoring his subordinates.
Your state of health can be significant if disobedience is alleged.
A reasonable employer would not, for example, be entitled to instruct a man who has just resumed work following a major heart attack to undertake immediately a long and arduous period of foreign travel.
But illness will not excuse disobedience to a legitimate order if you can indeed comply with what is required.
Breach of discipline
Any written disciplinary rules that affect you deserve careful study.
They will probably list examples of gross misconduct, such as:
1.
theft, unauthorised possession of or wanton damage to property belonging to the company, its employees or customers;
2.
acts of violence during working hours
3.
drunkenness during working hours;
4.
unauthorised disclosure of confidential information;
5.
working for or assisting a competitor.
The catalogue of offences regarded as serious enough to merit dismissal for a single occurrence is sometimes lengthy.
Most employers also take the precaution of stating that the illustrations given are not exhaustive.
If you commit an act which is specifically prohibited, you may lose your job even if what you have done is not usually regarded as quite so reprehensible in other organisations.
Entering into an adulterous relationship with a colleague is an example.
On the other hand, if your employer fails to adopt a particular rule, he might find it difficult to dismiss you summarily for breach of it.
An ambiguous rule will carry much less weight than a specific one.
Important as rules are, they do not necessarily bite with the same degree of force in every case.
Summary dismissal may not be in breach of contract (ie you will be unlikely to succeed if you sue for pay for your notice period) and yet still unfair if your employer behaves unreasonably by, for example:
(a)
applying the rules inconsistently; or
(b)
ignoring extenuating factors; or
(c)
refusing to allow you to appeal.
Conversely, it is possible for a dismissal which is technically in breach of contract (ie a summary dismissal when notice should have been given) to be fair.
In short, everything depends upon the seriousness of the particular incident in question and upon the significance of the surrounding circumstances.
What is vital is that no employer should approach disciplinary problems with a closed mind.
Offences away from work
Sometimes it is unclear whether misconduct is sufficiently linked to the job to entitle the employer to take disciplinary action.
Mishaps at social functions such as Christmas parties are a typical source of problems.
But if an incident has occurred involving violence or which leads to a soured atmosphere at work, management may consider that it has little option but to take action.
ACAS has long recommended that criminal offences outside employment should not be treated as automatic reasons for dismissal.
The main consideration ought to be whether the offence is one which makes the employee unsuitable for his or her type of work or unacceptable to colleagues.
While a conviction for dishonesty will not invariably justify dismissal, it is more likely to do so in the case of a senior executive in whom a high level of trust is invested.
If you are banned from driving and using your car is a vital part of  your job, your dismissal may be justified.
But whether or not the contract has anything to say on this subject, an employer should at least explore the possible alternatives to dismissal, such as allowing you to make other transport arrangements or seeing if you can be fitted in elsewhere within the organisation.
Suspected misconduct
Each year, a number of employees suffer the galling experience of being subjected to disciplinary proceedings for misconduct which they deny having committed.
If you have the misfortune to be wrongly suspected of an offence, the grim reality is that employment law contains fewer safeguards for the incorrectly accused than does criminal law.
The familiar principle that the guilt of a person on trial must be proved beyond reasonable doubt does not apply where your job is concerned.
If you bring an unfair dismissal claim in the hope of, among other things, ‘clearing your name’, you may be disappointed.
The industrial tribunal, in judging the fairness of your employer's actions, will often ask itself whether he:
1.
had a genuine and honest belief that you were guilty;
2.
had reasonable grounds for that belief;
3.
carried out a reasonable investigation;
4.
applied an appropriate penalty.
If the answer to all four questions is ‘yes’, then your complaint will normally be rejected.
There are even rare cases when the employer accepts that you might be innocent and yet is entitled to dismiss you.
This will be so where he is reasonably satisfied that one of a group of two or more people, including yourself, must have committed an act of gross misconduct (such as theft of money from a room to which only a very limited number of individuals had access), and yet he cannot pinpoint the actual culprit, despite having examined all the evidence thoroughly.
In other words, the ‘unfairness’ in an unfair dismissal tends to be of a procedural, rather than a moral, nature.
Fair procedures
With that in mind, how can you influence your employer's decision on your fate?
In the hope of getting a fair deal, you should press him to undertake the most careful inquiry into the facts.
Too often, even in serious cases, the investigative process is skimped.
Make sure that  management is fully aware of your version of events and of any points to which you think it should pay special attention.
If the person handling the matter seems to be relying on information given to him by others, it is worth pressing for full and frank disclosure of what they have said and for sight of any written statements or other relevant documents that may have been prepared.
You may even wish the witnesses to be called into the meeting, so that you can question them yourself.
While you should be offered the right to be accompanied at a disciplinary hearing by a fellow employee or (if appropriate) by a trade union representative, you might prefer your solicitor to be present.
There is no universal rule that you are always entitled to professional legal representation in the absence of a specific right in the company rules.
High-powered support will often be unnecessary.
In exceptional cases, though, such as those in which dishonesty is alleged, it may make sense to press the point strongly.
It is often a good idea to write up your own notes of a disciplinary interview immediately afterwards.
If you later disagree with the company about what was said at the time, having your own record could prove invaluable.
Warnings
Unless you are guilty of gross misconduct, it will seldom be fair to dismiss you for a first breach of discipline.
Proper procedures should indicate that warnings will be given for minor offences.
An initial warning is often verbal, even if logged in writing for record purposes.
A further complaint may lead to a written warning, which will sometimes be described as final.
If intended as a last step prior to dismissal, such a warning should describe the nature of the offence and make it clear that a repetition will cause you to be dismissed.
A final warning ought not to be worded vaguely.
You are entitled to know what will happen if you transgress again.
If you are not told of the risk that you run, you might be able to complain of an unfair dismissal if you are sacked following a recurrence of the same conduct.
If you are given a written warning, you may be asked to sign a copy to acknowledge receipt.
There is little to be gained from refusing to do so, but if you object to the warning for some reason, you should make that clear and pursue your rights under the appeals procedure.
Arguably, there is less of a need for formal warnings where senior employees are concerned.
By the nature of your job, you may reasonably be expected to be aware of the standards that are required.
Even so, dismissal should never come as a bolt from the blue, however exalted your place in the corporate hierarchy.
You need to know how long any warning will last.
If neither the disciplinary rules nor the warning itself provide this information, ask what is intended.
It would not be fair for the warning to remain in force for an excessive period.
The length of time for which the warning stays on record depends in most cases upon the seriousness of the offence.
A procedure which keeps alive a warning (even for a major breach of discipline) for more than two or three years is almost always unjust.
Twelve months is usually a more appropriate period.
Alternative sanctions
Warnings or dismissal are not the only possible penalties for misconduct.
Your employer may look at a variety of alternative sanctions.
If he does not, you may even wish to suggest one of them yourself, in circumstances where it seems a lesser evil than a final warning or dismissal.
The possibilities include:
1.
suspension with pay;
2.
suspension on reduced pay;
3.
unpaid suspension;
4.
demotion;
5.
transfer;
6.
loss of privileges.
Appeals
You may be dissatisfied with a disciplinary decision for any one of a number of reasons.
You may deny having done anything wrong at all.
Even if you admit to being at fault, you may wish management to take fuller account of mitigating factors or to impose a lesser punishment.
It may also be that further relevant information comes to light after the original decision was taken which, in your opinion, means that management should reconsider its attitude.
The company rules should lay down an appeals procedure.
If they do so, and you are nevertheless denied the right to appeal, that could render an otherwise justified dismissal unfair.
If nothing is specified, it is still important to discover what steps are open to you to challenge your employer's judgment.
The appeal ought to be dealt with by someone who was not  directly involved in taking the original decision.
It is usually only fair to deny you a right to appeal if top management has already been closely concerned in the matter because of your senior status or because the business is so small that there is no one left to whom you can bring your complaint.
The principles of fair procedure which govern the conduct of disciplinary hearings also apply, by and large, to appeal hearings.
Do not be deterred from exercising your right of appeal by the belief that the outcome will be a foregone conclusion.
If (admittedly, in some companies it is a big ‘if’) your employer is genuinely concerned to make sure you have a fair deal, it is quite possible that the original decision will be reversed, or at least modified, upon appeal.
Are You Redundant?
Job insecurity
Redundancy is a word which many executives dread.
To be described as surplus to requirements, perhaps after many years of loyal and diligent service, can cripple the self-esteem of even the most resilient person.
The past decade has seen labour-shedding on a massive scale.
Manufacturing industry has been especially hard hit, but even sunrise companies specialising in new technology have at times found it necessary to prune their work-force.
Redundancies have by no means been restricted to those nearing the end of their careers or whose job performance has been subject to criticism.
During the past decade, it has become increasingly clear that few people can count on having a job for life.
Losing your job as a result of a redundancy programme will often be a demoralising blow from which it is difficult to recover.
If you are over 50 years of age, if your skills are not in demand or if you live in an economic blackspot, you may find that your chances of finding a suitable job elsewhere are poor.
Fortunately, you are not always powerless when redundancies are threatened.
Apart from any safeguards built into your employment contract, you may be eligible for statutory rights not to be unfairly dismissed and to redundancy pay calculated on the basis of a formula reflecting your age, years of service and (up to a point) salary level.
Ironic as it may seem today, modern redundancy law developed from the belief in the 1960s that a state scheme was needed as an incentive to job mobility at a time of chronic labour shortage.
Harold Wilson's government introduced the original Redundancy Payments  Act 1965, which gave redundant workers the right for the first time to a statutory severance payment if they satisfied certain qualifying conditions.
The scheme was subsidised by the taxpayer in the granting to employers of a sizeable rebate on each statutory redundancy payment made.
Changes in the economy and in the make-up of industry have stood the logic of the original legislation on its head.
The rebate has now been scrapped.
Even so, businesses large and small continue to find it necessary to cut jobs.
The commercial difficulties which necessitate those cuts may cause management to underestimate the need to keep their employees' interests at heart.
To get a fair deal you need to be fully aware of your legal entitlements and the extent to which you can influence your own destiny.
What is redundancy?
The legal background
The phrase ‘redundancy situation’ is commonly used, both in industry and in the courtroom, but it appears nowhere in the relevant legislation.
When job losses are in prospect, it is easy to lose sight of the precise legal position, but for you to be genuinely redundant, your case must fall within the definition of redundancy contained in the Consolidation Act.
While redundancy rights can sometimes arise in the context of men being laid off from work or put on short time, in the case of a business executive, redundancy almost always involves a dismissal.
Briefly, you may be dismissed for redundancy when one of the following events occurs or is expected to occur:
1.
the business closes;
2.
the business moves;
3.
the job disappears.
When the business closes or moves
If the firm that you work for closes down, it will usually be beyond dispute that you are redundant.
However, if the reason for the closure is that your employer has transferred his business to someone else, there may be no dismissal because you have been automatically transferred to work for the new owner (see below).
Where the location of the business changes, the terms of your contract will be important.
If you are subject to an express or implied mobility clause, which covers the move to a new base, the mere closure  of the office or factory where you work at present will not in itself give rise to redundancy.
Where there is no mobility clause, the position is different.
If your employer ceases business at every place where you can be required to work under your contract, you will be redundant.
Has your job really disappeared?
Redundancies arising from a reduction in work present more difficult questions.
Until a few years ago, it seemed clear that there was redundancy where an employer no longer required the same number of employees.
However, as a result of a case in which a determined executive fought a long battle through the courts, the position now appears to be more complicated than was once thought.
The facts of Cowen v Haden Carrier Ltd (1982) were quite simple.
Mr Cowen was promoted from the position of regional surveyor to that of divisional contracts surveyor.
Later, his employers decided to reduce the number of staff employed.
Mr Cowen was not willing to accept demotion and was dismissed.
He argued that he was not redundant because there was other work available within the terms of his contract of employment.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal accepted his argument, albeit reluctantly, saying that, in the experience of the members deciding the case, in practice a redundancy ‘is accepted as having been shown where it is demonstrated that the actual job which the claimant was carrying out had ceased to exist’.
The Court of Appeal overruled the decision on the facts, but not this interpretation of the general law.
It therefore seems to be necessary to look carefully at the contract terms before deciding whether or not there is redundancy.
Possibly it is not too much of an exaggeration to say that the more flexibility your employer retains in framing your job duties, the harder he may find it to argue that you are redundant.
Bumping
‘Bumping’, which is sometimes referred to as ‘transferred’ or ‘translated’redundancy, is a well-recognised industrial practice.
It takes place where an employee's work disappears, but he is retained and another employee is dismissed instead.
The law provides that the business of your employer and that of any associated employer are to be treated as one for redundancy law purposes, if appropriate.
So, if the business in which you work is expanding, but an associated employer's business slims down and a long-serving employee of that other business is transferred to work  for your company, resulting in your dismissal, you may be redundant.
This is so despite the fact that your own company is not suffering from a reduction in work.
Reorganisational redundancy
It was long thought that a mere redistribution of duties without any reduction in the total number of employees required or the total amount of work to be done did not amount to redundancy.
It is now clear that this was too simplistic a view.
Take the example of a company implementing new technology which requires the recruitment of an employee with a new skill.
His job might necessarily include some or all of the functions formerly performed by existing employees, such as yourself.
If, as a result, your company no longer requires your services, your dismissal might be due to redundancy.
Spreading or subcontracting the work
There may be a redundancy even when your company's requirements for work of a particular kind to be done remain the same.
This will be so if the same work is done by fewer employees or by no employees at all.
Thus, as part of a cost-cutting exercise, an employer may simply ask some of the existing employees doing a job to absorb the work of colleagues who are then no longer required and are consequently made redundant.
A popular means of saving costs is to reduce the work-force and hire outside contractors to perform the same duties.
Employees dismissed in the wake of such an exercise will usually be redundant.
Non-redundancy dismissals
by no means every  dismissal occasioned by the need to restructure the business or to make economies is due to redundancy.
If the reason for dismissal is your employer's desire to run the business cost-effectively and not because of any reduction in the number of employees needed to carry out your particular functions, you will not be redundant.
If you are employed under a fixed-term contract which comes to an end and is not renewed, you may be redundant.
Occasionally, this may be foreseen even at the start of your employment: for example, if your position is subject to funding from an outside source or if you are taken on to supervise a particular contract, as may happen in the engineering and construction fields amongst others.
However, if you  are replaced by another employee, say of a lower grade and commanding less pay, there is unlikely to be a redundancy.
Business transfers
If your employer's trade or business is sold, your job rights will depend upon whether or not the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations of 1981 are applicable.
Unfortunately the Regulations, which do not apply where all that happens is a sale of shares in a limited company, are extremely complex.
To summarise, the Regulations come into play when there is a relevant transfer, ie:
1.
a transfer of a business or part of a business (usually including a transfer of its goodwill) from one employer to another, where
2.
the business is located in the UK and is run as a commercial venture.
If you are employed in the business at the time of the transfer, you will become employed by the purchaser and you should not be redundant.
In the important case of Litster v Forth Dry Dock Engineering Co Ltd (1989), the House of Lords rejected an argument which would have reduced the value of the Regulations as a means of preserving jobs.
It had been suggested that the Regulations did not apply if a business purchaser arranged with the buyer to sack employees in the business a short time before it was sold.
This would have left many people with worthless claims against insolvent companies.
But the Law Lords, applying European law, ruled that liability for a dismissal by a seller before a business transfer passes to the purchaser if the employee has been unfairly dismissed for a reason connected with the transfer.
When redundancy is in the air
Responding to a warning
A fair-minded employer will, unless circumstances are exceptional, give affected employees plenty of advance warning about possible redundancies.
He will consult with the candidates for redundancy and their trade union representatives, if any, about his proposals and will explore possible alternatives to job cuts.
Failure to give you a fair deal in this respect is likely to expose a company to legal attack.
When planned job reductions are announced, it is easy to panic, even if words of reassurance are added.
When redundancies are in the air, though, you need to keep your head.
Although there may be  a great temptation to seek alternative employment at the earliest opportunity, you should weigh up considerations such as:
1.
how likely it is that you personally will be affected by the cutbacks;
2.
whether this is only a temporary down-turn which may in the end not necessitate redundancies on the scale now envisaged;
3.
whether you may forfeit valuable legal rights if you leave too soon.
The danger that, by trying to protect your future career prospects, you may throw away substantial cash sums in terms of severance payments is a real one, as the case of International Computers Ltd v Kennedy (1981) illustrates.
In October 1979, the company announced that a factory was to close by the end of September 1980.
Employees were advised to make every effort to find other jobs as quickly as possible.
Negotiations had yet to be concluded with the trade unions as to the timing of the redundancies, but Ms Kennedy quickly found another job.
She left and sought a redundancy payment.
Her claim failed because no date had been fixed for the ending of her employment.
As was said in an earlier case, an employee in this position:
…has a perfectly secure right if he thinks St to wait until his contract is determined, to take his redundancy payment, and then see what he can do in regard to finding other employment.
If he does…choose to leave his existing employment before the last minute in order to look for a new job before the rush of others competing with him comes, then that is up to him.
This quotation shows the gulf between strict legal principles and industrial reality.
But the lesson of the Kennedy case is that if you have the chance to take another job before your redundancy has been confirmed, you may have to choose between safeguarding your future and cashing in on the job rights built up over the years in your present employment.
Volunteering for redundancy
The hard choice between premature resignation and awaiting redundancy does not apply if you are offered the right to volunteer for redundancy.
The courts have made it clear that an employee who responds to an employer's initiative by volunteering to go is not resigning, but making himself available to be dismissed.
As a result, a volunteer remains entitled to his statutory right to redundancy pay.
Early retirement
Contrastingly, if you take the initiative by seeking early retirement, perhaps because you are in poor health, you may not have redundancy rights.
For example, an employer who envisages having to slim down his work-force in the future, perhaps after introducing new technology, may offer those who are prepared to resign rather than to wait to volunteer for redundancy a financial inducement, perhaps exceeding state redundancy pay.
If there is no element whatsoever of coercion in the deal, there will be no dismissal if you accept such an offer.
Offers of alternative employment
If your employer tells you that you can be relocated elsewhere within the business, there should be no question of dismissal if the change falls within the existing terms of your employment.
This will be the case if, for example, you are asked to perform the same job at the same rate of pay but at a different office or factory and the move is catered for by a mobility clause in your contract.
You may lose your redundancy payment rights if, among other matters, you unreasonably refuse an offer of suitable alternative employment.
This is so even if the alternative job offered involves a change in your terms of contract or is with an associated employer, such as another company which is controlled, in terms of shareholders' voting power, by the same person or people who control the company that you work for.
The details of the offer must be made clear; the mere expression of optimism that a job can be found is not enough.
There is a close link between the vexed questions of whether an offer of employment is ‘suitable’ and whether a refusal is ‘unreasonable’.
As a broad rule of thumb, the more similar the new job is to the old, the more likely the new job is to be suitable.
Specific relevant factors concerning the new job may include:
1.
whether it involves a loss of status, like reduction in authority or superiority or loss of promotion prospects;
2.
pay and benefits;
3.
the nature of the new working environment;
4.
the new location;
5.
the new hours of work.
Whether or not a refusal is unreasonable is more likely to depend  upon subjective factors concerning you personally, such as your age, health and domestic circumstances, particularly if the latter mean that changes in your hours or place of work are unacceptable.
So it might be possible for a 50-year-old with a heart condition to be acting reasonably if he turned down a job involving more stress and daily travel, whereas a 30-year-old executive with no personal problems who rejected the same offer might forfeit his claim to statutory redundancy pay.
If you accept the offer of a new job on the same terms as your original job then:
(a)
you are regarded as not having been made redundant at all;
(b)
there is no trial period (see below);
(c)
you are not entitled to a redundancy payment; and
(d)
you have continuity of employment throughout the period of your original job and the new job.
If you accept the offer of a new job on changed terms, a trial period comes into effect automatically.
It will normally be for four weeks from the time when you start to work under the new contract.
It can be extended for the specific purpose of retraining you for new work provided that any agreement to do so:
•is made before you start work under the new contract;•is in writing;•specifies the date at the end of the trial period; and •specifies the terms of employment which will apply as at the end of that period.
If you end the contract for any reason during the trial period, you will be treated as having been dismissed on the date when your original job ended.
Your entitlement to redundancy pay will depend on the factors referred to above, just as it will if you are dismissed during the trial period for a reason connected with the changed terms of employment.
If you are dismissed for some other reason unconnected with redundancy, you will have to consider whether the circumstances justify an unfair dismissal claim.
This question is explored further in the next chapter.
Redundancy Selection and Consultation
Why have you been selected?
Any employee who is told that he must lose his job through no fault of his own is likely to ask, ‘Why me?’
You are entitled to a clear, logical and convincing answer to that question.
Above all, you need to satisfy yourself that the decision, however hard, was not taken arbitrarily.
Sometimes redundancy selection is automatically unfair.
This will be so where selection is for a ‘trade union reason’, such as refusing to become or remain a member of a particular trade union; or if you have been unjustifiably selected in contravention of a customary agreement or agreed procedure in respect of redundancies.
Where business executives are concerned, though, management has in most cases considerable discretion in deciding whom to retain and whom to release in a redundancy exercise.
Provided your employer acts reasonably, you will find it difficult to launch an effective legal challenge of his decision.
Even so, it is worth investigating his approach in detail, since employers do sometimes make erroneous assumptions during the redundancy process which amount to acting unreasonably.
The selection group
The first question is whether your employer has adopted an appropriate unit of selection for redundancy purposes.
Here again, the terms of your contract will be important.
Management ought to look at the work that you do and that you could be asked to do under any contractual ‘flexibility’ provisions before finally deciding upon the groups of people from which redundancy candidates will be sought.
If the business has different sections or different sites, you should enquire whether all its employees have been considered for redundancy or whether your particular part of the operation is the only one which has come under scrutiny for cut-backs.
There are no firm legal rules about the proper approach that a company should adopt, but often it will be reasonable to look at the organisation as a whole, without dividing it into separate compartments.
Nonetheless, many employers wish to concentrate for redundancy purposes upon only a particular segment of the work-force.
If so, ask them how they can justify such action.
Selection factors
You may be one of a number of employees with a roughly comparable job.
If you are being selected for redundancy in preference to one or more of your colleagues, it is worth trying to find out why.
If an employer is committed to an agreed procedure or customary arrangement regarding redundancies, he should adhere to it.
If he departs from it when imposing redundancies, he will usually be acting unfairly.
Where business executives are concerned, employers tend to have considerable discretion in the way that they implement redundancies.
They are entitled to take into account a variety of selection factors.
But any criteria used must be objective, not subjective, so as, according to the Employment Appeal Tribunal:
…to ensure that redundancy is not used as a pretext for getting rid of employees which some manager wishes to get rid of for some quite other reasons, eg…by reason of personal dislike.
It is not possible to draw up an exhaustive list of matters that may legitimately be taken into account.
Those referred to below are often considered.
Length of service
‘Last in, first out’ is a selection procedure frequently agreed with trade unions.
In any event, an employer's obligations to act fairly towards his longer-serving employees will mean that length of service is always an important factor in the selection process and will frequently be decisive.
Redundancy, however, will often imply a major organisational change in the business, in which case other factors may have to be considered which may cumulatively outweigh length of service in a  particular case.
Rarely, it may even be unreasonable to select you for redundancy on the basis of length of service, for instance if doing so entails retaining another employee past retiring age when you are much younger and still have plenty to offer.
Job performance etc
In a slimming-down operation, the job performance and skills of the members of the selection group are likely to be relevant in the redundancy selection process.
If it is suggested that you are not sufficiently flexible to adapt to the reshaped structure that is envisaged, you may be able to challenge that view if your past record shows a steady upward progression and if you have carried out a wide range of tasks without serious mishaps.
Here again, your job file may prove helpful.
Attendance and disciplinary record
If a person retained at your expense has a significantly worse record in terms of attendance or misconduct, it will be worth drawing the matter to your employer's attention to see whether his view changes upon mature reflection.
Personal circumstances
Most employers are reluctant to pay too much attention to personal circumstances, such as marital status or domestic problems when arriving at redundancy decisions.
Yet such matters may be relevant in some cases; one particular example is that if you are registered as disabled, you are entitled to special consideration.
Pay levels
Financial considerations are likely to have played an important part in the decision that redundancies are necessary.
Your employer may consider it more cost-effective to retain junior employees who are paid less than you.
If this is a relevant factor, one point that you may be prepared to discuss during the consultation process is the possibility of taking a pay cut, either on a temporary or permanent basis.
Just as selection criteria must be reasonable, so must they be rationally applied.
In particular, you will probably have good reason to complain if your employer departs at the last minute from an approach to the selection process that has previously been announced.
It is quite possible that some selection factors may point towards your retention while others will, in comparison, favour colleagues.
In checking to ensure that your employers have striven to strike a  fair balance, it could be worth asking whether they have considered drawing up some form of ‘points table’ or other grading system, by which the relevant matters can be assessed.
The consultation process
Consultation is, or should be, a key element in a redundancy exercise.
Without it, your employer risks making decisions on the basis of inadequate information and you risk losing your job without having been given sufficient opportunity to convince management that you still have something to contribute.
The statutory duty to consult a trade union about redundancies is well known, but both employers and those directly affected tend to be less familiar with what the law has to say about the need for consultation with affected individuals.
Trade union consultation
Employers are legally obliged to consult representatives of recognised trade unions about their redundancy proposals.
Information on a variety of matters, such as the reasons for the proposed job losses and the way in which they are intended to occur, must be disclosed in writing.
The legislation specifies various time limits.
For example, if 100 or more jobs are to go, consultation must begin at least 90 days before the first dismissal takes effect.
The overriding principle, though, is that consultation must commence at the earliest opportunity.
This is an obligation to consult, not a duty to reach agreement.
The legal requirements are not normally too onerous, but an employer who fails to comply with them will be exposed to a claim for a ‘protective award’.
Such a claim can only be instituted by the union itself and not by the affected employees.
Inadequate communications bedevil many redundancy programmes.
Even employers who are punctilious in consulting staff representatives sometimes fail to talk directly to the people whose jobs are at stake.
The law reports contain a number of examples where this kind of neglect has led to a successful unfair dismissal claim.
Similarly, not every trade union liaises efficiently with its members, even if its officials are trying hard to defend jobs in their negotiations with the company.
You therefore need to press both management and your own  representatives (whether a trade union, staff committee or works council) to make sure that they promptly give you adequate information about the progress of discussion.
Only in this way can you be confident of a fair deal.
Individual consultation
If, like many executives, you have no representative to act on your behalf in redundancy negotiations, it is all the more important for there to be detailed discussions between you and your employer about any plans to make you redundant.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has emphasised that consultation:
…is one of the foundation stones of modern industrial relations practice…in the particular sphere of redundancy, good industrial relations practice.
.. requires consultation with the redundant employee so that the employer may find out whether the needs of the business can be met in some other way than by dismissal and, if not, what other steps the employer can take to ameliorate the blow to the employee.
A general policy not to consult with employees of, say, a particular grade, runs contrary to good industrial relations.
Although the nature of consultation may differ according to whether one is a shopfloor worker or a member of management, the desirability of consultation applies to employees at all levels in the hierarchy.
If you have not been adequately consulted, and a tribunal is satisfied that consultation could have made a difference to the redundancy decision, there is a good chance that you will succeed in an unfair dismissal claim and be entitled to compensation.
Far better, of course, for it not to come to that.
The problem is that employers are apt to underestimate the value of direct discussion with executives who figure in their job-cutting plans.
There seem to be three main reasons why employers take a deliberate decision not to consult.
First, there may be a view that consultation may do little but depress and demoralise the work-force which is bound to see the implementation of redundancies as a fait accompli .
Second, in some industries the employer may fear sabotage from disgruntled redundancy candidates.
For example, it may be thought that a computer programmer will extract some kind of revenge by introducing a logic bomb into the computer system.
Third, the plight of the business may be so grave, and the selection  of the individuals concerned so inevitable and so urgently required, that consultation would make absolutely no difference to the outcome.
Non-consultation may be justified on one or more of these grounds, but only in unusual circumstances.
An employer who breaks the news of redundancy to you at 4.30 pm on a Friday afternoon, adding that you need not bother to work out your notice, is likely to incur the wrath of most industrial tribunals.
Even if he acts in such a way from what he misguidedly thinks are ‘humanitarian’ reasons, the tribunal will be unlikely to be impressed, as the manner of dismissal would eliminate the possibility, however remote, that following consultation, your job might be saved.
Similarly, unless there is evidence that sabotage was a genuine risk, for instance in the light of past experiences with other redundant employees, an argument based on that fear will generally receive short shrift.
Even where vital commercial considerations explain a failure to consult, an employer may be held to have acted unfairly.
A typical example occurred in a case when the Employment Appeal Tribunal overturned an industrial tribunal's decision that it was not practicable to consult where 33 redundancies were required urgently, at a time when take-over negotiations were being conducted in secret.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal considered that multiple interviews ‘could readily have been arranged without inconvenience or dislocation to the company’ and that there was insufficient evidence that the need for secrecy precluded consultation.
No firm rules can be laid down as to the form that consultation should take and how long it should last.
What matters above all is for the consultation to be a genuine exercise in communication and not an ill-conceived charade.
As well as asking why you have been selected as a redundancy candidate and, if appropriate, arguing that a fair procedure would result in the selection of one of your colleagues instead, you may find it fruitful to explore the other ways in which the company can achieve the desired savings without putting your job at risk.
The possibilities include:
1.
changes in pay structure
2.
relocating you elsewhere within the organisation
3.
a general redistribution of job functions
4.
changes in working patterns.
Above all, you need to take advantage of being given the chance to put your own point of view.
A fair employer will already have given  thought to the alternatives to redundancy, perhaps even contacting other companies within the same group to see whether vacancies exist elsewhere.
If, rather than face unemployment, you would at least be prepared to consider staying on with a reduced salary or a lower level of seniority, you should make that clear.
Clearly, if you fail to respond positively to it, the consultation process will achieve little or nothing.
If it seems inevitable that you will have to leave, consultation may still achieve a useful improvement in your severance terms.
You might be able, for example, to persuade your employer to give you constructive help by engaging an out-placement counsellor to assist you in finding a new job.
Finally, you ought to keep in mind the possibility that circumstances may change between the time when you are first told that you are a redundancy candidate and the date when your employment ends.
If the company fails to treat consultation as an ongoing process, it may be treating you unfairly.
An example of this is provided by the case of Stacey v Babcock Power Ltd (1986).
Mr Stacey was notified in February 1984 that he would be made redundant the following May.
In April, the company unexpectedly obtained new contracts which might have made it possible for it to keep him in work.
Unfortunately, they allowed his notice to expire without further action and proceeded to recruit new employees.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal decided that the failure to offer a long-serving worker the chance to stay on rendered unfair a redundancy which had originally been justified.
Demoralising as the threat of redundancy may be, therefore, all is not necessarily lost even when you are told that you are among those who will have to leave.
Although the outlook may seem bleak, a constructive approach towards consultation might result in hitherto unconsidered options coming to light which could enable your job to be saved at the eleventh hour.
Constructive Dismissal
What does it mean?
The possibility of claiming that you have been constructively dismissed has already been mentioned several times.
But what exactly is constructive dismissal?
Put simply, you are constructively dismissed if your employer breaks an important term of your employment contract.
If he does, you will be entitled to walk out of your job and, even though you have not been ‘fired’, take advantage of the various rights available to a dismissed employee, such as the right to claim that your dismissal was unfair.
Remember that unreasonable behaviour on your employer's part will not amount to constructive dismissal if the contract is not broken.
Here is yet another reason why you should clarify as many of your contract terms as possible.
If you do not do so, you may be left in some doubt as to when a constructive dismissal occurs.
Naturally, some cases of constructive dismissal are clear-cut.
Classic examples are reductions in pay and demotion.
But if your company has retained a good deal of discretion on key matters, it may be able to impose major changes on your working life without giving rise to a constructive dismissal claim.
For instance, you may be asked to go to a new and different place of work under the provisions of a mobility clause, or have the emphasis of your duties changed significantly, pursuant to a clause in the contract providing for flexible working.
Nor is that all.
In order to claim that you have been constructively dismissed, you must show that:
1.
your employer has broken your contract; and  2. that action was so fundamental as to justify your ending the contract (or that it was ‘the last straw’); and that
3.
you left the job as a result of your contract being broken; and that
4.
you did not delay too long in leaving.
In practice, you will find that courts and tribunals called upon to decide whether these conditions have been satisfied are themselves able to exercise a considerable degree of discretion.
Has the contract been broken?
The main area for uncertainty in constructive dismissal cases concerns an apparent breach of an implied term of your contract.
Implied terms were discussed in Chapter 2.
You will sometimes find that if your employer acts towards you in an unsatisfactory way, he is in breach of his implied duty of mutual trust and confidence.
Employers should not, without good cause, behave in a manner that is likely to destroy or seriously damage the employment relationship.
The law reports provide many illustrations of this kind of conduct.
They include:
1.
sexual harassment;
2.
humiliating you in the presence of your colleagues;
3.
turning a blind eye to harassment of you by your colleagues;
4.
overworking you and failing to provide you with reasonable support;
5.
penalising minor breaches of discipline with disproportionate severity.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has also made it clear that conduct ‘which a literal interpretation of the written words of the contract might appear to justify’ may in practice amount to a destruction of the relationship of trust and confidence.
This is worth remembering if your employer tries to justify giving you a raw deal by interpreting a stringent contract of employment harshly, eg by insisting you move your place of work at short notice and without financial help from Leeds to Birmingham, as in one case — even where this is within the terms of an express contractual mobility clause.
Does a failure to give you a pay rise, say on an annual basis, amount to constructive dismissal?
You might think the answer would be ‘no’, but the position is not quite that simple.
In F C Gardner Ltd v Beresford (1978), the employee was given no pay increase for two years.
Others did receive rises during that time.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal thought that in most circumstances it would be reasonable to imply a term along the lines that an employer will not treat his employees ‘arbitrarily, capriciously or inequitably’ in matters of remuneration.
Failure to give you a fair deal in terms of a pay rise can, therefore, amount to constructive dismissal if it reflects victimisation.
Another interesting question is whether you have any right of redress if, while continuing to pay your salary, your employer does not give you any work to do, perhaps sending you home and saying for some reason, ‘Don't call us, we'll call you’.
If this is not permitted by an express ‘garden leave’ clause — see Chapter 5 — can you argue that you have been denied ‘the right to work’?
There is no general right to work.
In a much-quoted phrase, one judge put the position bluntly:
Provided I pay my cook her wages regularly, she cannot complain if I choose to take any or all of my meals out.
Nevertheless, there are circumstances in which an employer may be under a contractual duty to provide work.
Many salesmen, for instance, are in practice entitled to be allowed to work in order to earn their commission.
In other jobs, there may be good reasons why employees have a right, under the contract, to be given work to do.
This is true of people working in the entertainment industry, who need to practise their skills regularly.
In the industrial context, too, it might be relevant to consider whether your reputation will be damaged if it becomes widely known that you have had your work taken away from you.
Broadly speaking, the higher a person is in the management structure, the more essential it is for him or her to be given work when it is available.
There are even one or two hints in the case law that some employees can claim that they have been constructively dismissed if they are denied job satisfaction.
Realistically, though, you would need to have strong evidence that the existence of such a right is part of your particular deal with your employer, and that you have been denied satisfaction from your work in a clear and unjustifiable fashion, before you could pursue litigation with confidence.
How badly has your employer behaved?
You may be able to claim constructive dismissal even if the incident which directly leads to your departure is minor, if it can be regarded as the last straw.
If there has been a history of such problems, an industrial tribunal may accept that eventually you became entitled to say ‘enough is enough’ and leave.
Unscrupulous employers are not allowed to squeeze out unwanted executives by indulging in a sustained course of conduct which nevertheless falls short at any particular time of a clear breach of contract.
The general rule, however, is that for you to be justified in ending the relationship, the breach of contract must in itself be serious.
A single trivial occurrence does not entitle you to claim that you had been constructively dismissed.
A failure to pay your salary at the agreed time, for example, might not in itself amount to constructive dismissal, although if the delay were prolonged or repeated subsequently, the position could be different.
How to respond
A serious breach of contract by your employer does not itself end your employment.
It only gives you the right to choose to do so, should you wish.
In order to claim that you have been constructively dismissed, you must give up your job in response to the breaking of your contract.
Simply presenting an unfair dismissal application to an industrial tribunal is not, for instance, sufficient if you continue to report for work.
You do not have to give formal written notice that you are leaving, but it is important not to say or do anything which is inconsistent with pursuing a constructive dismissal claim.
Certainly, you should make it clear by words or conduct that you are exercising your right to treat yourself as having been dismissed.
The best course will often be to confirm the position unambiguously in writing.
It may make sense to take professional advice on the wording of an appropriate letter.
While pursuing a complaint through the grievance procedure is sometimes worthwhile, you do not forfeit your right to claim constructive dismissal if you have been treated so badly that you decide that raising the matter through the company's internal procedures will not help you to achieve a fair deal.
Nor is it necessarily fatal if you give notice to terminate your contract and work that notice out, rather than walking out on the spot.
Jumping the gun
Do not make the mistake of reacting prematurely when a problem occurs.
Unless a serious breach of your contract has taken place, or your employer has made it clear that it will take place, you should not leave in a huff.
If you do, your employer will be able to argue that you have simply resigned and not been dismissed.
If you are told, for example, that the company is thinking of implementing a pay cut, but that the decision is not yet definite, that will not in itself be likely to amount to constructive dismissal.
Delaying too long
The other side of the coin is that, when your employer is guilty of a serious breach of your contract, you must not delay your response too long.
If you continue to work without leaving, you will eventually lose your right to claim constructive dismissal.
A good example of how this principle operates is provided by the case of W E Cox Toner (International) Ltd v Crook (1981).
An employee who was reprimanded at the end of July 1980 subsequently demanded, through his solicitors, that the letter of reprimand be withdrawn.
On 6 February 1981 he was told that the letter would not be withdrawn.
On 3 March 1981 he left.
His claim that he had been constructively dismissed failed because of the lapse of time after 6 February 1981 before he took action.
However, his failure to leave before 6 February 1981 did not necessarily mean that he had ‘waived’ the breaking of his contract.
You have a reasonable period of time to decide whether or not to give up your job, but it is not easy to forecast what will be regarded as ‘reasonable’.
Much will probably depend upon whether you are complaining about a single, unequivocal act, such as suspension in breach of your contract, in which event you ought to respond rapidly, or something such as a gradual change in your status, which may require prolonged consideration.
If you work under protest for a limited period of time, your attempts to resolve the dispute through negotiation prior to leaving should not jeopardise your right to claim that you have been constructively dismissed.
You should, though, make it clear at all times that you object to the way that you have been treated.
Similarly, if a threat that your contract will be broken is withdrawn, you are not entitled to leave subsequently and claim that you have been constructively dismissed.
So, if your company changes its mind about a plan to demote you, but, feeling disgruntled, you still decide to leave, it is likely that you will be regarded as having voluntarily resigned.
Practical implications
Almost all constructive dismissal cases involve an unfair dismissal claim.
You ought to keep in mind, though, that even if you have been constructively dismissed, an industrial tribunal might still regard your employer's actions as fair.
Typically, this could occur in the context of a bona fide business reorganisation, which involves a change in your terms of employment.
If there is a sound business reason for the change and your employer has observed the principles of good industrial relations practice, including full consultation with you and consideration of possible alternative courses, prior to taking action, he will probably have a good defence.
This underlines the importance — before you decide to treat yourself as constructively dismissed and leave your job — of weighing up the pros and cons of so doing.
The first worry is that proving that your contract has been broken may not be easy, particularly if you are complaining about the breach of an unwritten and rather vague term.
If you are confident that you can show that your contract has been broken, you might wish to pursue not only an unfair dismissal complaint, but also a claim in respect of breach of your contract.
These are potentially valuable rights for many senior executives, but you will do well to remember that litigation is apt to be an uncertain, protracted and depressing business.
Depending upon the kind of problem that has arisen, it may be easier and safer for you to sue for damages for breach of your contract while remaining in your job.
You might be able to do this, for example, if you have clearly suffered a direct financial loss.
Typically, this will be a realistic option if your pay has been cut for some reason.
But if your complaint is that a less tangible term of your employment has been broken, as when you have suffered harassment from your superiors or your status has been eroded, it may be difficult to establish a viable claim for compensation if you do not quit.
Leaving work and consigning yourself to the dole queue is obviously risky.
It is easier to find a job when you are in work than out of it.
Your age, health and qualifications might be against you.
But even if you have another job lined up, a constructive dismissal claim will not always be lucrative.
You are obliged to mitigate your losses; this duty is explained in Chapter 18.
If you succeed in finding another job, or already have one lined up at the time that you go, it may not be worth suing your employer because the losses for which you could claim reimbursement may be minimal.
In short, for many employees constructive dismissal claims give rise to a Catch 22.
If you can afford to leave your job, the claim may not be worth pursuing financially.
But if you cannot afford to leave, might it not be better to put up with the treatment that you have received rather than becoming unemployed?
Sometimes, sadly, even a bad deal is better than no deal at all.
The Threat of Dismissal
The need for awareness
If your job is threatened, you may be tempted to jump before you are pushed.
As an executive with a long-term career plan to protect, you may have sound reasons for leaving before a dismissal occurs or for departing on mutually agreed terms.
Rightly or wrongly, mention of a dismissal on your CV will worry many prospective employers.
Sometimes executives have, in effect, a choice as to whether or not to be dismissed.
This can happen at a time when you are under pressure and need to make a rapid decision.
Even so, you ought to balance the relative advantages and disadvantages of giving up your employment on the one hand, and staying on, with dismissal likely, on the other.
Bear in mind that a number of legal avenues may be open to you if you are dismissed and wrongly treated.
Those avenues are likely to be closed if, in law, there has been no express or constructive dismissal.
It is also important to avoid drifting, or moving accidentally, into a position in which you are unable to take advantage of dismissal law rights.
We have already seen examples of how you may, if you are not careful, forfeit your redundancy rights, the chance to claim constructive dismissal or indeed all your statutory employment rights in the event that your contract is frustrated.
There are a number of other circumstances in which your employer may argue, if it suits him, that you have not been dismissed.
You need to be aware of all the possibilities in order to make a realistic decision about the best way of securing your long-term employment and financial position.
Have you been dismissed?
It is by no means rare for there to be confusion about whether or not a dismissal has actually taken place.
Jobs can come to an end in an unorthodox and unplanned way.
This is usually unsatisfactory for all concerned.
In the simplest case, you may not be sure whether you should continue to turn up for work or not.
Moreover, you need to know if you are eligible for the rights available to a dismissed employee, such as the right to complain of unfair dismissal or to seek a redundancy payment.
In theory, it should be easy to tell whether you have left voluntarily or have been dismissed.
In reality, the position may be much more complex.
Words of dismissal
Sometimes it is open to doubt whether the language used by your employer, taken in context, amounts to a dismissal.
Ambiguous words spoken in anger, or intended merely as a reprimand, may in your eyes amount to words of dismissal, even if there is no constructive dismissal.
Equally, you might use ambiguous words which your superiors treat as a resignation which they will not allow you to retract.
The case law is not wholly consistent, but three basic propositions concerning ambiguous ‘resignations’ and ‘dismissals’are widely accepted, ie:
1.
certain words or acts can, as a matter of law, be interpreted only as amounting to a dismissal or resignation;
2.
some words or acts are ambiguous and may or may not constitute a dismissal or resignation.
Here the question is subjective: did the person hearing the words in fact interpret them as a dismissal or a resignation?
If so, there is a dismissal or resignation;
3.
if it is not clear how the words were in fact understood, the question is how a reasonable listener would have interpreted them in the particular context.
Thus in one case, during an argument, an employee said to his manager, ‘I'm leaving, I want my cards’.
Those words were capable of constituting a resignation and the manager interpreted them as such.
This was therefore a case of resignation.
Nevertheless, all the facts of each case must be considered.
For example, if you use the words, ‘I am resigning’, that unambiguous  statement is likely to be taken at face value unless perhaps you are speaking in the heat of the moment or under duress.
In short, you need to watch your words if you do not want to risk jeopardising your job.
Equally, if you are not clear about the exact implication of what your employer has told you, it is best to ask him to clarify his meaning.
Ultimatums and warnings
If you leave under duress, you are not resigning.
This means that if your employer says, ‘Resign or be sacked’, that amounts to a dismissal.
The precise interpretation of an ultimatum depends upon the circumstances prevailing at the time.
The question for a court or tribunal would be whether your employer's conduct forced you to resign.
As a practical measure, if you regard yourself as having been forced to quit, it is prudent to confirm the position to your employer in writing.
Mutual consent
An employment contract may be brought to an end by the mutual consent of the parties.
If so, there will be no dismissal.
There is no genuine mutual consent, however, if the deal has in reality been initiated by duress or the threat of dismissal.
Nevertheless, you should once again proceed with caution if you wish to make any claims on the basis that you have been dismissed.
An employee discovered this to her cost in the case of Staffordshire County Council v Donovan (1981).
Ms Donovan worked for a local authority and, during the course of disciplinary proceedings, was told that she would be permitted to terminate her employment on the last day of the year if she so wished.
Terms were offered as to suspension on pay and the provision of a reference.
Ms Donovan eventually gave notice on this basis, but she later submitted an unfair dismissal application.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal held that this was a case of mutual consent.
It pointed out that, where parties seek to negotiate during the course of disciplinary proceedings and an agreed formula is worked out, it would be ‘most unfortunate’ if the mere fact that agreement was reached while the proceedings continued enabled the employee to say later that there was a dismissal.
Having said that, courts and tribunals are generally vigilant to ensure that an alleged deal bringing a job to a conclusion by mutual consent truly reflects the reality of what has occurred.
Thus, a clause in your contract to the effect that your employment will ‘automatically terminate’, if, for example, you fail to return to work on the due date after a period of leave, is likely to be regarded as an invalid attempt to ‘contract out’ of modern job security laws.
Retractions
Occasionally, courts and tribunals take the view that a dismissal or resignation given in the heat of the moment can be withdrawn.
It is fair to say that, in so doing, they are applying sensible principles of good industrial relations rather than the strict law of contract.
In any event, you would do well to strive to avoid the uncertainty of a dispute about the legal effect of words said at a time when tempers flare.
This means not only avoiding the use of words which might amount to a resignation on your part, but also checking whether words that apparently mean that your job has ended were actually intended to have that effect.
Fixed-term contracts
If your employer fails to renew a fixed-term contract, you are deemed to have been dismissed in law.
On the other hand, where a contract for a specific purpose comes to an end, there is no dismissal.
The dividing line between the two forms of agreement is often fine.
Typical is the case of Wiltshire County Council v NATFHE and Guy (1980).
Ms Guy worked as a part-time teacher from 1969 to 1977.
She entered into a fresh contract each academic year.
Her appointment was not renewed in 1977–78.
The Court of Appeal held that there had been a dismissal.
The employee worked under a contract for a fixed, specified period from the start of the autumn term to the last day of the summer term.
The argument that she was employed for the specific purpose of teaching students, and therefore not eligible for dismissal rights, was rejected.
Subsequent agreements
What happens if, while you are under notice of dismissal, you wish to leave your job before the notice expires in order to work elsewhere?
If your employer agrees to your early departure, you will still be regarded as dismissed in law if the agreement is simply, in effect, to bring forward your dismissal date or if it is agreed that you need not actually work during the remainder of your notice period.
On the other hand, if the reality is that you have mutually agreed to the ending of the contract, then you will not be entitled to dismissal rights.
While courts and tribunals will again be reluctant to conclude that you have forfeited your entitlements, it makes sense to ensure that there is no question of your employer being able to argue later that there was no dismissal, if that does not suit you.
It is a good idea to record the position specifically in a letter or memo.
If your employer does not agree to your leaving during the notice period, you are entitled under the Consolidation Act to give counter-notice.
This may be verbal and, strangely, the Act does not specify how long your notice should be.
What is the date of dismissal?
Even if it is clear that you have been dismissed, the precise date when your employment comes to an end may be unclear.
Yet you are likely to need to know the exact date when your job terminates for several reasons, such as to ascertain:
1.
whether you have the relevant period of continuous employment to qualify for various statutory entitlements like redundancy pay and unfair dismissal rights;
2.
the amount of any redundancy payment or unfair dismissal ‘basic award’ to which you may be entitled;
3.
from when your time begins to run for presenting any complaint to an industrial tribunal;
4.
whether, at the date of termination, you were eligible for various rights, for instance in view of your age or location overseas.
The employment legislation lays down a series of rules as regards the date of dismissal.
Basically, that date is:
(a)
where your contract is terminated by notice, whether given by yourself or by your employer, the date on which that notice expires;
(b)
where the contract is not terminated by notice, the date on which its termination takes effect;
(c)
where there is a fixed-term contract, the date on which that term expires.
There are a number of additional provisions to cater for special circumstances.
For example, a failure to allow a woman employee to return to work after maternity leave is treated as a dismissal, with the termination date being the date notified by her as the date of return.
Ambiguous dismissal letters
Interpreting the facts correctly often becomes even harder  because of the vague way in which many dismissals are implemented.
A typical example occurred in Adams v G K N Sankey Ltd (1980).
A letter written in November 1979 said: ‘You are given twelve weeks’ notice of dismissal from this company with effect from 5.11.79.
You will not be expected to work out your notice but will receive money in lieu of notice…’
The payment was made without deduction of tax, and pension rights were treated as ending on 5 November 1979.
Nevertheless, the Employment Appeal Tribunal held that the termination date occurred only upon expiry of the 12-week notice period.
This was a case of an employee being sent home on paid leave during his notice.
All that happened was that the right to require his actual service was waived.
In interpreting a vague letter, a tribunal should be guided by:
1.
the way in which an ordinary, reasonable employee would understand the words used;
2.
the facts known to the employee at the date he received the letter;
3.
the principle of interpreting ambiguous words against the person who used them, so as not to encourage employers to mislead by deliberate vagueness.
Shortening the notice period
As we saw earlier, either you or your employer may wish to shorten the notice period.
If your company attempts to do so, tribunals will again construe any ambiguity in your favour, if there is a risk that you might be disadvantaged by what your employer purports to have done.
Unfortunately, there are limits to the extent to which tribunals can lean in your favour in such a case.
In Stapp v Shaftesbury Society (1982), the employer brought the job to a premature end before the expiry of the one month's notice period originally specified.
The effect was to bar the luckless employee from unfair dismissal rights, even though he would have had sufficient continuous employment to found a claim had the original termination date stood.
The Court of Appeal did not consider that the second notice was invalid because it amounted to a means of depriving the employee of his statutory rights.
However, the second notice was clearly given in breach of contract and it was indicated that in any subsequent wrongful dismissal action, damages might include a sum for the loss of the right to claim unfair dismissal to which the employee would have been entitled had the contract been honoured.
Statutory postponement
If you are not given sufficient notice in accordance with your contract, the Consolidation Act provides that the termination date for certain purposes will be when either:
1.
the actual notice given expires; or
2.
the minimum statutory notice period (see Chapter 6) would have expired;
whichever is the later.
It is important to appreciate that the contractual notice period is not added to your period of service.
This may be bad news if you do not have sufficient continuous service to qualify for rights if only the statutory period is added, although you would have had sufficient service if the longer notice period to which you are entitled under your contract were added.
If you have been validly dismissed for gross misconduct, you cannot add the statutory minimum notice period to your period of service.
Nor does the statutory postponement apply for the purpose of ascertaining whether you have made a complaint to an industrial tribunal within the requisite time limit.
Internal appeals
If you appeal against your dismissal, and your appeal is rejected, you may wonder whether your job legally came to an end at the time of your original dismissal or when the appeal was eventually turned down.
The answer will depend upon how the appeals procedure is framed.
If payment of your salary continues until the date of final rejection, that date is likely to be the termination date.
In most cases, however, the original date of dismissal will be the important date.
This means that, if you do pursue an appeal, you should not overlook any relevant time limits for pursuing your statutory rights.
If you do, you risk achieving the worst of both worlds by finding that the appeals procedure becomes protracted, that you are not ultimately allowed to resume your job and that you have missed the chance to complain to an industrial tribunal about your treatment.
Valuing Your Statutory Rights
What is your job worth?
If your job is at risk, you should be aware of the hard cash value of your legal rights.
Quite apart from potentially valuable entitlements under your contract, which are discussed in Chapter 18, you may be eligible to claim a redundancy payment and/or that your dismissal is unfair.
The main qualifying conditions are outlined in Chapter 20.
The value of unfair dismissal rights is not purely financial.
If a tribunal holds your dismissal to be unfair, it must consider which remedy to grant.
The possibilities are:
1.
reinstatement, ie an order that you shall be treated in every respect as if you had not been dismissed; or
2.
re-engagement, ie re-employment on terms which are not identical to those enjoyed at the date of your dismissal; or
3.
compensation.
The tribunal must consider the remedies in that order.
Nevertheless, unfairly dismissed employees are only awarded re-employment in a very small minority of cases.
In particular, business executives hardly ever regain their jobs.
This is presumably because it is seldom possible to heal the breach that is usually created by fighting a legal battle.
Even if reinstatement or re-engagement is ordered, an employer cannot at the end of the day be forced to take you back.
The ultimate sanction is financial: an additional award of compensation.
Knowing what your rights may be worth in money terms will help you not only to decide whether or not to take legal action, if necessary, to recover the sums due to you, but also to assess the reasonableness  of any ‘termination package deal’ offered to you and generally to plan ahead for the future.
17. 2 Redundancy payments
The amount of a statutory redundancy payment is calculated as follows:
1.
for each year of employment between the ages of 18 and 21 half a week's pay;
2.
for each year of employment between the ages of 22 and 40 one week's pay;
3.
for each year of employment between the ages of 41 and 65 one and a half week's pay;
4.
employment for longer than 20 years is not taken into account;
5.
the maximum amount of a week's pay taken into account with effect from 1 April 1990 is £184 per week, but that figure is reviewed from time to time.
The amount currently applicable should be checked with the Department of Employment;
6.
in the year before the employee's 65th birthday, various provisions scale down the payment on a monthly basis, ie the amount is reduced by one twelfth for each month by which his or her age approaches 65;
7.
no deduction is made for tax.
The relevant date for calculating your pay is normally the date on which your job would have terminated had proper notice been given under the Consolidation Act, whether or not such notice was in fact given.
In effect, therefore, the redundancy payment is based on final earnings.
A week's pay is calculated in accordance with a series of statutory rules.
Most business executives will find the arbitrary cutoff point of £184 means that state redundancy pay is worth rather less than they might have hoped or expected.
Your employer must give you a written statement when making a redundancy payment, showing how the amount is calculated, unless the amount of payment has already been fixed by the decision of an industrial tribunal.
Unfair dismissal basic award
The concept of the basic award in unfair dismissal is akin to that of the redundancy payment, ie it reflects loss of job security.
It is  calculated in almost exactly the same way.
However, deductions may be made from it if:
1.
your conduct was such that it would be just and equitable to make a deduction;
2.
it was just and equitable to make a deduction because you unreasonably refused an offer of reinstatement;
3.
your dismissal date fell after your 64th birthday, in which case the award is reduced on a sliding scale.
Furthermore, a statutory redundancy payment will be offset against the basic award.
The compensatory award
If you are entitled to compensation for unfair dismissal, you will usually receive a compensatory award as well as a basic award.
The compensatory award is intended to reimburse you for financial loss resulting from the unfair dismissal.
The award will be the amount that the tribunal considers just and equitable in all the circumstances.
It will cover any expenses reasonably incurred and any loss of benefit which you might reasonably be expected to have had but for the dismissal.
Legal costs for assistance with an unfair dismissal claim are not reimbursed.
The onus is upon you to show that you have suffered loss and, if you have suffered no loss because your job would have ended in any event, there will be a nil award.
Compensation may be limited if a fair dismissal would, or might, have been possible in the near future, ie where the unfairness lay primarily in accelerating your dismissal.
In Winterhalter Gastronom Ltd v Webb (1973), an employee, dismissed unfairly for incompetence because a fair period to improve was not allowed, nevertheless saw his compensation halved by the Employment Appeal Tribunal, who concluded that:
His chances of improving sufficiently to hold down his job were poor and…only a modest sum can be fairly attributed to the loss of this chance.
This principle might not be restricted to cases of misconduct or lack of capability.
For example, if you are unfairly made redundant because consideration was not given to offering you another job, your compensation might be discounted to take account of the fact  that, had proper consideration been given, you might still not have been offered that job.
In assessing compensation, a tribunal has wide discretion.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has expressed the view that any other approach would tend to defeat the system's objectives of speed, informality and accessibility.
It is accepted that this: may mean that sometimes an employee will get a bit less than he might have expected; it may mean that sometimes an employer will have to pay a little more than he had expected.
Quantifying the compensatory award
Unfortunately, but perhaps inevitably, the calculation of the compensatory award is highly speculative.
Making an advance estimate of its amount in a particular case is fraught with danger.
Above all, you should be aware of an extremely important ceiling on the compensatory award.
With effect from 1 April 1990, the maximum award is £8,925; that limit is reviewed from time to time.
The effect of this regrettable and wholly arbitrary restriction is that, for a senior executive, an unfair dismissal claim may provide only a very limited redress for the losses resulting from the unjust ending of employment.
Earnings during the notice period
If you are dismissed with pay in lieu of notice, or without notice, and you obtain new employment during the notice period, you are bound to bring into account those earnings.
Manner of dismissal
If you suffer loss as a result of the manner of an unfair dismissal, for example because you lose the chance of another job when your prospective employer learns that you have been sacked, you will be compensated for that loss.
In practice, you will seldom find it easy to show that you have suffered in that way and, in particular, you are not entitled to compensation to reflect the emotional distress than an unjust dismissal may well cause both you and your family.
Loss to date of hearing
You will normally be able to claim the amount (net of tax and National Insurance) that you would have earned between the date of dismissal and the date of the industrial tribunal hearing.
From this  will be deducted the amount that you have earned if you have found another job.
If you begin new employment before the hearing, that will not operate as a ‘cut-off’ date.
Instead, the earnings in your new job will usually be set off against what you have lost.
Sickness benefits received prior to the hearing need only be brought into account where your salary would have been reduced on account of ill health.
Social security benefits will be set off against your loss; the relevant rules are contained in detailed regulations.
The tribunal must specify various elements in its award of compensation if you have received certain state benefits.
First, the total monetary award will be calculated.
Second, the amount of the compensation, and the period covered by it, from the dismissal date to the date of the hearing, will be identified.
This amount is called ‘the prescribed element’.
Finally, the amount by which the total award exceeds the prescribed element must also be specified.
The prescribed element is, in effect, frozen for the time being and should not be paid by the employer.
The Department of Employment may serve a recoupment notice on the employer within 21 days of the end of the hearing, or within nine days after the decision is sent to the parties (21 days if the judgment has been reserved).
Your former employer should pay the amount so claimed by the Department in respect of social security benefits that you have received.
Any part of the prescribed element remaining should then be paid by you.
These rules do not bite where a claim is settled, thus providing an additional incentive to both sides to reach a private agreement.
Future loss
The onus is on you to show that you will suffer loss after the hearing date as a result of being treated unjustly.
If you have found work elsewhere at a lower salary before the hearing, the tribunal will have to project your loss forward for whatever period it considers appropriate.
If you are still out of work, the tribunal has to gaze into its crystal ball.
In effect, it will try to guess how long you will be out of work.
Your age and skills, as well as the local employment situation, will usually be highly relevant, but again the tribunal's discretion is very wide indeed.
Fringe benefits
The tribunal will generally compensate you for lost fringe benefits, although putting a figure upon them is often another exercise in guesstimation.
Quantifying the value of your lost pension rights is a particularly difficult task.
The Government Actuary's Department prepared a document in 1980 which sets out a suggested basis for making the calculation and this was supplemented ten years later by recommendations from a committee of industrial tribunal chairmen.
While an industrial tribunal may err if it misinterprets these guidelines, the Employment Appeal Tribunal has emphasised that, for all the potential complexity, the assessment of compensation is inevitably a rough-and-ready exercise.
Loss of employment protection rights
You will generally be awarded a sum in respect of your lost industrial rights, ie because you have to requalify for the right not to be unfairly dismissed.
In 1986, the Employment Appeal Tribunal suggested that the going rate under this heading was £100.
Nowadays a slightly higher figure is apt to be awarded.
Expenses
You may be entitled to compensation in respect of certain expenses incurred, for instance in seeking new employment.
Removal expenses might be recoverable if you have to leave the district in order to improve your employment prospects.
It is even possible that if you decide to set up your own business, you may be able to claim for the initial costs of this.
Deductions
Contributory fault
If a tribunal decides that, although your dismissal was unfair, you were partly to blame, it will reduce your compensation by the amount it considers just and equitable.
This may apply even in a case of constructive dismissal.
Once again, the tribunal has a very wide discretion.
It is even possible, in extreme circumstances, for contributory fault to be assessed at 100 per cent, thus resulting in a nil compensation award.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal has said that the weight to be given to an employee's conduct ought to be decided ‘in a broad, common sense manner’.
Bloody-mindedness may sometimes amount to contributory fault, as may any particularly unreasonable behaviour.
Mitigation of loss
The compensatory award may be reduced if you have failed to mitigate your loss.
This concept also applies in breach-of-contract  claims, and is further discussed in Chapter 18.
Similar principles apply in unfair dismissal cases.
Ex gratia payments
Quantifying compensation may be complicated if an ex gratia payment has been made to you.
For example, an ex gratia payment is not automatically treated as meeting any liability stemming from the basic award.
If it was clearly intended that the ex gratia sum should include an element to cover the basic award, it will be set off against that award, but not otherwise.
If a general payment is made, the tribunal will have to interpret whether it does actually cover both basic and compensatory awards.
What happens if you are paid an ex gratia sum which exceeds the current maximum compensatory award?
Are you able to claim any additional compensation if you have been unfairly dismissed?
The answer is sometimes yes.
The ex gratia payment should be deducted from the total gross award, which may far exceed the meagre statutory limit, before that limit is applied.
Thus, if the total award is large enough (say, reflecting three years' employment and loss of salary and contract benefits for that length of time), an ex gratia payment will not reduce your former employer's legal liability towards you at all.
Furthermore, any reduction in respect of contributory fault should only be made after the ex gratia payment has been subtracted from the total gross award.
This is another reason why a well-advised employer who offers you an ex gratia payment when your job comes to an end is likely to insist that you are effectively prevented in law from making any further claim against him (see Chapter 19).
What is Your Contract Worth?
Wrongful dismissal
If your employment contract is broken and you suffer loss as a result, you will probably wish to seek compensation.
In the case of a small pay cut, for example, we have seen that it is sometimes safer to sue for the amount that you have lost, rather than give up your job.
Where a more serious breach of contract occurs, or you are sacked, you will need to consider whether or not to claim that you have been wrongfully dismissed.
One point to clear up immediately is the widespread confusion between wrongful dismissal and unfair dismissal.
They are two distinct legal concepts.
A wrongful dismissal may be fair.
On the other hand, an unfair dismissal may not be wrongful.
The rules and procedures in the two actions are very different.
The right not to be unfairly dismissed is relatively modern and based upon statute; if you are unfairly dismissed, you may complain to an industrial tribunal.
A wrongful dismissal claim is a common law action for damages for breach of contract.
One of the unsatisfactory features of employment law over the past couple of decades has been the rule that a wrongful dismissal claim must be brought in either the County Court or the High Court.
Complex cases, or those where the sum at stake is above a specified limit, have been the sole province of the High Court.
Unfortunately proceedings in the civil courts tend to be slower, more expensive and more formal than those in the industrial tribunal.
Yet the cap on the compensatory award for unfair dismissal discussed in Chapter 17 meant that a significant number of executives had little option but to fight through the thickets of civil court procedure.
The scene was complicated by the introduction of the Wages Act 1986.
The key principle of the Act is that an employer should not make a deduction from the wages of a worker without that worker's written consent.
Under the Act, a worker may present a complaint about an unlawful deduction from his wages to an industrial tribunal.
As the Act became more widely known, people began to bring in the industrial tribunal claims which were, in effect, wrongful dismissal claims in disguise — typically, claims in respect of non-payment of notice monies.
Confusion increased when different industrial tribunals and different divisions of the Employment Appeal Tribunal disagreed about whether it was legitimate under the Act to pursue such claims.
It may have been no coincidence that the Government announced in March 1990 that industrial tribunals were to be given the power to hear claims for damages in respect of breaches of employment contract.
This is a welcome and long overdue development but at the time of writing the detailed regulations bringing it into force have yet to be published.
Even when the new system is operational, it will be subject to important conditions.
First, the claim must arise or be outstanding on the termination of the employee's employment.
Second, it must arise in circumstances which also give rise to proceedings already or simultaneously brought before an industrial tribunal.
The civil courts will not be deprived by this measure of jurisdiction for breach of employment contract claims.
Unless some specific provision is made limiting the power of a tribunal to hear claims involving large sums or very complex issues, it will be for the employee to choose the forum in which he will pursue his claim.
Only time will tell whether the requirement that ‘other proceedings’ must be brought will lead to an increase in more or less spurious statute-based complaints, for instance in respect of unfair dismissal.
There are a variety of reasons why, despite this new move, you may still wish (or be obliged) to bring a wrongful dismissal claim in the civil courts, for example:
1.
where you have insufficient service to quality for unfair dismissal rights;
2.
where you are ineligible on other grounds to claim unfair dismissal, perhaps because you are past normal retiring age or fall within an excluded category of employment;
3.
where you have missed the time limit for presenting an unfair dismissal application (the normal limitation period for bringing an action for breach of contract in the civil courts is six  years, rather than the strict three-month time limit for pursuing an unfair dismissal claim);
4.
where your dismissal, although wrongful, was plainly fair, such as a dismissal for genuine and inevitable redundancy, but with inadequate notice;
5.
where you stand to gain very much more from a successful action for wrongful dismissal than you would from proceeding before an industrial tribunal, bearing in mind the ceiling on unfair dismissal compensation and the potential value of your contract if your notice entitlement is lengthy.
Occasionally, it is both possible and desirable to launch claims in respect of both unfair dismissal and wrongful dismissal (see below).
What do you stand to gain in a wrongful dismissal case?
The basic rule of the common law is that:
where a party sustains a loss by reason of a breach of contract, he is, so far as money can do it, to be placed in the same situation with respect to damages, as if the contract had been performed.
These words, uttered by Baron Parke in an 1848 case, still hold good today.
The crux is that the amount of damages obtainable will,prima facie , be the total of the salary and fringe benefits to which you would have been entitled between the time of the job actually ending and the time at which the contract could lawfully have been ended by due notice.
Salary during the notice period
The major part of your claim will usually be your right to salary during the notice period.
This is where hard bargaining at the time that you negotiated your service contract could pay off handsomely.
For example, if you have been employed for four years and earn a basic salary of £40,000, one hardly need emphasise the difference between the value of your rights if you are eligible just for the statutory minimum of four weeks' notice and the scale of your claim if you are on, say, a three-year rolling contract.
The length of your notice period will also govern the worth of your fringe benefits in the event of a wrongful dismissal.
Although a breach of contract claim is based upon common law rights, remember that the Consolidation Act entitles you to minimum pay during your statutory notice period.
Even if you do not  work some or all of your normal hours during that period, you should still be paid for them if you are:
1.
ready and willing to work, but given no work;
2.
incapable of work through sickness or injury;
3.
taking your lawful holidays.
Motor car
If you are only allowed to use your ‘company car’ in connection with your job, you will probably not be entitled to compensation for loss of the right to use it during your notice period if you are not being asked to work.
More often, an executive's contract entitles him to private use of his car.
This, after all, is one of the commonest fringe benefits.
Nevertheless, you should check the exact scope of your rights under the contract.
Are you, for instance, due to be reimbursed in respect of all or part of the running expenses?
It is rare for a dispute about the value of an executive's car to reach the courts.
An illuminating exception to this general rule occurred in Shove v Downs Surgical plc (1984).
Mr Shove joined the company in 1937 and eventually became chairman and managing director.
In July 1982, he fell ill and the following month his fellow directors decided in his absence to sack him.
He was not given the 30 months' notice provided for by his contract.
Among other things, the company argued that he had no right to use the car for his private purposes.
The High Court disagreed.
Had that been so, it would not have been necessary for his contract to include a statement that, ‘the Company will bear the entire cost of servicing, repairing, maintaining, taxing and insuring the said motor car’.
Furthermore, Mr Shove was entitled to charge the company for private petrol.
The contract made no mention of this, but there was evidence that, in practice, he had been allowed to have petrol for private use.
The company claimed that Mr Shove's financial loss as a result of being deprived of private use of the car should be calculated by referring to the tax charge on it.
Again, the judge rejected this argument.
Nor would he accept that he should work out the sum due by looking at the cost of providing a type of car which Mr Shove ‘might reasonably be expected to acquire in his present circumstances’.
Mr Shove was entitled under his contract to the benefit of a Daimler throughout his notice period and that is what he was compensated for.
There are several different ways in which the loss can be assessed.
One way would be to take the cost of buying a car of the same age and then trying to quantify the cost of running it throughout the notice period.
Another method would be to look at the Automobile Association's figures on the cost of running a motor car of that engine capacity or at the cost of hiring such a car.
Pension rights
Your pension is valuable.
If you are wrongfully dismissed, the cost in terms of pension benefits alone is likely to be heavy.
Saying that is, unfortunately, much easier than calculating in hard cash terms exactly what you have lost.
In unfair dismissal cases, it is understandable that industrial tribunals tend to shrink away from complex arithmetic.
As we have seen, even though the Government Actuary's Department's guidelines are helpful, a rough-and-ready approach is perhaps inevitable.
In a wrongful dismissal case, where there is no equivalent to the statutory ceiling on the amount of compensation that may be awarded, it will often be worth taking the trouble to investigate the pension position in much more depth.
Once more, there are a number of different methods of calculating the loss.
If it is likely to be sizeable, it might be a good idea to hire a consultancy actuary to analyse the scheme involved and to pinpoint the relevant facts.
Pensions are often structured in a complex way and there may be plenty of material for an ingenious expert to get his teeth into.
With careful thought and the application of ruthless logic, it may be possible to establish a much larger claim than you would have expected.
If so, your investment in professional help will have been amply justified.
Commission and bonuses
If you have a contractual right to commission or a bonus, you are entitled to be compensated for what you have lost as a result of a wrongful dismissal.
This is so even though, inevitably, the amount that you might earn is variable.
If the matter ever came to court, the judge would estimate the amount that you would have earned, in the light of the evidence before him concerning the nature of your job.
Similar principles apply in the case of bonuses, which often involve an element of profit sharing.
The first step is to look at the  contract to see whether there is any discretion with regard to payment that is made.
If the company has the right to decide whether or not to award a bonus, you will not be entitled to compensation for its loss, unless the bonus has been declared by the date of your dismissal.
If the contract makes it clear that you will receive a bonus, without specifying a fixed sum, your entitlement is probably to a figure that is reasonable, taking into account sums received in previous years.
Other benefits
As we saw in Chapter 4, your contract may cater for a wide variety of perks, such as:
1.
life assurance;
2.
private health care;
3.
free or subsidised accommodation;
4.
loans on favourable terms;
5.
free or subsidised meals;
6.
home telephone charges;
7.
rights under share incentive schemes;
8.
professional subscriptions.
The list is almost endless.
You should not underestimate the importance of these rights when working out the value of your contract.
For example, in the Shove case, the sum awarded by the High Court under the first two headings in the above list alone amounted to £7300: not a trifling amount.
Hurt feelings
To be sacked on the spot, or with inadequate notice, is likely to distress even the most resilient of businessmen.
No one who has undergone the traumatic and humiliating experience of being bundled unceremoniously out of a senior position will deny that.
Grossly unfair treatment could affect your physical and mental well-being, as well as that of members of your close family.
Regrettably, a House of Lords decision in the early years of this century made it clear that wrongful dismissal compensation will not cover either:
1.
injury to personal feelings; or 
2.
Loss suffered because the dismissal makes it more difficult for you to find another job.
A few exceptions to this harsh rule have emerged over the years.
A person involved in the entertainment industry, such as an actor, might be able to claim if his contract clearly envisaged that publicity would enhance his reputation.
Furthermore, in 1975 an executive who suffered emotional distress after being demoted was awarded £500 compensation.
The current trend, however, is for the old orthodoxy to be reasserted.
Thus, in the Shove case, even though the judge accepted that Mr Shove had suffered distress as a result of being so deplorably treated, no damages were awarded because of that.
This seems unfair.
One can claim compensation for the dismaying experience of a spoilt holiday: it is strange that the same principle does not apply to the breaking of obligations under employment contracts.
Perhaps one day some brave soul will make a long legal journey to the House of Lords and persuade them to change their minds.
Deductions
Taxation
Damages for breach of contract should put you as nearly as possible in the position that you would have occupied had your contract been performed properly — but no better.
Because you would have received your pay and benefits net of tax if you had worked, your damages must take tax into account.
Complications arise if one tries to tie in this principle with the favourable tax treatment of ‘golden handshakes’, discussed in more detail in Chapter 19.
Over the years, the courts have adopted varying approaches.
One possibility is to ignore the part of the award of damages which exceeds the amount exempt from tax under the ‘golden handshake’ rules, for instance by expressing the exempt amount (currently £30,000) as an annual income over the unexpired period of the contract, estimating what the tax would be on that imaginary income and deducting that tax from the total compensation.
This artificial exercise was not repeated in the Shove case.
The High Court sought to make the final damages reflect Mr Shove's actual loss.
The chosen method was to calculate his net loss, taking into account that he would have paid income tax on earnings, then adding back ‘golden handshake’ tax so that he would be left with the net amount after the Revenue had collected tax on the damages.
There are several obvious difficulties:
1.
one cannot guess how tax rates, personal allowances and bands of income for higher rates are going to change in future tax years;
2.
the amount of your personal allowances may change for various reasons;
3.
you may have other income, pushing your total income into higher-rate bands;
4.
if you worked abroad, any tax relief that might be associated with your periods overseas ought to be considered.
Mitigation of loss
You are obliged to keep your losses to a minimum.
The basic legal principles are:
1.
you cannot recover loss that you could have avoided suffering by taking reasonable steps;
2.
if you in fact avoid or reduce your loss, you cannot recover the amount so saved, even if the steps that you took were more than could reasonably have been expected;
3.
you may recover loss or expense incurred in taking reasonable steps to mitigate your loss.
If you are wrongfully dismissed, you should therefore seek alternative employment at the earliest opportunity.
Wages that you earn or could reasonably have earned during your notice period will be taken into account when assessing compensation.
Whether or not you can reasonably be expected to take a job of a different kind or at a lower rate of pay will depend upon the circumstances.
The rules are not rigid.
If you occupied a senior position, you may not be under an immediate duty to accept an alternative job of an inferior status.
If so, you may look for work of the same status, remunerated at the same level, for a reasonable time, without having your compensation reduced as a result.
As a practical measure, keep a full record of all jobs that you apply for and the responses that you receive to show that you have not simply sat back and waited for the money to roll in.
State benefits
If you receive state benefits, such as unemployment benefit, during your notice period, they will be taken into account in calculating the extent of your claim.
This is another example of the way in which damages are intended to reflect only what you have really lost.
Accelerated payment
It takes some time for a breach of contract claim to reach a trial.
Occasionally, however, a compensation award will be made and become payable before the expiry of the notice period.
In such circumstances, the courts will usually make a deduction because you are receiving early payment.
In the Shove case, the compensation was reduced for this reason by 7 per cent, a figure which had been agreed between the parties.
In the context of pre-trial negotiations, and discussions about a termination package (see Chapter 19), you may also find that the company will insist that the value of your claim should be reduced to take account of this factor.
This is often a logical argument and the real issue may be the amount of the deduction that should be made.
Contributory fault
One of the attractions of a breach of contract claim is that there is no provision for contributory fault.
If you have been guilty of a fundamental breach of your obligations under the contract, you will, of course, have been lawfully dismissed and therefore entitled to no compensation.
Thus, wrongful dismissal sometimes proves to be ‘all or nothing’ litigation.
Overlap with unfair dismissal
Although there are a number of points of difference, some of them highly significant, between the calculation of compensation for unfair dismissal and for wrongful dismissal, there is nonetheless often a degree of overlap.
While you are not entitled to recover twice the same amount of loss, it is conceivable that you might be eligible for full compensation in respect of both claims.
This might happen, for instance, if you were unfairly dismissed without notice at the age of 60, when you had no prospect of finding another job before an expected retirement age of 65.
If your notice period was 12 months, you might obtain damages to cover that period and yet still be asking an industrial tribunal to reimburse you to the extent of the maximum compensatory award in respect of your anticipated future loss, together with payment to you of the basic award.
A number of important tactical questions may need to be answered.
For example, would it be prudent to ask the tribunal to postpone hearing your unfair dismissal claim pending the outcome of the breach of contract case?
This might be sensible if you were  advised that your claim would be better presented in the formal atmosphere of the civil courts, or that your wrongful dismissal claim is so much more substantial that it will lead almost inevitably to a settlement of the lesser, unfair dismissal claim.
It is worth bearing in mind, too, that a judgment in the industrial tribunal may bind the High Court and vice versa.
In which forum is your version of events most likely to be accepted?
Expert advice on such matters is indispensable.
Termination Package Deals
The gentle art of compromise
Inevitably, a book such as this harps on the pitfalls faced by executives.
You may easily gain the impression that only cynics survive and that every businessman needs a tame lawyer at his elbow when dealing with his own boss.
The good news is that, even in the minority of cases where the only solution is to leave your job and try your luck elsewhere, it is unusual for a dispute to arise that is so serious that you finish up in front of a judge or an industrial tribunal.
Whether you are leaving on a more or less amicable basis, perhaps just a luckless victim of business recession or a change in management style following a takeover, or in an atmosphere of mutual recrimination, it is usually possible sooner or later to strike a deal with the company which satisfies both sides.
If tempers have flared, and especially if you have been badly treated by your employer, the urge to retaliate with every means at your disposal will be enormous.
Firing off a writ or an unfair dismissal application may make you feel better for a little while, but you should think carefully before launching yourself into a full-scale battle.
Although there are times when pursuing litigation is tactically the right thing to do, and others when there is simply no realistic alternative, you need to be conscious of the possible drawbacks.
For example, how will suing your former employer affect your chances of finding another job?
However unjust it might be, there are many companies which will be inclined to think twice about recruiting someone who is engaged in a bitter fight with his old firm.
If you retain real career ambitions, this is a harsh truth which you  cannot entirely ignore, even if in the end you decide that you must not abandon your legal rights of redress.
The risks of a court case also have to be in the forefront of your mind.
Most lawyers will tell you that ‘cast iron’ prospects of success are much less common than their clients are apt to believe.
What seems plain maltreatment at the time could look rather different in the quiet surroundings of a tribunal or courtroom months or years later.
Indulging in litigation may mean that you have to expend substantial sums of money and wait a long time before achieving victory; to lose could prove very costly.
You have to take account of the worry to your family and yourself as well as the advice that you receive on the merits of your claims.
Any or all of these factors may encourage you to seek to negotiate a settlement which entitles you to speedy payment of a lump sum and perhaps other benefits, even if the value of the total package is less than the amount that you might theoretically win if you sued and all went well.
Similarly, your employer, whether out of a genuine spirit of goodwill, a hard-headed assessment of the damage that a court case might do or a combination of the two, may decide that the best course is to seek an amicable parting of the ways.
Frequently, senior executives are offered a termination package deal at the time when they are first told that it is likely or unavoidable that their job will come to an end.
Don't become despondent just because it seems that your employer is keen to drive a hard bargain.
Above all, remember that both parties are not irrevocably committed to litigation just because legal proceedings are issued.
Wrongful dismissal actions seldom reach a full trial in the High Court and about 70 per cent of all unfair dismissal claims are settled or withdrawn without the need for a hearing.
It is plain that, in the long run, the gentle art of compromise has much to recommend it.
Negotiating techniques
There are many different approaches to the negotiation of termination package deals.
Some advisers suggest that you look to past precedents within the company; others recommend that you gear your expectations to the financial sum that you expect to require in order to exist in reasonable comfort until another job comes along; others simply suggest that you look for payment of a year's full salary.
From a legal point of view, a useful rule of thumb is that the maximum  of a dismissed executive's legal claims is likely to be the total
1.
statutory redundancy pay (or an unfair dismissal basic award);
2.
the current maximum unfair dismissal compensatory award; and
3.
the total value of his contractual rights during his notice period.
Time and again this simple formula proves to be a constructive starting point for detailed discussion.
Naturally, it has limitations.
For instance, if the dismissal was plainly fair or the executive lacks sufficient service to claim unfair dismissal, the first two elements may be irrelevant.
But this approach avoids undervaluing your claims.
Indeed, you will probably find it difficult to construct a logical argument to the effect that you are legally entitled to a higher sum than can be arrived at by applying the above calculation.
How you conduct negotiations from there is largely a question of individual judgment supported by sound professional advice.
You need to exploit not only your commercial acumen, but also your personal knowledge of the people with whom you are dealing.
Do they really mean it when they say that a proposal is ‘not negotiable’ or conditional upon your acceptance within a very strict time limit?
Are these men who have to be pushed every inch of the way?
Is the first offer that they make simply an opening shot?
Some employers are unwilling to pay the whole settlement sum ‘upfront’.
They may insist on payment by instalments, possibly spread throughout the whole of your notice period.
Even more worryingly, continued payment of the instalments may be conditional upon your observing a variety of undertakings — typically including restrictions on competing activities.
You need to think long and hard before agreeing to such ‘strings’.
And if you do agree to them, but later have second thoughts, seek expert advice before doing anything which might expose you to legal action, or to the risk that the instalment payments will be stopped.
In particular, try to avoid agreeing to any deal which allows your employer to claw back moneys already paid, if you (perhaps unwittingly) transgress the terms of the deal.
At all times, you need to remain aware of the risk factors mentioned in the previous section.
There may also be a wide variety of specific points which influence your thinking.
If you have another lucrative position lined up, that will be a good reason to press for an early resolution if you fear that once your ex-employer learns of it, he might be much less inclined to generosity.
While it is only sensible  to acknowledge that the company will have greater resources and possibly less to lose than yourself, your hand could be strengthened if you are confident that messy litigation is the last thing that management wants because, for example, a merger is on the horizon or the publicity of a court case is likely to upset customers.
Although the adrenalin may flow, you owe it to yourself not to become carried away.
Over the years, a few huge, widely reported pay-offs have given rise to the impression among more gullible members of the newspaper-reading public that six-figure golden handshakes are the norm for the departing business executive.
Do not be deceived into throwing away a decent offer in pursuit of pie in the sky.
Tax implications of termination payments
Before you fix on a settlement figure, you need to consider how much tax you will have to pay on any agreed sum and whether the tax burden can somehow be reduced.
As ever, there is much to be gained from seeking expert advice at an early stage, especially since tax law changes at least as rapidly as employment law and your personal circumstances may also affect the view that you ought to take.
Only a brief outline of the main points which currently affect business executives can be given here.
Golden handshakes
The basic rule is that termination payments are generally regarded by the Inland Revenue as fully taxable pay, unless they are:
1.
gifts expressing personal regard for the employee's qualities, in the case of a parting or by mutual consent; or
2.
compensation for loss of office, in the case of dismissal or forced resignation.
Suffice it to say here that a payment which is large in relation to salary is unlikely to be viewed as falling within the first category.
Usually, you will be more concerned with compensation for loss of office colloquially known as a golden handshake.
Golden handshakes can be tax efficient.
At the time of writing, the whole of a payment by way of compensation for loss of office below £30,000, or the first £30,000 of a larger payment, is tax free.
There are anti-avoidance provisions which prevent you gaining from cunning manoeuvres such as arranging for different companies within  your employer's group each to contribute a share of the total pay-out; if this is done, all the sums will be aggregated.
‘Top-slicing’ applies to payments over £30,000.
The main points are as follows:
(a)
you add different payments in respect of a termination or terminations in the same year and treat them as one;
(b)
you deduct the tax-free sum;
(c)
you work out how much your tax would be if the non-exempt part of your payment was included in your income.
You find the tax due by deducting from that two reliefs:
•for the part of the payment between the exempt amount and £50,000, first calculate your income tax as if this part were included in your income and then your tax as if it were not; the relief on this part is half the difference;•for the part between £50,000 and £75,000, first calculate your tax as if the part between the exempt amount and £75,000 were included in your income, and then your tax as if only the part between the exempt amount and £50,000 were included; the relief on this part is 25 per cent of the difference;
(d)
there is no relief on the part of the payment over £75,000.
There are a number of possible tax-saving tactics which you may wish to discuss with your accountant, such as:
•minimising your other taxable income for the year in question;•leaving soon after the start of the tax year;•maximising deductions from your other taxable income, for example by making voluntary contributions to an exempt, approved pension scheme.
Pay in lieu of notice
Payments described as being ‘in lieu’ give rise to much confusion.
They can be classified as:
1.
genuinely in lieu, ie instead of giving notice; or
2.
a wages payment for a notice period which you are not required to work.
In the latter case, the payment is taxable as income.
In the former case, it can sometimes be brought within the scope of the rules on payments by way of compensation for loss of office.
If you are told that your employment is to end immediately, but  that you will be paid salary for your notice period, that will fall within the former category.
However, it would normally be taxable as income in the ordinary way if paid pursuant to a specific clause in your contract.
Furthermore, a payment made on the same basis as that in the case of Adams v G K N Sankey Ltd mentioned in Chapter 16 would probably also fall within the second category.
Other parts of the package
Money is not the only thing to think about when you negotiate a termination package deal.
Considering what else might be on offer is not only in your interests but may also help bring an overall agreement nearer if your employer is willing to provide non-cash benefits in return, perhaps for a slight reduction in the lump sum that you are looking for.
Take a close look at your pension position.
Can your benefits be ‘topped up’ in a tax-efficient way?
Your employer might be willing to purchase an annuity for you to make a one-off lump sum in commutation of your pension rights.
Do not forget the significance of any shares that you hold in the company or any rights that you have under a share incentive scheme.
What is to happen and do you have any extra negotiating counters, such as your potential nuisance value as a dissident minority shareholder, which can assist you in persuading the company to be more generous?
There are a number of other practical points to which you may wish to pay attention.
References
It may conceivably help your future career to have a suitably worded reference.
Much depends upon you, the company and the job concerned.
You have no legal right to insist upon being given a reference; the relevant legal principles are discussed in Chapter 21.
A clause in a severance agreement which merely acknowledges that the company will issue a reference upon being approached by a prospective employer is of little use.
You need to know what will be said and a suitable, accurate form of words should be specifically agreed.
Retraining
Occasionally, companies offer departing executives assistance with retraining.
This is naturally most relevant in the case of employees  whose skills have been overtaken by changing business patterns and the increasing use of new technology and who have fallen victim to redundancy or reorganisation plans.
If this possibility interests you, your main concern should be to ensure that you are given enough information to check that the retraining will be of real practical value.
The extent of your employer's duty to pay for it, if the retraining is to be conducted by some outside body, should be made clear.
Out-placement counselling
Everyone knows that, all too often, redundant executives experience difficulty in finding another job.
This explains the emergence of out-placement counsellors, consultants who specialise in aiding out-of work executives to sell themselves effectively in a buyer's market.
Leading counsellors command high fees.
Some decline to accept private clients and act only for employers.
They can sometimes boast impressive success rates.
It may therefore be worth ascertaining whether payment for such services can be included as part of the package.
Consultancy arrangements
If you are not leaving with a sour taste in your mouth, it may be viable for you to enter into an agreement with the company that you will continue to provide it with the benefit of your expertise, pursuant to a consultancy agreement.
This may be especially appropriate if you are planning to become self-employed or if retirement age is drawing near.
It is less satisfactory if there is a danger of creating a psychological barrier to doing something positive about getting another job.
Needless to say, the arrangement should be recorded in writing.
Apart from the question of payment, it will also be especially important to be sure of the precise nature of your commitment in terms of hours to be worked on a weekly or monthly basis.
A word of caution on the subject of tax is also necessary.
You need to make sure that, by staying on, you do not cause the Revenue to interpret your lump sum termination package as advance remuneration in disguise and therefore fully taxable.
This underlines the need for care when the wording of the total package is discussed.
‘Full and final settlement’
If there is goodwill on both sides, sorting out the precise details of the termination deal may not be too difficult once there is a consensus on the key points of principle.
You will almost inevitably be asked to accept the offer in full and final settlement of all your claims.
There is hardly ever a good reason why the deal should not be set out in writing, and this may help to avoid future dispute, but you need to check the proposed wording carefully in conjunction with your advisers.
The first question will usually concern the exact definition of your claims.
Does the document refer simply to any rights that you might have against the company that employed you or against every company in the group?
What about any claims that you may have against individuals, such as directors of the company?
Are you just giving up claims connected with your dismissal or any claim of any sort?
If the latter, do you need to negotiate special exceptions, for example in respect of your pension position?
What about any claims that may come to light in the future, for instance in relation to products that you may already have bought from the company?
You may be advised that the intended phraseology is appropriate and legally effective.
But settling a potential employment dispute tends to involve rather more than just signing a letter prepared by the company or initialling a few sheets of paper which explain the agreed terms.
Employers often insist that departing executives must sign a form supplied by ACAS and make this a fundamental condition of the whole deal.
This is because, although a breach of contract claim can be waived by agreeing to a full and final settlement, special rules apply to statutory job security rights such as the unfair dismissal and redundancy payment regimes.
The Consolidation Act provides that any clause in an agreement is void in so far as it purports:
1.
to exclude or limit the question of any provision of the Act; or
2.
to preclude any person from presenting a complaint to an industrial tribunal pursuant to this Act.
The practical effect of this rule is shown by the case of Council of Engineering Institutions v Maddison (1976).
An employee was made redundant and handed a letter saying that the cheque for £1000 which accompanied it constituted a ‘lump sum payment for severance (including redundancy payment), the acceptance of which is final settlement leaving you with no outstanding claim against the Council’.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal was not satisfied that this amounted to a binding agreement, but held that even if it did, it would have been rendered void because it would have been an agreement  purporting to preclude the employee from presenting a complaint to a tribunal.
We saw in Chapter 6 that fixed-term contracts offer one, strictly limited, means of contracting out of statutory rights.
Even more significant in practice is the rule that settlements of claims under the Act where a conciliation officer from ACAS has ‘taken action’ are binding.
Impartiality is a vital feature of the conciliation officer's role.
He is an independent party through whom you and your employer (or your representatives) can communicate in confidence.
He is not a negotiator or a devil's advocate.
Consequently, he will not advise on the merits of a settlement offer, although with a view to increasing the likelihood of a deal, he may point out the strengths and weaknesses of each side's arguments.
Above all, you should be aware that he is not under an obligation to promote a settlement that is ‘fair’ or to explain unfair dismissal law to you in great detail.
How he performs his function is largely up to him.
When agreement has been reached, it is generally recorded on form COT 3, which is only available from ACAS.
If you have already made an application to the tribunal, perhaps to obviate the risk of missing a crucial time limit should negotiations collapse, the detailed terms might, if it is thought appropriate, be set out in a separate document while you withdraw your claim on form COT 4.
Once you have accepted the offer and the position has been suitably documented, you will hardly ever be able to persuade a court or tribunal to upset it unless you can convince them that you were forced to agree as a result of economic duress.
Establishing this is extremely difficult; certainly, it is not enough merely to show that you were desperately short of cash.
The conclusion is clear.
Do not agree to any deal unless you have assessed in detail all its implications.
Once you have agreed, even if the outcome is a compromise that falls short of your original expectations, the sensible thing is to try to stop worrying about what has occurred in the past and to concentrate on the years ahead.
Going to Law
The right approach
Ambrose Bierce knew about the pitfalls of the legal process.
In The Devil's Dictionary , he described litigation as a machine which you go into as a pig and come out of as a sausage.
For good measure, he compared a litigant to a person about to give up his skin for the hope of retaining his bones.
There is enough truth in these cynical barbs to justify your thinking twice about becoming directly involved in legal action.
A number of potential snags were discussed at the beginning of Chapter 19.
No one can doubt that it is far better to aim to prevent job problems arising than to try to cure them by means of a law suit.
Yet it takes two to compromise.
Your employer may behave so foolishly or ruthlessly that a sensible settlement of your differences seems impossible.
A time may come when you decide, however reluctantly, that you have no alternative but to seek redress by complaining to an industrial tribunal or making a claim through the civil courts.
Litigation is not for the faint-hearted — or the half-hearted.
Unless you are prepared to pursue your legal action with a reasonable amount of vigour, you will find that you are wasting both time and money.
You need to have the courage of your convictions.
Like many a commercial negotiation, litigation sometimes involves an element of brinkmanship; but if you dare not risk your bluff being called, perhaps you should reconsider your plan of campaign.
Above all, effective litigation requires thorough preparation.
You should brief your adviser fully and seek his assessment of the pros and cons of your intended course before implementing it.
Do not expect a cast-iron guarantee of success.
Equally, do not despair just  because the path ahead is long and uncertain.
Litigation is more like a marathon than a sprint.
You need to have staying power.
Arbitration
Arbitration is a possible alternative to litigation.
Arbitration clauses in employment contracts used to be rare.
They have become commoner in recent years as business executives and their employers have sought a means of solving disputes without recourse to courts of law.
The Government's recent decision to allow industrial tribunals to hear claims relating to breach of the employment contract may, however, bring this trend to a halt.
You cannot contract out of your modem statutory job protection rights.
Indeed, the reasonably quick and informal procedure of industrial tribunals is eminently suitable for most cases.
But in comparison to proceeding in the civil courts, arbitration offers a number of possible advantages, ie:
1.
it is more private than a hearing in the civil courts — the press and public are not entitled to be present
2.
arbitration is quicker than the highly formalised court process;
3.
ideally, the chosen arbitrator will be a person with a first-hand grasp of industrial realities, rather than a judge.
Yet arbitration is often not simple, cheap or particularly quick.
That arbitration may often prove less attractive than was originally thought is shown by the case of Goodman v Winchester and Alton Railway plc (1984).
Mr Goodman's solicitor suggested that his contract should include an arbitration clause because the parties had failed to agree all the terms of his employment before he started work.
The idea was that this was a way of ironing out minor disputes, but the clause was worded widely enough to cover a dispute arising out of wrongful termination of the contract.
The contract was for a fixed term of five years.
However, after 12 months, Mr Goodman was dismissed.
He issued a writ claiming damages for wrongful dismissal.
The company, relying on the arbitration clause, argued that the action should be stayed until the case had been heard by an arbitrator.
Because this would cause Mr Goodman financial hardship, a High Court judge said that it was wrong to grant a stay.
The Court of Appeal overturned his decision.
They accepted that Mr Goodman would suffer financial hardship as a result, but said that they were not in a position to judge whether his dismissal had  been justified, so that it could not be said that his difficulties had been caused by the company's conduct.
There was no reason to ignore the general presumption that parties who agree to an arbitration clause should be held to their bargain.
Avoiding dismissal
A business executive who is faced with dismissal usually has to content himself with seeking financial compensation in the form of damages for breach of contract, unfair dismissal compensation or state redundancy pay.
Occasionally, there is a more positive option.
In special circumstances, the law of equity may enable you to seek an injunction or declaration, with a view to restraining your employer from carrying out his threat.
A major limitation is that, generally, an injunction will only be granted if the employer was in fact willing to continue with the contract, ie where the real problem was the prospect of unwelcome interference in the contract by a third party.
In a 1985 case, however, the High Court granted an injunction against a health authority which was unwilling to continue employing the plaintiff, despite regarding him as a competent worker, because of his personality clash with a more senior colleague.
This decision was described as exceptional in Alexander v Standard Telephones & Cables Ltd (1990), where the High Court reasserted the traditional principle that the courts should refuse to grant an injunction to restrain a breach of contract which would force an employer to provide work for an employee he does not wish to employ.
In the Alexander case, unlike the 1985 case, there was no work for the employee to do and the employers did not have complete confidence in the employee anyway.
So the scope for preserving your job by court order is limited.
Even so, an employee with a quick-moving and imaginative lawyer may occasionally be able to launch a surprisingly effective counterattack when he learns that his job is on the line.
Are you eligible for rights?
We have already seen that you will not be able to rely upon employment law rights if, in reality, you are not an employee or if your contract is unenforceable, as when it involves an element of illegality.
Where statutory job rights are concerned, you will also be ineligible if:
1.
you fall within a category of worker which is specifically excluded from protection; or
2.
you are excluded because you do not comply with a specific statutory condition.
The rules vary with the right in question.
Thus, Crown servants are not entitled to statutory redundancy payments, but most have the right not to be unfairly dismissed.
One of the most important limitations on statutory safeguards is the insistence that, to qualify for most rights, you must have built up a specified period of continuous employment.
If that period has been broken, or if you work only part-time, the small print of the legislation might exclude you from its scope.
The qualifying period for the right to statutory redundancy pay is two years.
The same is generally true of unfair dismissal rights, although if the reason for dismissal was trade union-related, there is no qualifying period at all.
You must have worked for 13 weeks to be entitled to a statutory statement of the main terms of your employment.
But you may be able to complain to a tribunal that you have been discriminated against on the grounds of sex or race, even if the company concerned never offered you a job.
The age limit in unfair dismissal law was discussed in Chapter 6; that applicable to redundancy payment rights was mentioned in Chapter 17.
Many other rights are not subject to any age limit at all.
Again, it is a peculiarity of unfair dismissal law that an industrial tribunal does not have the power to consider the fairness of dismissal where at the time of dismissal the employer was conducting a lockout or the employee was taking part in a strike or other industrial action.
This was one of the trump cards of News International in its dispute with the print workers in 1986–87.
On the other hand, an employer who dismisses a redundant employee for going on strike during his notice period will still have to make him a redundancy payment unless he serves a ‘notice of extension’ in accordance with the Consolidation Act requiring him to make up the time lost through the strike.
Much may hinge upon points that the typical executive might understandably regard as irritating technicalities.
Clearly, before you make too many assumptions about the strength of your position in law, it is vital to check the precise rules that apply to you.
Nor is that all.
Most statutory rights have to be enforced within a strict time limit.
A tribunal cannot consider an unfair dismissal complaint unless it is presented during a three-month period beginning  with the effective date of termination.
In a rare case where it was not reasonably practicable for the complaint to be presented within that time span, that complaint must be made within such further period as the tribunal considers reasonable.
You will not be entitled to state redundancy pay, on the other hand, unless within six months from the dismissal date:
(a)
the payment has been agreed and paid; or
(b)
you have claimed the payment by written notice to your employer; or
(c)
you have made a complaint to an industrial tribunal; or
(d)
you have lodged an unfair dismissal claim.
The time limit can be extended by a further six months if it appears to be ‘just and equitable’ to do so.
It has already been mentioned that, in contrast, there is generally a six-year limitation period for instituting proceedings in respect of breach of contract in the civil courts.
In all cases, you would be wise to avoid waiting until the last minute.
As any solicitor will tell you, time limits can be missed all too easily.
Most of the rules are applied strictly and it is hard to imagine any outcome more frustrating than for your legitimate claim to fail simply because you have been guilty of delay.
To secure your rights, be prepared to respond rapidly when problems occur.
Moving Elsewhere
References
No employee can insist upon being given a reference when he leaves a job, unless (as hardly ever happens) his contract specifically entitles him to one.
Not every employer is willing to give an open ‘to whom it may concern’ reference.
Some are even reluctant to respond positively when approached directly by another prospective employer.
But, if a reference is given, it ought to be accurate.
In the (one hopes, very unlikely) event that you are defamed by a reference, the normal rules of libel and slander apply.
You may also be able to sue for damages if your employer, past or present, fails to take care to ensure that his comments are based on correct information.
This point emerged in a 1986 case in which the High Court accepted that a person seeking a job relies on the accuracy of a reference about his character and capabilities even if he does not actually ask for it himself.
So if you lose the chance of a job because of a mistakenly critical reference, it is worth considering whether there is anything to be gained from taking legal action.
Written statement of reasons for dismissal
You are entitled to a written statement of the reasons for your dismissal if you have been employed for two years or more.
This is a modern statutory right.
The thinking behind it, according to the Employment Appeal Tribunal, is to enable you to have a ‘piece of paper’ explaining why you were dismissed to show to prospective employers.
In this respect, obtaining a written statement is very much second best to persuading your ex-employer to provide a suitably positive reference.
Asking for a written statement is often a prelude to presenting an unfair dismissal claim.
If, for example, the reasons described seem unfair or conflict with what was said to you at the time of your dismissal, and you are eligible for unfair dismissal rights, the next step might be for you to make a complaint to the industrial tribunal.
Your request for a statement of reasons may be either verbal or written.
It is better to put it in writing, and keep a copy, so that you have proof of when the request was made.
You are entitled to a response within 14 days.
If your former employer unreasonably refuses to supply a statement, or if the information that he gives is inadequate or untrue, you may apply to a tribunal which:
1.
may declare what the real reasons for your dismissal were; and
2.
should award you two weeks' pay.
A mere failure to respond, within the 14-day time limit or at all, does not necessarily amount to an unreasonable refusal.
The tribunal will look at the explanation for the employer's behaviour before reaching a decision.
The tribunal will also have considerable discretion in deciding whether or not the reasons given are adequate.
Clearly, the statement should contain a sensible account of why you lost your job, but a lengthy screed will seldom be called for.
You should not expect to receive a detailed resume of your employment history with the company.
How free are you to move?
As we saw in Chapter 5, your freedom to move elsewhere may be limited in a number of ways.
This is so even if your contract contains no specific restrictive covenants.
A case involving the intensely competitive newspaper industry demonstrates what may happen.
Evening Standard Co Ltd v Henderson (1987) concerned a production manager whose contract said that while he was employed, ‘on no account are you to engage in outside work’.
He told his company that he proposed to join a rival newspaper, giving two months' notice, rather than the 12 months' notice required by his contract.
His employers offered to pay him in full until the 12-month period expired and the High Court granted them an injunction, preventing Mr Henderson from leaving prematurely.
He could not argue that, if he was not allowed to start his new job, he would starve.
Even after your job has clearly come to an end, you need to beware of breaking obligations that remain legally binding upon you, such as the duty not to disclose trade secrets.
Naturally, you will have more room for manoeuvre if you have avoided agreeing to detailed and specific restraints.
An interesting illustration of the way in which the legal principles discussed earlier actually operate occurred in Faccenda Chicken Ltd v Fowler (1986).
This case concerned a man who set up in competition with the business that had previously employed him.
He advertised for staff, and eight former colleagues joined him.
They were not subject to service contracts containing restrictive covenants.
Soon they were selling goods to Faccenda's customers at lower prices, operating along the same routes as Faccenda and generally making calls earlier in the week than Faccenda.
Faccenda argued that its former employees had made improper use of a ‘package’ of confidential information, ie names and addresses of customers, the best routes to take to reach them, details of their usual requirements, times of Faccenda's usual deliveries and, above all, information about Faccenda's prices.
The Court of Appeal considered that the information did not amount to a trade secret.
It had to be known by employees to do their jobs and was widely known by relatively junior members of staff.
It could be memorised easily and no warning had been given about its sensitivity.
Accordingly, Faccenda's claim failed.
Study any written restrictions in your agreement with particular care.
To what extent do they appear to preclude you from making use of the skills and knowledge that you have acquired and competing with the people for whom you used to work.
If you overstep the mark, you may find yourself involved in a costly legal fight, with your former employers seeking an injunction or damages or both for breach of contract.
Take advice urgently if your intended course of action seems to be at all risky.
Aggressive recruiting
You may want to invite former colleagues to work for or with you in your new sphere.
If so, find out what their notice obligations are.
You should aim to avoid inducing them to break their contracts by walking out without either giving that notice or agreeing that the notice period be shortened.
Remember what was said in Chapter 1, section 1.7, on this point.
Your business plans could be severely  jeopardised if you become embroiled in litigation started by the company that you used to work for.
Taking stock
We live in an age of increasing employee mobility.
When the time comes for you to move on, whether or not you leave through your own choice, it is worth taking stock for a moment.
However many difficulties you have faced, what is certain is that you will have kept on learning, both about the realities of the business world and about yourself.
No one ever knows it all, but the experience should prove invaluable.
In the end, if you keep your wits about you, there is every chance that not only will you get the best deal from your employer, you will also prove that you are worth it.