

Trams About Blackpool
In 1884, Blackpool Corporation decided that the town should have a tramway, and were favourably impressed with the experimental line built in Manchester by Michael Holroyd Smith of Halifax.
The Blackpool Electric Tramway Company was formed in January 1885, and the first rail was laid outside Bailey's Hotel (Metropole) on March 13th.
The Company had a share capital of £30,000, and six out of the ten directors were from Yorkshire!
However, Holroyd Smith shrewdly gained the support of some significant local worthies including John Bickerstaffe — later responsible for the Tower — who became members of the Board.
The Mayor, Ald. Cocker, known as ‘The Father of Blackpool’, was not impressed and wagered John Bickerstaffe that the new tramway would not last more than two years!
Cocker's scepticism was not typical of the sentiments expressed on that day: Ald. McNaughtan, the Tramway Committee Chairman, in laying the first rail said that Blackpool's delay in constructing a tramway was fortuitous, otherwise they would have had horses or steam,‘instead of nature's more wonderful, immense and mysterious agency — electricity’.
Holroyd Smith, attaching an insulator to the rails, explained its purpose and said:‘This little act is important because…this line will be the first in the world to be worked safely in the public street by electricity’.
On this fact rests Blackpool's claim to fame.
Construction of the two-mile line from Cocker Street, at the entrance to Claremont Park, to Dean Street near South Pier, was the joint responsibility of the Company and Corporation.
The latter was responsible for the track, its foundations and the paving, while the Company provided the electrical equipment, together with the power station, depot and cars.
All was not trouble-free, and the line failed its Board of Trade inspection on July 29th, not for any defect of the electrical system, but because the contractor had failed to lay the track properly to gauge.
Holroyd Smith was indeed keen to demonstrate the relative success of his new traction system: on June 29th he operated the first test runs in Princess Street, using one of the experimental Manchester cars.
Blackpool's own first car — No. 5 newly delivered — gave free rides on the Promenade between the Foxhall and Wellington Hotels from 20th July.
The line was passed for service on September 9th, and a horse car service was operated temporarily.
Where It All Began
And so to the grand opening ceremony on 29th September 1885, a date chosen to coincide with the Lifeboat Festival.
For the inauguration of the first electric street tramway in England, the Lord Mayor of York and forty Mayors and Mayoresses from Lancashire, Yorkshire and Cheshire, were present on the day.
So too was Maud, the daughter of Holroyd Smith, who later recalled that auspicious day she rode on the top deck of car 5 after the opening ceremony and played with the chain of ‘a very jolly Mayor’ who sat next to her.
The car was started by Ald. Harwood, Mayor of Manchester, who was presented with an inscribed ebony and brass starting lever.
The Electrician of January 1st 1896 recorded: ‘The enterprise at Blackpool will be watched with great interest.
If success attends this venture, other seaside towns will follow the good example’.
Amongst the flag-waving crowd were children from St. John's C.E. Primary School, who were given the day off.
Their log book records:‘Holiday given on Monday afternoon and Tuesday on account of…the launching of the new lifeboat and inauguration of the electric tramway’.
Opposite: 1.
Ald. McNaughtan laying the first rail, watched by Michael Holroyd-Smith — the inventor — standing by the platform.
2.
The opening ceremony by the Mayor of Manchester.
3.
The North Pier has always been a focal point of the tramway: in this early scene, car 5 is loading for South Shore, while open-sided car 7 is bounded for Cocker Street.
This Page: Three comparative views at North Pier
1.
The scene shortly after the conversion to overhead line, with two ex-conduit cars.
2.
A Thirties scene with modern streamlined cars passing the massive war memorial constructed with the profits from shell-making by the Tramways Department in the First World War.
3.
A present-day scene, with the same type of trams as in the previous view rebuilt out of all recognition!
This page is sponsored by The Post Office
North Pier
About thirty-five years separate these two views of the Promenade near Church Street: the upper view is taken in 1899, after the conversion of the tramway to the overhead line system.
Car 3 of 1885 is seen with its 20-foot trolley arm reaching across to the overhead line above the kerb.
The shortness of the supporting bracket was dictated partly by aesthetics, partly by safety and partly with an eye to the future construction of a reserved track on the seaward side of the traction poles.
In the picture the car is bound for Victoria Pier via Lytham Road, and is thus fitted with high mesh guards on the top deck to prevent passengers hitting the centre traction poles with which this route had been re-equipped.
The horse buses were banned from the Promenade in the same year to avoid competition with the trams, which had been taken  over by the Corporation in 1892.
The remains of the conduit track can be seen in the road behind the car.
The Thirties scene shows the complete segregation of the tram track, made possible by the Promenade widening of 1905, with a traditional double-deck Standard and a modern railcoach of the period.
This far-sighted move was an important factor in the tramway's survival.
Central Promenade
The conduit system, where the power was drawn by a plough mounted under the car, from a centre slot between the rails, proved unreliable in Blackpool because of local conditions.
The exposed nature of the line, which was subject to flooding by high tides, resulted in the centre slot being blocked with sand.
To counteract this, depot staff would lay a rope along the conduit slot to keep out the water and sand whenever there was a gale warning.
Insulation was also a problem: the nominal voltage generated at the Blundell Street power station was 220 volts, but this was reduced to 170 volts at the termini by escaping current.
In 1892, the Corporation itself took over the running of the tramway, and in the following year the situation was so bad that the current was switched  off and the cars pulled by horses.
The condition of the track and the buckling of the conduit slot was not helped by the weight of the girders transported along the Promenade during the construction of the Tower.
Holroyd Smith was called back to overhaul the tramway in 1894, and he was shocked by what he found: faulty insulators were identified by flooding the conduit with salt water and watching for the smoke to rise!
The power station was in poor repair, and Smith set about installing new insulators and restoring good practice.
In 1895, an extension of the conduit system was built to South Shore Station on Lytham Road, while from Station Road to Squires Gate an unelectrified section of track was served by a horse-drawn car.
The Promenade line was extended in the same year from Dean Street to Victoria (South) Pier, using a new type of conduit with a hinged  top for easy inspection.
This Mapple conduit, named after its inventor who was the electrical engineer, was used for the Station Road link-line in 1897.
However this was the swan-song of the conduit system, for the decision was taken to convert to the overhead line system used today.
This Page: 1.
Horse-drawn car passing the Aquarium & Menagerie — site of the Tower — c. 1887, during a break-down in the electrical system.
2 & 3.
Contrasting scenes of Central Pier in 1894 and 1934.
The Golden Mile — Winter & Summer
Did you know that the trams are older than the Tower?
The foundation stone of the 519 feet structure was laid in 1891 and the complex opened at Whitsuntide 1894.
Its construction contributed to the demise of the conduit tramway, whose rails and centre channel were distorted by the heavy girders transported over them.
Since then, the trams and the Tower have become synonymous with Blackpool, and it is unthinkable that either should disappear from the scene.
Happily both are popular with tourists and still make money.
The tramway system at its maximum extent, following the take-over of the Blackpool and Fleetwood Tramroad in 1920, when there were approximately twenty miles of routes.
Today only the Starr Gate–Fleetwood line remains, which is 11½ miles in length, or 18 kilometres.
The Promenade as the holiday-maker rarely sees it!
In this wintery scene of January 1979, a lonely red and cream car ploughs its way through the snow and ice to Starr Gate.
The service is maintained all the year round, with a twenty-minute headway in winter and a twelve-minute headway during the summer season.
In the exceptionally  heavy snowfalls of 1940 and 1981, several trams were stranded and the service suspended for several days.
Each winter two cars are fitted with snow ploughs, which are operated in tandem, and the Unimog fitted with rotating brushes keeps the Promenade track clear.
(see p. 98).
In contrast, a pleasant summer scene in 1984 along the Golden Mile, with a new livery railcoach picking  up passengers at Central Pier.
The legacy of the 1905 Promenade widening was a 100-feet wide frontage, with separate carriageway, tramway and promenade.
This has provided the tramway with a singular advantage over buses operating in the congested traffic, however the close proximity of thousands of strolling holiday-makers to the traffic, can present problems for tram drivers.
In recent years, to avoid accidents trams have been fitted with more powerful klaxons and painted in brighter and more eye-catching liveries.
This page is sponsored by Joseph Mason Paints, Derby
South Shore
1.
Before the construction of the Promenade here, in 1903, the sands came right up to the tram track, as seen in this view of a Dreadnought approaching the terminus.
2.
Victoria (South) Pier in all its elegance, with car 9 on a working to Cocker Street via Lytham Road.
3.
The same scene in the Thirties with a stream-line rail-coach followed by one of the open toastracks.
Pleasure Beach
There had been a fairground at South Shore in the Nineties, but it took the efforts of W. G. Bean to create an American-style amusement park.
One of the first major attractions was the Sir Hiram Maxim flying machine, opened in 1904 and still operating today!
In 196 the fairground was named ‘The Pleasure Beach’, and today is one of Blackpool's major attractions, still owned by the grandson of the founder.
1.
In response to the growth of traffic, the Tramways Department constructed a four-track terminal at South Shore, literally at the end of the new Promenade, where four cars could load simultaneously.
The Dreadnought trams, with their double staircases, were ideal for this — as seen here — and four of them could move 360 people at a time!
2.
When it was proposed to extend the Promenade to Clifton Drive in 1926, the Pleasure Beach Company, in return for granting a right-of-way to the Corporation along the shore, made an agreement with them concerning the trams.
This stated that all through trams would stop at the Pleasure Beach, and that all trams terminating there would show PLEASURE BEACH instead of SOUTH SHORE on their indicators.
The elaborate four-track layout completed in 1925 allowed cars to reverse without impeding the through cars.
This Page: 1.
The busiest part of the Promenade route is from North Pier to the Pleasure Beach.
This 1965 scene shows passengers boarding a traditional Standard car at its rear platform, while a second car waits on the centre reversing track.
These sound but elderly cars survived until 1966, when the last of them were acquired by museums in Britain and the U.S.A. (see page 60).
2.
An open-air car provides a vantage-point for passengers or photographers, as this 1960 scene shows.
At Waterloo Road on the Promenade, vintage open-balcony Standard 40 — the last of its kind — passes open boat car 225 (600) in 1960.
The ‘shimmering trees’ lining the track were long a feature of the Autumn Illuminations.
3.
In complete contrast, the 1984 scene shows the newest tram 641 passing a completely  revamped South Pier.
641 was the first new car to be built for Blackpool in thirty years.
4.
Pre-war poster for Circular bus route 22, which replaced the Layton and Central Drive trams in 1936.
The route was subsequently altered to run between Cleveleys and Lytham via Layton and Halfway House.
This Page: 1.
The landaus have been part of the scene for longer than the trams.
They are privately  owned and have to be licensed each year by the Borough Council.
Unlike the trams, they are only seen during the summer season.
Double-deck 724 is turning north on the Pleasure Beach inner loop on a Promenade short-working.
2.
Open-boat cars 606 and 602 side by side on the twin loops, while the crews enjoy their rest break in the sunshine.
These cars run as specials, which run as required by the time-keepers according to passenger flows.
3.
Edinburgh car 35 of 1948, one of the cars on loan to Blackpool for the Tramway Centenary celebrations 1985, approaching the Pleasure Beach from Harrowside.
This car, loaned by Lothian Regional Council with financial assistance from the Department for National Savings, proved popular with visitors from north of the Border!
4.
Pre-war poster for the tramway Circular Tour around town, established originally by the ‘toastrack’ cars.
The service was briefly revived in post-war years between 1957 and 1960.
North Shore & The Gynn
The original Promenade line terminated at the gates of Claremont Park at Cocker Street, but it was important for the tramway to serve the developing northern end of the town and link  up with the new Blackpool and Fleetwood Tramroad at the Gynn, opened in 1898.
The Corporation had bought  out the right-of-way from the Claremont Park Company in 1895, and constructed a three-tier Promenade.
It was proposed to lay the tramway extension along the broad Middle Walk, but this was defeated in a poll of the ratepayers, and the track had to be constructed along the narrow upper carriageway.
To avoid single-line and passing  -loops construction, special dispensation was obtained from the Board of Trade for the north-bound line to be laid in the gutter.
Work began in winter 1899, and opportunity was taken to relay the old conduit track from Cocker Street to Church Street on the Promenade.
On May 24th 1900, the ¾-mile extension was inspected and passed for service.
At this time, the unique double-staircase Dreadnought cars came into service and became the mainstay of the Promenade route until the Thirties.
It was now possible to ride right along the coast by tram from South Shore to Fleetwood, albeit with a change of car at the Gynn, where the two systems met at right-angles.
Passengers carried in 1900 approached the 3½ million mark, compared with only one million five years earlier.
Following the take-over of the Blackpool and Fleetwood Company on 1st January 1920, the tram tracks of the two systems were linked at Talbot Road Station and the Gynn.
This was a short-term measure while a major reconstruction of the North Promenade followed in 1923/4.
The footpath was extended over the Middle Walk on colonnades, and the tram track removed from the road and placed on reservation where the Promenade had been.
At the Gynn, the ravine was bridged and an elaborate tramway layout constructed, facilitating cars reversing in both directions.
This was completed on April 15th 1924, and two days later, the first Blackpool double-deck car operated from Squires Gate to the Cabin.
In 1926 the St. Annes' blue-cars were extended from Talbot Square to the Gynn, making it a busy junction, where the cars of three systems met.
1.
A 1934 scene with six different types of cars from three systems.
2.
Showing the new three-track layout with a Fleetwood car on the siding and a blue-car leaving for Lytham.
North Station & Fleetwood
The Blackpool and Fleetwood line opened in 1898, the track from the Gynn to Talbot Road Station being constructed by the Corporation and leased to the Company for twenty-one years.
It was single track with passing loops, except from Warley Road to the Gynn, where it was double-single controlled by signals.
The opening of this section of route was delayed until September, because the Board of Trade insisted upon street widening to accommodate the wider Company cars.
At first there was a basic 15-minute service to Fleetwood, with short-workings to Gynn, Bispham and Cleveleys, and a fare of 6d (2½p) all the way.
After the Corporation acquired the Company in 1920, they proceeded to double the track and widen Dickson and Warbreck Roads.
In the following years, a ten-minute service was operated in season, and twelve  minutes in winter.
The North Station cars were greatly missed by the locals for whom they offered a quick journey to the Station and Town Centre, when they were withdrawn in 1963.
This Page: 1.
Pantograph car 172 reversing outside North Station in 1959.
These cars were associated with the route from their introduction in 1928.
2.
Two Pantograph cars in the post-1937 cream livery pass in Dickson Road during demolition work for the new Odeon cinema opened in 1939.
3.
Warbreck Road behind the Imperial in the Twenties: the street has been widened, but one building is still in the way!
Opposite: Scenes from the Sixties: 1.
A 1937 Brush car climbs the 1:26 gradient to Warley Road.
2.
A visiting car from the Marton route uses the new trolley reverser in 1962.
3.
A railcoach loading at the Springfield Road barrier, guarded by the TRAM STOP road markings.
This page is sponsored by Jeffrey MacKenzie's London Tramway Association
Bispham, Norbreck & Cleveleys Square
While the Blackpool cars ventured over the ex-Company tracks as far as the Cabin, soon after the Gynn junction was completed, it was not until 1926 that double-deckers reached Bispham.
This had been made possible by relaying the flat-bottomed Company rail from Cabin to Bispham in bullhead rail, fitted with check-rail for double-deckers.
In June, regular services began from South Shore to Bispham, which became a major terminal of the Promenade cars as it is to this day.
However the track north of this point remained the preserve of single-deck cars for many years.
In 1928 ten new Pullman cars, fitted with pantograph collectors instead of trolley poles, took over the Fleetwood service.
They provided new comforts for passengers, with their upholstered seats and faster running.
1.
De-luxe car 66 of 1911 at the new Bispham Station, built in 1932 replacing the old Company building.
The new station building provided facilities of waiting rooms, toilets and crew rooms for those using Bispham for their mid-day break.
2.
Red Bank Road Bispham, with open rack 134 coming up from the Depot to go into service as an afternoon ‘special’ to the Gynn.
The old Company cars continued to operate from Bispham Depot until the late Thirties, when they were replaced by modern cars.
3.
Norbreck in the Twenties still retained the old red-brick Company waiting room.
Glasshouse car 121, so named from the number of windows, was one of several converted from open-sided cars by the Corporation in 1920, to provide more saloon cars on the Fleetwood route.
Norbreck Hydro in the early Thirties, shortly after the new road was opened.
The open nature of the hinterland, with Bispham village isolated amongst the trees, contrasts with the same scene today.
A Pullman car in green livery is bound for Fleetwood.
(These cars became commonly known as Pantographs).
Cleveleys Square c. 1929, before the old station building was demolished, with Box-car 111 loading for Fleetwood and Pullman-car 176 about to collect passengers for Blackpool.
The letter codes B and F were supplemented by more informative side indicator boxes.
This page is sponsored by the Norbreck Castle Hotel
Cleveleys & Rossall
Cleveleys has always been an important destination on the Blackpool and Fleetwood line, with an intermediate service operating there from earliest Company days.
It would be true to say that Cleveleys has grown with the tramway, large areas being developed before and after the Second World War.
Now part of the Wyre Borough Council, Cleveleys — as a growing part of the old Thornton U.D.C. — benefited from the dispute between Blackpool Corporation and the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway in 1919.
Stung by the proposed take-over by Blackpool of the Tramroad Company line, the Railway Company whose station was at Thornton, proposed to build a branch line from Thornton to Cleveleys.
To counter this unwelcome threat to its monopoly of Cleveleys traffic, Blackpool offered to run a bus service — its first — from Thornton Station to Cleveleys and to carry goods along the tramroad from Fleetwood to Cleveleys.
The bus service began on July 2nd 1921 and the mineral sidings were constructed in an area just north of Cleveleys Park.
The sidings, which became known as Thornton Gate, opened with the arrival of the first coal train on September 23 1927.
The coal trains were drawn from a railway connection to the rear of Fleetwood Depot by a neat steeple-cab locomotive, now preserved at the National Tramway Museum (see p. 110).
Coal trains were a feature of this part of the route until April 30 1949, when the uneconomic traffic was transferred to Thornton Station and motor wagons.
This page is sponsored by Bemrose Security Tickets, Derby
Rossall is now the only part of the Blackpool and Fleetwood route which suggests in any way the rural origins of the line.
North of Thornton Gate sidings the tramroad passes between farming land on one side and the playing fields of Rossall School on the other.
Even here housing has encroached, with the sale of one farm for housing development at Rossall and proposed development of another at Rossall Beach.
From Cleveleys to Rossall School the tramway is parallelled by Rossall Road–Broadway, which was opened in 1931 as a direct route to Fleetwood.
However the original route of the tramroad passed immediately in front of the school gates and then to a sharply  banked curve, before turning eastwards towards Broadwater.
In 1925 a more direct line was constructed to facilitate the new road and obviate the Rossall curve, which was the scene of many dewirements in high winds.
Opposite: 1.
This attractive sign welcomed visitors to Cleveleys until the roundabout was removed and traffic lights substituted in 1968.
2.
The tramway station is now effectively a traffic island, surrounded by a one-way system and linked by pedestrian crossings.
3.
A short-working Promenade car reverses ahead of a car on the North Station service.
This Page: 1.
The Thornton Gate Mineral sidings, which since 1963 have been used as a rail store, showing car 170 towing a train of rail bogies.
2.
Double-decker 713 passing Rossall School on the rural section of the route in 1983.
Double-deckers were first introduced at Easter 1958.
3.
The private right-of-way into Fleetwood from Broadwater with Pantograph car 168.
Copse Rd. & Bold St. Depots
The tramroad enters Fleetwood on a private right-of-way, now paralleled by Radcliffe Road and Copse Road.
The original Company depot was built in Copse Road, and used largely as a store for surplus cars.
Latterly, until its closure in 1963, it was used by the permanent-way department, and has since been sold for industrial purposes.
At Ash Street the tramroad ends and the track traverses Lord Street and North Albert Street — originally East Street and West Street — on its way to the Ferry.
At first the track was more widely  spaced with ornamental centre poles, but in 1927 — at the request of Fleetwood — side poles and span wires were substituted and the track re-positioned centrally.
The route in Company days terminated at Bold Street, where there was a small depot housing four cars; but the construction of the Ferry loop line in 1925 disconnected the depot, which was leased until demolished in 1973.
A block of flats now occupies the site.
The Ferry loop line brought the trams to the waterfront, passing on their return the Pharos Lighthouse, which had been built in 1840.
Uniquely placed in the centre of the street, it was in line with a smaller lighthouse on the seafront, which together guided ships down the Wyre Channel.
The Tramroad Company was acquired by Blackpool under the terms of the Blackpool Improvement Act of 1919, which was opposed by the then — Fleetwood U.D.C. Fleetwood resented Blackpool's ownership of the track within its area, and succeeded in winning the right to purchase the tramway after twenty-one years.
This terminated in 1940, but the right to purchase was extended for seven years until 1947, when Fleetwood requested a further three-year extension, which was opposed by Blackpool.
Fleetwood's powers thus lapsed, and Blackpool retained control over the line, bringing with it responsibility for the track and the roadway up to 18″ on either side.
This has recently been fulfilled in the combined relaying of the track and road surface of Lord Street, by Blackpool Corporation and Lancashire County Council.
This Page: 1.
Standard car 40 on its first Fleetwood trip in 1959, with the old Bold Street depot in the background.
2.
Copse Road Depot with the locomotive and van, plus works-car 167.
3.
The locomotive leaving Thornton Gate sidings with a train of wagons.
Lord Street–Fleetwood
1.
Lord Street in the Twenties, after the centre poles had been removed, with ex-Company rack 134 and a Blackpool bus on local route 11.
2.
The scene in the Fifties and Sixties was dominated by the handsome Coronation cars of 1953, which operated the Promenade–Fleetwood service for some fifteen years until their untimely demise.
(see p 76).
Fleetwood–Albert Square
The direct tram service between Fleetwood and Blackpool has been maintained continuously since 1898, with the single exception of winter 1963/4 when buses ran between Blackpool and Cleveleys.
Following a public outcry this experiment was not repeated.
Fleetwood has always jealously guarded its 1919 agreement, in which Blackpool agreed to maintain services to Fleetwood equal to any terminating at Cleveleys.
In practice, on Market Days, every available car is operated including twin-car units, and impressive convoys of trams — all shapes and sizes — run to Fleetwood.
Workmen's services also had to be provided under the agreement, and this is reflected currently by the early morning cars which are operated from 0500 each working day.
The principal service to Fleetwood until 1963 was that to North Station, alternating with which was a Promenade service, providing a combined headway of six minutes during the season.
When service No. 1 to North Station was withdrawn, the Promenade service was strengthened to a six-minute headway.
Following the 1972 introduction of double-deckers in regular service to Fleetwood, with double the capacity of the single-deckers, the headway dropped to 12  minutes.
From 1973 the winter service has been operated by one-man cars as an economy measure which has been successful in saving the line.
Fleetwood is unique in having a tramway operating along its main street, and the recent track renewals represent a vote of confidence in the future.
This page is sponsored by Ribble Motor Services Ltd.
Fleetwood Ferry
Opposite: 1.
Glasgow and Edinburgh cars, both dating from 1948, seem quite at home in Fleetwood by the Parish Church during a tour in 1984.
2.
Albert Square with a traditional Pantograph car passing Ribble buses.
3.
Ash Street with the shelter, now demolished, and a North Station car.
This Page: 1.
Glasgow car 1297 passing the unique Pharos lighthouse.
2.
The Pilling Circular Tour of pre-war years has recently been revived using vintage trams and buses.
3.
The Ferry terminus with double-deckers and the North Euston Hotel in the background.
Dating from 1841, its name reflects Fleetwood's origins as the northerly terminal of the LMS railway.
Queen Victoria came here on her way to Balmoral in 1847.
This page is sponsored by C. & I. Supplies Ltd.
(‘Treadmaster’ flooring)
Talbot Square Town Centre
In 1901, am ambitious extension of the system took the trams away from the Promenade, on an almost  circular four-mile route from Talbot Square to Marton and back to Central Station, only 250 yards away.
There were 3½ miles of double track and  ½-a mile of single track, mostly on Central Drive and Church Street.
A depot for twenty cars, which was subsequently enlarged and today serves as a garage, was built on Whitegate Drive, near the Saddle Inn.
The route left Talbot Square by Talbot Road, Abingdon Street and Church Street to Devonshire Square, then along Whitegate Drive to Oxford Square at its eastern extremity.
The line then turned westward along Cow Gap Lane — now Waterloo Road — turning right at the Waterloo Hotel and running along Central Drive to the Station.
Opened on May 23rd 1901, the line served the rural communities to the east of the town, and was speculative resulting in heavy losses, until extensive development took place in the Twenties.
When constructed, the line crossed open fields from Waterloo Hotel towards Bloomfield Road; and Central Drive was constructed round it!
Unfortunately the opening was dogged by controversy, because the track in which the route had been laid was of a type having a 1¼″  groove instead of the normal 1″ groove.
This was supposed to give a better ride on curves, but was banned by the Board of Trade because of the danger to cyclists.
This resulted in a protest on the inspection day, when the official car was stopped in Church Street by two cycles stuck in the offending rails.
Hung between them was a sign which read:‘Suicide made easy — ride on these tramlines’.
More disasters followed, when it was found that the track had been laid slightly out-of-gauge, and all of the new cars 27–41 broke their axles in the first two weeks.
Even worse, the curves into the new depot were too tight for the 4-wheel cars to enter, and had to be relaid.
In the following year, a one-mile route from Talbot Square to Layton Cemetery was opened on June 19th 1902, putting an end to the horse buses which had served the inland routes since being banned from the Promenade in 1899.
The area served by the new line was largely industrial, the cars passing Talbot Road Station, the goods yard, Abattoir , Sanatorium and brewery, before reaching the Cemetery.
This unattractive prospectus was such, that the destination was changed to New Road, amid some local mirth in the press.
The Gazette commented:‘Good old Cemetery cars!
They are about as cheerful as the place they run to.
In fact they bear a striking resemblance to a hearse’.
A two-class system was introduced, with a penny on the open top deck of the small ex-conduit cars which operated the route, and 2d inside.
It was soon discontinued for lack of patronage!
Talbot Square now became a focal point on the tramway system, where the new town routes met the busy Promenade track, newly relaid and extended to the Gynn.
In 1902, a direct line was laid up Clifton Street for the Marton cars to avoid the bottleneck on Talbot Road.
The two tram routes departed from opposite sides of the central loading island in the Square, where for many years there was an ornamental drinking fountain and later a stone shelter and underground toilets.
In 1911 the Circular Tour was introduced to boost the finances of the Marton route, and toastrack cars became a regular sight in the Square, loading at the island before crossing the Promenade, and returning along Abingdon Street.
The imposing dome of the Winter Gardens dominated the street, and the track in the foreground became a siding for theatre  specials.
The Marton Route…
In The Sixties
After the demise of the Layton and Central Drive routes in 1936 —see page 28 — trams operated a three-minute service between Talbot Square and Royal Oak, extended to South Pier in the summer season via Lytham Road and Station Road.
Operated by traditional double-deck Standard cars, and untouched by the modernisation of the Thirties, the Marton route survived into the post-war era as something of an anachronism.
Had the war not intervened, it is certain that new cars would have been introduced and the track relaid as part of Manager Walter Luff's modernisation of the system.
However, the Marton route in 1945 was in a sorry state of repair, and there was much talk in the press of alternatives to tramway renewal.
The rival costs of buses, trolley-buses and trams were reported to the Council by the Manager, and a decision to relay the route was continually deferred.
Meanwhile, behind the scenes, the Manager was preparing a demonstration by a tram fitted with ‘silent-wheel ’ bogies and modern control equipment.
On 9 April 1946, he demonstrated car 303 on the Marton route after the regular service had finished, to members of the press who described the riding qualities over the disintegrating track as ‘sensational ’.
The press began to campaign with a strongly pro-tram tone for a decision on renewing the tram track: ‘The tram is such an efficient means of transport — its retention would be in line with modern ideas, and the expense would be justified’.
Mr. Luff's propaganda exercise had paid  off, when — by a close vote — the Council decided in January 1947 to relay the Marton track.
All the rail joints would be welded by the Thermit process, to give a smooth ride throughout.
Unable to obtain sanction for purchasing new cars, Manager Luff decided that the next  best thing would be to re-equip the 1939 sun-saloon cars and six 1937 railcoaches, to make eighteen ‘silent trams ’ for Marton.
His objective was to demonstrate what had already been proved in the U.S.A. with the PCC car, that a really modern tram could compete successfully with a bus and other modes of transport.
On 18 January 1948, the first modern car went into service, and by January 1952 the entire winter Marton service was operated by modern railcoaches.
The Marton service, with its three-minute headway, operated by smooth-riding and comfortable trams whose rapid acceleration could leave a bus behind, was probably the finest tram service to be operated in post-war Britain.
The concept of a frequent service by small 48-seat trams which were quick-loading on busy streets, was the ultimate development of the conventional street tramway.
However traffic conditions were changing in the Fifties as car ownership increased, both reducing passengers and increasing road traffic at the same time.
Costs were also rising: costs of electricity, maintenance and crew wages; all of which affected the new Marton cars adversely.
Mr. Luff retired in 1954, but the Marton route continued undisturbed for the rest of the decade, while getting increasingly uneconomic.
The coup-de-grace was administered by the Council in October 1960, when it was decided that the cost of relaying the Squires Gate route could not be justified, and it would close in October 1961.
This would leave the Marton route isolated, deprived of its remunerative summer extension to South Pier and its Circular Tour traffic.
It thus came as no surprise when it was announced in 1961 that the Marton route would close at the end of the 1962 season.
The residents, alarmed by the loss of their superior service, collected a petition for the retention of the route, but all to no avail.
The inevitable pressure of market forces rendered Luff's experiment obsolete, long before the track and overhead were worn out.
October 28th 1962 had a double significance for tram enthusiasts, who flocked to Blackpool for the last rites: Marton was the last all-street tramway in Britain.
The experiment was over!
Opposite: 1.
Talbot Square in 1962, with trams of two generations at the loading island.
2.
Clifton Street with railcoach 208 heading for Marton past the imposing G.P.O. building.
3.
A Standard car turns into Church Street outside the Opera House in 1962, while higher up the street the old Hippodrome is transformed into the ABC.
This Page: 1.
Devonshire Square, with its traditional tramway shelter and a tram to match.
The shelter was demolished and traffic lights installed after the trams departed in 1962.
2.
Marton Depot on Whitegate Drive with two Standard trams returning from a summer day's special duties on the Promenade.
3.
The last tram into Marton Depot on October 28th 1962, as the Marton route closed after 61 years.
Oxford Square & Layton Square
During the Twenties, following the neglect of the First World War period, three-quarters of the Blackpool tram track had to be relaid, and this led to extensive disruption of services and vocal criticisms of the Tramway Department.
The General Manager, Mr. Charles Furness, who was a keen exponent of electric traction (he was also the Borough Electrical Engineer), resisted pressure to replace the Central Drive trams with buses, which were first introduced in 1922.
During the relaying of this track, the Marton trams operated in a complete circle, returning to Talbot Square via Royal Oak and Lytham Road, while the St. Annes blue cars were diverted for the first time to the Promenade at Talbot Square.
So much ill-will was generated towards the tramways that when — in January 1925 — public meetings were held to discuss an extension of the Layton route to Hoo Hill near Layton Station, it was rejected by a vote of the ratepayers.
A new bus service from the Tower to Hoo Hill was started in the same year, sealing the eventual fate of the Layton tram route.
By 1926 there were nine bus routes, although trams still operated all the main trunk routes.
Passengers  carried had risen from 9 million in 1902/3 to almost 34 million in 1921/2; typical fares were: Bispham and Talbot Square 2d and to South Shore 4d, while there was a shilling return on the Fleetwood route.
The Central Drive line facilitated the running of tramway football specials, and on Saturday afternoons during important matches, convoys of Dreadnoughts and Toastracks were to be found trundling round from Marton Depot.
They were favoured for the job because of their rapid loading, the cars hardly needing to stop!
Twenty to thirty cars could be used on football specials, running to all parts of the system.
When a new Manager took over the Transport Department in 1933, he was keen to modernise the Promenade and Fleetwood tramway and build  up the bus system.
To achieve the latter objective, he proposed to close the Layton and Central Drive lines, which had single-track and were subject to many delays.
Buses could more effectively operate them when integrated with the rest of the bus network, which would also enhance its profitability.
The last trams on these routes ran on the night of 19 October 1936.
This Page: 61 years separate these two pictures outside the Oxford Hotel in Marton, at the easterly point of the tramway.
1.
Shows Marton Box Car 40, one of the original and troublesome cars.
2.
Standard car 48, reversing on the Marton route's last day of tramway operation in 1962.
3.
Layton Square with top-covered Box-car 29 outside the Cemetery as the trolley is swung for a return to Talbot Square.
Central Drive
Above: Central Drive in the Thirties, with Standard 48 negotiating the Vance Road loop outside Central Station, amongst the busy crowds.
Below: A view from the Revoe Library, looking down Central Drive towards the Tower, with car 34 approaching the tram stop.
Royal Oak & Squires Gate
The Squires Gate route to the Airport, which was operated by trams until October 1961, when it became the first post-war route to change to bus operation, was latterly operated in the summer season by double and single-deck cars, running alternately to Cabin and Bispham.
However the route had the unique distinction in Blackpool of operation by horse, gas and electric trams!
Blackpool Corporation had laid the tracks to Squires Gate along the straight Lytham Road by August 1895, extending beyond the terminus of its conduit tramway at South Shore Station.
The railway bridge at this point represented the steepest gradient on the whole system at 1:16.
From October that year, a small car was towed behind the first electric car of the day to South Station, and pulled by a horse on a shuttle service between there and Squires Gate.
However in July 1896, the track was leased to the Blackpool, St. Annes and Lytham Tramway Company, who operated gas trams driven by a 15 h.p. internal combustion engine.
This continued with variable results until the depot at Squires Gate was demolished in a gale during February 1903.
In June the same year the Lytham line re-opened with forty electric cars, which was an act of faith, considering that there were only ninety-two houses between South Shore and Ansdell!
This Page: 1.
Royal Oak became the regular terminus of the Marton route from 1936 until its closure in 1962.
Standard 147 is seen there in 1962.
2.
A railcoach from Bispham nearing the end of its journey to the Airport at Squires Gate in 1960.
3.
In 1950 the streamlined cars were still in the wartime green livery, as seen here at Squires Gate, with the Airport in the background.
Opposite: The restrictions on the blue-cars of Lytham St. Annes in Blackpool meant that considerable efforts had to be made to advertise the line.
These posters span the life of the tramway until its closure in 1937, as the costumes show.
This Page is sponsored by Spacegrand Ltd., Blackpool Airport
Blue Cars to Lytham St. Annes
This page is sponsored by Fylde Borough Council Transport Department
Lytham Road & Squires Gate
In 1905 the Lytham Company, whose blue cars operated into Blackpool only as far as South Shore Station, threatened legal action unless Blackpool Corporation allowed them to operate further into town.
Somewhat grudgingly they were admitted to Central Station via Central Drive, to Manchester Square and Victoria Pier via Station Road, but excluded from the Promenade itself.
In return, Blackpool trams were granted access to the Company tracks as far as Lytham, but rarely exercised the privilege.
However during the 1909 Air Display at Squires Gate and again for the steeplechase meetings at the racecourse there, Corporation trams were operated through from Talbot Square, at a fare of 4d.
During the First World War the red cars of the Corporation were seen more regularly at Squires Gate, where there was a military camp.
By 1920 there was a regular 12-minute service from Talbot Square, as well as a 12-minute blue-car service from Central Station.
This was the year that St. Annes Council bought-out the Company, a move opposed by Blackpool and the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway Company.
In 1922, the blue cars operated regularly on the Promenade for the first time, during the track relaying in Central Drive, and in 1926 were extended to the Gynn.
The blue cars became a familiar sight on Blackpool Promenade in the Thirties, until their demise on 27 April 1937.
Blackpool had been interested in purchasing the line to St. Annes Square and extending the Promenade tramway reserved  track from Starr Gate.
Sadly this interesting proposal was lost by the casting vote of the St. Annes Mayor, and the blue cars were replaced by the blue buses seen today, now operated by Fylde Transport.
1.
Manchester Square, where the Lytham Road route diverged from the Promenade, with a Standard car bound for Squires Gate and a blue car heading for St. Annes via Promenade.
2.
A quiet winter day at Royal Oak sees an unusual visitor, ex-conduit car 4, retracing its former route to South Shore Station, followed by a Squires Gate service car.
3 and 4.
Station Road, South Shore, linking Lytham Road and the Promenade, was once a busy tram route traversed by the Circular Tour.
In post-war years there was only a nine-minute service of Marton cars during the summer season, until it closed in 1961.
After the demise of the blue cars in 1937, a new service was started from Squires Gate to Fleetwood, but this was short-lived.
In 1936 it had been decided to relay the Lytham Road track, despite considerable opposition in the Council.
The original proposal featured centre loading islands, but this idea was abandoned.
During the War, Squires Gate became especially busy because of the Vickers Armstrong factory, which employed 10,000 people making Wellington bombers.
In 1941 Vickers suggested that the tramway be extended from Squires Gate for a mile down Squires Gate Lane towards the factory gates.
Blackpool Corporation was decidedly lukewarm towards the scheme, and specified that the Company should pay the whole costs of the extension, upon which the idea was dropped.
The track and overhead in Squires Gate Lane was retained during the War to allow trams to reach the St. Annes depot there, if air-raid dispersal of the Blackpool fleet became necessary.
This facilitated the return of the Circular Tour in 1957.
After twenty years, the Lytham Road track was badly worn, and by the late Fifties the cars performed ever  more alarming rolls.
The Council in 1960 was opposed to spending a six-figure sum on track-laying there, even though the Royal Oak junction had been relaid in 1958.
The decision was taken the change to bus operation, and the last car — railcoach 268 — left Squires Gate for Manchester Square on 29 October 1961.
Next day it became bus service 12, now shared with the blue buses of Fylde Borough.
1.
A St. Annes car heading for Blackpool along the long straight of Lytham Road before the First World War: notice the absence of traffic!
2.
More familiar in post-war years were the streamlined railcoaches, workhorses of the Blackpool fleet, which provided a six-minute service in the season.
3.
The sandhills of Squires Gate Lane with few signs of civilisation, although the scrolled bracket poles lend a touch of elegance.
4. 1957 saw the return of trams to Squires Gate Lane after many years when the Circular Tour was revived.
On the right is the old St. Annes tram depot, now a bus garage.
The Circular Tour 1911–1960
The purchase of twenty-four toastrack trams beginning in 1911, and the introduction of a Circular Tour using the Marton route, was a response to the increasingly popular char-a-banc trips.
The venture was an immediate and highly profitable success in the years between the Wars.
The cars loaded in Talbot Square by the side of the Clifton Hotel, which was also the terminus of the Marton route, and were shedded in an enlarged Marton depot.
When loaded, the toastracks crossed to the Promenade and travelled as far as Victoria Pier, up Station road and along Lytham Road to Royal Oak, round the Marton route and so back to Talbot Square.
It became something of a ritual that the cars stopped at the Oxford Hotel in Marton, where a photographer snapped the passengers.
This practice was officially discouraged in 1927, but not before thousands of pictures had been taken, one of which is reproduced on this page.
In  1912 the Corporation itself had purchased 30,000 coloured postcards of a circular tour car on a leafy Whitegate Drive (see p. 61 ), where the cars were posed facing the wrong direction to catch the sun (below ).
The tour became so popular that, when all twenty-four toastracks were in service, any other usable car in the depot was pressed into service.
In 1927 six more toastracks were purchased, and it is one of these which survives at the National Tramway Museum today (see 61 ).
The fare for most of those years until 1939 was 6d (2½p ), although it was increased to 9d when the tour was extended to Clifton Drive in 1932.
For using the St. Annes tracks in Squires Gate Lane, Blackpool had to pay a levy of ½d per passenger.
Resistance to the price rise resulted in a reduction back to 6d in 1933!
The twelve modern ‘boat-cars ’ were used on the Circular after their introduction in 1934, but the War put a stop to this service.
It was briefly revived in 1957 until superseded by a new Promenade ‘Circular’, which was circular only at each end!
The last of the traditional Tours via Marton operated on September 9th 1960 after fifty seasons.
Opposite: 1.
‘Smile please for the cameraman’, outside the Oxford Hotel, Marton, ‘your prints will be ready this evening on the Promenade’.
2.
The start of the tour in Talbot Square with huge queues.
This Page: 1.
Setting out: the toastrack crosses the Promenade.
2.
In leafy Whitegate Drive: the car faces the wrong way for the official photographer.
3.
At Devonshire Square, toastracks follow in quick succession!
New South Promenade
New South Promenade was the last major extension to the Blackpool system, completed on 2 October 1926 and opened by Lord Derby.
The first car to Clifton Drive — as the new terminus was known — was toastrack 82, but the track was not used regularly until the start of the 1927 season.
The total cost of the extension was £320,000, including the roadway, tramtrack and sunken gardens.
During the Twenties and Thirties the tram service gradually expanded until, by August Bank Holiday 1933, every one of the 156 cars was on the road.
The highest number of trams ever operated on the system in one day was 224 cars on September 14th 1935: this included 25 cars on hire from Lytham St. Annes.
There have always been considerable fluctuations between winter and summer services: before the War the daily winter turnout was an average of fifty trams.
During the War this difference narrowed, until in 1942 the figures were 86 in the winter and only 108 in the summer.
In post-war years, from a maximum of 58 million passengers in 1950, a steady decline has set in, so that 30 years later the annual total was only 8½ million.
Accordingly the number of service cars has dropped: winter service 1954 needed 52 cars, by 1984 this was 8 rising to 20 service cars in the season and up to 50 specials, making a maximum turnout of 70 cars.
Changing work patterns, social habits and a growth of car ownership have affected all public transport, but the tramway has enhanced its tourist value as it has become unique.
1.
First car on the extended Circular Tour, April 1932.
2.
Open-topper on the Cleveleys–Clifton Drive service 1935.
3.
A revival in 1957: boat-car in Clifton Drive on a Circular Tour.
Trams & Their Times
A proud Ald. Brodie, Tramways Chairman, and John Lancaster, Manager, standing in front of car 3 decorated and illuminated for the opening of the new Promenade in April 1905.
The car proudly bears the legend: ‘First Electric Street Tramcar in the Kingdom — Still Running’.
Royal Occasions
Above: King George V and Queen Mary making an official visit to the Fylde Coast on 8 July 1913, are watched by crowds in the grandstands provided by a parked line of tramcars, at a cost of one shilling each.
This more than made up for the Tramway Department's loss of revenue resulting from the suspension of the service!
The same facility had been provided in 1912, when Princess Louise opened Princess Parade, costing only 1d!
Below: One of twenty-five cars decorated for the Coronation of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra in June 1902, which sadly did not take place owing to the King's illness.
It seemed a shame to cancel the celebrations: children in the Borough were allowed free riding on Coronation Day, which they used to full advantage!
The celebrations were repeated on 9 August when the King was finally crowned.
The only recorded royal tram ride in the first hundred years of Blackpool tramways occurred on 21 October 1937, when HRH The Duke of Kent (the present Duke's father) visited Blackpool to open Victoria Hospital, the lifeboat house and Princess Way, culminating in him switching  on the Illuminations.
As he completed the ceremony he said: ‘I think it is now time to start our tour of the Illuminations.
With you, Mr. Mayor, at the helm, I feel we shall be in no danger of a shipwreck, but I notice you have left nothing to chance, and for safety's sake have provided us with a lifeboat’.
(laughter)
Waiting for him was the illuminated Lifeboat tram, on which he made a tour of the Promenade, waving to the crowds and commenting favourably on Blackpool's modern streamlined trams.
After visiting the Pleasure Beach and Bispham, the Lifeboat diverted from the Promenade at the Gynn and took the Duke to North Station to catch his train!
This Page: 1.
The Royal visits of 1912 and 1913, saw De-luxe car 68 decorated with lights and bunting.
It was described by the Blackpool Times as ‘the cynosure of all eyes’, when it appeared on the Promenade.
2.
Trams again provided a grandstand view during the Prince of Wales' visit in 1927.
3.
During the Coronations of 1937 and 1953 all trams carried pennants on their trolleys and patriotic emblems in the trolley towers.
For the Silver Jubilee of Queen Elizabeth II in 1977, the Department re-decorated the Centenary tram of the previous year.
The flags have been added by shed-man Jim Ingham!
IN THE NEWS
Blackpool's trams have featured in many celebrations during their one hundred years, and often made news themselves.
On these pages is a selection of events, both happy and sad.
This Page: 1.
The return of the Devonshire Road Choir from Paris on May 31 1912 was the scene of much rejoicing, as this scene outside Talbot Road Station shows.
2.
Less cheerful was Blackpool's only known tramway funeral, that of Alexander Hollas — a depot worker killed on duty.
Here the tramway cortège is drawn  up outside the Cemetery gates and the coffin is removed from the tramcar hearse, by uniformed tramwaymen.
3.
Shell manufacture in Blundell Street car shed during the First World War: 200,000 shells were produced here, largely by female labour, yielding a profit to the Town of £16,000, which was used to pay for the erection of the Cenotaph war memorial on Princess Parade.
Above: The 1937 Bandwagon illuminated car in two of its wartime guises: left, celebrating Victory in Europe and Japan in 1945, and right, advertising War Weapons Week, one of the patriotic fund-raising events of the period.
Below: A conference of the Women's Liberal Federation setting out for a tour of Blackpool and St. Annes in May 1926, using six toastrack trams, here drawn  up on both tracks at North Pier.
Conferences are now big business for Blackpool, and bring extra traffic in the early and late seasons.
Trams & The Media & Celebrities
In post-war years, the advent of television brought the tramway into the living room on the small screen.
Most spectacular was the televising of the Illuminations for the first time in 1951, using toastrack 166.
The tram carried a mobile generator for the power and provided a stable platform for the television cameras.
The experiment was repeated in successive years, using two cars in 1953.
In 1957, cars 166 and 165 were rebuilt as mobile studios: the first car 166, carried the cameras and a raised commentary box, while 165 was enclosed to carry the equipment.
The cars were later used separately by BBC and ABC TV, notably for the latter's Holiday Town Parade in 1961.
As outside broadcasts became more sophisticated, the cars fell into disuse, and 166 was presented to the National Tramway Museum for restoration as an open toastrack in 1972.
A feature of the Blackpool season for many years was the Daily Mirror Week in Blackpool, when a specially  decorated tramcar operated for a week on the Promenade, with all the fares collected going to charity.
Double-deckers were used for the maximum impact, including the historic Dreadnought, in 1964.
Twenty years later, the Daily Mirror hired this car to transport its first million-pound Bingo winner, Mrs. Maudie Barrett to the Town Hall to receive her cheque.
The only known occasion when a tram depot was used as a television studio with trams as scenery, took place on the evening of 20 September 1962 at Rigby Road Depot, when ABC television recorded its ‘Sing Along’ programme using transport staff as the audience.
The programme was transmitted on 7th October, and opened with the presenter Dennis Lotus saying: ‘This is a transport depot, it garages the only tramcars still operating in the United Kingdom’.
Several special trams were featured in the programme, including the historic and illuminated cars, with appropriate songs, including of course‘The Trolley Song’.
Each year a celebrity is chosen to switch  on the Illuminations in Talbot Square, followed for many years by a tour of the Lights by tram.
In 1959, Miss Jayne Mansfield, the American film-star, made a well-remembered tour on the new Blackpool Belle illuminated tram, both making a considerable impact upon the spectators!
The opening of the ABC Theatre in Church Street on 31 May 1963 by singer Cliff Richard, featured the illuminated train, then sponsored by ABC.
A single track of the defunct Marton train tram route as far as Kings Square, was kept intact to make this possible, thus making the Train the last tram to run through the Town Centre.
1.
A recording studio in a train depot as ‘Sing Along’ is televised in 1962.
2.
One of the artistes, Mrs. Mills, abandons her piano for No. 1.
3.
Glamour on the tram, as Jayne Mansfield waves from the Blackpool Belle in 1959.
4.
The opening of the ABC Theatre with Cliff Richard and the Western Train, 1963.
Tramway Celebrations
The trams have had events of their own to celebrate during the hundred years, generally firsts , rather than lasts .
In recent years, every new development and anniversary has been used as a good publicity platform for the Town and its tramway.
1.
The opening day scene on the Marton route in 1901, where nobody looks very happy, which might be a reflection of the rough ride given by the first car!
Notable on the picture are, John Lancaster (right) the Tramway Manager, and John Grime (bearded  centre) the founder of the Blackpool Gazette.
Getting in on the act, is the crew of the Marton horse bus (left) who were about to become redundant.
2.
The first new post-war tram on the Promenade on June 16 1952, when it was driven by a top-hatted Mayor, guided by Manager Walter Luff.
Later during the first journey, comedian Jimmy Edwards tried his hand at the controls.
3.
A civic line-up of Fylde Coast Mayors at Fleetwood Ferry on 9 April 1958, celebrating the inaugural run of the first twin-car unit 276/5.
On the right, Manager Joe Franklin looks pleased with his achievement.
1.
The 29th September 1960 saw two historic processions of cars, led by an 1885 car numbered 1 for the occasion.
Free rides were given on the eleven cars, which represented all types then in service.
Four cars were specially restored for the occasion: the 1885 car, Dreadnought 59, and two ex-Company cars 2 and 40.
All of these cars were later presented to the National Tramway Museum at Crich, and two will return in 1985 for the Centenary.
2.
The Great Tram Race on 12 April 1984 between Edinburgh 35 and Glasgow 1297, which the Edinburgh car remarkably won, was a prelude to the Centenary celebrations.
Commercial sponsorship by National Savings and Sealink respectively, had made their journey to Blackpool possible.
3.
Cheers — for the launch of rebuilt double-decker 761 in 1979, with left to right:
Trams in Trouble
It is always news when something happens to a tram!
Here the effects of the weather — snow, wind, sand, rain and fog — are shown.
The worst snow storm was in January 1940, when ten trams and a bus failed to make the depot.
An inspector and two crews were stranded at Fleetwood and did not get home until 5.00 p.m. the next day.
Normal services were not resumed for seven days, while snow ploughs freed the tracks.
The most spectacular accidents were to two Standard cars which were blown over in gale-force winds: car 28 on the Cliffs in 1927 and car 50 at the Metropole in December 1940.
Remarkably, the only injury was a scratched finger!
1.
Picturesque Marton with Standard 48 on Whitegate Drive.
2.
Digging out a railcoach on the Promenade in 1966.
3.
Heavy snowfalls at Fleetwood in 1940 left these cars stranded.
4.
Central Promenade 1984: a car is pulled clear of the track after derailing in sand.
1.
Blown over in a freak gust outside the Metropole on 6 December 1940; car 50 was subsequently broken up.
2.
Whitegate Drive flooding was common before the new drainage scheme was built in the Sixties.
3.
A most unusual picture at the Tower, with trams emerging from the fog in January 1953.
The End of The Line!
Tramway accidents are fortunately few and far between, and a tram is a very safe vehicle indeed.
Unlike a bus, its wheels are guarded by lifeguard trays which drop on to the rail when the hinged gates under the front of the tram are swung back upon impact.
Many people have been glad of this device over the years, which has saved them from death or serious injury.
Sadly, there are fatalities with trams, as with any vehicle, usually caused by careless jay-walking along the tram lines or across them.
The first fatality at Blackpool was in August 1887, when car 6 killed an elderly visitor who stepped in front.
At that time trams were not fitted with lifeguards.
Trams make news when they unexpectedly leave their predictable rails, as the pictures on this page show:
Above: This car was bound for Squires Gate on 18 June 1955, when the car suddenly turned right into Station Road, the points having been left open by the previous Marton car.
It is the job of conductors to reset the points after their car has taken the junction.
Below: In February 1977, this car ran out of track, when its driver returning to the depot at night, ignored the warning signs for track under repair.
Only the tram subsequently returned to service!
A Cavalcade of Trams
Conduit Cars
1.
Conduit cars 2 and 6 posing with their crews, local boys and a landau near North Pier.
Tram crews did not wear uniforms until the Corporation took over.
The driver of car 6 is holding the unusually  placed controller handle.
2.
Car 7, as rebuilt from an open-sided car, at Layton terminus.
3.
Several ex-conduit cars survived as works cars, such as car 8 seen here on New South Promenade c. 1926.
By extreme good fortune, Blackpool can celebrate its tramway centenary with one of its original ten cars of 1885.
The diminutive car 4 is a prize exhibit in the National Tramway Museum, and is to be restored to its 1885 appearance for its return to Blackpool in 1985.
Although it is clearly not possible to restore it as a conduit care, the same external effect will be provided by the use of re-chargeable batteries with a replica truck and control gear.
Its survival is due to Blackpool's practice of using ex-passenger cars for works duties, thus prolonging their working life.
Car 4 is one of two small cars — the other was 3 — which were built by the Lancaster Carriage and Wagon Company, along with the larger 5 and 6 and trailers 9 and 10.
The two small cars seated only 32 inside, and it has been speculated that they were intended to draw the trailers during summer operation.
Unfortunately the Company failed to get Corporation sanction for this, and so the trailers remained disused in the depot until replaced by new cars 9 and 10, built by Milnes in 1891.
The other four cars were built by Starbuck: 1 and 2 of conventional design and 7 and 8 with open sides.
The first Blackpool car to run under power was car 5 on July 2 1885.
In August, a Blackpool Times reporter visited the new depot and reported:‘This is an erection of imposing dimensions, with a capability of holding at least a score of cars.
There were nine in…some of which are fine specimens of their order.
We question whether there will be a tramway in England with handsomer or more convenient carriages’
Following the 1892 Corporation take-over, in 1894 car 4 and others were reconstructed with separate trucks, and in the same year the first of four large Palace cars, seating 82, was delivered.
The Borough arms in its now  familiar garter, appeared on the cars in the same year.
As larger cars became necessary on the Promenade, some of the ex-conduits were relegated to the short Layton route, opened in 1902.
However car 4 spent the First World War ferrying bread to the military camp at Squires Gate, for which it was fitted with a pair of side doors.
When the war was over, an overhead inspection tower was fitted to its roof, and it continued in this role until superseded by car 31 (754) in 1934.
For the next twenty-six years it languished at the back of Bispham Depot, until driven under its own power to the Works in February 1960 for renovation.
In a striking — but inaccurate — red and white livery, it posed as No. 1 for the 75th Anniversary celebrations in that year.
In 1963, the car was donated to the National Tramway Museum, where it is now displayed, pending its return to native rails as a most remarkable survivor!
1.
An early view of trailer car 9 in the depot with 3 or 4 behind.
2.
A disguised car 4 heading the 75th Anniversary procession in 1960.
3.
One of the two cars which replaced the trailers in 1891 outside the depot.
The Unique Dreadnoughts
Named after the famous battleships and secured by a £12 patent, the twenty Dreadnoughts which operated on Blackpool Promenade from the turn of the Century until 1934, were certainly unique.
When Mr. Shrewsbury of Camberwell displayed his model tramcar to the Tramways Committee on January 13 1897, they saw its advantages and bought the patent.
With its twin staircases and end steps, a Dreadnought was capable of loading and unloading simultaneously  at a terminus.
Unusually the driver stood in the centre of the platform, framed by the staircases, and peering round the windscreen, which was later removed.
On a Saturday, when the front platform was piled high with suitcases, his job was even more difficult, and it needed a strong arm to operate the hand-brake effectively on these 18-ton cars.
Unfortunately, safety was not one of the Dreadnoughts' strong points, and there were some horrible accidents were one car, failing to stop in time, piled into the back of the other injuring and even killing passengers on the steps.
Following such an incident, a Board of Trade enquiry ruled that the cars should be fitted with massive bumpers, which would protect passengers on the rear steps.
The sole survivor, 59, was built in 1902 by the Midland Railway Carriage and Wagon Company, and its unusual bogies are of box construction which were prone to working loose under intensive operating conditions.
The rest of the class suffered its demise in the winter of 1934 when they were replaced by the streamlined double-deckers as part of Manager Walter Luff's modernisation of the tramway. 59 was spared and sent for storage to Fleetwood depot, following a valedictory tribute in the Evening Gazette: ‘They were clumsy, awkward and dangerous, but they were Blackpool's own trams, and there was nothing like them anywhere else.
I think it would have been nice to announce the passing of these old trams; there should have been a farewell trip on the Promenade’.
When the retention of 59 was announced, the Gazette responded: ‘Sometime in the future, it may be possible to resurrect the old car and parade it on the Promenade as a specimen of what people in Blackpool used to enjoy travelling on’.
In 1960, this is exactly what happened when the car was restored and run in the 75th Anniversary parade.
Its reappearance then — and since — made exactly the impact which the Gazette forecast.
However, in 1965 it was given to the National Tramway Museum to care for, and it operated at Crich in the Derbyshire hills from 1965–1971, when 59 was withdrawn as needing extensive overhaul.
The Blackpool Civic Trust made the restoration of the car their special project for the Borough Centenary in 1976, and accordingly the car returned in 1975 and was displayed on the Promenade opposite the Foxhall.
During that winter, the body was renovated at the Blackpool Technical College by apprentices.
On May 22 1976, the venerable car returned to the rails once again and took part in the Centenary parade on June 12th.
Since that time, the Dreadnought has been seen on private hirings, trade promotions and Illumination tours.
Whenever the car appears all heads turn and there is no doubt that something special is passing  by: a unique part of Blackpool's tramway past.
Above: South Shore terminus with four Dreadnoughts in line abreast, demonstrating their legendary capacity to absorb crowds.
During the winter season, they proved invaluable for football specials!
Below: The Dreadnoughts did not operate to Fleetwood in their heyday, and it is only the restored car 59 which has appeared there in recent years.
59 is seen in Albert Square during a tour in 1984.
1.
Dreadnought 16, was delivered in 1898 and initially operated on the conduit system.
2.
The survivor, No. 59 at Fleetwood Depot in 1939, before being stripped of its steps, handrails and trolley mast.
3.
Here comes the Daily Mirror Tram!
The Dreadnought in 1963.
4.
In 1984, 59 takes part in a joint Circular Tour with a vintage Ribble bus, via Fleetwood, Knott End and Poulton.
The Standard Evolves
The opening of the town services in 1901–2, necessitated Blackpool buying trams which would be suitable for year-round operation.
The fifteen Marton Box cars 27–41, which were built by the Midland Railway Carriage and Wagon Company for the opening of the Marton route, proved to have poor riding qualities on their four-wheeled truck.
It was to the Scottish firm of Hurst Nelson of Motherwell that Blackpool turned for its next batch of cars in 1902.
These were bogie cars, ‘suitable for use anywhere on the system’ numbered 42–53 and christened Motherwells .
Both types were fitted with top-deck covers before the First World War, as seen on this page, but more extensive rebuilding followed.
Car 32 was the first to be extended and placed on bogies (see 3 ), although the old top cover was sometimes used.
Many of the Motherwells were in a poor state of repair, and had to be completely reconstructed.
There was a general need for a new class of car which would be purpose-built for the town routes.
This Page: 1.
Marton Box car 33 at North Pier in 1913, with top-cover.
2.
This fascinating picture shows a Motherwell car in Princess Street fitted with a pantograph in 1927 as an experiment.
The car is unnumbered, suggesting that its number might have been taken by a new Standard car.
3.
Car 32 at South Shore Baths after its rebuilding on bogies.
The original saloon length is retained.
4.
Standard 42, one of the new cars fitted with an old Motherwell top deck, giving a strange angular appearance.
Car Building & Rebuilding
The fleet was enhanced in the years before the Great War by the acquisition of the seven de-Luxe cars 62–68.
These were built by the United Electric Car Company of Preston, and were luxurious in comparison with the rest of the fleet, with their basket seats.
The crews later referred to them as basket-cars or shower-baths , from their open fronts.
They were built as convertibles with full-drop windows, hence the seats made of rattan cane.
The four-wheel cars — 62–64 — were smaller, seated 66, and had seven narrow full-drop windows in the saloon.
It was said that these were not made for Blackpool, but for another buyer.
The next four cars were more conventional, seating 76 having bogies, and a top-cover which later became standard for double-deck cars.
The last car of the type — 68 — was fitted with coloured lights in 1912 for the royal opening of Princess Parade, and thereafter until 1934. (see p. 83).
1.
The scene in the new Body Shop c. 1928 with rebuilt Marton car 30, and a new top-cover and stairs.
It was here that Blackpool constructed thirty-four new Standard cars and six toastracks in the Twenties.
2.
The prototype Standard car 43 under construction in Blundell Street car shed.
In the foreground are the old bogies, in the background the old top-cover, and between them the newly-constructed sides.
The remains of the old Motherwell car are lying in the inspection pit underneath!
3.
The top deck is being lowered on to the bottom deck of Standard 152 by this unusual structure outside the Blackpool Works, after the new car's arrival from Motherwell in 1925.
Blackpool & Fleetwood Ex-Company Cars
When Blackpool Corporation bought the Blackpool and Fleetwood Tramroad Company on January 1st 1920, it acquired the forty-one single-deck cars which were of two main types.
There were fifteen saloons, known as Box-cars , and the remainder were crossbench open-sided cars of varied designs, including three which had been trailers.
The fleet had been built  up from 1898, matching the rise in passenger traffic, and was specially suited to the inter-urban nature of the line with its infrequent stops.
Blackpool Council were impressed with the smooth running and high speeds, when they were taken for a trial run on July 1st in 1898.
The contrast in ensuring years between the success of the Company and the problem-ridden Corporation trams, made a take-over desirable when the 21-year lease on the street track expired.
The ex-Company cars were given Corporation numbers 101–141, and were gradually repainted in Blackpool's red and white livery.
Some survived as works cars and snow ploughs, making possible the preservation of one of each type in working museums today, as seen on these pages.
Opposite: 1.
The old Gynn Inn was the meeting-place of the Blackpool and Fleetwood systems, which were not connected till 1920.
2.
Several of the Company cars survived as snow ploughs, including 128 seen here in Blundell Street Depot in 1950.
3.
Car 127 was a similar snow plough, based at Fleetwood depot, where it survived until 1960, when it was restored for the 75th Anniversary and re-numbered 2, its Company number.
4.
Car 2 was presented to the National Tramway Museum at Crich in 1963, where it became the first car there to move under power in June 1964.
Twenty years later  it is still operating successfully.
This Page: 1.
A commercial postcard publicised the attractions of the coastal line.
2.
A Company saloon car 114, survived as a crew room in Rigby Road Dept.
3.
Like 127, this car was restored in Company colours with its original number 40, in 1960.
It is seen here at Rossall on its final tour in January 1963.
4.
After a period at the Tramway Museum, it was transferred to a working line in Manchester's Heaton Park in 1979, and repainted in full Company livery.
The Evolution of the Town Car
Open-Top ‘Motherwell’ 1902
Top-covered ‘Motherwell’ 1910
Standard Car 1924
Enclosed Standard 1930
The need for a Blackpool standard car, arose from the year-round requirement for good  riding and reliable cars for the town routes.
These had expanded in intensity after the First World War, with extensive housing development in the areas served.
Of the 84 cars in stock in 1919, half comprised the Toastracks and Dreadnoughts and a few dated back to 1885!
The acquisition of the Blackpool and Fleetwood Tramroad Company in 1920, brought a further 41 single-deck cars of several differing types.
While these could be used on the Promenade, their length and awkward entrances precluded their use around town.
Blackpool had been experimenting with extensive rebuilding of the Marton and Motherwell cars, but the confines of Blundell Street Depot limited the scope of such activities.
However the first prototype Standard car — 43 — was constructed there, prior to the completion of new workshops on the old Highways yard in Rigby Road.
Once the four old aircraft hangars were erected side-by-side to make the Central Works, construction of the first completely new car began.
This was car 33, replacing an old Marton Box car, which became a works car (see p. 94).
The new Standard cars were somewhat traditional in detail, featuring the Tudor-arch saloon windows of the 1902 Motherwell cars.
This distinctive feature may have been retained to convince a money-conscious Council that they were rebuilds rather than new cars!
By 1929 the Works had built 26 completely new cars, and built a further eight using the old top  decks of the cars they had replaced.
To ease the pressure, a further seven Standards were built by Hurst Nelson of Motherwell, and together with the prototype, this totalled forty-two Standards.
(Full details are given in ‘Blackpool By Tram’ and ‘Trams and Buses Around Blackpool’).
The cars were initially unvestibuled, but in 1929 car 153 had its driving platforms enclosed (see p. 102) and the last two, 51 and 177, were built with vestibules.
The effect of this can be seen on car 34 (above ), presenting a decidedly more modern appearance.
The final development was the enclosure of the upper decks of the seventeen cars, beginning with 100 and 159 in 1930.
As built, the cars were in the red and white livery, but in 1933, car 28 was painted in the new green and ivory colours, and the others followed.
Car 34 as built in 1923, and fitted with vestibules in 1931.
3.
Standards were a familiar sight at the Royal Oak terminus of the Marton route until 1952,
STANDARDS IN CAPTIVITY
The modernisation of the Blackpool fleet by the acquisition of 116 streamlined cars between 1933 and 1939, left the Standards looking decidedly old-fashioned, although they were only circa ten years old by then.
Their operation in regular service was confined to the Marton route, after the conversion to buses of Layton and Central Drive in 1936.
Once the Marton track was relaid post-war, the Standards were replaced by modern single-deckers, and by 1954 when Manager Luff retired, many had been broken  up.
This destruction was halted by the new Manager, Joe Franklin, and the remaining Standards gained a temporary reprieve, proving useful as Promenade extras and for Illumination Tours.
In 1955, car 144 was exported to the U.S.A. for preservation, and numbers of Standards gradually declined until, by 1966, only three were left in service: 147, and 158–9 which had been illuminated in 1959.
At the end of the season they were withdrawn and sent to Museums, making a total of six Standards preserved, three in U.K. and three in the U.S.A.  
This Page: Three of the six Standard cars  preserved in museums.
1.
The magnificently  restored 40 at the National Tramway Museum in 1931  condition.
The car is to return to Blackpool for the Centenary in 1985.
2.
Also at Crich, enclosed Standard 49 in post-1933 livery.
3.
Thousands of miles away at Seashore Trolley Museum in Maine U.S.A., is 144 the first Standard to be preserved.
Toastrack Trams
The toastrack tramcars were Blackpool's answer to the motor char-a-banc, when they were first introduced on August Bank holiday 1911.
Their regular rows of benches, ends and centre trolley mast instantly christened them ‘toastracks ’.
The original twenty-four cars 69–92 were bought from the United Electric Car Company of Preston between 1911 and 1914, but in 1927 Blackpool itself built a further six smaller racks, using its Standard car frame.
The original cars seated 69, but the new one seated only 64.
When this latter batch was modernised in 1936, a centre gangway was cut through the benches to make life easier for the conductor.
there had been several accidents to conductors swinging along the open-sided cars.
When the Second World War broke out, the twenty-four older racks were broken  up, following the requisition and closure of Marton Depot, where they were based.
The six smaller cars survived the War, but were never used in passenger service again — at least, not in their original form.
Two toastracks, 165 and 166 were used as mobile television studios for televising the Lights, while 163 was rebuilt as the Blackpool Belle illuminated car in 1959.
In 1972, 166 was donated to the National Tramway Museum, where it was beautifully restored to its original condition.
The Pantograph Cars
The ten Pantograph cars 167–176 were introduced in 129 for service between Talbot Road Station and Fleetwood.
Known at first as Pullmans , they were built by the English Electric Company at Preston, home of many Blackpool trams.
Their 7 foot 6 inches-wide body was the widest permitted at that time, and allowed two-by-two seating on upholstered seats in the saloon.
The general appearance of the cars owed something to the American inter-urban, almost the only example of this type in Britain.
Mounted centrally on the roof was a tall tower supporting a neat diamond pantograph collector, which gave the cars their popular name.
For high-speed running on the Fleetwood route, two 50 h.p. motors were fitted, and air-brakes improved the stopping capacity.
Their unusual width prevented two cars passing Albert Square Fleetwood until this curve was relaid, delaying their entry into service until the winter season 1928.
They took over the main Fleetwood service from the old Company cars, which were then used on the short-workings.
At first they were only fitted with a route-letter box on the front while the side indicator box contained such interesting displays as: STOPPING CAR TO BISPHAM, ALL STATIONS TO BLACKPOOL and SPECIAL TO FLEETWOOD.
Full destination boxes were fitted in 1932, but these did not contain Promenade or town route displays, confining the Pantographs to their own route.
The introduction of pantograph collectors on these cars, resulted from experiments carried out in 1927, following the return of Tramways Engineer Freddie Field from a study trip to Europe.
The operation of trolleys and pantographs together was not without its problems, and it was said that the great used on the collector plates could be found on the overhead line as far as Lytham!
When the pantographs were removed in 1933, the trolley towers were shortened and the replacing trolleys fitted ropes, which was unique at Blackpool.
A rebuilding of the platforms in 1936, improved the windscreens, fitted platform doors and gave a more streamlined indicator box.
During their lifetime, the Pantographs operated in four livery styles.
Originally they were red and white, then green and ivory in the original style; after the 1936 rebuilding they adopted the cream railcoach livery which they carried throughout the War until 1945, when they adopted the wartime green livery with broad cream flare.
It is in this latter style that the sole survivor, 167 — has been restored for the Centenary celebrations.
Like so many other cars, its survival followed its early withdrawal from the passenger fleet and use as a works car from 1953.
Except 176, the other eight care remained in service until 1960–1, when they were broken  up or used as Illuminated feature cars.
(see pp. 88 and 90).
1.
A commercial postcard showing 173 at Bispham in its original colour scheme complete with pantograph.
2.
A period poster featuring the new cars at Fleetwood Ferry.
3.
A wartime guise for the Pantographs was this cream pre-War livery.
Notice 174's headlamp mask and the air-raid shelter under the Bispham cliffs.
4. 173, in its final condition, waits at the North Station loading barrier opposite the Odeon.
Streamliners of the Thirties
Streamliners…
The English Electric Railcoach
The most radical development of the Blackpool fleet took place between 1933 and 1939, when no less than 116 new trams were added.
They were a central part of a modernisation scheme, implemented by the new Manager, Walter Luff, who took over in January 1933.
Their design was a radical departure from the traditional concept of a tramcar, and incorporated features of styling and comfort which had been seen only in motor-coaches of the day.
The single-deckers became known appropriately as railcoaches , a name which placed them firmly to the forefront of modern transport.
All but twenty of this new fleet was built at the English Electric Works at Preston, which already had close links with Blackpool.
Although the new cars were of radical body design, they used conventional equipment of proven reliability which stood the test of time.
It is a remarkable tribute to their builders that they have survived for fifty years in regular service, albeit in rebuilt form.
The impact of the new fleet on Blackpool Promenade was considerable.
Apart from the Standard and Pantograph cars built in the Twenties, the rest was a motley collection of vintage designs, which did not square with Luff's vision of a modern coastal tramway.
His famed ‘Five-Year Plan ’ was designed to modernise the tram and bus fleet, together with its infrastructure, and raise the level of passengers and revenue.
Hitherto, Blackpool's aim had been to crush-load its trams to bursting-point, now the object was to give them a comfortable ride for their money.
When Walter Luff took over the Transport Department, he realised the potential for development of the Fleetwood route, and it was with this in mind that the first twenty-five railcoaches were purchased.
There followed a family of streamlined cars, designed by W. L. ‘Mac’ Marshall of English Electric, who applied the railcoach features to open single-deckers and two types of double-deck car.
The common feature of all the cars was a central entrance complete with platform doors, which Luff claimed speeded loading, reduced accidents and made cleaning quicker!
Other features new to tramcars were the sliding sunshine roofs, clocks, heaters, textured roof and floor coverings and well-upholstered seats.
The new cars were a sensation when they first appeared, passengers let old cars pass in order to ride on them, and upon entering removed their hats and looked for a door mat!
The luxury tramcar had at last arrived!
Soon after Walter Luff's arrival as Transport Manager in 1933, Marshall showed him the design for the new railcoach, which fitted exactly the requirement for the Promenade and Fleetwood route.
The Transport Committee was persuaded to order a prototype from English Electric at Preston, at a cost of only £2,000.
The car, numbered 200 and painted in the new ivory and green livery, was delivered at night on June 19th 1933, just in time to achieve maximum impact at a Conference of Municipal Transport Managers being held in the town.
Free demonstration runs were provided from the siding at Gynn Square, and 200 met with general acclaim.
Publicity for Blackpool was enormous, and the railcoach achieved fame on a world-wide scale.
Twenty-four more cars of the type were immediately ordered for delivery in 1934, at a cost of £2,356 each.
The modernisation plan was launched.
As the new railcoaches arrived, they were tried on each of the routes in turn, with the exception of Marton and Layton.
After their introduction on the Fleetwood service, journey time was reduced to 32 minutes on a five-minute headway.
The increased headway was essential to the concept of smaller 48-seat cars, which were quicker loading than the old Tramroad Company cars they replaced.
The first batch of railcoaches took fleet numbers 200–224, and a second was delivered in 1935 numbered 264–283.
Together with twenty similar cars built in 1937 by Brush of Loughborough, this comprised the largest single class of trams Blackpool ever had: sixty-five in all.
It was possible to run all the winter services by railcoach, although this did not happen until the Marton route was modernised in post-war years.
On October 13th 1933, railcoach 200 was seen in St. Annes Square for the first time, when it operated from there on a private hire to Fleetwood.
It is recorded that the return journey from Fleetwood was achieved in 45 minutes, which surely must be a record for a tram?
Sadly the Lytham St. Annes system closed at Easter 1937, its cars looking increasingly antiquated alongside the modern Blackpool streamliners.
Blackpool had been keen to develop the Promenade tramway as far as St. Annes, but this was defeated and the blue buses took over.
The railcoaches however, went from strength to strength and became the work-horses of the Blackpool system.
Significantly, twenty-two of them are still in service today, although their distinctive design has been lost under extensive rebuilding.
Evolution from Railcoach to One-Man Cars
The railcoaches being the largest single class of trams, it was inevitable that they would be chosen for post-war rebuilding to suit changed circumstances.
First to be modified was car 208 in December 1946, when it was fitted with silent-wheel bogies and VAMBAC control equipment.
(Variable Automatic Multinotch Braking and Acceleration Control).
The appearance of the car was modified when the new bogies raised it higher from the ground, a housing for the equipment was built within the tower, and tinted windscreen panels were fitted to protect the vision of a seated driver.
After its experimental period, when it played a key part in the campaign to modernise the Marton route, 208 remained in regular service from Marton Depot (left ) until the closure in 1962.
Always an odd car, 208 was scrapped with the other Marton cars in this depot early in 1963.
In 1957 a radical development took place when two railcoaches, 276 and 275, were rebuilt as a motor and trailer set, in the style of the 1953 Coronation cars.
This followed a Transport Department delegation to Zurich to study trailer car operation there.
Manager Joe Franklin saw the use of 114-seat twin-cars as the answer to rising crew costs, which had outmoded the original concept of small 48-seat cars.
It is debatable whether he ever envisaged trailer operation in its accepted sense, with trailers being detached at off-peak times.
After its inaugural run to Fleetwood on April 9th 1958, the prototype twin-car operated Coastal Tours, since loading platforms on the tramroad were not long enough to accommodate it.
These were lengthened selectively for a limited-stop service after ten new trailers were ordered for delivery in 1960.
Eight more towing cars were rebuilt in the workshops, and 275 was so equipped, making ten twin-cars.
Between 1962–1970, seven of the sets were permanently linked, driving cabs being built in the trailers.
Three cars, 678–680 now run singly, following disposal of their trailers.
Right: The prototype twin set 276–5 on Central Promenade in 1957.
Following the demise of Bispham and Marton Depots and the routes that they served, in the early Sixties, twenty railcoaches were scrapped and two transformed into illuminated cars.
This left only thirteen railcoaches in original condition, plus the ten trailer towing cars.
In 1968 the fleet was renumbered, with single-deckers taking 600-series numbers and double-deckers 700-series.
Car 618 (271 ) was rebuilt with a lengthened body, seating 56 and having tapered ends.
It was a response to the expense of operating the Coronations, for which the Department was seeking an alternative.
Although 618 remained a prototype, it paved the way for rebuilding the remaining railcoaches as one-man cars, including this one as OMO car 13. (left)
The creation of thirteen one-man cars from the remaining railcoaches between 1971–1977 was possibly the most radical and far-reaching step taken in post-war years.
In 1970, an all-party Committee of the Council had been set  up to examine the future of the tramway; rising costs had once again called into question the future of winter tramway operations.
A solution seemed to be the introduction of one-man trams, following experience gained with the buses from 1969.
The Department of Transport was then offering a 50% grant towards the cost of new one-man buses, and was persuaded to give Blackpool the same grant for converting its railcoaches to ‘new trams’.
Considerable discussion went into the design of the OMOs — as they became known — by a Works team headed by the Chief Engineer, Alan Williams.
The resulting design was a radical departure from the Blackpool tradition: the 43-foot railcoach body was to be extended to 49 feet, with front doors and tapered platforms.
For the driver, the chief change was not only issuing tickets, but operating the controller with his right hand.
The first car, initially 616, was renumbered 1 and painted in a striking livery of crimson and sunshine-yellow, to distinguish it from crewed cars.
OMO 1 was passed by the Railway Inspector in April 1972, and after trial runs on the Promenade during the season, went into service on the Fleetwood route that winter.
The public were prepared for the change by an illustrated leaflet, and the cars carried illuminated Pay As You Enter signs.
All shelters had to be altered so that queues faced the trams, new signs were erected and the traditional round stop-signs disappeared.
No less than 170 conductor-posts were saved by the introduction of one-man buses and trams between 1969 and 1976, but the tramway was saved too!
Technical improvements to the riding qualities of the OMO cars, followed the replacement of the traditional steel springs by rubber suspension.
The lengthened car bodies had reduced tyre-life from the normal 100,000 miles to 60,000 miles.
With rubber suspension, tyre life was increased to a minimum of 150,000 miles!
The first with improved riding qualities was car 10, which was painted in a new red-and-cream livery in 1975.
All the cars adopted this livery, and early in 1976 car 5 was fitted with a pantograph.
A new livery of green and cream, in the style of new car 641, appeared in 1984 on car 1, however the days of these OMO railcoaches are numbered after 50 years in service!
Seaside Trams
The modernisation programme in the Thirties involved the introduction, not only of the single-deck railcoaches, but also some types uniquely suited to the seaside.
The open-top Dreadnoughts and Toastracks had been the mainstay of the Promenade route for many years, and Manager Luff proposed to replace them with modern equivalents.
In September 1933, he presented Marshall's designs for a ‘Luxury Dreadnought ’ and a ‘Luxury Toastrack ’, at a joint cost of £4,170, with the hope of a bulk order to follow.
The Committee accepted the prototypes first, which duly arrived in January 1934 and were placed on display in Talbot Square (Opposite ).
The Committee was impressed and placed a bulk order for 37 cars, comprising 11 more toastracks, 12 open-toppers and 14 double-deckers with railcoach features.
The open cars were delivered in 1934, to save money they were fitted with second-hand controllers.
Their nautical appearance immediately christened them Boats , and they were numbered 225–236.
At first they operated alongside their toastrack predecessors, but in post-war years they were the only open cars in operation.
They have always been popular with the public and eagerly sought  after whenever they appeared.
However their numbers have been halved over the years, as depot space has contracted: four were broken up in 1963 and the remainder numbered 600–607.
In 1971, 601 went to California U.S.A. for preservation, and has since operated in downtown San Francisco for the Trolley Festival.
603 went to Philadelphia for the American Bi-Centennial celebrations in 1976, but has since returned to San Francisco.
In 1985 two Boats are to be exchanged with cars from tramway museums coming to Blackpool for the Centenary of the Tramway.
This Page: 1.
Little Willy, the prototype Boat with lower sides, now 600, in Princess Street upon delivery in January 1934.
2 and 3.
The driving position and saloon, seen at the Preston Works of English Electric.
The thirteen open-toppers were popular in the years before the war, when they replaced the Dreadnoughts.
Seating 94 passengers, they had spartan wooden seats on the top-deck, but the lower saloon was equipped to railcoach standards.
With the stairs enclosed by wooden shutters, they could operate in bad weather as single-deckers.
Their first duty in 1935, was on the new Promenade service between Clifton Drive and Cleveleys.
However in 1941–2 they were enclosed to match the other streamlined double-deckers, the first car being 249 in August 1941.
They could still be distinguished internally by their thinly-upholstered wooden seats upstairs.
Upon renumbering in 1968, they became 700–712.
Following a serious collision at the Pleasure Beach in 1980, 705 was scrapped, but happily 706 has been restored for the 1985 Centenary, reviving a long tradition of open toppers on the Promenade.
This Page: 1.
The new Luxury Dreadnought attracts an admiring crowd at North Pier in January 1934.
This prototype — 226 now 700 — differed from the production models in having lower sides and being slightly shorter in length.
Double-Decker ‘Balloons’
The fourteen streamlined double-deckers were bought for the Squires Gate route in 1935, on which they spent most of their working lives until its closure in 1961.
When delivered early in that year, the new Rigby Road tram depot was incomplete, and they were temporarily shedded in Blundell Street depot displacing some old cars.
The application of a centre-entrance design to double-deckers was fairly unusual, the only other examples being seen in Sunderland, Aberdeen and Darwen.
The Blackpool cars were the largest, seating 84, and two conductors were carried to cope respectively with the upper deck and the large platform doors.
This rendered them less economic in operation.
In post-war years, the Balloons remained in the war-time green livery long after the single-deckers, and it generally assumed that the 25 Coronations of 1953 were intended to replace them.
With a new manager came a change in emphasis and a renovation programme was commenced, starting with car 250 in 1955.
This was rebuilt with a large single-indicator box at each end, and fitted with bench seats upstairs to increase the capacity to 94.
The programme was gradually effected over the years, with  interruptions for the trailer and OMO programmes, the last car 709 being rebuilt in 1980!
Occasional operation on the Fleetwood route began at Easter 1958, while regular summer season operation of the service with these cars commenced in 1972.
Today they are being rewired and repainted in a new livery, giving them a handsome appearance which belies their fifty years.
The streamlined double-deckers acquired the name ‘Balloons’ from their rounded appearance.
Over the years, they have appeared in several liveries, as seen on these pages.
They are now the largest single class of trams in the fleet.
1.
The pre-war livery seen on car 257 at Bispham Station on the Squires Gate service.
2. 712 (249) in 1984 at Starr Gate wearing the current livery.
This was the first Balloon to be fitted with a pantograph collector.
3.
The mainly  green livery was adopted during the War, but lasted until 1959 on some cars.
The need for more flexibility and economy of operation led to the rebuilding of 725 with new ends and a front entrance/exit in 1979.
Renumbered 761, the car entered service in July, fitted with a new control system which dispensed with the traditional controller, and was operated by a simple joy-stick for acceleration and braking.
Experience with Atlantean buses suggested that a driver could operate a double-deck vehicle, and this principle was applied to 761.
Following union agreement, the car operated one-man in winter while carrying a conductor in the summer.
The riding of the new car was decidedly lively because of the rubber suspension fitted to the bogies.
When the second car, 762 was rebuilt, a new layout with separate entrance and exit was included.
Experience with 761 had shown that loading and unloading at the same door was too slow on the Promenade.
Riding qualities were improved by completely  new bogies designed by the Department and manufactured locally, and a similar control system to 761.
The new car was rolled  out on March 31 1982 in time for the retirement of its designer, Chief Engineer Stuart Pillar.
The two large Jubilee double-deckers 761 and 762 were rebuilt from Balloons 725 and 714 in 1979 and 1982 respectively, completely altering their appearance.
1.
Football specials lined  up at the Pleasure Beach loop on 22 November 1980, during a cup-tie match between Blackpool and Fleetwood.
2.
The impressive bulk of 762 at the Pleasure Beach, showing its new bogies which were prototypes for those on the new Centenary class.
3.
An eye-catching all-over advertising livery for 719 in 1984; the first such car was 707 in 1975.
Sun Saloons to Marton Vambacs 1939–1962
Although by 1939 a total of 104 new trams had been delivered since 1933, there was still a requirement for some new cars to replace the old open-sided Fleetwood cars which had been retained for seasonal use.
In January 1939 an order was placed with English Electric for twelve semi-open seaside trams, which like the Boat cars would have second-hand controllers.
These cars were the last to be constructed by English Electric for Blackpool, and the last trams that they built in their East Works, now used by British Aerospace.
As the picture of the production line shows, construction was lightweight, and the cars had half-windows, a folding soft roof, half doors, no separate driver's cab, minimum lighting and wooden seats: in effect a streamlined crossbench car.
Their appearance owed more to the 1937 Brush-rail railcoaches than the English Electric family, and represented the ultimate and probably most handsome development of the streamlined design.
Unfortunately the outbreak of the War restricted their entry into service, and the new sun saloons which were delivered between August and October, got little use in their first season.
During the War, seasonal traffic declined, but there was a new requirement for troop carriers by the R.A.F., which operated major training facilities in Blackpool.
There was a daily requisition to carry troops  to the Rossall rifle ranges, leaving between 8–30 and 9–30 and returning at the end of the afternoon.
In January 1940 the requirement was for eleven cars, but this sometimes rose to fifteen, and a special siding was constructed at Rossall.
The troops did not appreciate the lack of comfort on cars 10–21 and christened them cattle-trucks .
As a concession to their unexpected winter use, special permission was obtained in 1941 to enclose the cars and partition the driver's cabs.
Throughout the War they retained their cream livery, when the rest of the fleet was green, and when the War ended they were again used on the Promenade as specials .
In 1945, the Marton route was still operating the traditional Standard cars over deteriorating track (see pages 26/7), and the Manager was campaigning for its modernisation.
When this succeeded, there was insufficient money for new cars, so eighteen sets of modern control and running equipment, similar to that on car 208, were ordered.
Its cost was £5,000 per car and was destined for the twelve sun saloons and six of the 1937 railcoaches, although these never materialised.
On 18 January 1948, car 10 became the first modern car in regular service on the Marton route, fitted with upholstered seats and fluorescent lighting.
At first, Marton's new cars 10–15 retained their old equipment, but in December 1949 car 21 went into service completely modernised with new ‘silent’ bogies, four motors and VAMBAC control equipment: the first Marton Vambac .
Gradually all cars of the series were fitted with the new equipment, and by 1952 it was possible to operate the winter service entirely with modern cars.
Attention switched to the new Coronations then being delivered, and the other six Vambacs failed to materialise.
Marton's new trams gave a superb ride on the relaid and welded track, the new equipment combined with a lightweight body ensuring lively acceleration and braking performance.
Tests carried out on the prototype car 208, showed that the car should accelerate to a speed of 30.5 m.p.h. in 17 seconds, against 23 seconds for a bus.
The new equipment, operated by a joy-stick control lever, was ideal for the Marton route with its many short stages and traffic lights.
The writer well remembers the surge of power as the cars moved forward leaving motor vehicles well behind; similar to that of an American PCC car, which the equipment was designed to emulate.
The demise of the Marton route in 1962 was the end of the line for the Vambacs.
By this time, fuel and crew costs had made them uneconomic, and despite rumours that they were to be transferred to Bispham, they were broken  up in Marton Depot by 1963, all except one car.
After the route closed, the track remained intact as far as the depot, which still stored surplus seasonal cars.
This enabled car 11 to be extracted for a farewell tour in January 1963, but it never went back, and so was preserved for posterity.
After an abortive trip to Hampshire for use on an electrified branch line, 11 now operates at the East Anglia Transport Museum near Lowestoft (see p. 111).
Sun saloon 10, a modern version of the old cross-bench car, upon delivery in 1939.
Opposite: 1.
A post-war scene in Rigby Road with a line of enclosed Sun Saloons.
2.
July 1949 on the Marton route, as the new cars replace the old Standards, seen here at Devonshire Square.
3.
The curve from Clifton Street to Abingdon Street was the sharpest on the system in regular use, as seen in this 1962 scene of a Marton Vambac, bound for Royal Oak.
Construction of the 12 sun saloons in the English Electric East Works in 1939 — the last of a long line.
The Colourful Brush Cars
The 1937 batch of twenty railcoaches were the exception amongst the streamliners, being built by the Brush Company of Loughborough, hence their familiar name.
Although they came from a different factory, their designer was the same ‘Mac’ Marshall, then freelancing, who had designed the other streamliners.
Because English Electric held patents on their designs, every single detail was different on cars 284–303: bogies by E.M.B., motors by Crompton Parkinson and controllers by Allen West.
The layout of the bodies was basically similar to the other railcoaches, but the saloon windows were full-drop and the platform doors were an air-operated sliding type.
These could be controlled by the driver, on either side, enabling the cars to load at central islands, as envisaged on the Lytham Road route before it was conventionally relaid in 1936.
The Brush cars compensated for the loss of the Lytham St. Annes blues cars, twenty-five of which were hired during peak illumination periods.
They were used initially on the new ten-minute Squires Gate and Fleetwood service which required ten cars, and the remainder used as Fleetwood specials .
However they were always odd cars to the crews and the maintenance men, who had become accustomed to English Electric equipment, and were not particularly well-liked.
When Bispham Depot reopened in May 1940, all twenty Brush cars were sent there, along with the 1928 Pantographs.
There they maintained the North Stations and Fleetwood service until the closure of the depot as a  running-shed in 1963, when they were transferred to Rigby Road.
In the 1968 renumbering they became 621–638.
Between 1957 and 1960 they were fitted with the large single indicator box, which did not suit their designs.
During the Sixties, they were re-equipped with English Electric motors and controllers, thus standardising them with the rest of the fleet.
Car 638 was rebuilt for one-man operation in 1969, but was found unsuitable and subsequently scrapped.
Although numbers have declined, 14 of them still survive, and recently have been appearing in colourful advertising liveries, as seen on this page.
4.
During the War, a predominantly  green livery was carried, seen here in this 1950 line-up at Fleetwood Ferry.
4.
A Brush car climbing the Gynn hill in 1963, on the North Station route with which these cars were associated.
Opposite: Advertising liveries seen in 1984 on the Brush cars:
1.
634 — Blackpool Zoo and Splashland.
2. 636 Warburton's Bread, known as ‘The bread van’.
3. 626 Belle Cuisines, Kitchens and bathrooms.
This Page: 1.
The Blackpool Pleasure Beach car 621, first blue-car since 1937!
2. 622 sporting a new livery introduced in 1983.
3. 633, the only post office tramcar in the world!
Coronations 1952–1975
Before the War, Manager Walter Luff, said: ‘I realised that if we wanted to have larger and wider cars, it would be necessary to have greater clearances between the tracks and more room at curves; and when the trackwork was relaid, we took account of this’.
Such farsightedness resulted in the purchase of twenty-five Coronation cars, 50 feet long and eight feet wide, between 1952–54.
English Electric were not building trams by this time, and the new cars had to be ordered from a railway wagon builder, Roberts of Wakefield.
The cars were massively constructed to railway standards (above), and were well  finished internally in attractive Alhambrinal panelling.
Externally, their appearance was enhanced by their cream livery with green lines which emphasised their length.
Undoubtedly the Coronations were the most handsome cars ever operated at Blackpool, unfortunately they were constructed to a pre-War concept, which by this time had become outmoded.
Despite their great size, the new cars only seated 56, although their massive platforms could accommodate many standing passengers.
This was nullified by union agreements specifying only six standing passengers.
This Page: Right: 1.
A Coronation car framed  up at Wakefield.
2.
The spacious lower saloon.
3.
The driving position showing controls.
4.
The delivery of 304 by Pickfords in 1952.
Opposite: 304 in Abingdon Street on its night-time Marton route test.
The equipment was the same as used on the Marton Vambac cars, which in itself was a British adaptation of the American PCC design.
In Britain, the equipment had not been well-proven, since the only cars to employ it were the Marton cars at Blackpool, and an experimental car each at Glasgow and Leeds.
In retrospect, it was not ideal for the Promenade and Fleetwood route, with its more resilient sleeper track and the blowing sand, which affected the roof-mounted control unit.
The Coronations were launched by an ever-publicity-conscious Luff, shortly before his retirement, which he delayed until 1954.
His successor, Joe Franklin, recalling his first visit to the Department, was told of 14 Coronations which were off the road with faults.
Upon taking  up his new post, he discovered that the bearings were not strong enough and put great strains upon the axles which broke regularly.
Eventually the manufacturers fitted new bearings and the problems was solved.
The new cars cost an average of £12,000 each and involved borrowing £300,000 — a large sum at the time — which with loan charges over fifteen years, amounted to £500,000.
Franklin always resented the Department being saddled with so much debt at a time of falling revenue, but the Coronations dominated most of his time as Manager.
The first car, 304, was delivered on June 2 1952 by Pickfords (opposite) and went into service on the Promenade on July 3rd.
Criticism that the new cars could not operate the town routes, provoked Luff to arrange a demonstration for the Transport Committee on the Marton route.
Cleverly he arranged it at night when there were no cars parked in Clifton Street, otherwise the swing of the 50-feet car would surely have reached them!
Joe Franklin recalled, ‘He didn't take the tram any further than Marton Depot, as it certainly would have stuck on Waterloo Road bridge.
I ruled that they would be confined to the Promenade and Fleetwood line’.
Apart from this venture, which took place on 6 August 1952, the Coronations never operated on Dickson Road, Lytham Road or Marton.
As more cars came, they took over the Fleetwood service, until on 10 March 1953, there was a complete service by Coronations between Starr Gate and Fleetwood for the first time.
The last car, 328 was delivered in June 1954, just before the new Manager took office.
While they might not have been popular with the depot staff, the crews and passengers loved them.
Driving was easy from the spacious cab, except when the electric brake failed, which sometimes happened!
Conducting was made easy by the wide gangways, bright lighting and double platform doors.
The crews knew them as Spivs , and initially their speed was such that a driver complained: ‘I've been catching seagulls with that thing!’
Some conductors took to wearing sun-glasses, until half the fluorescent tubes were removed!
Passengers liked them for their smooth ride, comfortable seating and the good views they gave from their many windows.
However there were snags: the glass panels in the roof leaked, the chrome work rusted and had to be removed, the twenty-feet trolley arms were prone to dewiring, until shortened.
Worst of all, the heavy four-motor cars were a drain on the electrical distribution system, especially in South Shore, and sometimes a whole section would go ‘dead’.
Money had to be spent in updating the sub-section equipment.
In time, the Coronations became uneconomic to operate and ways were sought of improving reliability.
Thirteen cars had their Vambac equipment removed and replaced with conventional controllers, commencing in January 1964.
This provided a breathing-space, but once the loan charges were repaid, withdrawals started between 1968–1971.
The last season for any Coronation operation was 1975, over twenty years since their introduction.
Their demise is a sad chapter in the history of the tramway, made worse by their initial promise as a new post-war generation of trams.
Three are preserved, including 660 in Blackpool which has been restored for the Centenary.
Post-War Cars — OMOs to the Centenary Class
Blackpool's experiences with its 47 post-war trams, of which only one Coronation and seven trailers are now running, ensured that any new cars would be well  researched before going into production.
The experience with the one-man cars 1–13 and the rebuilt Jubilee cars 761–2, would be used to provide a specification for any new trams.
The most urgent priority was identified as the replacement of the 13 OMO cars, which had maintained the regular service for over ten years and were heavy on maintenance costs.
Experience gained with the chopper control equipment on the Jubilees and the new bogies on 762, provided a way forward, but there remained the problem of new bodies.
After the time taken to reconstruct the Jubilee cars in the Department's own workshop, at the expense of routine body overhauls, it was decided to seek commercial manufacturer to build the new trams.
Enquiries were made from European tram-makers and British bus and railway builders, and their prices compared.
It was found that an all-British car could be built at approximately half the cost of the £300,000 for an imported model.
Tenders were sought for a prototype body, 50  feet long and 8  feet wide, clearances for which were tested with the remaining Coronations.
The contract for building the new car went to East Lancashire Coachbuilders of Blackburn, who also built Blackpool's Atlantean buses.
The new car was delivered by road on 17 April 1984, being weighed  en route at the Whitbread Brewery at Samlesbury, near Preston.
The new car body weighed 9.55 tonnes, and the unladen weight of the complete car proved to be 17.29 tonnes.
The first sortie on to the Promenade was made on June 6, and two days later was taken round the whole system to test for clearances. 641 was passed by the Railway Inspector as ready for service on 3 July, since which time it has regularly operated the Fleetwood service.
Hopefully, this car will be the first of the Centenary class, replacing the OMOs, and maintaining the regular service for many years to come!
This Page: 1.
A Marton Vambac refurbished in its post-war livery.
2.
The surviving Coronation 660 as restored, in 1983.
3.
The OMOs were the most successful post-war rebuilds.
4.
A change of livery for the Coronations in the Sixties.
5.
A twin-car unit being driven from the trailer car in 1984.
Top: Harrowside 1984 with restored Coronation 660 on tour, followed by a one-man car which succeeded this type.
One-man winter operation was the answer to rising costs.
Bottom: 641 — the first of a new generation — seen at Little Bispham in 1984.
Strangers in Blackpool
Blackpool has only once bought second-hand trams, and then in an emergency at the end of the First World War.
The war-time had been an unexpectedly busy period for Blackpool, with the resorts on the south and east coasts closed to visitors.
Scarborough had even suffered a naval bombardment!
The tramways had suffered from a lack of maintenance, repair facilities being reduced by the manufacture of shells in Blundell Street Depot.
Some cars were in such a bad state of repair that standing passengers were banned on them.
It was in these circumstances that Blackpool bought six open-top trams from the London United Tramways Company in July 1919.
No time was lost putting them into service for the season, still in the L.U.T. livery, which was similar to Blackpool's.
In the Blackpool fleet, they became Nos. 93–98 ‘, and were used on Layton as well as the Promenade, until 1933.
They were some of the first cars to be withdrawn when the fleet was modernised, and they were scrapped in 1934.
The blue buses of Fylde Transport, which are today a familiar sight on Blackpool Promenade, are the direct descendants of the Lytham St. Annes blue trams.
Their gradual integration with the Blackpool tramway has been documented elsewhere in this book, suffice to say they played a significant part in the Promenade service until their demise in 1937.
Latterly they looked increasingly obsolete when compared with the modern cars operated by Blackpool, and indeed most of them dated from the early years of the Century.
Of the original forty cars, 1–20 were open-toppers with closed saloons, while 21–40 had open sides and crossbench seats.
The car pictured (left) at Foxhall in the Thirties, was one of ten Pullman cars 41–50, which were built by English Electric in 1924.
They were so named because of their comfortable leather seats on the lower deck.
During the Thirties, several secondhand cars were bought from Dearne District (51–54), Accrington (55) and Preston (56), but the system was not saved and closed in April 1937.
Between 1949 and 1955, a visitor to Marton Depot would have been surprised by the presence amongst the tall green-and-cream Blackpool Standard cars of a small red open-topper from Southampton.
The car was stored there for the Light Railway Transport League, by courtesy of their President, Walter Luff, the Blackpool Manager.
Purchased in 1948 for £10, Southampton 45 was the first of many trams to be bought by enthusiasts for preservation.
When the Tramway Museum Society was formed in 1955, this was the first car in their fleet.
However until a site was found at Crich in 1959, 45 was moved around the country, at one time being displayed at the Montagu Motor Museum in Hampshire.
Today 45 is regularly operating at the National Tramway Museum at Crich in Derbyshire, and occupies a place of special affection.
TRAMS…
IN LIGHTS
Trams in Lights
Of all the trams operated by Blackpool during the Century, it is the galaxy of illuminated cars which make the most lasting and vivid impression.
Who can ever forget their first impression of an illuminated tram gliding over the rails in a halo of coloured light?
The writer's own experience was seeing the Progress car in the first post-war Illuminations of 1949: sheer magic as it swept by, playing music while its myriad bulbs radiated heat and light.
Today's children are still enraptured by the approach of the illuminated cars along the Promenade, just as they were by the Gondola and Lifeboat in days gone  by.
The feature cars, as they are known in the Department, are one of the tramway's brightest assets.
The story of illuminated trams began with the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria in 1897, when the Tramways Department equipped five trams with lights and patriotic slogans to mark the occasion, and operated them after nightfall on a packed Promenade.
The effect was tremendous, and the Gazette commented: ‘This first experiment with illuminated trams was a huge success.
No doubt the idea will be elaborated when the occasion offers’.
This was a portent of future events, and for the Coronation of 1902 no less than twenty-five trams were decorated (see p. 38), illuminations being added in the evening while the cars were in service.
The Gazette reported: ‘Red, white and blue incandescent lamps were rapidly fitted in position, and when the trolley kissed the wire, a brilliant design of stars burst forth and the car was outlined in national colours’.
The Tramroad Company, not to be outdone, illuminated some of their own cars both inside and out.
The Gazette reported their arrival in Fleetwood's main street: ‘The car with its brilliantly illuminated electrical devices, was a sight which overwhelmed the people in the street with astonishment, broken later by applause as the car passed slowly through the town to the terminus’.
The enthusiastic reception of the illuminated cars was such that any future occasion was bound to be graced by their presence.
The next major event in Blackpool which called for illuminated cars, was the opening of the new Promenade in 1905.
Eight cars were illuminated, including car 3 of 1885 (see p. 37), and the lights were kept on for the rest of the season to enhance the scene.
The Coronation of 1911, when only three cars were illuminated, was a prelude to Blackpool's own royal occasion in 1912 when Princess Louise opened Princess Parade, round the Metropole.
The newest car,De-Luxe 68 , was decorated by 3,000 bulbs, and the effect was stunning, especially when the car toured the Blackpool suburbs and visited Lytham St. Annes.
The significance of that occasion was the retention of the strings of lights round the new parade for the rest of the Season, thus founding the concept of Illuminations in Blackpool.
For the Royal visit of King George V and Queen Mary in 1913, 68 stood in Talbot Square proudly bearing its message, ‘Long Live Our King and Queen ’.
A full season of Illuminations followed in the Autumn, for which Charles Furness as the Borough Electrical Engineer as well as Tramways Manager, was responsible.
This was the foundation of the close association between tramways and illuminations, which has lasted to this day.
This Page: 1.
The Gondola outside the depot in Hopton Road, complete with boarding ladder.
2.
The Progress car, originally the Bandwagon of 1937, was really old Fleetwood car 141.
3.
One of two illuminated Standard cars, 159, seen here at North Station during the last weekend of that route in 1963.
The car survives in a museum at Lowestoft.
No. 68 ‘Progress’ Car 1912–1936
The Gondola 1925–1962
The 1914 Illuminations had to be stopped because of the outbreak of the First World War, and it was 1925 when they were revived by popular demand.
The Tramway Engineer, Mr. Freddie Field, was responsible for the display, and his centre-piece was the creation of an illuminated Venetian Gondola from the remains of car 28, which had been replaced by a new Standard car of the same number.
The Gondola was a most elegant car, with its high-swept prow, graceful pagoda-style roof, and its hull decorated with scrollwork in gold leaf.
It could seat twenty passengers on rattan cane seats, who boarded by a short ladder over the sides!
The effect was enhanced by a marine canvas skirt of green lights, and a distinctly nautical motion provided by the short four-wheel truck.
For its first season the driver and guard of the Gondola were dressed as Venetian gondoliers, much to the amusement of the other platform staff.
The car did not normally carry passengers, but its seats were used that season by a small orchestra which played selections from ‘The Gondoliers ’ as it made its romantic way along the Promenade.
The 1925 Illuminations attracted an additional million passengers to the Promenade trams, bringing an extra revenue of £7,360.
It was certain the display would be repeated.
The Gondola was significant in being the first of the specially  built feature cars, unlike 68 which still operated normally while annually assuming its illuminations.
The Gondola was the most graceful of illuminated trams, and was built in 1925 on the base of an old tram.
It did not originally carry passengers, since entry was gained by a ladder!
Here it is seen on a private hire: Walter Luff is sitting at the back of the saloon.
Below: At first the crew had to dress as gondoliers, much to the amusement of their colleagues!
The Lifeboat 1926–1961
The success of the 1925 Lights ensured that there would be an even bigger display in the following year.
In 1926, Field created an illuminated Lifeboat out of another Marton Box car 40.
It was realistically  painted in the authentic lifeboat colours and had a sail of white lights which could be turned to the direction of travel.
Since 1926 was the Golden Jubilee of Blackpool's Incorporation as a Borough, the lifeboat was named ‘Jubilee’.
Lacking something of the Gondola's panache, it nevertheless played a regular part in the Illuminations until 1961, survived only one year longer by the Gondola.
The Gazette reviewed the display: ‘Twenty-six electrically decorated tramcars, and an illuminated double-deck car carrying 3,500 bulbs, will convey passengers along the three-mile fairyland.
The beautifully illuminated Gondola, which was so greatly admired a year ago, will  recommence nightly voyages.
It will be supplemented by a wonderful model lifeboat named Jubilee ’.
Unfortunately the 1926 Illuminations had to be terminated prematurely because of a miners' strike, although they were reinstated for one night on October 2 for the opening of New South Promenade by Lord Derby.
Building the Lifeboat illuminated car in 1926, demanded some knowledge of boat-building, as seen here.
With its four-wheel truck, the motion of the car was decidedly nautical!
The illuminated sail was reversible, so that it always sailed in the right direction to ensure authenticity.
The Lifeboat survived until 1961, when its truck was saved for a preservation project.
Progress Bandwagon 1937–1958
The Gondola, Lifeboat and 68 operated every year as a trio, until in 1933 they were joined by a most unusual tramcar, which purported to represent Anne Hathaway's Cottage.
Known as the Cottage Tram, it was unique among even Blackpool's trams in having a thatched roof, completed by a genuine thatcher from Marton Moss.
The rustic cottage was surrounded by topiary and flowers and was surmounted by a chimney-pot, out of which incongruously sprouted the trolley pole!(see p. 112).
The driver and guard were compelled to dress in smocks and straw hats, but the unusual feature was short-lived because of the damage done to the thatch by the wind and rain.
In 1933, with the appointment of a new Transport Manager, Walter Luff, the Electrical Department was separated, still under the direction of Charles Furness.
After the discovery that the Tramways Department had effectively been subsidising the Illuminations for years, a completely new Illuminations Department was set  up in 1936 under Freddie Field.
Car 68 was withdrawn and replaced in the following year by a modernistic design, which eventually became known as the Bandwagon .
It was intended to represent the concept of a tram in 2937, but its unfortunate shape resembled more closely a cottage-loaf, by which it became known to the crews.
When the Second War came, the Gondola and Lifeboat were stored out of the way at Fleetwood Depot, but the Bandwagon continued  unilluminated to advertise various war efforts.
(see p. 41)
For the 1949 Lights, the Bandwagon was rebuilt as the Progress car , which changed its design each year.
It broadcast music as it passed, and its windows contained the silhouettes of passengers, convincing the less  perceptive that it was a double-decker tram.
In 1958 the car ambitiously featured a large tableau along one side, showing the Mayflower crossing the Atlantic.
This so weakened the structure that the car was withdrawn and dismantled, revealing the unglamorous Fleetwood car 141 underneath.
All those magic hours were reduced to a pile of plywood and lightbulbs: Sic transit gloria!
Blackpool Belle 1959–1978
In 1959, the place of the Progress car was taken by the Blackpool Belle, an elegant structure in the form of a Mississippi paddle steamer.
This was constructed on the base of the last remaining toastrack 163, which had been stored in Fleetwood Depot.
The Belle was a careful replica with coloured panels illuminated from behind to give the impression of saloons, and rotating fluorescent tubes simulating paddles.
A funnel surmounted the structure, which housed the trolley mast, and music was played by the conductor on equipment housed in the upper cabins.
The chief innovation however, were the 32 passengers who sat along wooden seats at each side.
This was a departure from tradition, since the illuminated cars had hitherto only been decorative.
The Gondola and Lifeboat also carried paying passengers from this time, having a ‘gangplank’ cut in their sides, which incidentally weakened their bodies.
Since the capacity of these three cars was fairly limited, two Standard cars 158–9 were decorated with coloured lights in the manner of the former 68.
Premium fares were charged on these cars, establishing a pattern which is maintained to this day.
The Standards looked most attractive, and operated throughout the summer season in normal service until 1966, when they were withdrawn.
The Belle continued in service for twenty years until 1978, when it was withdrawn as being uneconomic to rewire to modern standards.
By this time it carried the advertisements of a well-known whisky, and had lost some of its charisma.
In 1982 the Belle was exported to the Glenwood Trolley Park in Oregon, U.S.A., where it joined Standard 48 in retirement.
1.
The Belle before 1967 carried no commercial sponsorship.
2.
The men who built the Belle in 1959: including centre, Manager Joe Franklin, on his left Bert Kirby, Body-shop foreman, and right Stanley Holmes the Rolling Stock Superintendent.
Derek Morrison, the present Electrical Engineer, is second from the right.
3.
The Belle's last official tour on April 21 1979, was for a group of local enthusiasts, seen here at the Pleasure Beach.
The Rocket — 1961
The prize for the most unusual tram in the present fleet must go to the Rocket.
It is the only tram in service where you have to climb up to your seat and sit at an angle of 20 degrees behind two spacemen in the front compartment!
Fortunately they are not driving the car, because they are the waxworks of deposed rulers: King Peter of Jugoslavia and General Neguibe of Egypt, dressed as spacemen.
The driver is actually beneath the saloon in his own cab at the front, and therefore all the usual tramway sounds are absent from the voyage.
However the motion of the car shatters any illusion that you are travelling through space!
In reality, the saloon is mounted on the frame and bogies of Pantograph car 170 of 1928, whose body was scrapped in 1961 in order to make way for the Rocket.
This car was the last to be constructed without a sponsor, although it has since been sponsored by several firms.
Above: The Rocket under construction.
Below: On a special enthusiasts' tour in 1983 at Little Bispham loop.
The Western Train 1962
The Western Train is the most ambitious creation, in that it is a twin-car unit, built in 1962 using a spare set of towing gear.
It was initially sponsored by ABC television, and now by Lofthouses — the local makers of Fisherman's Friend cough lozenges.
The train comprises two different types of car: the locomotive is built on 1934 railcoach 209, and the trailer on Pantograph car 174.
The latter's design was especially suitable for the job, having American features of design.
As built, the train had two features which are now missing: the ability to make smoke, and the illuminated projecting cow-catchers at the front.
However, it is still the most popular of illuminated cars, attracting admiration whenever it appears.
Hovertram & H.M.S. Blackpool
The Hovertram was built in 1963 and originally sponsored by the Shell Oil Company.
It is based on railcoach 222, and is the only double-deck illuminated car in the fleet.
The inspiration was the hovercraft, a feature of which are the roof-mounted engines.
This necessitated having a low roof and a side gangway in the upper saloon, reminiscent of the old low-bridge buses.
With its 99 seats, it is the largest-capacity car in the fleet.
The last of the modern illuminated cars is a frigate, based originally on H.M.S. Blackpool, which has since been sold to the New Zealand navy!
It was built in 1965, using the underframe of Pantograph car 170, whose distinctive running noises can still be heard beneath the superstructure.
The car has a distinctive siren and the driver sits in a very elevated position, giving him a clear view over the bows!
The 1963 Hovertram is seen here on an Illuminations tour at Little Bispham loop, its northerly terminal.
The 1965 Frigate, like all the Illuminated cars, was constructed by the Transport Department on the frame of an old car.
Behind The Scenes
Blundell St. Depot 1885
At the Foxhall Hotel, a single track leaves the Promenade line and runs down the centre of the narrow Princess Street, turning into Blundell Street, Here until 1982 stood the original tram depot, as rebuilt in 1898 for the conversion of the system to overhead line.
The original conduit shed was a low-roofed red-brick structure with a wooden roof, built to house the small 1885 cars (see page 51).
When the four larger Lancaster cars were bought in 1894/6, they had to be housed in a lean-to shed at its side.
Blundell Street Depot served as a running-shed and workshops until a new works was developed in 1920.
Thereafter it was used as a running-shed, serving the Promenade, Fleetwood and Marton routes in turn, until in 1945 it became a store for surplus trams.
Although converted to a bus garage in 1956, it was reopened to trams in 1963, following the closure of Marton Depot.
Briefly used as a running-shed at Easter 1964, the protests of the Princess Street residents led to the opening of a new entrance into Rigby Road (above).
Following gale-damage and doubts about its safety, it was demolished in 1982.
A contrast in styles between the Transport Offices of the Thirties and the Victorian Blundell Street Depot.
Below: The interior of the depot, with its five inspection pits and single-span roof.
Marton Depot 1901
In 1901 a depot was built for twenty cars on Whitegate Drive, Marton, to serve the town routes, but the new cars could not enter because the curves were too tight!
They were relaid and cars gained access in November that year.
The building was enlarged in 1911, as seen here, to accommodate the seasonal toastrack cars used on the Circular Tour.
During the Second World War, the depot was requisitioned and used by R.A.F. Technical Training Command, the cars being dispersed to other depots or broken  up.
The building was rewired in 1945, and used as the Marton route running-shed; once again its east side was used for storing seasonal cars.
For several years Marton was closed during the winter, and its service cars transferred to Rigby Road shed, which operated the Marton route.
In 1962 the Depot closed with the Marton route, although cars were stored there until March 11th 1963, when Standard 48 left and the power was turned off.
Today part of the building is a garage.
Bispham Depot 1898
Bispham Depot, situated down Red Bank Road, was the headquarters of the Blackpool and Fleetwood Tramroad Company, and it is interesting to compare its somewhat spartan structure with that of Marton Depot.
The Bispham site housed not only the depot, but also the power station, offices and manager's house.
The latter, named Pooldhooie , is the only one of the buildings which can be seen today as the Bispham Conservative Club, the others have been demolished in 1983 for a Sainsbury's store.
As originally built, the depot was only half its eventual size, being extended in 1914 over the reservoir of the power station, which was behind.
This reservoir, fed by a natural stream, was revealed when the depot was demolished, to the consternation of the developers!
Throughout its life, the depot was associated with the Fleetwood route, and was known by the employees as ‘The Other Firm ’.
It was closed as a running-shed between 1934 and 1940, but was then in daily use until the arrival of the last North Station car — 290 — on 27 October 1963.
Bispham was then used as a store, and the final car — Coronation 313 — left on 5 January 1966.
Central Repair Works 1920
The lack of a proper repair works was keenly felt at the end of the First World War, when the fleet was very run-down.
The old Highways Yard in Rigby Road with its railway connection, seemed to offer an ideal site.
In 1920, a connecting line was built from Blundell Street to the railway siding, and the site was laid out in the form of a tramway avenue, served by a tram traverser installed in 1922.
This was a moving platform which carried trams sideways and give them access to the rows of workshops which were built alongside.
These were old aircraft hangars reassembled on site by the Department's workmen, however they housed an efficient car works which had built forty new trams by 1929.
The Works continued in this form until the early Sixties, when there was a major reorganisation which swept away the traverser and the old hangars to make room for a bus park.
Trams and buses henceforward shared the same Body and Paint shops, while a new Fitting shop was created in an adjacent building fronting on to the Coliseum.
1.
The site of the present Transport Offices is here occupied by an old Marton Box car which has collected a cable-drum from the railway siding of the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway at Rigby Road.
2.
The paint shop staff at Blundell Street Depot in 1908, where car-painting was carried out in a corner of the depot surrounded by sheeting, until transferred to Marton in September 1911.
3.
The pristine Gondola has just emerged from the new paint-shop, opened in 1922, and is about to be moved sideways on the traverser.
In the background, a railway wagon awaits collection.
Rigby Road 1935
The only depot now in operation is that in Hopton Road, which was opened in summer 1935 to house the streamlined fleet newly in service.
It was the intention to operate all the service cars from here during winter months and close the outlying depots.
Although achieved briefly, it was not until the closure of the street routes in the early Sixties, that the fleet was centralised on this depot.
Originally the depot was to be known as Kirby Hall, in recognition of its dual role as an exhibition hall.
An imposing entrance for this was built at the end of Kirby Road, and the inspection pits were only half the length of the depot to facilitate displays.
This never materialised, and the pits were extended in post-war years to facilitate routine inspections.
The depot now houses all the remaining trams.
Repairing & Painting The Trams
The Fitting Shop, seen here during the commissioning of 641 in 1984, carries out all the heavy engineering work for the Department's vehicles.
Here tramcar bogies are overhauled, wheels re-tyred, under-frames fabricated, pantographs made, and a thousand-and-one other jobs carried out to keep the tramway operational.
Trams are ‘docked’ when their steel tyres need renewing after 100,000–160,000 miles.
Two cars can be accommodated over the pits, which have wheel-drops.
The Paint Shop can house four buses or trams at a time, and the latter are towed  in here because there is no live overhead line for safety reasons.
In this 1983 scene, a ‘Balloon’ and a ‘Coronation’are painted by hand in the traditional way.
Service cars are repainted every three to four years, but the fierce weather conditions can ruin a livery in one season.
Strong chemical cleaners are used to remove the deposits of salt, sand and iron-dust from the paintwork; unfortunately this also removes the gloss finish!
This Page (anti-clockwise): 1.
Repairs to the roof panelling of a double-decker in the Body Shop.
2.
Gears are fitted to the standard 57 h.p. motor, through which it drives the axle.
3.
The motor is re-fitted into an English Electric bogie, in the Fitting Shop.
4.
A controller is serviced in the Depot Electrical Compound.
5.
Refitting the headlamp of a double-decker in the Body Shop.
Permanent Way
The title Permanent Way is the traditional name applied to the tram track, which is laid to a gauge of 4′ 8½″.
The condition of the track determines the smoothness of the ride enjoyed by a tram passenger, and so continuous maintenance work is needed by the track-gangs.
Rather like the painting of Blackpool Tower, as soon as one end is finished work starts at the other!
Over the years, mechanised methods of handling have reduced the size of the track-gangs.
Two principal types of construction are used: on street sections grooved tram rail is laid directly on to a solid track-bed, while on the Promenade it is spiked to wooden sleepers.
The open tramroad is laid in light-railway track, known as bullhead , which is mounted on chairs and sleepers.
This requires more maintenance than the welded grooved rail, but has the advantage of ready access and interchangeability from one side to the other.
Tramway track on straight sections has a life of 25–30 years, but on sharp curves has to be renewed every 2–3 years, although this life has been extended by ribbon welding (see p. 101).
This Page (clockwise): 1.
Grinder car 752 is used traditionally to grind wrinkles or corrugations out of the track with its carborundum shoes, and is seen here in Red Bank Road, Bispham in 1964.
2.
The tram rail is carried on trailer 751, which is fitted with a hydraulic crane for loading and unloading.
Towed behind car 624, it is seen at Thornton Gate in 1983.
3.
Arriving on site, the new rail is loaded on to the track-bed, in Lord Street, Fleetwood.
4.
The Unimog all-purpose maintenance vehicle sweeps the Promenade of debris after a storm.
During gales, the Unimog sweeps the track free of sand.
Overhead Line
The overhead line supplies current to the trams at 550 volts DC.
This is distributed in sections which are fed by a series of six rectifiers along the line.
These transform current from the National grid at 6,600 volts AC.
Originally, Blackpool supplied its own power for the tramway, originally from a generator at the back of the tram depot, and later from the Municipal power station at Shannon Street.
The line itself is made of copper, which has an average life of ten years over the whole system, but much  less on sharp curves.
Traditionally the tram has drawn its power through a phosphor-bronze trolley wheel mounted over the end of a trolley arm.
However there have been two periods of pantograph operation on a limited scale: from 1927–33 and again from 1974.
Presently, regular service cars are receiving pantograph collectors made by the Department in place of trolleys.
This Page (anti-clockwise): 1.
Sunday morning overhead line renewal at Rossall in 1984, using works tram 753 and the Unimog operating on rails.
2.
Last outing for vintage 754 in April 1983, repairing a section feeder at Norbreck.
This car has now been sent to the North East England Open Air Museum at Beamish for restoration as open-top car 31.
3. 750, the reel wagon, carries the new copper overhead wire on its drum, and the old wire stacked at the side.
4.
The Unimog used for inspecting the overhead wire, can travel on road or rails.
In the latter mode, guide wheels are lowered on to the track at front and rear.
Track-laying techniques (clockwise): 1.
Demonstrating the Mapple hinged conduit, which made inspection easier.
2.
Laying the conduit track in Station Road, South Shore in 1897.
3.
Relaying the Marton route in the Twenties: Abingdon Street.
Notice the tar boilers and the channel prepared for the tar to bind the rails to the track-bed.
4.
The Promenade track receiving the attention of a vigorous track gang near Central Pier.
The track here is laid on wooden sleepers.
5.
A conduit-point, linking the Promenade with Station Road, being the final extension of the conduit system.
Permanent Way
This Page (anti-clockwise): 1.
Welding a bonding cable on to the new rail.
2.
Track relaying in Lord Street, Fleetwood in 1951, with the Fleetwood Box-car on Works duties, while the passing railcoach is bound for South Promenade.
Single-line working took place during the relaying.
3.
Thirty years  on, Lord Street track is relaid again: this time the tram service is suspended at Ash Street to facilitate progress, and buses carry the passengers to the Ferry.
4.
A German crew belonging to Elektro Thermit of Essen are welding a strip of manganese steel on to the rail to extend its life.
5.
Grinding  smooth a welded rail-joint on the new street track in Fleetwood.
People & Trams — The Platform Staff —
The platform staff are the most public of the Transport Department's employees; currently c. 400 are employed, augmented annually by 150 seasonal staff.
This represents a considerable reduction from the figure of 980 in the Sixties, when student conductors were employed and before the introduction of one-man operations on trams and buses.
Wages and conditions are now negotiated nationally by the Transport & General Workers Union, but this was not always so.
Under the regime of the Blackpool Electric Tramways Company, drivers worked from 0830–2230 for 20–24 shillings a week.
The wages for guards was very low, a mere 16 shillings (80p) a week, but they had the advantage of making as much again in tips.
When the Corporation took over the tramway in 1892, conditions improved: the working week was reduced from 90 to 60 hours and wages raised to 24 shillings.
Uniform was issued for the first time: until then, only caps had been issued to crews.
During the First World War, women were employed for the first time, resulting from Manager Furness' refusal to employ any able-bodied man eligible for military service.
By 1917 more than 75% of the male tram crews had enlisted in the army.
The first intake of women was in 1915; they had to wear their own skirts but were provided with a ¾-length coat and a round hat.
In 1917 women were allowed to drive trams, and were paid 5¾d per hour, the same rate as the men!
After the War, no further women were employed.
In 1920, a national strike of tramwaymen was feared, but averted by a rise of 5 shillings a week.
In October 1922, employees' wages were reduced by three shillings a week! conditions at that time were severe; men had to serve for several years on the seasonal staff before being taken  on as a regular.
Each season, there was two week's probation, which was unpaid even though the Labour Exchange considered such men employed and refused to pay them dole-money!
There were long shifts on the road without a break, and wives used to bring their husband's lunch out to them on the road.
Between the Wars the cars were open at first, and drivers had to be well-clad in oilskins to avoid the cascade of water which poured on to them from the canopy of the open-fronted trams.
In 1928 the opinion of the crews was sought about the enclosing of drivers' platforms with a vestibule, and in the following year the first car was enclosed.
During the Thirties when the streamlined fleet was introduced, the driver was for the first time provided with his own driving cab, complete with folding seat.
Some of the older drivers were not impressed, and one was given to shouting to drivers of passing modern cars, ‘Get off yer backside and drive!’
In 1940, so many men had joined  up that women conductors had to be employed again.
Eventually the total rose to 350 women on the platforms of trams and buses, and at Whit 1940 the first ten motorwomen were trained.
To qualify they had to be at least 26 and measure 5 feet 7 inches in height.
Although at first, women had to wear white dustcoats and men's hats, new uniforms were eventually provided which suited the female figure.
The first women inspectors were appointed in April 1942, but were withdrawn shortly afterwards following objections from the remaining men.
At the end of the War many men did not return to their former transport jobs, and women became a regular part of the platform staff.
For many years, tram and bus crews operated as separate entities, but to cope with the seasonal demand for drivers, bus crews worked overtime on trams.
The 1968 Transport Act restricted driving hours to a maximum of 130 in two weeks, which effectively ended the practice of working double shifts.
It is now policy that crews are inter-changeable between trams and buses, although there is a nucleus of tram drivers who operate the winter service.
There are differential rates of pay for drivers of trailer trams (17% bonus), single-deck OMOs (20%) and double-deck OMOs (25%).
In 1974 VHF radio was introduced to one-man trams and buses, so that crews could be in touch with the controller and he could contact the line inspectors.
Conditions have changed radically from a Century ago: but drivers on the busy Promenade still require alertness and quick reactions when contending with thousands of holiday-makers in close proximity to their tramcar.
Those drivers who volunteer to drive one of the vintage cars for Centenary year find a big difference between the neat control lever of Blackpool's latest trams and ‘Arm-strong's Patent’ required on those of yester-year!
On this Page:(anti-clockwise): 1.
The driver first gets protection of a vestibule in 1929.
2.
Until then, drivers had to wear protective capes.
3.
Choker collars and straw-topped hats between the Wars.
4.
Streamlined trams provided separate drivers' cabs, 1930s.
Opposite: 1.
Women tram crews in 1915 at Blundell Street.
2.
Stepping out in Second World War style, 1940.
3.
Mrs. Eve Bainbridge at the controls, 1985.
Men Who Ran The Trams — The Managers
Michael Holroyd-Smith 1885
A new name, that of the 38-year old Michael Holroyd Smith, appeared in the technical press of Europe and America in 1885 and stayed in the news into the next century.
For much of this time Holroyd Smith was synonymous with Blackpool, the location of his achievement by installing one of the world's first sustainable application of electricity to street transport.
Not only did Holroyd Smith succeed in a location where the fierce Irish Sea buried the delicate electrical apparatus of the day under shingle and salt water, but his method of transmitting electricity along the Promenade by means of a naked electrical conductor located between the tram rails in a conduit with a narrow slot at the top, was similar to installations later made by major electrical companies in great cities where overhead lines were considered rude.
For the first few years Blackpool's trams represented the only practical example in the World, of electric tramcars running in crowded thoroughfares.
The electrical giants of the age, Siemens and Edison, were not yet able to offer a viable alternative.
Sadly Holroyd Smith did not reap the full reward his ideas should have brought.
After working in his father's wire rope works at Halifax, Holroyd Smith struck off on his own, no doubt evoking a sigh of parental relief as he could not stop inventing and improving everything around him, from furnaces to ladies' corsets.
In the 1880s the development of a practical electric tramway was a pressing need in developed countries, and to this end Holroyd Smith brought his inventive mind, energy, connections and moderate financial resources.
To develop his system, the idea for which probably came to him during a passing involvement with cable trams, Holroyd Smith built three experimental miniature lines in Halifax during 1883–4.
Fate then struck.
Following the failure of an unknown inventor's narrow-gauge electric line at Blackpool's Winter Gardens, Holroyd Smith used his experimental apparatus to rebuild it and produced a successful revenue-earner which was seen by Blackpool Tramways Committee.
This led to the Committee's visit in 1885 to Holroyd Smith's full-size demonstration line at Manchester, and the signing of an agreement for his patents and professional services to be used in constructing an electric street tramway at Blackpool.
Apart from the immediate proximity of the rumbustious sea, Blackpool Promenade was a good — perhaps unique — location for the great experiment.
It was flat, and having been open for only fifteen years, was not criss-crossed with sewers, gas and water pipes which otherwise would have required costly re-location.
The Board of Trade, who were responsible for regulating tramways, looked kindly on the venture as being in the interest of electrical progress.
There were no powerful property owners to object, and the lack of heavy industrial traffic meant that the conduit could be lighter and cheaper than elsewhere.
On the other hand, Blackpool was the premier destination for Lancashire's holidaymakers, which generated sufficient traffic to make a tramway on the Promenade a paying proposition.
The intimate relationship of Blackpool with the Wakes Weeks towns had enabled it to raise capital for its piers, Winter Gardens and other improvements.
The tramway was to prove no exception, a fact underlined by the presence of rows of mayors at the opening on 29th September 1885.
Despite much rebuilding and the need for dogged perseverance by Holroyd Smith and his supporters, his conduit line although equipped with primitive electrical apparatus, handled everything Blackpool's crowds and the sea could throw at it until 1899, when it was converted to the cheaper overhead line method now used.
Although Holroyd Smith carried out other tramway work in Britain and Europe and took out patents world-wide, he had no comparable achievement with Blackpool.
If he had been associated with a major electric manufacturer it could have been different, but his character was too individualistic.
The turn of the century saw Holroyd Smith manufacturing motor cars, his first experimental one appearing to incorporate parts off a Blackpool tram!
Holroyd Smith died at the age of 84 in North Wales, still at work inventing devices to assist in his favourite hobby of angling!
 A. Winstan Bond 
Note: Winstan Bond is an authority on Holroyd Smith and his inventions, has published papers on the subject and is custodian of the family archives.
John Lancaster 1885–1910
John Lancaster's connection with the Blackpool Tramway spanned twenty-five years from 1885 until his death in March 1910.
He was invited by the directors of the Blackpool Electric Tramways Company to become their Traffic Manager, and arrived three weeks before the tramway was opened.
His connection with tramways was first established with the Blackburn and Over Darwen steam tramway, where he served for three years.
While Holroyd Smith and Cornelius Quin took care of the electrical side of operations, John Lancaster managed the day-to-day running of the tramway, for which he was paid the princely sum of £1–15 shillings a week.
When the Company's lease expired in 1892, Lancaster's services as manager were retained, thus giving him the distinction of being the first electric street tramway Manager, and upon his death the longest-serving.
It was Lancaster who presided over the transformation of the conduit system to overhead line in 1899, and the extensions to the Gynn, Marton, Lytham and South Shore via Lytham Road.
One of his earliest duties under Municipal control was to formulate a scheme for improved conditions of labour for the men, involving a reduction in working hours, increase of pay and provision of uniforms.
About his men, Lancaster is quoted as saying: ‘A tramway servant is now regarded as a responsible public servant and not, as formerly a drudge’.
He maintained a kindly interest in welfare matters, instituting an annual reunion for former employees and an annual tea-party for the children, over which he presided.
His Gazette obituary concluded in 1910: ‘Blackpool has lost one of its oldest and most devoted public officials’.
His period as Manager was not highly innovative, but the system expanded geographically, including the widening of the Promenade and the provision of the reserved track tramway.
However the credit for this should be given to Ald. Joseph Brodie, the Tramways Committee Chairman from 1895 until his death in 1917.
Brodie had a breadth of vision which complemented Lancaster's conservatism, and together they made a balanced working team.
(They are pictured together on page 37, in front of the 1905 decorated tram).
Brodie was well-known in the Municipal Transport world and became a distinctive and well-accepted figure wherever he went.
He was the first in a line of long-serving Chairmen, whose keen interest in the tramway contributed in no small measure to its success and survival.
Charles Furness 1910–1932
Charles Furness was unique in the annals of Blackpool Tramways in occupying two major posts: he was Borough Electrical Engineer from 1902–1936 and Tramways Engineer from 1910–1932.
It was not surprising that, on his retirement in January 1936, he was quoted as saying: ‘A man cannot serve two masters, I am a man without a hobby’.
After taking over the Tramways Department following the sudden death of Lancaster, Charles Furness became responsible for several innovations.
Firstly he introduced new cars, including the De Luxe cars, new Pullman cars for the Fleetwood route and the famous toastracks which successfully operated the Circular Tour.
Secondly he presided over the integration of the Blackpool and Fleetwood Company in 1920, reconstructing the electrical distribution system on the line.
Thirdly, he was responsible for the popular Illuminations first started in 1912 and revived in 1925.
With these achievements to his credit one would have thought he would have enjoyed the support of the Council, but it was not so.
Furness was strong and forceful by nature and wielded a power in his Departments, although he was always just and fair with his employees.
The former qualities did not endear him to those in the Council who wanted change, and a replacement of the tramways by buses.
He stoutly resisted these demands and campaigned for the retention of the tramways.
Although bus services were started, they never impinged on the tramway services.
The result of his intransigence was a refusal by the Council during the Twenties, to sanction the number of new trams required for modernisation.
Consequently he instituted a programme of car-body building in the new workshops under the guise of rebuilding old cars.
In 1929 the name of the Tramways Department was changed to Blackpool Corporation Transport, in recognition of its wider operations.
In 1932, the growth of both Electricity and Transport Departments was such that a new Transport Manager was appointed, while Charles Furness stayed on as Borough Electrical Engineer until his retirement in 1936.
On this occasion his achievements were measured in terms of the £160,000 which his departments had contributed to rate relief during his tenure: ‘No man is more deserving of the thanks of the ratepayers than Mr. Furness whose enthusiasm and enterprise has made his department's a wonderful source of revenue for the town’.
Undoubtedly he built a solid foundation for the great changes which were to come, and secured the tramway for the future.
‘The man who saved Blackpool trams’.
Walter Luff 1933–1954
Considering that Walter Luff will be forever associated with the modernisation of the Blackpool tramway in the Thirties, it was surprising that his previous appointment had been as Commercial Manager of the West Riding Tramways Company, which had just abandoned its trams.
Above all he brought an accountant's mind to the affairs of the Transport Department, with startling results.
Within a few months of arriving in Blackpool, Luff announced his five year plan to transform the Undertaking, changed the livery to ivory and green, and introduced a streamlined tramcar as the prototype of a new fleet (see p. 65).
A year later, the local press was singing his praises: ‘He has done what some people thought could never be done — make the buses pay.
He has also made a record profit on the trams in the year he has been here’.
Walter Luff did not make the same mistakes as his predecessor, and paralleled the extensive improvements on the tramway by a redevelopment office of the bus system, including the sacrifice of two heavily-trafficked tram routes to bus operation.
By 1939, he had a considerable list of achievements to his credit, including 116 new tramcars, new depot and transport offices at Blundell Street, modern fare collection and accounting systems, and extensive track relaying and modernisation of turning facilities.
At this time, the Blackpool Transport fleet totalled 350 vehicles and had become the seventh largest in the country.
Luff described himself as ‘something of a visionary ’, and during a talk in 1940 indulged in some Wellsian flights of fancy, producing drawings of a tram whose driver's cab was on the roof giving passengers a clear view forward, and a bus which had folded wings!
In a post-war broadcast in 1946, he referred to the development of eight-feet wide trams with resilient wheels which he hoped to introduce to Blackpool, and these were manifested in the 1952 Coronation trams.
Significantly he was awarded the gold medal of the Institute of Transport in 1949 for a paper entitled: ‘Budgeting and Statistical Control of Road Passenger Transport ’.
In 1952 Walter Luff should have retired, but was twice persuaded to stay  on for another year by the Transport Committee.
Writing as President of the Light Railways Transport League in 1952, he continued to show optimism over the future of the tramway: ‘Here in Blackpool there is no talk at all about abandoning tramways, but on the other hand our progressive modernisation programme continues’.
Luff's achievements have now become legendary in the history of Blackpool's tramways, but it should be recorded that he was fortunate in presiding during a time of expansion, and also enjoyed the political support of the Transport Chairman Ald. C. E. Tatham from 1934 until his death in 1954.
Upon retirement he declared that he had only one regret: his failure to divert the tram track round the sea-side of the Metropole Hotel!
Joseph Franklin 1954–1974
It fell to Joseph Franklin, the Rochdale Manager, to succeed a man who had become a legend in his time, but whose legacy was not an easy one.
Franklin, as a Lancashire man, had always wanted the Blackpool job, and had regarded his appointment to Rochdale in 1951 as a stepping-stone to Blackpool.
He recalled that he was overjoyed when he heard that Walter Luff was staying  on until 1954, thus providing him with the chance that he needed.
He later admitted that his knowledge of trams was limited to his experience where, as Chief Engineer, he was lucky to get fifteen out of a decrepit fleet of fifty-seven trams into service each day!
It must have been a relief when trams were never once mentioned at his Blackpool interview!
His first weeks in Blackpool were — on his own admission —‘an eye-opener ’.
He had inherited from Walter Luff an undertaking whose proud boast was that it had contributed £454,361 in rate relief during his management.
However the good financial years had ended, and it fell to Franklin to break the bad news that Blackpool's trams and buses would actually make a loss in 1954–5.
A stunned Council considered selling the Undertaking to private enterprise, but Joe Franklin persuaded them that it could be made to pay providing economies were made.
During the Fifties, the national pattern of soaring costs and falling revenue was reflected in Blackpool; Franklin countered by cutting winter and off-peak services and the generous concessions which had previously been given.
He was always something of a showman and sought to attract extra revenue by utilising the tramway as an attraction: to this end he introduced Illuminations tours, reintroduced the Circular Tour and created new feature cars, attracting commercial sponsorship.
This policy culminated in the 75th anniversary of the tramway in 1960, which was a publicity triumph of the tramway.
By this time, the climate in the Council was increasingly hostile to tramways, and the Management had to take desperate measures to secure the future of the Promenade and Fleetwood lines.
Franklin later admitted: ‘Right from square one I knew that the street routes would eventually have to go’.
Throughout the Sixties, the Manager and his Chief Engineer Alan Williams struggled to make the trams economic and resisted attempts to close them down completely.
The twenty-five Coronations, with their expensive running costs, were the principal casualty, and the evolution of the one-man trams was the principal story.
By the time of his retirement in 1974, with one-man operation established and costs reduced, the future was more secure and Joe Franklin — like Charles Furness — could claim to have saved the tramway from certain extinction.
Derek Hyde — from 1974
The change of Manager in 1974 coincided with Local Government Reorganisation which provided an opportunity for Derek Hyde, a Lancashire man himself, to leave Coventry City Transport which was being absorbed into the West Midlands PTE and come to Blackpool.
The press made much of his brother Geoffrey's Chairmanship of the Tramway Museum Society, which operated vintage trams at its Museum in Derbyshire.
However Derek Hyde's vision of the tramway was not as a museum line, but as a forward-looking system of transportation in the field of light rail, the virtues of which were again being recognised.
The change in climate towards electric traction reflected the huge rise in oil prices, and the recognition that reserves of oil are finite.
Lancashire County Council, who with local government reorganisation, had a responsibility for developing policies in respect of public passenger transport, accepted that the Blackpool tramway was an integral part of public transport in the area and they made finance available towards the operation of the tramway including renewal of the tram track.
This enabled much of the Promenade track to be relaid during the 1970s and the Fleetwood track in 1982–3.
One of the problems facing the new Manager was that of renewing the tramcar fleet.
Most of the fleet dated from pre-war days and whilst overseas manufacturers could supply new cars, they were unduly sophisticated and prohibitively expensive.
It was decided therefore, to make a start upon upgrading the existing fleet by adopting improved technology wherever possible.
A new truck and suspension system was designed by the Department and a major step forward taken with new technology in the introduction of electronic chopper control.
These new features were included in the specification of the two double-deck cars that were completely rebuilt by the Department, with work carried out under the direction of Mr. Stuart Pillar, the then-Chief Engineer, who was justly rewarded with the MBE upon his retirement in 1982.
In the same year the Department gained its first Deputy General Manager with the promotion of Anthony Depledge from Traffic Manager.
It became obvious however that because of limited resources within the Transport Department workshops, it would be necessary to seek outside assistance if significant progress was to be made in replacing the fleet.
A decision was taken to use bus technology in producing a body to be mounted on the trucks that had already been designed by the Department and were operating successfully.
One of the first tasks of the new Chief Engineer, Bernard Browne, was to prepare a specification for a single-deck car and to oversee its building by East Lancashire Coach Builders, using the new technology, tried and proved successful on the Jubilee class of double-deckers.
Counterpointing this forward-looking development was the forthcoming Tramway Centenary in 1985, involving the operation of museum cars from other systems.
The concept of this event was largely that of Transportation Committee Chairman.
Councillor Stan Parkinson, a former Manchester Transport man himself.
As Chairman since 1974, he has provided a stable political basis for the Department during this period.
At a time of enormous demands on the energies resources and initiative of the Department, and the Government proposals for changes in the legislative framework of bus operation, the development work on further cars underlines Blackpool Borough Council's confidence in the future of the tramway.
Trams on the Move 1984!
Above: Car 710 en-route for the Tramway Museum, passes through a hilly street in Huddersfield.
This car was exchanged for Glasgow 1297 in 1984/5 during the Centenary Celebrations.
Below: The first Centenary Class car 641 on its way from the East Lancashire Coach Builders factory in Blackburn to Blackpool on 17 April, 1984.
Trams & Their Fans
Finally we come to the tram's own fans, those enthusiasts who devote boundless energy in pursuit of their hobby.
Some travel to far parts of the world to see tramway operation, while others conserve and maintain the cars which are in museums.
Special tramway tours have always been a feature of the hobby, and the first was held at Blackpool by the Light Railway Transport League in 1938.
The object is to ride on an unusual or distinctive tram, photograph it and to place it in unusual locations where it is not usually to be seen.
Sometimes this can tempt providence when the train demurs and falls off its rails (opposite), however there are always plenty of experts to offer friendly advice to the professionals upon re-railing!
Enthusiasts in Action: 1.
The launch of a new tram book in 1978 is the excuse for a special run on 59 (opposite).
2.
Students in the bed race compete with the Blackpool Belle for the attention of photographers at the Cabin in 1979.
3.
Ready for off: the Fylde Tramway Society and Tramway Museum Society join forces for a little boating!
This Page: 1.
Disaster strikes when 160 falls off the rails at Thornton Gate siding in 1963.
2.
The proud team who rebuilt the Bolton car at Rigby Road in 1981.
3.
A Christmas party on a tram is now an annual event for local fans, including author Steve Palmer, second from right.
Trams in Captivity
Of the twenty-two Blackpool trams preserved, nine are at the National Tramway Museum in Derbyshire.
Here they operate in very different surroundings to Blackpool's, as seen on this page:—
Anti-clockwise: 1.
The 1927 electric locomotive newly-restored in 1984.
2.
A procession of Blackpool cars was staged on Members' Day in May 1984.
3.
Pantograph car 167 was first to leave Blackpool in 1962, but is returning fully-restored for the Centenary in 1985.
4.
Standard car 40 is the pride of the Crich workshops and provides the Centenary logo before returning to its native system in 1985.
5.
The 1948 Glasgow  Cundarder 1297 was sponsored by Sealink during 1984–5.
The Blackpool Dreadnought returned in 1975 for the Borough Centenary.
Clockwise: 1.
A Leyland Lion belonging to Ribble provides a suitable partner for Bolton 66 on a vintage Circular Tour, in 1983/4.
2.
Manchester 765 seen operating here in Heaton Park, Manchester on a former tramway branch line into the park.
3.
Marton Vambac 11 was saved mercifully from the scrap merchant at the eleventh hour, to operate at the East Anglia Transport Museum, Lowestoft.
4.
Sheffield 513 was saved by a choirman from York Minster, and has been loaned to Blackpool by the North of England Open Air Museum at Beamish.
5.
Bolton 66 was the first ‘foreign’ tram to operate in Blackpool in June 1982 and its success led to the arrival of cars from other systems.
Believe It Or Not!
Did you know that passengers on Lytham gas trams had to push them over the railway bridge in Lytham Road?
That special trams were run to enable people to view a solar eclipse?
That between the Wars you could post a letter on a tram?
That in 1925 you could watch motor-racing on the Promenade from a tramcar grandstand?
Finally, do you know these tramway expressions?
Tram Pinch, Running Over Frogs, Flashing a Breaker, Crippled Joints, Demic, Jim Crow, Going down for Two, 3-bell load?
If not, ask a real tramwayman!
The Blackpool Tramway is rightly claimed as the first and last street tramway and unique in many other ways.
On this page we add a post-script to the Century by straining the readers' credulity still further!
1.
The largest single load ever carried on the tramway was this boiler transported from Bispham to Rigby Road in March 1925.
2.
Albert was the name given to this tank built in 1918 on the frame of an old 1885 tramcar which toured the town to raise funds for the war effort.
The name was that of Mayor Albert Lindsay Parkinson.
3.
The Cottage Illuminated tram was built in 1933 on an old tram to resemble Anne Hathaway's Cottage.
The driver and guard wore rustic smocks in keeping.
4.
During the Second World War, tram crews had to carry gas masks and don them during air raids, as this picture shows.
1885 Centenary Year 1985
The publication of the second edition of this book provides a welcome opportunity to record the events of the Centenary Year.
On June 6th, only the second royal tram ride in Blackpool's century of trams, took place when Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester rode from Starr Gate to North Pier on board car 40.
Here she inspected a line-up of historic trams, including Glasgow 1297, Bolton 66 and Manchester 765.
Newly-restored open-topper 706 occupied the Centenary siding, and the Princess unveiled a plaque on the side of the car commemorating her visit and naming it ‘Princess Alice’.
She was presented with a  Wedgwood Centenary Plate and a copy of ‘Blackpool's Century of Trams’, by Councillor Stanley Parkinson, Chairman of the Transportation Committee.
Centenary-class car 641 was provided for a ride to the Tower, where the Princess made the famous ascent to the top, on the recommendation of her son The Duke of Gloucester.
The plaque is now displayed at the Transport Offices, but 706 still proudly carries its name ‘PRINCESS ALICE’.
Princess Alice holds the Centenary Plate, while Councillor Parkinson holds a copy of ‘Blackpool's Century of Trams’.
Both were presented to the Princess at the naming ceremony of 706 on June 6th 1985.
The stainless steel plaque, initially mounted 706.