

Jesus Green Lock
Standing on the beautifully tended grass of Jesus Green and watching a throng of tourists, language students and local people enjoying the  tranquillity of the lock, it is hard to believe that it was built for commerce rather than leisure.
Until the present century water transport was of great importance in the fens and the lock at Jesus Green was the highest on the River Cam and gave access to Quayside.
This important wharf, originally lined with warehouses only recently demolished, is set in the very heart of the city amid colleges and shops.
Consider for a moment the bustle of the scene a hundred years ago, with horse-drawn barges and occasional steam tugs nearing the end of their journeys or perhaps setting out on the return trip towards the sea.
King's Parade
King's Parade offers a remarkable contrast between the Senate House, the Old Schools and King's College to the west, whilst to the east is a splendid miscellany of houses, the lower floors of which are now almost all shops, many catering mainly for visitors.
The blend of architectural styles rewards inspection for here is the very antithesis of 20th century town planning.
There is stucco, half-timbering, red brick, gault brick, dormered roofs and  parapeted Georgian facades, all set seemingly at random, yet in perfect visual harmony one with another.
This architectural anarchy contributes enormously to the appearance of our city, and forms a perfect backdrop to the splendours of the colleges.
Queens' College ‘Mathematical’ Bridge
The Mathematical Bridge, properly known as the Wooden Bridge, which connects the wonderful Cloister Court of Queens' College with The Round has, over the years, attracted a number of appealing myths.
It is said to have been built without nails, bolts, dowels or other fixings to a design by Newton, but to have been bolted together following its dismantling by drunken students who were unable, when sober, to reverse their vandalism!
The truth of the matter is that the bridge was built in the mid-18th century by James Essex to a design by W. Etheridge, an undergraduate.
It was almost certainly held together with dowels but has in any case been rebuilt twice, in 1867 and 1904, with the use of ample numbers of bolts.
Portugal Place
Visitors to the city may easily fail to chance upon Portugal Place which remains an oasis of timeless calm only a few paces from the crowded pavements of the city centre.
From its entrance off Bridge Street, watched over by St. Clement's church, the tower of which can be seen in our illustration, this traffic-free lane progresses in two distinct parts.
It is initially flanked to the north by the church and to the south by gault-brick houses until it reaches the shop building (now an office) at No 9; it then changes character dramatically becoming lined with gaily colour-washed Victorian terraced houses, reached by short flights of stone steps with iron balustrades and usually bright with flowers and shrubs.
The ‘Bridge of Sighs’
Inspired by the bridge of the same name in Venice, the Bridge of Sighs was completed in 1837 to provide access to the New Court of St. John's College and was designed by Henry Hutchenson.
It is regarded as the finest of the Cambridge college bridges; an achievement to which the architect may have been spurred by the old St. John's bridge, a masterpiece by Wren, barely 20 yards downstream.
A refinement of the design of the Cambridge bridge over the original was the incorporation of wrought-iron latticework in the unglazed windows to prevent the lovelorn emulating their Latin counterparts by leaping to their deaths in the river.
The Great Gate, Trinity College
Perhaps because Henry VIII, founder of Trinity College, was a larger-than-life character everything about the college seems to be on a grand scale.
This includes the impressive list of distinguished men, including royalty, who have as undergraduates passed through the great gate which forms the subject for this picture.
Built about 1490, the gatehouse actually pre-dates the foundation of the college, having been built as the entrance to King's Hall which together with another ancient establishment, Michaelhouse, was incorporated into Trinity when it was founded.
The statue of Henry VIII which has pride of place above the gate will be seen to be holding a chair leg.
Repeated attempts to fit a more appropriate sceptre as originally intended have been thwarted by generations of students with a keen sense of tradition.
The Old Granary, Darwin College
This splendid though rather whimsical riverside house was built as a granary, conveniently positioned at the very head of the navigable part of the River Cam along which barges laden with corn could travel from King's Lynn and the fenland farming areas.
Since its conversion to a dwelling house in the late 19th century its impressive list of distinguished tenants has included Bertrand Russell the mathematician and philosopher and Henry Morris, founder of the famous system of Village Colleges still in use throughout the county.
The writer and artist Gwen Raverat, a member of the famous Darwin family, was the last private occupant prior to 1957 when the house became college accommodation, being first let to New Hall.
Since 1965 it has been part of Darwin College.
Magdalene Bridge
For centuries successive bridges at Magdalene Street provided the city's principal river crossing.
Early timber structures fell, in turn, into decay the last being demolished in 1798.
The present bridge was built to an adventurous design wherein the cast iron sections forming the arches were pin-jointed not only at the ends but also in the centre of the span.
Perhaps because of its futuristic design or perhaps through slow fund-raising, the bridge took many years to complete and was not opened until 1823 which must, to say the least, have been highly inconvenient.
It has survived many more recent attempts by central government to have it replaced but since a major overhaul took place in 1986 this fine landmark has a secure future.
The Senate House
Cambridge is a collegiate university — there is no campus as such and no particular place or building to which one can point and say ‘there is the university’.
The teaching faculties and administrative offices are scattered all over the city but, forming a wonderful backdrop to King's Parade, stands the Senate House.
This fine 18th century building, designed by James Gibbs, is at least symbolically the heart of the university.
It is here that each year graduating students resplendent in academic dress gather with their families and colleagues in attendance to receive their hard-won degrees.
Visually, the beautiful ashlar-faced, portland stone facade makes an interesting contrast to the towers, turrets and dormers of the Gonville and Caius College building to the right of our illustration.
Northampton Street
The buildings of Cambridge colleges are predominantly of stone, while those of domestic Cambridge are mainly of brick and slate.
These timber-framed houses in Northampton Street, with their plastered elevations and tiled roofs, make a quite delightful contrast.
They have existed for centuries, serving as shops, offices, workshops and homes in this bustling corner of the city.
A study of their history reveals a wonderfully varied past during which almost every imaginable trade and profession seems to have been carried out within their walls, from shoe-mender to motorcycle dealer.
Although, alas, there are no longer any licensed premises, the tradition continues today, with shops, offices, flats and cottages all represented.
King's College
King's College Chapel is one of the finest buildings in England.
Begun in 1446 by Henry VI as a private place of worship for just 70 scholars it took no less than 69 years to build, being completed in 1515 on the instructions of Henry VII but only after his death.
Although called a chapel, the building is more like a cathedral in scale, with its awe-inspiring and lofty interior terminating in a remarkable fan vault, the largest in the world, and its wonderfully delicate detailing belying its weight of almost 2000 tonnes.
The skill of the masons of 500 years ago and the faith of those who commissioned such works, which were truly built to the greater glory of God, is difficult to understand today.
The rest of King's was built much more recently, indeed the gate house, south range and screen date from only 1828, the Gibbs building having belatedly begun to offer accommodation to students in 1724.
The President's Lodge, Queens' College
Towards the end of the 16th century when the President's Lodge of Queens' College was built its timber framework was plastered over and it was not until 1911 that the plaster was removed to reveal the massive but somehow delicate oak members which make up the frame.
It now stands unique — the only substantial half-timbered building in any Cambridge College.
When seen in conjunction with the Cloister Court, of which it forms the northern side and which offers some fine Tudor brickwork, it presents a showpiece of a rather more homely kind than do the grand stone courts of some other colleges.