

Britain, Ireland and the Channel Islands
The British Isles linger off the shores of continental Europe, uncertain whether to be apart or a part, and their cattle have developed to some degree in isolation but also with many strong two-way links with the cattle of the Continent.
The wild aurochs, as big as a modern English Longhorn, was widespread in Britain while there was still a landbridge linking the land to the Continent after the retreat of the glaciers of the last Ice Age, but it died out here during the Bronze Age 3,000 years ago and it never reached Ireland.
Early Domesticated Cattle in Britain
The domestication of cattle, which began in Neolithic times, gradually diminished the animals' size.
Although British cattle remained large for a while, they gradually reduced to an average height of 125cm at the withers by 2600 BC and by 300 BC, in the Iron Age, they were considerably smaller, averaging only 105cm.
It was these small livestock, found all over northern and central Europe, which would form the basis of many modern European breeds.
The Iron Age also produced the first evidence of polled cattle in Britain.
By the time domesticated cattle had reached northern Europe, Britain was already isolated from the Continent by the Channel, so that all the British domesticants were imported by boat, and in late Neolithic times (about 2000 BC) there were also domesticated cattle in Ireland.
They were generally about the size of a modern Ayrshire but otherwise still had many similarities with the wild aurochs in their shape, horns and the noticeable difference in size between male and female (sexual dimorphism).
By about 1000 BC much smaller cattle began to appear and they came to be called the Celtic oxen, their different skull shape giving rise to the term Bos brachyceros or Bos longifrons , though they were not in fact of a separate species but members of the Bos taurus species like other longhorns and shorthorns in temperate regions.
It is uncertain whether these small shorthorns were simply the result of a gradual diminution in size of the earlier British cattle, possibly from a combination of selection and lack of nutrition, or were imported from Europe in the Bronze Age.
During the Roman occupation of Britain between the first and fourth centuries, there is evidence of greater variety in cattle sizes ranging from the small Iron Age types to some much larger and more hefty stock.
Although some of the Roman cattle of the time were indeed large, with long lyre-shaped horns, the archaeological evidence does not in fact suggest that larger stock were imported into Roman Britain, but rather that the increase in size was probably the result of improved management and breeding of the existing British cattle.
The Dark Ages
The several centuries of the ‘Dark Ages’ that followed the Roman withdrawal from Britain were a period in which peoples from northwest Germany and Denmark were coming into the country.
Angles, Saxons and Jutes gradually colonised parts of Britain and it seems that the Saxons, at least in East Anglia, Kent and Hampshire, helped to maintain the general improvement of British cattle which had been initiated by the Romans.
They also introduced the heavy plough to cultivate the claylands and no doubt this encouraged the development of strong draught animals in those areas.
It is not entirely clear whether these were improved native stock or were imported, nor is it conclusively proven that the Saxons brought the large type of red cattle to southern England, establishing the ancestors of the heavy modern red breeds now found in Devon, Sussex and Lincolnshire.
However, there is ample archaeological evidence to show that cattle types in the eighth to tenth centuries varied considerably in different regions and that those of the areas most remote from Anglo-Saxon influence were the smallest, for example in Cornwall and the Scilly Isles.
Cornish cattle and the Pictish cattle of Orkney in the tenth century were no bigger than the old Iron Age types and were short-horned.
During the early ninth century, the Vikings of Norway, Sweden and Denmark began raiding Anglo-Saxon colonies on Britain's eastern coasts and within that century they became dominant in the north and east.
There is a theory that they brought with them the ancestors of the naturally polled northern breeds such as the Angus and Galloway, but in fact there had been polled cattle in Britain since the Iron Age and they were not necessarily imported — not even from Scandinavia, where many cattle are polled.
The polling factor in cattle arises as a spontaneous mutation once in every 50,000 births anyway, so that there are always likely to be a few naturally polled cattle in any population.
However, horns were generally seen as desirable, especially for harnessing plough oxen, and it was not until the eighteenth century that Scottish farmers began to breed selectively for the polled factor in order to make the cattle of Galloway easier to manage on the long droves to the London markets.
Medieval Cattle
The Dark Ages are often considered a time of retrogression, but it was not until the period drew to its close that the cattle of Britain began to deteriorate quite seriously.
By the eleventh century they were generally no bigger than the unimproved Iron Age cattle, averaging about 107cm in height, and they were short-horned.
The same was true of cattle in much of Europe at the time, and probably reflected neglected animal husbandry and a failure to breed selectively in a period when crop-growing was far more important than livestock.
For two or three hundred years British pastures were widely being ploughed up and put down to grain to feed a fast-growing human population.
As the livestock population rapidly decreased, the lack of their manure encouraged the ploughman's equivalent of slash-and-burn agriculture: more and more pasture was converted into arable land as the existing grain fields became depleted of crop-growing nutrients.
The cattle that survived this vicious circle of pasture depletion were no doubt those that could make the most of small areas of rough grazing and it is likely that small, thrifty cattle were positively selected in preference to larger improved types which needed better feeding.
By late medieval times in the fourteenth century, British cattle had reached a low point, literally: the average height was about 106cm and they were still generally short-horned.
Population Explosions
The population of London nearly trebled between the mid-sixteenth and mid-seventeenth centuries and, suddenly, the city people wanted meat.
Their demands were to have a radical effect on British livestock on a national basis and a massive trade developed in which cattle were reared in the more remote northern and western regions, sent in droves to fatten on grass and turnips in the Midlands, Norfolk, Essex, Hertfordshire, Middlesex and Surrey, and thence to London's slaughterhouses in due course.
The local seventeenth-century beef cattle were the large, black longhorns of Yorkshire, Derbyshire, Lancashire and Staffordshire, the tall, large, long-bodied pied shorthorn draught animals of Lincolnshire and the blood-red cattle of Gloucestershire and Somerset.
Local types were beginning to be noticed, and in 1709 the English parliament passed the first of a series of Enclosure Acts which, indirectly, would lead to breed development by curtailing the traditional practice of communal grazing and random mating.
In 1663 an Act of Charles II had placed a partial ban on the importation of foreign cattle to England; the ban became total in 1666 and permanent in 1680.
In Scotland, Irish imports were banned, and after the Union in 1707 the total ban on European imports extended to Scotland and at the same time free trade between England and Scotland was allowed.
Prohibition of imports continued, in theory if not in practice, until 1842, though many European cattle did manage to slip through the net.
During the eighteenth century the population of Britain as a whole doubled and politicians and farmers began to worry about how to feed the people.
The nineteenth-century agricultural historian Youatt calculated that in the second half of the eighteenth century every Londoner purchased an average of half a pound of meat a day — more than twice as much as the average in Paris or Brussels.
There was a huge exodus from the countryside into the towns of the new industrial age and the people demanded both meat and milk.
To meet the demand for beef, cattle had to become rapidly more numerous and also bigger.
In addition there was a heavy demand for tallow for candles, so that the animals (sheep as well as cattle) also became much fatter.
The draught oxen breeds already had the advantage of size but it was weight that counted and in particular the volume of meat in proportion to bone.
At the same time, milk yields had to be substantially increased and sustainable and the scene was set for a revolution in breeding and for the development of most of the modern breeds.
Development of Breeds
The revolution had already begun by the end of the seventeenth century and its first candidate was the big, rangy Longhorn.
The breed's history is described later, but its systematic improvement, begun at that time by a blacksmith with a herd near Burton-on-Trent, was to become the breeding blueprint once it was adopted by the master breeder Robert Bakewell in 1760.
His methods are still used today and it can reasonably be claimed that the influence of the eighteenth-century cattle breeders has been a major one worldwide.
At this stage, in Britain as in other cattle-rearing countries, the cattle tended to be regional types rather than formal breeds, but by 1750 there was a recognisable regional distribution by coat colour and pattern in Britain — one of the first stages in breed development.
In most of Scotland, most of Wales and Cornwall there was a preference for black or black finchbacks, while solid red cattle dominated Devon, Sussex and Kent, and part-reds were preferred all along the east coast of England down to East Anglia, where there was a mixing of red-and-whites and duns.
There was also a pocket of duns in southeast Devon.
The finchbacks spread into Glamorganshire and much of western England, and some white-faced finchbacks began to dominate the English side of the Welsh borders.
The Pennines and the land to their west were the homes of the finchback longhorns.
By the late eighteenth century there had been a remarkable increase in the average height of British cattle.
from its low point of 106cm in the fourteenth century, it had climbed rapidly to more than 120cm in the seventeenth and was well on its way to the twentieth-century average of about 137cm at the withers.
Yet there was still a considerable size range, especially where environmental factors intervened.
In 1800 the artist and sculptor George Garrard carefully measured contemporary cattle for the Board of Agriculture and made engravings to scale.
The heights he recorded varied from the tiny Shetland bull standing at only 97cm, up to the large, improved Holderness Shorthorn bull at an immense 152cm (with a record-breaking 168cm in the ox).
The New Leicester Longhorn, which Bakewell had taken in hand, was half-way down the size table at 140cm in the bull and 125cm in the cow.
In the last 50 years new forces have determined the size of British cattle.
After the Second World War there was a strong export trade of beef cattle to Argentina and the Argentinian cattlemen showed a marked preference for smaller, blockier British beef bulls at the annual sales in Britain in order to meet their own requirements for exports to Europe.
The breeders therefore reduced the size of their cattle, almost to the point of dwarfism, and the typical British beef animal became very short-legged and chunky in the body.
In other countries where the British breeds were prominent the same trend was often followed, until it was realised, in the USA and South Africa in particular, that the cattle were becoming functionally inefficient and that the dwarfing gene was spreading dangerously within the three British beef breeds.
These overseas breeders therefore began to increase size again in order to produce a ‘normal’ animal which could efficiently produce  lean meat from roughage.
However, they are now going to extremes and breeding the traditional British breeds to be veritable giants at two years old, turning Herefords into red and white Charolais…
In the meantime, the UK is now the third largest producer of beef and veal in the EEC, though its production of about a million tonnes is only half of that of France and it is only seventh in the table of per capita consumption at 22.3kg per annum.
They eat more in the Irish Republic (23.7kg per capita), which is a major beef-exporting country producing 570,000 tonnes per annum but only consuming about 84,000 tonnes at home.
There are about 1.4 million breeding cows in the British beef herd and about 3 million breeding cows in the dairy herd; the total number of cattle of all ages and types is about 12 million.
Breed Groups
Many attempts have been made to classify British cattle breeds on the basis of ancestry and these categories are often based on obvious physical characteristics such as horns and coat colour.
But such distinctions can be very misleading indeed.
Breeds develop according to local needs and fashions, so that it is not necessarily true that a large, red, short-horned breed in one area has a common ancestry with a similarly large red in another, any more than it is correct to assume a blood link between the black-eared, white-coated White Park and the similarly coloured but polled British White, or between the Gloucester and the Pinzgauer of Austria because their coat patterns are similar.
Unusual coat colours and patterns can arise spontaneously by genetic mutation anywhere in the world, and breeders in different regions might quite coincidentally seize upon a colour mutation and henceforward seek to establish it as a mark of their breed.
Moreover, colour selection within a breed is a very recent trend and even in the late nineteenth century there was often a wide tolerance of colours in the breeds.
for example, today the Shetland is invariably black-and-white pied, looking as if it is a distorted Friesian (which it is not), but in 1912 its herdbook recorded only a dozen black or black-and-white bulls outnumbered by a score of duns or dun-and-whites, and there were also reds, blues and greys.
Nineteenth-century market records show a considerable colour range among all the cattle of Britain, regardless of breed.
More about breed relationships can be learned from skeletal differences and more still from phylogenetic studies examining correlated chromosomal polymorphisms and blood-typing.
Researches under the auspices of Britain's Rare Breeds Survival Trust suggest that the indigenous breeds have not yet diverged enough from each other for a high frequency of chromosomal polymorphism to be established and in most of them the similarities far outweigh the differences.
Only the White Park seems to stand a little apart from the crowd, but there is an interesting factor in the haemoglobin alleles which separates the Jersey, Guernsey and South Devon from other British breeds and suggests a remote link with the cattle of Asia and Africa.
For the sake of simplicity, the British breeds in the following sections have been divided partly by colour and partly by region.
Only indigenous breeds are described, but the British Friesian has been so dominant in this country that its history is included here, though the Friesian and Holstein are considered in more detail in the Netherlands and North American sections.
Britain also makes full use of several continental breeds for beef and these are described in the geographical sections for their countries of origin.
Rare Breeds
The Rare Breeds Survival Trust is one of the world's leading organisations for the preservation of rare breeds of livestock.
In 1964 the Zoological Society of London gathered small groups of some of Britain's endangered breeds at Whipsnade Park.
The FAO's breed preservation meetings began in 1966 and in 1968 the ZSL and the Royal Agricultural Society of England set up a working party to consider the problem of Britain's vanishing breeds.
The RBST was formed in 1973 and a year later a British survey identified 48 breeds of livestock (cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and horses) in need of help.
By the late 1980s, 43 breeds were still endangered, including the cattle breeds in Table 2.
SCOTLAND
The breeds of Scotland encompass a collection of world-famous specialist beef and dairy breeds on the one hand and one of the most unusual, picturesque and hardy of all European breeds on the other, along with the remnants of an equally hardy small breed of the isles fashioned by its exceptionally harsh environment.
The cattle of Scotland used to be of many colours but predominantly black and of the Highland or Galloway type.
It became customary to refer to all bovines as ‘black cattle’ in order to distinguish them from other ‘cattle’such as horses, sheep and pigs.
ABERDEEN ANGUS
Black (also red).
Polled.
Early maturing, prime marbled beef.
Northeast Scotland, widely exported.
[Plate I]
This is the mild-eyed breed which produces possibly the best beef in the world — lightly marbled, succulent and tender.
It is also evolving rapidly to meet modern requirements.
Previously a very short-legged blocky type, it is growing longer, leaner and taller, especially during the last 10–20 years in America, Australia and New Zealand, by careful and selective breeding.
It remains a most economical breed to rear, able to thrive on rough grazing and to fatten on low-cost rations, and is a popular ranching breed, exported to more than 60 countries.
Daily weight gains in Britain average 1.23kg and performance-tested bulls achieve average 400-day weights of 460kg.
There are no parturition problems: the calves are small at birth (30–35kg) and have nicely tapered heads, and the prepotent bulls are ideal for crossing on first-calf heifers; they also give a shorter gestation period by about a week and colour-mark their progeny.
The most important virtue of the breed is its very high carcass quality.
Because of its fine bones its size can be deceptive: carcass weights were considerable even when it was short-legged and blocky.
The polling factor is contributed to crossbred offspring along with the black colouring; red is recessive but increasingly popular in some countries, though usually registered separately.
In 1523 there were highly rated black ‘hummel’ or ‘humble’cattle (the word means polled) in the Cutler district of Aberdeenshire and they were carefully maintained in a pure state even then.
In general, the cattle of Aberdeenshire before 1760 were small and often horned, and their colour range included black, brindle, dun, yellow, grey, red, riggit, belted, and black with brown ears and dorsal line.
After 1760 bulls were brought in from England, the Netherlands and southern Scotland to improve them and some farmers began to specialise in certain colours or coat patterns.
Those of Buchan preferred black, or black with a touch of white on the udder, which was said to be a sign of a good milker.
The Buchan cattle were known as Buchan Humlies and these polled cattle were crossed with horned animals from the Aberdeen highlands (though some people deny this) producing a mixture of horned, polled and loose-horned or scurred stock of various colours — mostly red, brindle and black tinged with brown.
The mixture also included the polled lowland Angus Doddies of Forfar — animals with very hairy coats and rather large, hairy ears.
Steps were taken to improve the combined breed from the very beginning of the nineteenth century, using the Bakewell and Colling methods, but the Scottish stock's inherent early maturity and marbled meat needed no improvement.
Gradually the type became fixed as black and polled, though the red recessive gene remained within the breed; a herdbook was established in 1862, initially including the polled Galloway, and by 1867 the breed was officially known as the Aberdeen Angus.
In that year the first Aberdeen Angus steer won the Silver Cup at Smithfield and the breed's fame spread rapidly, first into France and during the 1870s to North America, and also Australia and New Zealand.
In fact the earliest exports to Australia had been in 1820 but the breed did not become established for another 30 years.
Other countries soon welcomed the breed, including several in South America and southern Africa, and it later became the first foreign breed to be imported by Japan.
There are now about 6,000 purebreds in the UK but the breed provides 20 per cent of the British beef industry's terminal sires.
There are perhaps 24,000 registered purebred breeding cows in New Zealand and perhaps 15,000 in Canada, and it remains a major beef breed in Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay, the USA, Australia and South Africa.
The new, taller type has been re-imported from North America, New Zealand and Australia by some British breeders to increase slaughter weights in the UK by combining the improved size and growth potential with the traditional Scottish fleshing qualities and muscling.
A variety is the Red Angus, and derivatives are the American Angus and German Angus.
The breed has contributed to the Africangus, Amerifax, Barzona, Beef Synthetic, Brangus, Hash Cross, Holgus, Ibagé, Jamaica Black, Japanese Poll, Murray Grey, Pee Wee, Regus, Romosinuano, Volynsk, Wokalup and the Znamensk.
There are breed societies in the UK (1879) and also in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, Paraguay, South Africa, Sweden, the USA, Uruguay and Zimbabwe.
AYRSHIRE
Brown-and-white (distinctly defined).
Lyre-horned.
Dairy.
Good milk on low-cost forage; veal and reasonable beef; excellent udder.
Southwest Scottish lowlands, widely exported.
[Plate II]
Scotland's only native dairy cow, this graceful breed is noted for its balanced, well-attached udder, excellent milking capacity (UK average milk yield 5,000–6,000kg at 3.9 per cent butterfat) and adaptability to a wide range of climates.
It has, for example, become the principal breed in subarctic Finland and the Finnish Ayrshire is now widespread in several northern countries, including the USSR, but the Scottish cow has also adapted well to hot climates and is found in Kenya and South Africa in particular .
Kenyan Ayrshire bulls have been mated with disease-resistant Boran zebu cows since 1919 and the breed has proved its ability to produce high-quality milk and good meat at low levels of nutrition, exhibiting admirable drought tolerance.
It also crosses successfully with the Sahiwal zebu of Pakistan.
By the mid-seventeenth century the rather humid Cunningham region of northern Ayrshire in southwest Scotland was already noted for its Dunlop breed of dairy cattle (and their Dunlop cheese).
The breed expanded into other Scottish counties and became known as the Ayrshire by the early nineteenth century.
It was especially popular in the show-ring and by 1850 two types had developed: smaller, delicate lightweights bred for their pretty appearance, and larger, productive dairy cows bred for practical milking capacity.
The Ayrshire Cattle Society was founded in 1877 and its first herdbook published the following year, but there continued to be conflict between those who bred for show and those who bred for commercial production.
In due course the two types were combined, the show stock contributing its ‘perfect’ udder and well-placed teats (ideally suited to machine milking) to the efficient productivity of   the commercial animal, and the breed was further developed for increased yields without loss of butterfat.
The breed society pioneered milk recording and also took a lead in establishing disease-free herds by instigating tuberculin-testing schemes.
Originally many cattle in Ayrshire were black with a white stripe on the back and white flanks and faces, and were of the Highland or Galloway type, but these were locally displaced by Dutch cattle imported between 1750 and 1780, with (it is rumoured) a few Alderneys coming into Scotland in 1756.
In 1842 British ports were opened to foreign livestock and large numbers of Dutch cattle poured into Scotland, including 5,000 in 1865 to Leith alone.
Other cattle came to Scotland from Hamburg, Oldenburg and Denmark at the average rate of 2,600 per annum between 1857 and 1870.
It is likely that, in the early days, the Ayrshire owed its improvement to infusion of Dutch, Holderness Shorthorn, Highland and possibly Jersey blood.
Gradually the colour of the Ayrshire cattle became selected and standardised as various shades of brown with white, clearly defined, though even now there are some black-and-whites.
The old high, crooked horns were refined into the characteristic Ayrshire lyre horns of today.
It is now a classically wedge-shaped dairy cow, particularly fine about the neck and shoulders, with an alert carriage and generally elegant appearance; its mild temperament makes it very easy to handle and it is famous for its productive longevity.
Although essentially a milk breed (and the Finnish Ayrshire holds the world record of all breeds for lifetime butterfat production) it can also produce a good beef steer or crossbred suckler cow.
The average height of mature cows is 127–135cm.
By the beginning of this century Ayrshires were being exported in large numbers to Finland, Sweden and Canada in particular and also to the USA, Australia, New Zealand and Japan.
The Finnish breed has become so popular in the USSR that there are now about a million there.
In 1969 the first world conference of Ayrshire breeders was held in Toronto, and today the breed has spread to several African countries, Malta, Iran, Sri Lanka and Burma as well as North and South America and a dozen European countries.
There are approximately 127,000 milking Ayrshire cows in the UK.
Derivatives are the Finnish Ayrshire and Swedish Ayrshire.
The breed has contributed to the Japanese Black, Lithuanian Red, Målselv, Norwegian Red-and-White, Red Trondheim and the Swedish Red-and-White.
There are breed societies in the UK (1877) and also in Australia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Kenya, New Zealand, South Africa, Sweden and the USA.
GALLOWAY
Black (also red, dun, white and belted varieties).
Polled.
Beef/suckler.
Hardy hill breed.
Southwest Scotland.
Widely exported.
[Plate I]
A hardy, naturally polled breed of a type which has been in southwest Scotland for centuries, the Galloway is capable of growing a thick, shaggy coat of long, rain-shedding hairs over its thick, soft, mossy undercoat to protect itself in the cold, damp climate of the region.
In the past it was believed to be closely related to the shaggy, hardy Highland.
Its short, wide, heavily fringed face has an indefinable appeal and character: it looks slightly ridiculous, like a favourite teddy bear.
The ears are very hairy and the switch is long and full.
This thick coat, however, is replaced in warmer climates by short hair.
It has something of the look of the Aberdeen Angus but is a little rougher and without the tapering poll of its eastern cousin.
The beef is tender and full of flavour and, although the breed grows more slowly than the big continental animals, the deficit is adequately compensated for by much cheaper production costs in terms of food and housing (it stays out all year round).
It is well suited as a hill suckler on rough grazing and plays an essential role in the production of the well-known Blue Grey store cattle of the borders, which are from Galloway cows put to Whitebred Shorthorn bulls to add earlier maturity to the Galloway's good beefing  qualities and excellent mothering instincts.
The Galloway cows have wide pelvises and calve easily, even to Charolais and Romagnola bulls, and they respond well to quiet handling and familiarity, though naturally they tend to be shy if left alone in the hills.
It is a medium-sized breed; the cows average 525–625kg and the bulls 775–900kg or more, with weight gains averaging 1kg/day.
They are typically blocky in conformation but have small, neat, hard hoofs on which they seem to stand and walk daintily, almost on tip-toe.
In recent years there has been a strong demand for the Galloway from Germany, especially for low-cost meat production on upland heaths and lowland swamps where the typical German dual-purpose breeds need to be brought inside for the winter and need better grazing.
The Galloway is also doing well in Canada, the USA, Australia and South America, and in addition has been exported to South America and Kenya.
There are still a few in New Zealand but numbers there are now very low, and the Belted variety is more popular than the standard black.
The standard and predominant coat colour is solid black, often with a brownish tinge, but other recognised varieties include red (recessive), dun, white with coloured points, and white belts on black or dun.
There used to be brindles, riggits (linebacks) and brocket-faces (large white area down the front of the face but not around the eyes) but these are no longer seen.
They used to be common in the Aberdeen Angus too.
In the Galloway there has been strong discrimination against red, to the extent that red animals have been falsely maligned as ‘poor doers’, and today the red varieties probably have Devon, South Devon, Red Poll or Shorthorn blood.
The colour of the duns varies from dark to silvery pale dun, and in fact is dun rather than red which is the common recessive in the breed and which could suggest a link with Scandinavia, where dun was a common colour.
There is a possibility that dun Galloways, which were traditionally fattened on turnips in East Anglia in large numbers in the nineteenth century, contributed to the now extinct Suffolk Dun which was part-originator of the Red Poll.
Originally the Galloway type was dominant in southwest Scotland; the breed was formed more specifically towards the end of the sixteenth century and was already popular across the border in the seventeenth century for fattening in large numbers.
Its history is a long one in Scotland and in 1786 it was already a polled breed (though some were scurred) but in other respects it resembled the Highland, especially in shape and colour.
Local farmers preferred black or dark brindled animals in both breeds and some said that the Galloway had originally been a horned black animal with touches of white, or perhaps brindle with a white dorsal stripe and occasionally belted.
The polling factor probably arose as a natural mutation which local farmers selected for preference in due course, as they did later with the Aberdeen Angus.
In 1862 the Aberdeen cattle and the Galloways were entered together in the new Polled herdbook but the Galloways had a separate herdbook from 1877.
They still retain their stronghold in southwest Scotland and northern England today.
The breed was initially dual-purpose, whatever its colour, but for the most part ceded its milking role to the neighbouring Ayrshire; it has continued as a beef breed but has never been intensively developed for that role.
During the reign of George III a breeder imported a white, horned Indian zebu to experiment by crossing it with Galloway bulls, but the results are not known.
Belted Galloway
The Belted Galloway has rapidly increased in popularity and is no longer a rare breed.
It is not only a colour variety but also a more milky strain of the breed and there have been dairy herds of the beloved ‘Belties’, though they would be better described as dual-purpose cattle.
The Belted bull colour-marks his progeny and traces of the belt persist into the second generation: it is a broad white band between the shoulders and hocks, and including the udder in cows.
One of the advantages of the belt is that the animals are easily visible from afar in the gloom in rough country.
The first mention of belted Scottish cattle is dated to about 1790 but there is a theory that it received its belt originally from imported Dutch  Lakenvelder cattle in the seventeenth century, a breed which possibly also contributed to the now extinct Sheeted Somerset .
There is also a belted variety among the Welsh cattle; indeed, like the Galloway, the Welsh also have a white colour-pointed variety, and both Galloway and Welsh are of the ‘Celtic’ type in spite of the Galloway being polled.
Lord David Stuart, formerly president of the Belted Galloway breed society, wrote an interesting and detailed history of belted cattle which includes ninth-century Bohemians, belted mithans and Indian zebu as well as European belted breeds such as the Lakenvelder: he shows that the belted factor is found in cattle in Britain, Holland, Switzerland, Austria and Germany and also in the multitudinous herds of Mongolia.
White Galloway
The White Galloway is a prepotent colour variety with a white coat and coloured points of black, dun or red inside the ears and on the muzzle, eyelashes, knees and feet, sometimes with coloured freckles on the shoulders and sides.
The oldest continuous herd, the Creetown, was founded in 1919, but the variety was known for at least a century before that, when the feral Ardrossan herd of White Park cattle became extinct in 1820.
That herd was apparently shy, rather fierce and polled and it is possible that the Ardrossan was ancestral to the White Galloway, or its coat colour might have come from the other White Park herds in Scotland (for example at Cadzow Forest near Hamilton, Blair Atholl in northern Perthshire, the Duke of Buccleuch's estate at Dalkeith, the Cumbernauld estate or Cally Palace at Gatehouse-of-Fleet).
But the variety has all the Galloway qualities that make an ideal suckler cow, such as hardiness, longevity, adequate milk, good growth rate and fleshing qualities, and it is registered in a separate section of the Belted Galloway herdbook, which also has sections for the Red and Red Belted Galloways.
The White and the Red are both rare.
Incidentally, in the eighteenth century Lord Darlington had a herd of Galloway-type cattle ‘finely globed with red and white’, while in 1821 William Cobbett described the herd of Lord Caernarvon at Highclere, Hampshire, as white hornless ‘Galways’ with black or red spots varying in size from that of a plate to that of a crown piece, and some without spots.
Galway might be a misprint for Galloway, so that the herd was in fact White Galloways.
The breed has contributed to the Australian White, the Beef Synthetic, the Blue Grey and the Pee Wee.
Breed societies exist in the UK (1877) and also in Australia, Canada, Germany, New Zealand, South Africa, the USA and the USSR.
HIGHLAND
Various colours (usually tawny dun, also reddish brown, brindle, cream, dark brown, black), long-haired.
Long horns characteristic.
Beef.
Slow-growing, extremely hardy.
Northwest Scotland.
[PLATE IV]
An ancient Celtic type which, with its spreading ‘handlebar’ horns and long, thick, shaggy coat, epitomises Scotland for the tourist, the Highland is indeed representative of Scotland's native type of cattle.
It is one of the oldest and possibly purest breeds in Britain.
Its exceptionally shaggy coat, almost yak-like, covers its face as well as its body, and becomes matted and felted after a long winter.
It is the hardiest breed of all, able to be productive where other cattle could not even survive, and, like other hardy old breeds, it is long-lived and can make do with the poorest of grazing.
Brought on to lowland pastures in kinder climates, it gains considerably in size though in its own environment it is almost the smallest breed in Britain: only the Shetland and the Dexter of Ireland are shorter.
It was ever thus; in 1800 Highland bulls measured 112cm and the cows 104cm.
Bulls can match Galloways for weight at 200 days but thereafter they rapidly fall behind, reaching perhaps 325kg at 500 days compared with the Galloway's 415kg and averaging 270kg at 400 days old.
Its marbled, fine-grained beef is of very good quality and taste and it is well worth the rather long wait for maturity in spite of the lack of size.
Like Scotch whisky, the Highland takes time to ripen.
It produces a good faster-growing cross to a Shorthorn bull (typically Whitebred or Beef Shorthorn).
Milk yields are not high but the milk is quite rich, though cows do not usually produce their first calf until they are perhaps 42 months old.
yet the breed is ideally suited to its rugged upland environment and for the most part remains unimproved — nor need it be.
Black was once the most popular colour in the breed, in common with many other Scottish cattle; today the most common colour is a sort of tan, but the colours can range from creamy white and yellow through reddish brown to brindled and black.
The photogenic horns are similar to those of some of the White Park herds, though generally longer in proportion to the animal's size, and also like those of some of the Spanish and criollo breeds.
These tough little animals used to be swum across the narrow straits (or Kyles, hence the alternative name ‘Kyloe’ for the breed) between the islands and the mainland.
There are perhaps 11,000 of them in the UK today and twice that number worldwide: they were exported to countries such as the USA (where they have an enthusiastic following), Canada and Australia before the First World War and are also in the USSR, the Falkland Islands, Sweden and Germany.
The breed society was established in 1884 and a herdbook opened the following year.
LUING
Various colours.
Horned.
Beef/suckler.
Argyll, west Scotland.
[PLATE IV]
The Shorthorn/Highland first cross has always been popular but it took the concerted efforts of the three Cadzow brothers on an island off the west coast of Scotland to consolidate the virtues of the cross and turn it into a genuine breed, the Luing, named after the island of its origin.
Beginning in the 1940s, they used Beef Shorthorn bulls on Highland cows and crossed the best of the heifers back to the Shorthorn bull, Cruggleton Alastair, and followed this with a careful and deliberate system of inbreeding and then line-breeding to establish the breed, which was officially recognised in 1965.
A breed society was formed in 1966 and herds are now found in mainland UK, Canada, New Zealand, Australia, Uruguay and, more recently, Germany.
The thick and quite shaggy coat is usually a reddish brown like the Highland, or sometimes yellow, white or Shorthorn roan.
Selection has been for growth potential; the average 400-day weight of bulls is 447kg and their mature weight 966kg, with an average withers height of 140cm (the breed minimum is 132cm).
The food conversion rate on roughage or forage is good.
The cows are particularly milky and can give high ratios of calf weaning weight to cow weight; they calve easily and have retained the Highland's strong mothering instinct.
Calves are small at birth and Luing bulls are often used on lowland dairy herds for easy calving.
There is a programme to develop a Sim-Luing by cross-breeding with Simmental bulls.
SHETLAND
Black-and-white pied.
Short horns.
Very small dual-purpose island breed, crofter's cow (milk and meat).
Shetland Islands.
Rare breed.
[Plate II]
The many islands off British shores, by the fact of being islands, naturally developed their own isolated types but very few survive today.
The Orkney variety is extinct and the Shetland is critically low in numbers: at one stage they were down to 35 purebred cows and two bulls.
Seven of these cows and one of the bulls, along with two bull calves, were taken into the care of the Ministry of Agriculture's senior livestock officer for Scotland in 1958 and a nucleus herd was gradually built up and monitored, with the practical support of the Rare Breeds Survival Trust in due course.
By 1979 there were 61 pure breeding females and nine males, and numbers continue to increase gradually.
A breed society had been established in 1910; the original 1912  herdbook lapsed after a decade because there was so much crossing with larger breeds, but it was revived in 1982.
These bulky little cows seem to have some physical resemblance to the old South and Westland cattle of Norway and also to the Jersey: the face, for example, is slightly dished.
They are fine-boned, short-legged, deep in the body and with fine, short horns curving inwards and slightly upwards at the tips in most cases, though direction of growth is variable.
Originally the horns were lyre-shaped and traditionally the animals were horn-tethered.
The colour range used to be wide, as in other Scottish cattle, including red-and-white, solid red, dun, dun-and-white, yellow, solid black, blue, grey, grey-and-white, brown-and-white, brindle, white with blue or black on the neck, black riggit (finchback), brockle-faced and even belted.
However, today the standard colour is black-and-white pied and indeed many have Friesian blood but are much smaller, shorter and more compact than the Friesian and a great deal hardier.
There was also at least a century of crossing with Shorthorn, Hereford, Aberdeen Angus and Red Poll.
Largely because of their native climate and sparse grazing, they are small animals standing perhaps 100–110cm at the withers on the islands and weighing 300–350kg, but in improved mainland environments they reach 116–122cm and can weigh 50 per cent more than the island cattle.
They are surprisingly early maturing: like the Jersey, they have been known to calve even younger than two years old.
However, there have been problems in using artificial insemination and there is a possibility of reduced fertility in some of the bulls.
The Shetland's main role today is in multi-suckler herds, where their dual-purpose nature is invaluable.
Although improved feeding increases body size, and they fatten well on grass if given the opportunity (growing faster than the Galloway), they seem to achieve better beef quality and milk yields on fairly frugal regimes.
With such a small population averages tend to be meaningless but butterfats are generally about 4 per cent and milk yields can be almost as high as a Jersey's.
They remain useful house-cows well suited to harsher environments, though their beef potential is surprisingly good and is perhaps worthy of greater exploitation.
However, care should be taken that they do not lose their exceptional hardiness and thriftiness in pursuit of greater yields, and also that they do not become extinct through being crossed with Friesians.
It is possible that in fact the true Shetland breed disappeared by the 1950s but the type persists.
A small herd of Shetlands was shipped to the Falkland Islands in 1983; otherwise they remain in Britain and are beginning to spread to the mainland among rare-breed enthusiasts.
BRITISH LONGHORNS AND SHORTHORNS
These are the breeds that revolutionised European breeding methods in the wake of their dramatic improvement.
They also, in turn, completely dominated their homeland, much as the black-and-whites do today.
The Longhorn faded into relative obscurity quite quickly, once it had been overshadowed by the new Shorthorns, but the latter spread to many parts of the world, improving local cattle and forming the basis of countless new breeds.
LONGHORN
Light red roan to dark brindle, with white finchback.
Long horns.
Originally triple-purpose, then dual-purpose, now beef.
Northwest and central England, and Ireland.
Rare breed.
[Plate IV]
This is the historical breed that effectively launched the concept of ‘breed’ rather than local type.
Its story is a classic one in the history of breeding and of famous breeders, for it was the Longhorn which was taken in hand by the great master breeder Robert Bakewell (1726–95) of Dishley, Leicestershire, to be fashioned most skilfully into his ideal commercial animal of the period.
There are several characteristics of the breed  that seem to set it apart from other British cattle, though appearances can be deceptive.
It has always been quite large-framed and long in the body.
Its unusually long horns grow slightly backwards and then outwards before sweeping obliquely forwards and often downwards and then inwards towards the face.
These horns can be so long and incurved that there is a danger of damage to the animal's cheeks if they are not carefully trimmed at the tips.
This downward arc is also seen most noticeably in the Murcian, a Spanish breed, and the Shorthorns of Britain often have drooping horns as well.
In many of the Longhorns, however, the horns spread outwards and upwards instead and some have one horn growing in that fashion while the other curves down or one or both forwards rather than upwards or downwards.
They used to be called waghorns in Lancashire.
These amazing horns were neither described, illustrated nor found in skeletal remains in the UK before the eighteenth century and there is a theory that they resulted from Bakewell's intensive inbreeding methods.
But the breed's origins are uncertain and the theories are numerous — that they are almost directly descended from the wild aurochs, for example(the claim of many a breed!) or are at least of Bos primigenius stock like the Podolians of the steppes, or are descended from large, long-horned continental cattle imported several centuries ago (some say by the Romans), or were imported 3,000–4,000 years ago, or came from Ireland where they were an ancient indigenous type, or were developed from Dutch and old English breeds before the eighteenth century, or must have Norse origins because of their coat colour and pattern.
Who is to say?
The Old English Longhorn was prevalent in Ireland and the west of England, particularly northern Lancashire, southern Westmorland and the Craven district in Yorkshire, and it has been described as rough in the shoulder, flat-sided, light in the hindquarters, thick-necked, lean of flesh, thick of skin, slow to grow and slow in its movements — a very useful draught animal, in fact.
The cows were said to be no more than fair milkers, but their milk was particularly creamy.
Other sources say that by the seventeenth century big, stately, black longhorns were being reared in Yorkshire, Derbyshire, Lancashire and Staffordshire and that by the eighteenth century there was a large, rangy, big-hoofed plough-ox type which could also give acceptable though ordinary meat and the cows could give reasonable milk well suited for cheese-making.
These animals were noted for the white finching along their backs and were prominent throughout the English Midlands early in the eighteenth century, soon spreading southwards and westwards and also into Ireland's central plain.
In 1726 Robert Bakewell was born near Dishley.
His father was a farmer with advanced agricultural views who lived until the age of 88, so that his son, who farmed with him, had ample time and restless energy to travel the country and buy pigs, sheep, horses and cattle with the aim of deliberately improving them.
He bought his cattle in Westmorland, Lancashire and Yorkshire.
Until then, cattle had been required mainly for work and milk but an increasing demand for meat inspired Bakewell to breed for the butcher rather than for the plough.
He decided that the animals would fatten quickly once they completed their growth, that is reached maturity, and ‘fatten’ was the apposite word.
Bakewell bred not only for meat but for as much tallow as possible and in doing so he improved the Longhorn but at the same time destroyed its future prospects.
He started with unrelated and dissimilar stock from many sources and with this genetic pool of material he was able to practise his novel system of inbreeding and ruthless culling.
Before Bakewell, traditional breeders had agreed with the churches that breeding between close relatives was not good practice, either in humans or in livestock.
To hasten this process, Bakewell rented out his bulls so that their performance was proven elsewhere before he used them in his own herd.
Thus he established not only systematic inbreeding but also the importance of using proven sires and initiated the system which was to be used to produce most of our breeds today.
He was not, in fact, the first to work with the Longhorns: a blacksmith named Welby living on the borders of Leicestershire and Derbyshire had  been attempting systematic improvement of the type using animals from the Derbyshire herd of Sir Thomas Gresley of Drakelow House, Burton-on-Trent (a herd which by 1720 was already uniform and impressively well matched for shape and colour), and a Mr Webster of Canley, near Coventry, bred animals from the same herd with stock from Westmorland and Lancashire.
Bakewell bought two of Webster's heifers and they, with a Westmorland bull, were the nucleus of his own new Longhorn.
Bakewell aimed for earlier maturity, shorter legs, a minimum of bone, wide hips, a barrel-shaped body, a thinner hide and plenty of fat; indeed he changed nearly every aspect of the old type.
He wanted ‘the greatest value in the smallest compass’; he wanted an animal that weighed most in the best cuts and that quickly repaid the outlay on its food.
The improved breed's success was startling: it quickly became England's dominant breed, whether known as the Lancashire, the Leicestershire, the Warwickshire, the Dishley, the Craven or the Longhorn.
A breed, by Bakewell's definition, embraced animals descended from good ancestors and inheriting the latter's good qualities in form, flesh and speed of fattening.
The demise of the Longhorn, however, was as dramatic and sudden as its success.
It did indeed fatten well and grow great but its milk yield, fecundity and basic hardiness suffered badly; when Bakewell died, its breeders lost impetus and a sense of direction, and the breed lost its popularity.
It reverted to being a draught animal in many places, losing its beef productivity, though in some areas its old milking abilities were encouraged and in due course the dairies of Cheshire came to rely on Longhorn milk for cheese-making; from 1839 onwards Longhorns were frequently winning major beef prizes too, right through to the 1880s.
In 1834 it was notable for being more varied in coat colour than any other breed, but nearly always with the white finchback and white hough spots it still has today.
In the meantime, however, those long horns had become undesirable: drovers and slaughterers found them a nuisance and they compounded the drawbacks that had already become apparent in Bakewell's breed.
Very soon the Longhorn was completely eclipsed by the new, improved Shorthorn.
By the 1880s the Longhorn was almost extinct but always regarded with a certain fondness as a quaint and essentially useful animal which appealed to cattle-lovers in spite of its commercial faults.
In 1899 it was rescued and a moderately successful breed society was formed.
Although the animal was slow to mature (some claimed that it would keep growing until it was six years old) the new society was able to show that properly managed steers could reach market weights before they were two years old.
By 1907 there were 22 herds and about 400 registered animals in the herdbook, mainly in the Midlands and on the Isle of Man.
In the early years of the twentieth century it was noted for its hardiness and the bullocks' ability to feed to heavy weights, while the cows won many Royal Show prizes for butterfat yields, though the quantity of milk was low.
By now most of the animals were brindled or red with white markings, though there were still various mixtures of red, black, yellow and white, either blended, combined or in contrasting patches.
Several had black or blue flecking on brindled or streaked red and white coats, or were yellow-and-white brindles, but still the white finching persisted in nearly every case.
Today the Longhorn remains one of Britain's rare breeds.
It is still long-bodied, with a cylindrical shape on fairly short legs, but it is well muscled and potentially a good beef animal.
Its coat, once described as very long, can still be quite long and is thick and silky; the colours range through the spectrum of brownish red, red brindle, dark red and brindle, with a touch of fleckiness like the Shorthorn.
It is effectively colour-sided, with a broad area of white along the back and tail (finchback) which catches the light like a halo, and there is usually a white patch (not clearly defined) on each thigh and often areas of white on the brisket and lower legs.
The long, broad head is sometimes all white, or white and roan; the muzzle is pink.
The Longhorn has a most amicable and docile nature and is a pleasure to keep as well as one of the most handsome breeds for a parkland setting.
It also has the basic shape of the big continental breeds which are so eagerly being  imported by British farmers.
It can develop as fast as a Charolais if fed appropriately and under ideal circumstances it can achieve similar weights within the same time span, especially if breeders are selective in their choice of stock.
It can also produce a good carcass when the diet is mainly roughage.
Easy calving is a characteristic of the breed, in that the cows have one of the largest ratios of pelvic area to bodyweight; they give almost too much milk for single suckling and are excellent mothers.
The breed's reclaimed hardiness makes it useful for extensive suckling systems and there have been successful attempts to produce crossbred suckler herds (especially Longhorn x Welsh Black cows to Charolais bulls).
The Longhorn's main role at present seems to be as a suckler dam or terminal sire and their popularity among commercial farmers is noticeably on the increase.
Fashions change.
Between the wars the Longhorn became valued for its large size and late maturity but after the Second World War the fashion in Britain swung to smaller, earlier maturing breeds.
Recently the trend has swung back in favour of large carcasses and the Longhorn, able to make meat from grass and hardy enough to live out without pampering, is ready for the challenge.
SHORTHORN
Red, red-and-white, white, roan.
Short-horned.
Beef.
Dual-purpose and dairy types.
Docile, reliable, economical, productive and adaptable.
Has influenced a large number of the world's breeds.
Northeast England, exported worldwide.
[Plate II]
The main British breeds within this group are the Beef Shorthorn and the dual-purpose Dairy Shorthorn.
In addition, the breed has been very widely exported and has played a major role in the creation or improvement of many other breeds: its influence has probably been greater than any other breed except perhaps the Friesian group and its adaptability is legendary.
It is said that the original Shorthorn (as a British type rather than as a general term for short horned cattle) was being bred by the Dukes of Northumberland in the sixteenth century and was probably descended from a mixture of red Anglo-Saxon cattle with red and white Dutch ‘Hollanders’ and ‘Zeelands’that are typified in the Paul Potter painting,The Young Bull .
These Dutch cattle were not of the Friesian type but an old type which was devastated by cattle plague in the Netherlands in 1745.
It was not until the eighteenth century that the history of the Shorthorn became clearly recorded.
By then they were generally known simply as the Dutch breed and were found only on the east coast of England.
The Tyneside Shorthorns were very similar to the Ayrshire in 1790 and even as late as 1887 there was a Dutch breed in Drenthe which looked exactly like the Ayrshire of the time.
The Drenthe, Hollander and Zeeland eventually disappeared into the Meuse-Rhine-Yssel.
During the eighteenth century superior local cattle known as Teeswaters (in the north east of England around Darlington) and Durhams were of good repute for their conformation and milking ability and were being systematically improved by various notable cattlemen.
The selective breeding techniques used became blueprints for other breeders and ensured that the Shorthorn quickly ousted Bakewell's then ubiquitous Longhorn.
The most famous and influential Shorthorn breeders were the Colling brothers in the Darlington area — Charles (born 1751) at Ketton Hall and Robert (born 1749) at Barmpton — who developed a milky type by using (ironically) Bakewell's method of close breeding to fix the characteristics of their herds but without such an excessive reliance on inbreeding.
At one stage Charles introduced a halfbred polled Galloway bull from a red Galloway cow.
Following the example of the Collings, the divergence of type was continued by the Booth family of Killesby and Warlaby, Yorkshire, who in 1790 began to breed the Teeswater for fleshiness (and were still doing so in 1919), and Thomas Bates of Kirklevington in Yorkshire, born in 1775, who bred for milk, both families making full use of Colling stock in the first half of the nineteenth century.
By 1800 the new Shorthorn was Britain's tallest breed, the bulls  standing 152cm at the withers; the famous Durham Ox was 165cm tall and weighed 3,024 pounds as a five-year-old in 1801 when it was exhibited all over the country, remaining a star travelling showpiece until it dislocated its hip in 1807.
The first Shorthorn herdbook — indeed the world's first herdbook — was published privately by George Coates in 1822 and the Shorthorn Society was incorporated in 1875.
In 1823 a Shorthorn bull was exported to Buenos Aires to begin a long history of the Shorthorn influence on the South American meat trade.
During the nineteenth century the Shorthorn became by far the most popular breed in England and was overwhelmingly dominant in the national herd.
By 1916 the register included more than a dozen identifiable types and the breed had spread to Scotland, Ireland, North America, Australia and the European continent.
France imported considerable numbers in the 1850s and 1860s and became a useful reservoir of lines which were later extinct in England.
At the time of the First World War the Shorthorn was described as the most widely distributed of all the breeds of cattle, both at home and abroad, and it far exceeded other purebreds in Britain while the great majority of commercial crossbreds also relied on Shorthorn blood.
However, numbers of purebred Shorthorns in Britain have dropped sharply in this century, particularly in the last 30 or 40 years from about 25,000 in the 1950s to not many more than 3,000 in the 1980s.
Beef Shorthorn
With the expert help of master breeders like Amos Cruickshank (1808–95) of Sittyton, in Aberdeenshire, the meatier Booth strain ultimately became the Beef Shorthorn and found its main home in Scotland.
Many Aberdonians emigrated to Canada in that period and took the Cruickshank or Scotch Shorthorn with them.
It is a typical British beef type and perhaps for that reason its numbers at home are now dangerously low: fewer than 450 breeding cows were registered in 1987 when it was for the first time classified as a rare breed, though in the nineteenth century it had been the mainstay of the Scottish beef industry.
Mature Beef Shorthorn bulls weigh about 800kg, and the cows about 500kg on average.
Its capacity for quick growth and early maturity is still appreciated, especially abroad, and there are breed societies in countries such as the USA (which also has a Polled Shorthorn ), Canada, Argentina, Uruguay, South Africa, the USSR, New Zealand and Australia.
In South Africa the Beef Shorthorn has the highest cow efficiency ratio of all the country's breeds.
The Australian Beef Shorthorn has become naturally adapted to the tropical northern regions and its population is high.
Dairy Shorthorn
The Bates/Colling cattle became the genuinely dual-purpose Dairy Shorthorn, a deep-bodied type with good conformation for both milk and lean, well-marbled beef.
The breed is generally larger than the Beef Shorthorn, with mature bulls averaging 900kg and cows 600–635kg.
It has always been bred with an emphasis on good food conversion rates, whether for the production of meat or milk.
Cows in recorded British herds average about 5,000kg of milk at 3.64 per cent butterfat but many herds average more than 6,000kg at more than 4 per cent.
The Northern Dairy Shorthorn is officially a rare breed in Britain, though it is sometimes included under the Dairy Shorthorn umbrella in that it is registered in the Coates herdbook, albeit with a separate code to identify the bloodlines.
It is based on cattle from the six Dales counties of northern England and is specifically a milking breed rather than dual-purpose.
The Whitebred Shorthorn is a selected white strain of the Dairy Shorthorn, bred mainly in the English/Scottish Borders region, and is used largely as a sire on Galloway cows to produce the popular Blue Grey beef suckler cows of southern Scotland.
The Whitebred/Welsh Black cross is known as the Blue Albion and from time to time it has been classified as a separate breed.
Its traditional area is in northern Derbyshire and the Peak District.
The soft, silky coat is short to medium in length and is blue, blue-and-white, white-and-blue, blue roan or blue-roan-and-white, the blue being formed by a mingling of black and white hairs.
The muzzle is dark, the skin lightly pigmented, the broad head of medium length, the white or yellow black-tipped horns curving outwards and forwards.
The body is long and deep and it is a dual-purpose type with a good milk yield (there is probably some Friesian blood as well) and fine-grained, marbled meat.
There was a herdbook from 1920 until 1957 when it was found to fail to breed true, but attempts are now being made to reform the breed society.
The Lincoln Red was originally included in the Shorthorn herdbook but split away in 1941 (see separate entry).
More recently the Shorthorn Society in the UK has adopted a scheme to develop the Dairy Shorthorn by carefully controlled crossbreeding with other red-and-white breeds (Red Holstein, Red Friesian, Danish Red, Simmental and Meuse-Rhine-Yssel) to produce a Blended Red-and-White Shorthorn .
The Milking Shorthorn has been developed from the Dairy Shorthorn in the USA by improving the Bates type, recently with Red Holstein blood.
Fifteen English Shorthorn cows were sold in the USA in 1873 for an average record price of £3,679 each (the best being auctioned at £8,120), and in 1981 a Milking Shorthorn   was sold for $100,000.
Australia has also developed its own milking Shorthorns, especially the Illawarra based on nineteenth-century British imports (see Australian section).
The Shorthorn Influence Worldwide
The qualities of beef and dairy types of Shorthorn have been appreciated worldwide and they have been used extensively in creating new breeds or improving existing ones and native types.
They have proved to be adaptable to a wide variety of climates and environments, able to tolerate heat and cold and with a high resistance to disease.
The main breeds created from Shorthorn crosses are shown in Table 3, while Table 4 shows some of the many breeds which have been improved with the addition of Shorthorn blood.
(Individual breeds are described in more detail in their geographical sections.)
The original breed's hardiness, great adaptability, pleasant nature and dependable productivity live on in other breeds on every continent.
Breed societies can be found in the UK (1875; herdbook 1822), Brazil, Canada, South Africa, the USA and many other countries for different types.
BRITISH FRIESIAN AND BRITISH HOLSTEIN
Black-and-white.
Short-horned.
Dual-purpose (Friesian) or dairy (Holstein).
The British have imported Dutch cattle for at least three centuries (references go back to 1681) and initially they formed the basis of the famous Shorthorns.
During the eighteenth century imported black-and-whites from Jutland became the foundation of the British Friesian , which continued to develop with the help of imports from the Netherlands at intervals and also imports from South Africa (1922) and Canada (1946 onwards).
In Britain the type remained dual-purpose in common with other European black-and-whites for many years, as a pied animal with white switch and stockings, and there is also a recessive red.
However, in 1909 the British Holstein Society was formed, becoming the British Holstein — Friesian Society in 1914 and the British Friesian Society in 1919.
The British Friesian quickly became very popular and by the late 1940s it was the country's dominant breed, although it was sometimes decried for being uglier, having a worse udder and giving lower quality milk than the Ayrshire and the Shorthorn.
However, individual black-and-whites even then were capable of yielding 9,000kg and the commercial returns were excellent.
The famous bull Terling Marthus, with plenty of American blood in his ancestry, was imported from South Africa and played a major role in continuing the British breed's development.
In 1946 the BFS imported Holsteins from Canada and four years later imported 50 young bulls of a very different type from the Netherlands.
The Dutch types were overwhelmingly preferred during the 1940s, when there was a general boom for dual-purpose breeds in Britain, but a few Canadian animals were preserved, bolstered by Canadian gifts of heifers to promote the Holstein in Britain which led to the formation of the  separate British Holstein Society in 1947.
However, they made little impact until in the mid-1960s the Milk Marketing Board began to notice that many of its top AI dairy bulls seemed to have plenty of Canadian blood in them.
In 1967 an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease decimated the herds of Cheshire in particular and a small group of local farmers restocked with imported Holsteins, because they were cheaper than British Friesians, and continued to import from North America in larger numbers.
In Britain today, the Holstein type is almost threatening to extinguish the dual-purpose Friesian type completely and there is once again confusion about names, with the British Friesian Society changing its name in 1988 to the Holstein Friesian Society of Great Britain.
There is talk of a merger between the latter and the Holstein Society….
The average British Holstein type of cow stands 145cm at the withers and weighs 655kg, while the bull is up to 183cm and 1,360kg in extreme cases.
Many farmers are grading up their Friesians over four generations to register as Holsteins.
Holstein yields are up to 1,000kg higher than those of Friesian types in Britain and the butterfat content is now similar.
The conformation of the Holstein is poorer for beef, but because of its greater frame size it seems to be able to produce almost as much meat, though the quality might not be as good.
The Holsteins also tend to have much more white in the coat so that the white areas predominate and they could almost be described as white-and-blacks in contrast to the black-and-white Friesian type.
WALES AND THE WEST OF ENGLAND
In 1858 the local breeds of the west included the South Hams, Cornish, Welsh, Hereford, North Devon, Somerset Devon, Gloucester and Sheeted Somerset.
The South Hams is now known as the South Devon; the Cornish and Sheeted Somerset have vanished, and the Gloucester is now a rare breed.
At about the same period Youatt remarked that most of Somerset's cattle were good red Devons but that a few in northern Somerset were particoloured Devons and some in the west of the county were yellowish rather than deep red or were sheeted (that is to say, with broad white belts).
A few years earlier the reddish-yellow Sheeted Somerset , which probably became extinct before 1890, had been described as a mainly polled breed remarkable for nothing except its coat pattern: the belted pattern became popular among those who liked decorative livestock in their parks.
The ancestral Cornish cattle were small, black, horned and hardy.
It is possible that they were taken to northern France (Brittany) by Cornish refugees about 1,500 years ago and that there continued to be trading between the two regions for several hundred years; there is certainly a theory that the Breton cattle originated largely in Cornwall.
The Breton later became part originator of the Canadian breed, so that it is possible that the genes of the extinct small Cornish cattle are perpetuated on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean.
WELSH CATTLE
Black (also other coloured varieties).
Middle-horned.
Dual-purpose but mainly beef.
Wales.
[Plate V].
The cattle of Wales have a long history: they are usually described as ‘Celtic’ types which have been indigenous to Wales for many centuries.
Their environments are locally various and the types are often divided from each other by the topography of the country, so that several different regional types have developed over the years.
Large numbers of Dutch cattle were imported during the seventeenth century to improve the fattening and milking abilities of some of the Welsh cattle.
In past centuries the cattle of Wales became well known as graziers' stock in the English Midlands in particular, where considerable herds of steers were traditionally fattened on grass or winter-yarded.
At home, the cows were managed by the women, who hand-milked them and ensured that they continued to yield  plenty of good quality milk and were selected for being docile and good-tempered.
Today the Welsh breed is usually understood to be the Welsh Black (Gwartheg Duon Cymreig ), a dual-purpose type, though primarily used for beef production in suckler herds, especially on the uplands, either as a purebred or crossbred cow.
The cows are superb mothers, with good milk yields and a remarkably even lactation curve.
They have wide pelvises and calve easily, even to a Charolais bull, and are hardy and robust, living out all year round.
Because of their traditional background they are easy to handle and have a notably long life: one cow produced and reared 30 calves of her own.
The calves grow quickly and can be taken to substantial weights without becoming too fat, providing prime beef.
Average 400-day weights are about 465kg.
The Welsh Black has a deep, long body set on short legs.
The head is moderately short, the eyes large and prominent with a placid look, the ears fairly large and well haired.
The yellowish horns are of medium length, growing outwards and then curving slightly forwards in the bull, and finer and well spread in the cow, whose horns grow in various directions but preferably level and turning upwards at the tips, which are black.
There is also a Polled Welsh Black .
The coat is thick, soft and fairly long, especially in winter, and the thickness is retained in cold weather; the coat is shed in warmer weather and it remains sleek in hot climates.
The colour is black, either pure jet or with a rusty tinge, and a little white on the underline is acceptable.
(Colour varieties are described separately.)
The skin, which is quite thick, is black and gives good protection against solar radiation.
In recent years the breed has been exported to some extent to Jamaica, Uganda, Saudi Arabia and Iran but more widely to Canada, the USA and New Zealand.
In the last few years there has been a strong demand from Germany as well, but on the whole it has been a home breed rather than a traveller.
The Welsh Black is, in fact, a composite breed.
Originally there was considerable variety among the cattle of Wales, which at one time included the Glamorgan, said to have been an ancient breed of doubtful origin, possibly partly Norman or from a Devon cross.
It was a good grazing animal and a fair milker, and its team oxen were excellent.
It was a good-looking breed with a shapely, cleanly tapering head, longish upturned horns, a lively appearance and a short coat of fine hair which was originally red with white markings including, often, a white face and usually white finchback and underline.
Gradually, over the years, the colour of the breed became darker through mahogany to black, and there was plenty of crossing to the Hereford for its grazing characteristics and to the Ayrshire to restore milk yields.
It had been kept pure during the nineteenth century and was still thriving early in the twentieth century, but the heavy crossing took its toll and the old type was lost.
The Montgomeryshire breed survived as isolated individuals in 1919 but it, too, has become extinct.
At the end of the nineteenth century there had been two carefully maintained pure herds of this small, deceptively heavy breed which was more like a shorter-horned Sussex than a Welsh.
Its colour was described as ‘full red with smoky points’: the red shaded to black on the face and tail.
By the late nineteenth century there were two main groups of Welsh cattle: the short-legged, heavy, compact Anglesey mountain cattle of the north and the taller, longer-bodied, larger and rangier Pembroke types of the south (including the Castlemartin and Dewsland breeds) which had something of a tendency towards the dairy type but which fattened well enough in due course.
The southerners had longer legs and were generally of a less heavy conformation; their skin was thicker, their coat less silky and they were slower to mature.
Though middle-horned like the northern types, their horns were more yellow in colour with dark tips, and they were natives of Pembroke, Carmarthen and Cardigan.
In 1873 the first Welsh Black Cattle Society was formed but in 1883/4 it was divided into north and south breed societies to improve the two Welsh types.
However, in 1904 north and south recombined in a united Welsh Black Cattle Society and the strains were mingled into a single, hardy, dual-purpose breed.
Black was  decreed to be the only acceptable colour (though a few white hairs in the switch and a little white on the udder were permissible) and the most prized colour was an almost chocolate brown-black.
There are now also breed societies for the Welsh Black in Canada, New Zealand and the USA.
Coloured Welsh
Before the strict selection for black, all the Welsh types had shown a great variety of coat colours and patterns.
Black was predominant because black was what people preferred, but the so-called ancient cattle of Wales included every conceivable colour: very bright orange-red, yellow dun (dominant to black) in Montgomery, blue around Llanfair Caereiniou (blues were said to be better milkers than black, possibly because of some Shorthorn blood in the past), a recessive mousy colour popular in the Lleyn peninsula, white with coloured points, solid colours and pies and brindles, belts and linebacks.
In the last ten years or so a group of enthusiastic breeders has been attempting to locate and rescue some of the coloured cattle of Wales and in 1981 a breed society for the Ancient or Coloured Cattle of Wales was set up; its Welsh title is Gwartheg Hynafol Cymru.
White Welsh
Among the coloured cattle, perhaps the most interesting is the White Welsh (Bolian Gwynion), a white breed with coloured points.
There are tenth-century references to red-eared white cattle in Wales and they were considered far more valuable than black cattle, being often used as propitiatory gifts.
The White Welsh today has black points, very like the White Park ; this is not surprising as there has been a close connection between the two and White Park bulls have quite often been used on Welsh cows.
The White Park, which in the past was as much a colour type as a breed, had several representatives in Wales such as the Chartley herd and the Vaynol or Faenol Park herd at Bangor (originally from Scotland).
Indeed, several authorities have striven to prove that the Pembroke and the White Park are different only in colour and that the Pembroke was a direct descendant of those tenth-century red-eared whites.
The Dynevor herd of White Welsh near Llandidlo was amalgamated with a Northumberland herd of White Parks in 1980.
The White Welsh is generally rougher in coat than the White Park and tends to have bluish flecks and patches on the neck and shoulders rather than black.
If the White Welsh is crossed to black or red animals and the offspring are also crossed to black or red, the dark extreme of the colour-pointed cline becomes evident and the coats are colour-sided or linebacked.
GLOUCESTER
Dark mahogany (sometimes light red) with white dorsal and underline.
Middle-horned.
Dual-purpose or dairy.
Gloucestershire, England.
Rare breed.
[Plate II]
One of England's older (and now rarest) dairy breeds, the ‘Old Gloucester’ was traditionally a good milker whose produce was converted into Gloucester, Double Gloucester and Blue Vinny cheese: the milk is quite rich and its fat globules are unusually small and digestible.
As breed numbers are now critically low, reliable yield figures are unavailable, but its dairy potential could still be exploited.
Its breed society considers it to be a dual-purpose type, though it is rather slow-maturing for beef.
The Gloucester has a slate-coloured muzzle and black tongue and teats.
Its unusual mahogany colouring and coat pattern, with a bold white finching along the back and underside and flashing white tail, suggest close links with the extinct Glamorgan (see Welsh cattle) and most would accept that the two in due course merged into a single breed.
The Severnside cheese cattle were first documented in the thirteenth century and there is a theory that there might be a Norman ancestry, though the evidence is circumstantial: a certain Norman baron owned large parts of the two counties in about 1100 and is known to have imported cattle from Normandy.
It is also said that the Vikings introduced the finchback characteristic to Normandy in the ninth or tenth century and, according to a detailed history of the Gloucester breed by Adam Stout, there could be a common ancestry with the finchbacked Longhorn of Lancashire through Scandinavian cattle brought to Shetland, Ireland and Lancashire by the Vikings.
However, in 1981 a blood-typing project showed that the Gloucester is almost certainly within a group of southern English red cattle which includes the Devon and the Sussex .
Indeed, the Gloucester's middle-length horns would also suggest a link with the red group and with similarly horned Welsh and Hereford cattle.
The nearby red Hereford was often fully finchbacked in the eighteenth century and so was the old Castlemartin of Pembrokeshire, later incorporated into the Welsh Black .
As Gloucester used to be a major droving centre, there was inevitably much crossing with various Welsh types and the Gloucester's slender, white, dark-tipped horns, spreading quite wide and tilting upwards at the tip, are often similar in style to those of the Welsh, though more refined and a little shorter.
The horns and its clean, tapering head also give it a close resemblance to the dainty Kerry cattle of Ireland and individual Gloucesters often look almost exactly like the Kerry about the head.
By the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Gloucester was deemed one of the country's better dairy cows and a useful draught ox.
It covered an area extending from Worcestershire to Dorset.
However, during the eighteenth century it came into competition with the Longhorns and Shorthorns and by 1790 very few pure Gloucester herds remained.
By 1830 the breed was almost extinct and by 1907 the situation was critical.
A breed society was formed in 1919 to rescue the remaining 130 cattle and over the next 70 years there was considerable out-crossing to Friesian, Jersey, Shorthorn, White Park and no doubt other breeds as well.
By the late 1950s extinction was again close with only two or three herds in existence.
By 1973, after the last major milking herd had been dispersed, only 70 purebred (or relatively purebred) Gloucesters were registered, but the breed society was re-established and, with the help of the Rare Breeds Survival Trust, the breed's numbers are slowly building up again.
In the meantime, the milk remains ideal for cheese-making and the breed's beef production is creditable for a dairy type.
Traditionally, however, the fine-boned Gloucester, which is about the same size as the Dairy Shorthorn, is a milk animal happy not to try and compete in the beef market with the neighbouring Hereford, and it has become a handsome, elegant house-cow or single-suckler, or a useful milk producer for the small-scale farmhouse cheese-maker.
HEREFORD
Red, with characteristic white face; white underside, belly, feet and switch; often partial white backstripe.
Originally middle-horned, now also polled (USA).
Beef.
Excellent forager and suckler; economic producer; docile, easy to manage, early maturing, reliable, consistent, highly adaptable; particularly good for fattening on grassland or range.
Herefordshire, western England; also widely exported.
[Plate II]
The instantly and universally recognisable white face of the famous Hereford is its trademark, which it always passes to its offspring.
It is also seen in the Simmental, which developed its own white face independently.
Many other breeds have white faces, too, but not necessarily from Hereford or Simmental blood, though the Kazakh Whiteheaded (USSR) owes its origins to imported Herefords crossed with the native Kazakh in the 1920s, while the Canadian black or red Hays Converter 's white face can be traced to its Hereford origins in the early 1950s.
The breed's native county is sandwiched between the Welsh borders and the Gloucester and Longhorn finchback regions, with the homeland of Devon's red cattle close enough to influence the Hereford's rich red colour.
Some say that the breed originated in Wales from a  cross between local cattle at Castle Farm in Brecon with Castlemartins from Pembrokeshire, which means that it is related to neighbouring Glamorgan, Gloucester and Welsh Black breeds.
Some suggest that the importation of white-faced Flemish cattle by Lord Scudamore in the seventeenth century (the paintings by Cuyp,c .
1606, show the type) introduced the Hereford pattern.
Others suggest that the first Hereford ancestor was a cow called Silver who, with her calf, was bequeathed to Benjamin Tomkins by his father Richard in 1720, and indeed Benjamin's son, Benjamin the younger, became the great improver of the breed in the 1760s.
It was originally a large, stout, hardy draught animal at a time when beef came mainly from plough oxen once they were no longer in prime working condition (typical of meat production in many countries even now) and was then developed as a triple-purpose draught, meat and milk type but it soon evolved into essentially a beef animal and in that role its influence worldwide has been immense and far-reaching.
By 1788, at a time when the improved Longhorn was at its peak and the Shorthorn already rising to the challenge, an eminent livestock judge declared that the Hereford was the ‘first breed’ of cattle in Britain, though the judge lived in the heart of Longhorn and Shorthorn country.
William Cobbett, writing in 1830, described the Hereford as the country's finest and most beautiful breed.
A breed society was founded in 1878; the first herdbook had been published in 1846 and was closed in 1884, ensuring the purity of the breed for more than a century.
Traditionally a compact, blocky, short-legged but relatively fine-boned beast, it fattens readily and matures early: it is perhaps the quickest of all breeds to convert pasture into prime beef.
In Britain, typical sizes are 150/136cm and 895–1,300/630–825kg, but to suit modern needs it has grown noticeably taller, and longer in the body, in recent years in many countries.
Though less fat today, it remains massive in build and has retained enough of its original milking capacity to make an excellent suckler cow, with high conception and calving rates, and a hardiness and placidity that make management a pleasure.
Its attractive, spreading horns and cheerful, open face add to its appeal.
It is ironic that early in this century the ubiquitous ranchbred Hereford of the western USA became too small in the bone and Beef Shorthorns were imported from Scotland to boost the Hereford's size, whereas in the second half of the century the American Herefords have become much taller than those in Britain and are being re-imported to boost the height of the native herds.
The Hereford is probably the most numerous and widely distributed beef breed in the world.
It has been exported since 1817, when it first went to the USA and Canada, soon spreading into Mexico and South America and readily adapting to environments which ranged from very cold uplands to hot, semi-desert plains.
The breed and its crosses still tend to dominate the beef herds of North and South America, Australia, New Zealand, Denmark and Finland.
There are more than 2 million in the USSR and they are also common in several African and Asian countries as well as in most of Europe.
The breed has contributed to the formation or improvement of at least two dozen breeds all over the world, including many zebu-taurine crosses (see Table 5).
Although the old colours ranged widely and included deep or light red, blue, ‘grizzle’ and all-white, nearly all had white finching and white on the belly and face and early selection was made for the famous white face in contrast to a deep, rich red body colour set off by the white brisket, belly, legs, shoulder stripe and tail switch.
This colouring and pattern were fixed by the end of the eighteenth century.
Some animals have a red spot over the eye giving them good protection from sunburn and eye cancer in warmer climates, and the mossy, curly coat, which gives such good insulation in temperate regions, is replaced by a smooth coat in hotter parts of the world.
It is a middle-horned breed: the bull's horns are thick and grow horizontally and sideways from the poll, while cows display finer, gently curved horns somewhat similar in style of growth to those of the Longhorns but shorter and more balanced, though occasionally one horn grows in a different direction to the other.
There is a Polled Hereford in North America and Australia.
There are breed societies in the UK (1878; herdbook 1846), Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Ireland, New Zealand, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the USA, Uruguay, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
ENGLISH REDS
In 1834, Baxter's Library of Agricultural and Horticultural Knowledge described only seven ‘breeds’ in Britain: the long-horned, the middle-horned, the short-horned, the Welsh, the Polled or Galloway, the Scotch, and the Alderney or French.
The middle-horned breed was described as a group of ‘local varieties’ of which the most noted were the Devon, Sussex and Hereford, the last two being considered varieties of the Devon, with the Hereford thought to be the least active and hardy under the yoke but better for fattening.
The middle-horns were the most esteemed of draught cattle because of their activity and hardiness; they would also fatten at an early age if not working but the milk yield of the cows was poor in comparison with the short-horned cattle of Durham, Yorkshire and Lincolnshire.
There are today five solid red breeds in Britain, excluding the white-marked Hereford already described.
They include the other two middle-horns (Devon and Sussex) and also the very different South Devon, as well as two east coast red breeds, the Lincoln Red (originally from the Shorthorn) and the Red Poll.
Because of their proximity, there was a certain amount of crossing between the two Devon breeds and also occasionally between them and the Hereford and with the Guernsey, which has an ancient link with the South Devon.
But the links are probably closest between the Devon of the north and the Sussex.
One theory is that there used to be a group of cattle to the west of the Pennines and in the south west known loosely as the Red Wessex.
The farmers of Devon and Somerset around Exmoor and in ‘soft’ country wanted a stick-and-dog beef animal and selected the lighter types among the Red Wessex, heavier at the rear and lighter in the forequarters.
Over on the heavy clays of Sussex, farmers needed a heavy plough animal and selected the nearest cattle they could find (that was, from Wessex) for shoulder muscle and draught power.
Yet another branch of the Red Wessex developed into the triple-purpose Hereford.
Certainly the Devon, in the late eighteenth century, was described by William Marshall (1796) as being ‘in size somewhat below the desirable point for the heavier works of husbandry’, making up for this deficiency with its agility and exertion so that it was regarded as the best worker in Britain.
It was considered that the larger Devon found in Somerset formed a link to the big, powerful ploughing oxen of Sussex which, even in the mid-nineteenth century, were regarded also as valuable beef makers, worked only for three or four years before being turned over to the fatteners.
It seems, then, that the Red Wessex was potentially a very useful breed indeed.
DEVON
Rich ‘ruby’ red.
Middle-horned.
Beef, early maturing.
Fine-boned, thin-skinned, thick mossy coat (often curled).
Very hardy and active.
Northern Devon (southwest England).
[Plate III]
This very old and handsome breed should be a great deal more valued than it is, though it is much better appreciated overseas than at home, especially in hotter climates.
Centred around Exmoor in northern Devon, where the climate is wet and humid, with cold, rough winters and an exposed environment, this was the dominant breed of Devon and Somerset for several centuries.
Its colour used to range from yellowish or tawny to dark red, but the red was always preferred and the breed is now characteristically ‘ruby red’— a dark but bright blood colour — and it has long been known as the Ruby of the West.
In summer the coat tends to become dappled with darker spots.
The muzzle is flesh-coloured and, like other red breeds, there is a slightly lighter colouring around the eyes.
The pigmented skin is yellow-orange, and the dark eye-rims are a considerable asset in tropical climates in which the skin pigmentation also protects the   udder against harm from solar radiation.
The middle-length waxy horns are dark at the tips and grow outwards, curving slightly downwards on the bull but spreading gracefully and turning upwards towards the ends on the cow.
Fine-boned, fine-limbed and agile, it is well adapted to the uplands and moorlands of Devon where it has the ability to convert poor grazing into excellent beef.
Originally bred as a draught animal, its milk has always been known for its quality (if not quantity) and it can fairly be called a dual-purpose breed.
The size of the neat, compact body is deceptive: the Devon can weigh more than a Hereford or Beef Shorthorn.
It is an early maturing breed and popular as a terminal sire on dairy heifers: the typical Devon calf weighs about 40kg at birth.
The cows calve easily and are good mothers, with plenty of milk to rear a good calf and with good fertility.
In the eighteenth century the Devon began to spread from its western kingdom and the well-known livestock engraver, Garrard, described it as almost the most perfect breed in Britain.
At that time it was very similar to the modern Devon in conformation and colour: Garrard's engraving in 1800 showed a dark red Devon ox standing 152cm at the withers, but the bull was 135cm and the cow 119cm — similar to the ‘Suffolk Polled’ of the time but smaller than the Hereford and Sussex (each about 142cm/130cm).
It was probably Thomas William Coke (later the Earl of Leicester) of Holkham Hall, Norfolk, on the other side of England, who did most to introduce the Devon elsewhere.
This famous agriculturalist, influenced by the Duke of Bedford and dismissive of the Norfolk and Suffolk breeds that later combined to become the Red Poll, brought the small, thrifty Devons to his estates, where he was already known for experimenting with sheep such as the Southdown, the Norfolk Horn and Bakewell's new Leicester.
Coke was at Holkham from 1776 to 1842.
He found that the Devon, although it was small, gave him good quantities of good beef and rather lower quantities of very creamy milk.
His herd numbered up to 200 head, including working bullocks used on the estates until local prejudice combined with shoeing difficulties encouraged him to abandon them for working horses.
The Devon herd, however, remained well known throughout the nineteenth century.
Coke died in the 1840s and a monument was erected to him at Holkham, guarded by a cudding Devon cow carved in stone.
A model farm was built for the herd in 1850 but after 1870 the herd's size was never more than 100.
It was from Holkham that the first Devons were commercially exported to the USA, though in fact the Pilgrim Fathers, who set sail from Plymouth, took some Devons with them in the seventeenth century.
In about 1800, a bull and two heifers from the Duke of Bedford's herd had been exported to southern Africa in order to improve the weak, long-legged local oxen.
Late in the eighteenth century a distinguished West of England breeder called James White Parsons experimented to create a new breed by crossing his Devons with French and Indian cattle of unspecified breed.
After several years he   displayed the results in London in 1804 but said himself that the calves at one month old were ‘as fat as quails’, though he declared that in due course the hide, flesh, milk and tallow would be of superior quality and value.
No more was heard of the breed, but more than a century later the Devon was very carefully crossed with Indian zebus to contribute to the creation of hot-climate breeds such as the Jamaica Red , the Bravon , the Makaweli and the Santa Gabriela , and it also helped to improve some of the Japanese breeds.
Despite its Exmoor origins, the Devon has proved as tolerant of hot climates as it is of cold wet ones and is now reared extensively in Australia, New Zealand, the USA, Brazil and Jamaica.
This ability to tolerate the heat has encouraged imaginative claims that it is linked with Indian cattle brought to southwest England on Indian trading boats long, long ago, and others suggest a link with the Salers of France.
Early in the nineteenth century the Devon was shipped to Tasmania and was exported to mainland Australia at intervals during the century until health restrictions put an end to imports.
It has had more than a century and a half to prove its worth in the demanding environments of Queensland, New South Wales and even the hot, dry north west of Western Australia.
In nineteenth-century Queensland it was claimed that Devons produced as much beef per acre as Herefords or Shorthorns and also produced a good proportion of lean meat to fat when crossed with the Shorthorn.
By the end of the nineteenth century the Devon was finding a warm welcome in the American West; there cattlemen associated red coats with good, profitable beef and the Devon bulls proved invaluable on ranches where endurance and the ability to travel in search of water and grazing were essential.
They produced an excellent cross on the native Texan cattle.
In 1919 the first of the Rubies landed in Brazil and there have been regular importations ever since.
Some of the English herds used to be milked in spite of the concentration on work and beef, but on the whole the Devon's old milking traits have been neglected.
However, the original stock which accompanied the Pilgrim Fathers from the Devon port of Plymouth in 1623 to provide them with milk, butter and cheese on the voyage continued to give them dairy produce (not to mention beef and boot leather) when they colonised the land.
There is still a breed known as the Milking Devon in Massachusetts which is very close to the original seventeenth-century type and a valuable reserve of the old genes.
There is also a popular Polled Devon beef strain in the USA.
In Britain today the Devon has become a beef breed.
It is now much thicker and rumpier, and larger than it was a century ago.
Its rectangular frame is well suited to beef production.
During the Second World War, when cattle food supplies were necessarily restricted so that the supposedly early maturing breeds were deprived of some of their rations, it was the Devon and the related Sussex which came to the fore and proved that, even under difficult conditions, they were able to produce good beef quickly.
They managed to finish on grass quite happily and their marbled, lean, tender beef caught the eye of the butchers, as it has for centuries.
In the 1960s the breed was exported to Canada and is thriving at altitudes of 1,400m on the eastern slopes of the Rockies with bitter winter temperatures and no more shelter than brush.
They also thrive in Kenya on a farm at 1,800m above sea level, in a wet savannah climate where they are being used to improve native cattle.
There are breed societies in the UK (1884; herdbook 1851), Australia, Brazil, New Zealand, South Africa and the USA.
SOUTH DEVON
Medium red to yellow-red.
Horned.
Beef (originally milk and beef).
South Hams region of southern Devon.
[Plate III]
The south coast of Devon bulges into the Channel between Exeter and Plymouth as if being pushed out to sea by the bulk of Dartmoor and reaching out towards France.
This is the area known as the South Hams, where the climate is kind, the soil red and the beaches, cliffs and clotted cream are famous.
It is the home of the large sandy red South Devon cow, whose rather  ungainly and capacious udder yields ample milk rich in butterfat — typical of cows whose skin is tinged with yellow.
In this respect, and in the sandy tinge to its red coat, it resembles the ‘golden’ Guernsey, and indeed the South Devon and the two Channel Island breeds have a type of haemoglobin which is not found in other British breeds nor in most of those of Europe, although it is prevalent in Asiatic cattle and is found in several African types as well, often associated with butterfat-rich milk.
There was a time when a few Guernseys were traditionally kept in South Devon dairy herds to boost the fat content of the milk.
At the same time, studies of other biochemical markers (such as enzymes, transferrins and serum albumen in the blood) show a very close affinity between the South Devon and the breeds of northern Devon and Herefordshire.
Blood-typing studies of ten European breeds carried out in the early 1980s showed that the genetic distance was closer between the South Devon and the yellow Gelbvieh of central Germany, or the South Devon and the Swiss Brown, than between the South Devon and the Hereford.
It is a large breed and, known as the Big Red, it used to be the biggest breed in Britain.
It was considered triple-purpose: the big oxen put to the plough, the cows milked and the steers fattened to feed (specifically) the mining and industrial areas of the Midlands and south Wales; the meat was produced in large joints but the proportion of bone to meat was high and the bone coarse.
In due course it was bred a little shorter in the leg, with finer bone and a better udder, though it was still disparaged as being rather ungainly and plain.
During the 1920s the milking potential was encouraged, to the detriment of the beef, but in the 1950s the efforts of the breed society (formed in 1891) concentrated on beef conformation and the dual-purpose image was discarded when the South Devon was classified as a beef breed in 1972.
The potential for growth had been retained and it is said that some of today's bulls gain weight faster than continental breeds such as the Charolais; the meat itself is now of much better quality.
Current aims are to achieve 440-day weights of at least 650kg.
Although in Britain this big yellow-red is largely confined to its home region, it has spread abroad, like the Ruby of northern Devon, and seems to be much better appreciated overseas; it has become established in North America, Australia and New Zealand, South America, and perhaps above all in South Africa, whither it was first exported in 1897.
In 1954 the breed's South African journal made the point that wool farmers wanted a breed of cattle that needed no coddling to produce milk for the house and top-price slaughter oxen whose main role was to keep the veld short for sheep, while the mixed grass veld farmer wanted a good cream cheque, a bullock to work and a profitable steer which could be fed on surplus grain.
In addition, of course , the cattle needed to be suited to the climate.
The writer quoted an old Italian who, in discussing the merits of his own dual-purpose white cattle, explained: ‘With beef cattle my children cry for milk.
Dairy cattle…eh, Beh, milk is not food enough for a man and besides I have my fields to plough.’
The South Devon of the period, in South Africa, was still able to provide milk and draught power as well as beef and proved a good match for the local Africanders, especially the lighter-coated animals which tended to develop dark muzzles (disliked at the time by English breeders who preferred a dark red, woolly type with a light muzzle).
Today the South Devon in South Africa makes a good cross with the Africander and also with Brahman cows.
In some countries it is still used as a dairy cow, but in Britain it is definitely a beef breed with the advantage of being able to convert grass into meat with great efficiency.
There used to be a polled breed in southern Devon known as the Devon Natts and also a Somerset Poll .
The name of the extinct Old Marlborough Red dairy breed is possibly a misprint for Malborough, an old South Hams village near Kingsbridge and Salcombe.
There are South Devon breed societies in the UK (1891), Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, South Africa, South America and the USA.
SUSSEX
Rich dark red with white switch.
Middle-horned.
Beef.
Southern England.
[Plate III]
The further east the northern Devon type was found, the larger it seemed to be.
The Sussex is very like the Devon in type, performance and character but bigger, less ‘tidy’ and more of a very deep chestnut-brown in colour, often so dark it seems almost blood-black.
It needed to be bigger, for it was widely used as a plough ox on the very heavy, stiff clays of the Sussex Weald and in its more distant past it played a valuable role in the Sussex iron industry by hauling hefty loads of timber and metal.
It continued as a draught animal into the nineteenth century and even into the twentieth century here and there, and today there are a few teams of working Sussex oxen at open-air museums and farm parks.
Its working past laid the foundations of a good beef breed and it was improved for that specific purpose during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, by selection rather than crossing; it was said (rather coldly) to ‘die well’, that is, to yield a lot of meat in the best cuts.
But, like its relatives in Devon, the Sussex has remained largely confined to its own region in spite of its potential, though it was at one time more widely used in several English counties as a draught animal.
In 1844 Youatt described two types of Sussex: one closer to the Devon stock, being smaller, light and agile, the other larger and more like a Hereford except that its coat colour was whole.
In 1834 it was described as red like the Devon with a golden nose, long silky hair, prominent eyes, wide forehead, fairly wide muzzle, small dewlap, rather thin forelegs of moderate length and a barrel-shaped body; the average oxen of the time weighed up to 545kg with some up to 725kg.
An eighteenth-century Sussex ox outweighed the famous touring Durham Ox and stood 168cm tall.
It never gave large quantities of milk, but the milk was said to be richer than that of the well-known Suffolk Dun (see Red Poll ).
In the Weald (extending into Kent) the Sussex could thrive on rough or scarce grazing but, put on good pasture, it fattened quickly with a high daily weight gain.
The breed is unusual, and perhaps unique among cattle, in its grazing habits: it is quite without discrimination and leaves a level swathe through mixed grass, clover and weeds, eating whatever happens to be in front of its muzzle.
It was often used to clean up patchy pastures, rough grazing and marshland, and it remains a superb and thrifty grazer with the quiet temperament of its working ancestors.
Today it is often a top-cross sire in dairy and suckler herds, especially to Friesians and Holsteins.
It is an early-maturing breed, capable of calving at two years old.
It is probably more common now in Kent than in Sussex, though there has been an important herd on the Leconfield estate at Petworth for some 200 years, where there is an increasing tendency to introduce Limousin blood into the breed.
There is also an interesting herd in Devon where the Pure Meat Company practises extensive organic methods.
Since the Second World War the Sussex has become a stronger colour-marker, much neater of shoulder than the powerful draught type of old, shorter in the leg and better in the hindquarters, and it still produces lean, marbled meat, especially in the prime cuts.
With its reputation for thriftiness on poor soils, its good bones and its red colour, it has also found favour in Africa and Australia, and has been exported to both North and South America as well.
It has proved excellent in South Africa since 1903, especially in cooler areas with a higher rainfall where the Brahman and Africander are not successful.
In hotter climates the Sussex has demonstrated several advantages: it has a smooth coat, and twice as many sweat glands as other European breeds (in this respect it is on a par with the Africander) and has been able to adapt well to the heat.
The cows retain a high level of fertility and have ample milk for their calves, which are small at birth (30–40kg) and present no calving problems in crossbreds.
It can pass its calm temperament to its offspring when crossed with the more excitable Africander and Brahman.
It has retained the strong legs and good feet of a draught animal, so that it can travel long distances over rough terrain on the range, and it has proved able to withstand the stress of drought better than other Bos taurus  breeds .
South African breeders are now  concentrating on increasing its size and weight for age and it has been exported during the past 80 years to most beef-producing countries, especially in southern and eastern Africa.
In Texas the Sussex has been crossed with the Brahman to create the Lambert Ranch's Sabre .
The Polled Sussex is a variety created by crossing with the Aberdeen Angus.
There are breed societies in the UK (1879), New Zealand, South Africa, the USA and Zambia.
RED POLL
Dark red, white tail switch.
Polled.
Dual-purpose.
East Anglia.
[Plate III]
Before the Second World War, Britain's dual-purpose breeds included the Dairy Shorthorn, Lincoln Red, South Devon, Welsh and Red Poll.
Average milk yields for Red Poll cows in the 1930s were about 3,300kg at 3.64 per cent butterfat, which was better in both respects than the Dairy Shorthorn but below the Lincoln Red.
Its most important role at the time, however, in common with other dual-purpose breeds, was in the production of first-class veal and yarded ‘baby beef’(slaughtered at less than 15 months old) and it was the first breed to be used for this trade because of its early maturity.
At the time it was found that a major drawback in dual-purpose cattle was that they often failed to breed true: the offspring tended towards either the beef or the dairy type of the breed's dual-purpose spectrum, partly because of breeders' preferences but partly, it was believed, because the dual-purpose breeds were effectively hybrids: if they had begun to show too great an emphasis on dairy characteristics, extreme beef sires were introduced to draw them back to their dual-purpose role, and likewise extreme dairy sires were used when they became too beefy.
The Red Poll was the most truly dual-purpose breed within the 1930s group.
However, as a milking animal it always had a problem which is still apparent today in some animals: the udders were frequently so pendulous that they were prone to injury and made suckling awkward (baby beef calves were bucket-reared), and later were a problem for machine milking.
The breed was largely restricted to its light-soiled native area in East Anglia, especially on the poorer, sandy Suffolk lands where it was so well adapted to living on sparse, low-quality grazing that on good pasture it would grow too much and become coarse in the bone.
Today it is still a polled dual-purpose breed, with a dark red coat and white tail switch.
Steers and heifers make good beef and the conformation could be described as a dairy type with extra flesh.
It has the potential to be a double-suckler (some families have a tendency to produce twins) and remains well able to produce high-quality meat and milk from low-protein foodstuffs, with an excellent food conversion rate.
It has found a role in extensive or intensive beef systems, maturing early and producing fine-grained meat.
Mature bulls weigh on average 620kg and cows 520kg.
Average milk yields are now about 4,600kg at 3.9 per cent butterfat.
It is said to be the longest-lived of the British dairy and dual-purpose breeds; it is also hardy and with a low incidence of metabolic disease.
The Red Poll was probably developed during the early nineteenth century from a mingling of the meaty Norfolk Red and the famous milking Suffolk Dun.
The latter was generally believed in the eighteenth century to be a Galloway variety or cross, looking exactly like the Scottish breed except in colour.
At first the colour of the East Anglian breeds was not fixed: there were black-and-white sheeted Earsham Polled cattle on the Norfolk/Suffolk borders, for example, but in general blood red was preferred in the cattle of Norfolk and dun was favoured in Suffolk.
The merged ‘Norfolk and Suffolk Polled’ could be any colour as long as it was polled and it was not until the Red Poll herdbook was formed in 1874 that the colour of the breed was formally agreed as red, preferably deep in colour, with a red udder; white touches were permitted only in the tail switch, or on the udder and just in front of the udder on the inside flank.
Polling was essential and scurs or ‘slugs’ were strictly ruled out, and a fringe of hair over the forehead was desirable.
A breed society was established in 1888.
The Suffolk Dun , according to Arthur Young in 1794, had long been celebrated for its  magnanimous milk yield, said to be the highest in the country in proportion to its body size and food intake.
It was quite a small type, rarely weighing as much as 320kg, with short, thin legs, a proportionately large body, ridged backbone, big-bellied (the Red Poll still has a good rumen capacity for digesting quantities of low-grade roughage), rather plain and very lean, with a thin ‘snake’ head, always polled, and a large baggy udder with prominent milk veins.
Its general conformation showed a dairy-type leanness, but individuals could fatten well.
Milk yields of up to 35kg a day in June were common, with an average of 25kg a day over the summer months, but the milk was not very creamy.
Coat colours included red, brindle and yellowish cream, and the ‘dun’ colour had almost disappeared by Youatt's time.
In Young's time most of the cattle in Norfolk were in fact Scottish by origin, brought from their native regions to fatten in East Anglia, but the Norfolk Red was an old local middle-horned breed not unlike the Devon in colour and horn growth, and described as ‘as loose and ill-made as bad Suffolks’.
In the 1780s the Norfolk cattle in general were described as blood red with white or mottled faces like miniature Herefords and able to fatten easily at an early age.
Some, however, were black.
There is a tradition that the cattle of eastern England have Scandinavian origins, but the West of England influence was strong and during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries Devon blood was widely used in Norfolk (especially, of course, by Coke of Holkham and his tenants), though it did not necessarily have a direct influence on the future Red Poll.
However, some of the Holkham tenants, almost in reaction to their landlord's introduction of the alien West Country breed, decided to combine their native Norfolk and Suffolk types as being more suitable to the region and it was their efforts which, by 1810, produced by the first selectively bred combinations of the horned Norfolk meat types and the polled dairy Suffolk in the Norfolk and Suffolk Poll .
The separate Norfolk Red and Suffolk Dun gradually became extinct and the Red Poll was East Anglia's dominant breed for many years.
By the late nineteenth century, like other British reds, the breed began to find favour on the ranches of western America, especially where cattle were rail-trucked, in which circumstances horns were a definite nuisance.
By the 1940s and 1950s the Red Poll was one of Britain's major breeds but, in the rush to set up new herds, breeding standards began to slip badly on the farm, while at the same time the invading Friesian, fed on concentrates, considerably outyielded the breed and by the early 1960s its popularity had tumbled.
There followed a deliberate yield-improvement programme using Danish Reds, with the aim of creating a new crossbred British Red.
The Danish infusion did increase yields but had an adverse effect on food conversion rates, longevity and hardiness so that the experiment waned.
In the meantime, the Red Poll had rapidly become a minor breed, indeed officially classified as a rare breed, and was in great danger of losing its identity when in 1980 the breed society was reorganised and revitalised.
The breed's prospects are gradually improving (1,500 adult animals, and rising) and it is being recognised as what is called a farmer's cow, able to produce well on cheap, home-grown rations without having to rely on expensive concentrates.
The cows have a long, flat lactation curve and readily adopt a second calf for suckling, and are considered easy to care for as housecows.
The milk's small fat globules make it highly digestible — almost as good as goat's milk in this respect — and at least one farm is specialising in Red Poll cheese for export.
Despite its demise in Britain, the Red Poll (like other red breeds) is more appreciated overseas where it has proved tolerant of both cold and hot climates.
Its native climate combines cold winters, with the winds blowing off the North Sea, and very dry summers.
There are now milking herds in North and South America, Jamaica, Australia and East Africa and the breed is also found in New Zealand, South Africa, Zimbabwe, Germany and Romania.
In New Zealand it is still milked but is mainly used as a suckler for early-maturing calves, or as a terminal sire for easy calving in dairy herds, whereas in Australia it competes successfully in steer competitions, especially for home-frozen beef.
It is valued for its ability to milk off poor grazing and for its polled  factor, which is passed to all first-generation crossbred offspring.
Its coat colour and pigmented skin are valued in hot climates where it has proved resistant to eye cancer and also, to some extent, to ticks.
The Red Poll's greatest successes overseas are in Jamaica, Brazil and other Latin American countries where it has been instrumental in the creation of types bred for local conditions, such as the Jamaica Red, Pitangueiras (Brazil), La Velasquez (Colombia), Senepol (US Virgin Islands) and possibly the Romosinuano (Colombia).
There are breed societies in the UK (1888; herdbook 1873), Australia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, New Zealand, South Africa, the USA and Zimbabwe.
LINCOLN RED
Cherry red.
Polled or horned.
Beef (originally dual-purpose).
Lincolnshire, eastern England.
[Plate III
The Lincoln Red was at first known as the Lincolnshire Red Shorthorn: it originated when eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Durham and Yorkshire Shorthorn bulls were put on the large, rugged, pied Old Lincolnshire short-horned draught cows which could withstand all the weather thrown at this east coast county by the cold North Sea winds.
This old local type was possibly introduced by the Vikings in the eighth to tenth centuries.
By consistent selection, based on a group of red Colling-bred Shorthorns brought to Lincolnshire in the early nineteenth century, the breed's characteristic colour and qualities became fixed.
At first it was included with other Shorthorns in the Coates herdbook from its inception in 1822, but in 1896 the Lincoln became separate and established its own Lincoln Red herdbook.
Always a big, fleshy animal, it retained its large frame when many other British cattle became fashionably short-legged and stocky in the 1940s.
Thus the Lincoln was ready for the current fashion for larger carcasses.
In 1946 it was recognised as a dual-purpose breed and the herdbook was divided, with a section for dairy Lincoln Reds as well as one for the beef animals.
The milk cows produced quite respectable yields (3,200–3,600kg), calving regularly and for many years, and able to live out all year round.
Many herds gave yields of more than 4,500kg and individual cows could double the figure.
The beef herd proved the breed's ability to thrive on modest feeding and to give high killing-out percentages in all age groups, and gradually the beef traits increased in importance until it became a single-purpose beef breed.
The breed was already being exported to South Africa in the 1940s to improve the native cattle and it adapted well to a variety of climates and management systems.
It has also been exported to Argentina, Uruguay, the USA, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Germany and, in surprisingly large numbers, to Hungary, where in one herd alone there are 800 pure or graded-up polled Lincoln cows at Szentes, near the Romanian border.
The Lincoln is the basis of the Hungarian Pankota Red and has also contributed to the American Fort Cross .
The Lincoln Red's breed society has a pioneering spirit: it was the first to introduce beef recording and it was the first to dehorn its breed deliberately, dropping its ‘Shorthorn’ tag by 1960.
At the time the only polled British beef cattle were Scottish — the Aberdeen Angus and Galloway.
The 25-year polling programme began in 1938 when the Nottinghamshire breeder Eric Pentecost (1896–1980) used Aberdeen Angus red or black bulls on some of his Lincolns, selectively backcrossing over five generations until his first Polled Lincoln Red could be licensed.
He used red bulls for preference among the Angus, and suggested that this recessive colour factor probably arose from the use of red Durhams (originating from Dutch cattle) two centuries earlier.
The Polled Lincoln Red is now absorbing the horned type.
More recently (1977) the breed society introduced a controlled development scheme using a proportion of European blood to retain the breed's size and increase leanness, typically with touches of Charolais, Maine-Anjou, Chianina and Limousin.
By the 1980s they were achieving 400-day weights of more than 500kg with bulls, 375kg with steers and 320kg with heifers and the Lincoln Red is now Britain's largest traditional beef breed with a capacity for rapid live-weight gains and early maturity.
Yet its numbers are not high: in 1985 there were 1,918 pedigree breeding females and 47 bulls in Britain.
However, like other reds, it has been exported successfully, especially with the increasing emphasis on the polled type.
There are breed societies in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa.
Beevbilde
In 1950 Eric Pentecost concentrated on improving the Lincoln's food conversion rates and on giving it a deeper back end.
He eventually found that the ideal mix was 55 per cent Polled Lincoln Red, 35 per cent Polled Beef Shorthorn (he had also succeeded in polling the latter) and 10 per cent Aberdeen Angus, which improved the qualities he desired without reducing size and liveweight gains.
He called this new breed the Beevbilde.
In the early 1950s he used his creation to improve the size of the Aberdeen Angus and began to outcross with the red Beevbilde to produce a new breed of black beef cattle which combined Angus quality with the Lincoln's fast weight gains.
He called it the Black Beevbilde and by 1965 he had built up a sizeable herd.
Yet at the age of 77 this remarkable part-time breeder was echoing Cecil Rhodes: ‘So much to do; so little done!’
Pentecost was not a farmer: he was trained as a scientist specialising in pure chemistry and made a considerable contribution in the development of man-made fibres.
WHITE COLOUR-POINTED CATTLE
In Britain the dark extreme of the colour-sided cline described in the Genetics section is characteristic of the Gloucester, while the light (colour-pointed) extreme is the standard colouring of two breeds: the horned White Park (including the Chillingham ) and the polled British White .
Other breeds have colour-pointed varieties such as the White Galloway and White Welsh, but these are colour varieties within their breeds rather than separate breeds and quite often their non-standard colour can be traced back to crossings with White Park or British White in the past.
It should be noted that the White Park and the British White, although sharing a herdbook for many years, are very separate and distinct breeds; in fact the true White Park is genetically distant from all British breeds, including the British White.
The White Park apart, the British breeds are closely related — they have not yet diverged to a noticeable extent in spite of their apparent differences.
The breeds likely to be most closely related to the White Park are probably the Kerry of Ireland and the old Scottish breeds, the Highland and Galloway.
Colour-pointed cattle are referred to in pre-Christian Irish epics and the colour pattern was a favourite in Celtic lore.
It is said that the pattern is mentioned in records dating back to the fifth century BC, which is to say that it was known well before the Roman invasion.
Perhaps because of their colouring, and also because of their romantic associations with decorative herds roaming half-wild across extensive parklands on gentlemen's estates in days gone by, there have been more imaginative theories about the origins and development of the two colour-pointed breeds, especially the White Park, than about any other breed in Britain.
The controversies and speculations will no doubt continue for many years to come and only the briefest notes will be given here to suggest some of the possibilities, without prejudice but also  with realism.
WHITE PARK
White with black (or red) points.
Middle-horned to long-horned.
Beef potential.
Rare breed.
[Plate IV]
The White Park has the potential to be a most promising beef breed if numbers can be built up.
Good growth rates have been achieved with appropriate management and the carcass is large and lean.
Because of the breed's genetic separation from other breeds, crossbred calves display considerable hybrid vigour and outgrow many other crosses but can still be fattened off grass.
It is thrifty, healthy, long-lived and adaptable, it calves easily and is also very handsome with its white coat and coloured ears, muzzle, eyelids, feet and teats.
The most common colour-point is now black, though in some herds the favoured colour has always been red, and the bulls are strong colour-markers of crossbred offspring.
The horns are of middle length or can be quite long, and they vary in style according to the herd's origins, but commonly those of the cow grow outwards, forwards and then upwards.
The Chillingham horn type is very upright, curving inwards at the tip and often lyre-shaped in older cows; it is also seen in the Vaynol herd.
The graceful Dynevor type grows sideways and then curves forwards and upwards; it is also seen in the Cadzow, possibly because Dynevor bulls often ran with Cadzow cows in recent years.
The Chartley type, possibly influenced by the Longhorn, extends outwards and then tends to curve downwards rather than up.
There is a disproved theory that the Romans brought the white cattle to Britain; however, the white Italian breeds differ fundamentally from the White Park type in several decisive respects.
The Italians (i.e. the Podolian types such as the Romagnola and Marchigiana) are very pale grey or cream with black switches and black skin and the colouring is recessive, whereas the White Parks are a completely different colour type in which white is dominant and the tail switch is invariably white.
The Italians are usually born red but the true White Park calf is born white.
A more recent theory is that the Celtic or pre-Celtic White Park type originated on the Iberian peninsula, along the immigration route of the Hamitic longhorns which travelled from the Middle East into North Africa and West Africa, with some branching off to cross into southern Spain by way of the Straits of Gibraltar.
It has often been stated that the coloration, if not the breed type, suggests Scandinavian origins for the White Park and for the British White, in that the pattern is quite common, especially in the Swedish Mountain cattle.
However, the pattern can arise as a genetic mutation quite spontaneously in any part of the world (see Genetics chapter).
Nor does a coat pattern make a breed; indeed it has often been remarked that the only common factor among the various old park herds in Britain was their colouring.
There is considerable variation between them in horn growth, face shape and general conformation.
Some of the emparked herds of White Cattle claim a history of enclosure from the thirteenth century onwards, when they were confined for private sport and to decorate the landscape.
However, it seems that the earliest documentary evidence for any of the ancient herds is from the seventeenth century: in 1692 there is a record of ‘wild white beasts’, twelve of them with red or black ears, in Northumberland at Chillingham, and in 1634 ‘wild beasts all white’ were recorded at Bishop Auckland park in Durham.
However, whenever they might have been emparked, it seems that the colour pattern had been established in Britain for a very long time indeed.
The ‘ancient’ herds were originally in various locations in Wales, Scotland and the northern half of England, all of them in Britain's ‘Celtic’fringes.
Some of the major old herds still exist today, including the Welsh Dynevor (now in southwest England), Scottish Cadzow , Staffordshire Chartley (originally from the Welsh Lamphey herd and dispersed in 1905 but recently re-established in south and southeast England) and the feral Northumberland Chillingham .
The feral Faenol or Vaynol herd of Bangor, North Wales, was of Scottish origin and was thought to have much Highland blood in it, but blood tests have disproved this (though one animal was shown to have a trace of Indian blood from an experiment in the 1880s).
Like  the Chillingham, considered separately below, the Vaynol is a unique population and is a more primitive type than other White Parks, timid by nature and needing very sympathetic handling; it is angular in appearance with a sloping pelvis and sickle hocks, and about the size of a Kerry.
It was recently transferred to Gloucestershire and elsewhere in an attempt to instigate an embryo transplant programme.
The White Park breed today is based on a combination of the Cadzow, Chartley and Dynevor types with minor infusions from a single Chillingham red-eared bull at Cadzow in 1886.
Old traces of Longhorn blood seem to have been bred out now.
However, there are still quite a few rather heavily marked White Parks and sometimes a completely black calf is thrown, which is never the case with the pure Chillinghams.
Most of today's herds are in the Midlands and north of England, but there are still several in Scotland and also some in the south and southwest of England.
With fewer than 150 breeding females the breed remains in the RBST's ‘Critical’ category among the rare breeds, treasured as the Trust's symbol.
In the Second World War it was protected by the government which, in order to preserve part of the national heritage, transferred a group of White Parks to the famous King Ranch in Texas, USA.
More recently, White Parks have been exported to other parts of the USA and also to Canada, Australia, Denmark and France, but they are a precious resource and carefully looked after by the breed society which was formed in 1983.
There has been a herdbook since 1974 in Britain.
CHILLINGHAM
Perhaps the most intriguing of all the White Park herds is the Tankerville family's famous ‘wild’ white cattle of Chillingham in Northumberland, between Alnwick and Berwick-on-Tweed.
This small herd of 40 or 50 animals, though enclosed, still has the freedom of 135ha of land and the animals are rarely in contact with humans; they live as a wild herd and exhibit many interesting behaviour patterns, which have been studied in the past by famous artists and very recently by Cambridge zoologist Stephen Hall, who has published his observations.
With no outside blood since their enclosure at least three centuries ago, the Chillinghams are now in effect a separate breed, and of course inbred at that.
There is a primitive look to them: they are small (perhaps 100cm at the withers, and weighing 280–300kg, though they probably used to be larger) and very narrow in the hindquarters.
The coat is whitish and the muzzle and insides of the ears are red.
The cows have red freckles on the face and neck in particular, while those of the bulls tend to be greyish.
The horns are quite different to those of other White Parks: they are much more upright, and curve inwards on the females.
They are not very long-lived: the oldest cows are about 17 years of age and the bulls perhaps 13.
Maturity comes late and the cows are often as much as four years old before they conceive, while the bulls can be sexually mature at 18–20 months old but do not usually mate until about four years old.
After the severe winter of 1946–7 there were only eight cows and five bulls in the herd, but there are now perhaps 50 animals altogether and they are owned and protected by the Chillingham Wild Cattle Association, a registered charity which bought the herd on the death of the eighth Earl in 1972.
BRITISH WHITE
White with black (sometimes dark brown or red) points.
Polled.
Beef (originally dual-purpose).
Originally in Lancashire and East Anglia.
Rare breed.
[Plate I]
The British White, largely on the basis of its coat pattern, was for a long while considered to be merely a polled variety of the White Park and, of course, there was some interbreeding.
There was a tendency for both to be referred to as the Wild White or Park cattle but there are noticeable differences between them and it has been firmly established, by cytogenetic and other  tests, that the British White is no more closely related to the White Park than are other British breeds.
The resemblance is superficial and since 1946 the polled has been known as the British White.
It has many similarities with the old Swedish Mountain cattle (and indeed two bulls of that type were imported in 1949) and it also has an unusually high incidence of a particular chromosomal translocation which might have a very minor effect on fertility.
The British White's colour pointing is usually black, though occasionally red or dark brown, and is on the inside of the ears, the nose and muzzle, the eyelids, teats and feet, with a splash of colour on the front of the fetlocks and sometimes mottled flecking or freckling on the shoulders, head and body.
By the mid-twentieth century there was a fair amount of crossing with other breeds in order to boost production, and there is therefore much more evidence today of colour spotting on the head, neck and shoulders and an increasing tendency towards overmarking.
The skin is pigmented.
The breed is medium-sized and is smaller than the White Park, but can achieve average daily weight gains of 1.35kg.
Its main role today is in single-suckler beef herds and the cows weigh about 475kg.
Bulls are used as crossing sires in dairy or suckler herds.
Known as the White Polled in the late nineteenth century, the breed was then described as quiet and gentle, similar in size and growth rate to the Red Poll at a time when the few existing white herds were found mainly in Norfolk and Suffolk.
The truest of the breed were selected for ‘swan white’ long shaggy coats with black points but some herds (for example, the old Woodbastwick) were bred selectively for red points.
The histories of the various herds are quite complicated but, very broadly, two of the oldest were the Guisborough Priory in Cleveland and the Whalley Abbey in Lancashire, whose stock was said to be derived from the wild white horned cattle of near-by Bowland Forest in the sixteenth century and deliberately bred for the polling factor by the abbot.
Originally the whites were kept more for their decorative qualities than for practical reasons, but since those days their breeders have changed their minds at intervals about the main role of the breed.
In the nineteenth century the Gunton Park was essentially a dairy herd and here the emphasis on a good milk yield at 4 per cent butterfat continued into the 1930s and 1940s, when the rest of the breeders were changing from dairy to dual-purpose types.
Whitebred Shorthorn and White Galloway bulls were introduced in the 1920s and 1930s to improve the beef quality of some of the old dairy herds and, although some were still being milked in the 1950s, a positive decision was made in the 1960s to concentrate on high-quality beef production.
The breed society was formed in 1918.
Although still classified as a rare breed, the British White has increased considerably in numbers in recent years and has also been exported: it seems to thrive in hot climates and has a good degree of heat tolerance, helped by its pigmented skin and reflecting white coat.
It also has some degree of resistance to ticks and seems to be well suited to range conditions.
It is known in Australia as the Australian White and was first exported there in 1958 (heifers in calf to a White Galloway); it is one of the basic breeds within the Mandalong Special .
It is also happy in New Zealand and in the USA where, confusingly and misleadingly, it is known as the American White Park .
Perhaps the confusion is understandable: British Whites went to the USA along with the few true White Parks during the Second World War for the security of the breeds.
There are now about 1,200 registered polled breeding cows in the USA.
It also went to Colombia, where there is a similarly coloured but unrelated Blanco Orejinegro , and there has been some experimental crossing recently of British Whites with Brahmans.
IRELAND
There are perhaps two main types of indigenous cattle in Ireland: the ancient ‘Celtic’ races and the Scandinavian polled.
In addition, of course , there has been influence from across the Irish Sea, in particular with the widespread use of Bakewell's improved Longhorn in the eighteenth century and its nineteenth-century Shorthorn successor, and various other English and Scottish breeds.
It is said that there were four breeds in Ireland by 1835: the Longhorn, the Kerry, the Moil and the Old Irish.
KERRY
Black.
Gracefully middle-horned.
Dairy.
Southwest Ireland.
Rare breed.
[Plate V]
This beautiful small cow is elegantly built with fine bones, a fine, clean head held alert and set off by gaily carried white horns which curve upwards, tapering to black tips, and which are quite long in proportion to the size of the animal.
The body conformation is typical of a dairy type and the whole appearance is lithe, alert and graceful.
It is a notably hardy and thrifty breed, able to produce good milk yields from the poorest of fodder and an excellent smallholder's cow, well suited to hill farms iii particular, light enough not to poach winter pastures and small enough to be tightly stocked.
Although it is small in its native environment, where food might be scarce, it can grow larger on good lowland pastures.
For her size, the Kerry cow is a top yielder and one of the most economical producers.
Yields are best after the second lactation and the smallness of the fat globules makes the milk very digestible.
Typical yields are about 3,500kg at 4 per cent butterfat and a good cow can reach perhaps 4,500kg.
The dairy-type conformation does not lend itself readily to beef production and though steers will fatten they grow rather slowly.
The average weight for the breed is 350–450kg.
The Kerry has an unusually long history as a specialist dairy breed and it has been suggested that it was being bred for milk production in early Irish Celtic times when, it is thought, milk formed a major part of the people's diet, either fresh or preserved in various ways.
The type has been in Ireland for at least 4,000 years, according to archaeological evidence, and it is within the same ancestral group as the White Park, the Welsh cattle and the old Scottish breeds, and also the European remnant breeds such as the Hérens of the Alps and the Camargue of southern France, to which the Kerry bears a noticeable likeness.
Genetic studies at University College, Dublin, suggest a common ancestry between the Kerry and Iberian and Romanian cattle.
Originally there was a variety of coat colours including brown, black-and-brown, black-and-white, the linebacked black mountain Drimmon variety and, predominantly, black with or without a little white on the udder or belly.
In oral tradition, stretching back more than 1,000 years, there was also a white, red-eared Kerry type, still mentioned in 1830.
By the eighteenth century the most common colour was red but today, although red calves are still born occasionally, the breed is black and some of the animals have a touch of white on the udder.
Although essentially the poor man's housecow in Ireland, the breed was exported to England in the second half of the nineteenth century to become the rich man's pet, favoured for its dainty good looks.
A herdbook was first published in 1890; a joint breed society for the Kerry and related Dexter was formed in 1917 and was restricted to the Kerry alone in 1919.
There was also a breed society in the USA from 1911 to 1921, and a UK society was established in 1882 (herdbook 1890).
After the First World War some Kerries were exported to France to help repopulate areas which had been decimated by war and the small black cattle were given prime grazing in orchard meadows near the River Somme; within nine months they looked like beef animals!
However, they made flesh at the expense of milk: the breed does seem to milk better in harder conditions.
Yet in Ireland the Kerry almost became  extinct by the early 1980s, and in 1983 the total world population of pedigree cows was only 200.
A rescue operation was launched by the Royal Dublin Society with the help of the Department of Agriculture and the Public Works office, which now has a herd at Killarney, with sponsorship by the Ulster Bank.
Even now there are only about ten private herds of pedigree Kerries in Ireland.
DEXTER
Black, dun or red.
Horned.
Dual-purpose.
Very small and short-legged.
Southwest Ireland.
[Plate V]
While the Kerry is naturally small in its native environment, the Dexter has been deliberately bred small, often to the point of being a true dwarf.
It has a characteristic shortness of the leg between knee and fetlock and a much thicker and more solid conformation than the Kerry.
Its head is short and broad, the neck short and thick, the body deep, compact, square and low-set.
The horns, thicker than the Kerry's, are of medium length, curving forwards and upwards.
Its short, fine hair is usually black, though some animals are dun or red.
Provided breeding is selective, it is a most useful smallholder's animal, giving perhaps 3,000kg of milk at more than 4 per cent butterfat and also providing good, small beef carcasses which are ideal for home freezers and small-scale catering.
Milk and meat are both produced economically, and the breed's smallness enables tight stocking for more efficient land use.
Unlike the Kerry, the Dexter is an increasingly popular breed; it has been well promoted by its breed society in recent years so that it now hardly qualifies as a rare breed.
It has also become well established not only in mainland Britain but in other countries.
However, there can be problems, specifically because of the fashion for breeding it as small as possible, which at one time was taken to dangerous extremes.
There is a lethal or semi-lethal dwarfing factor in the breed, sometimes called the bulldog-calf syndrome, the genetics of which have been closely studied and which seems to be slightly different to the dwarfing factor sometimes seen in other cattle breeds.
The bulldog calves are usually aborted in the later stages of the pregnancy and the syndrome is particularly seen where very short-legged types are favoured.
In Britain and South Africa, most breeders are now careful to select the longer-legged type, standing perhaps 100–112cm at the withers, which is a well-proportioned animal in contrast with the big-headed 90cm dwarves.
Cows of the better types can weigh as much as 360kg and mature bulls or steers more than 460kg at three years old.
An ideal weight for early-maturing beef is perhaps 305–330kg.
It is probable that the Dexter was developed from very small Kerries but the two breeds are now genetically distinct, though the longer-legged type of Dexter is potentially a useful gene reservoir for the rare Kerry.
Traditionally Dexters were bred by mating Kerry cows to Dexter bulls, and it used to be known as the Dexter-Kerry.
It is not known whether the original breeding arose from mutation or selection, or, some say, by crossbreeding with perhaps a French breed or the Devon.
A Mr Dexter, agent for Lord Hawarden on Valentia Island (Co.
Kerry), deliberately developed the breed as a small animal able to fatten as well as to give house milk, probably by selection from the local mountain dairy cattle, and gave his name to the breed by the early nineteenth century.
It became quite common in southern Ireland and was registered in the new Kerry herdbook established in 1887.
It was exported to England during the 1880s and an English herdbook was opened in 1900.
By 1911 there was also a breed society in the USA where today there are about 250 registered Dexters, with lower numbers in Canada.
In South Africa a breed society was formed in 1958 and there are now perhaps 1,200 registered animals, the largest herd with 120 head, and the total commercial herd numbering about 2,500, the demand for the breed remaining keen, especially for the taller type (107–117/102–107cm).
IRISH MOILED
Rich red with white finching.
Polled.
Dual-purpose.
Northwest Ireland.
Very rare.
[Plate 1]
There used to be a polled Irish Dun dairy breed not unlike the old Suffolk Dun of eastern England.
There were other polled cattle in Ireland throughout the ages: the ‘maol’(hornless) types are referred to in traditional cattle-raiding stories which in some cases can be traced back to the fourth century, and remains of polled cattle have been found (along with small, horned Kerry types) at archaeological sites dating back three to four thousand years.
Today, however, there is only one polled Irish breed and its numbers are precariously low: it is the rarest breed in the whole of Britain and Ireland.
There are several variations of the word which describes polled cattle.
The Irish maol or maoile means, literally, ‘little mound’; the Welsh equivalent is moel, the English poll, and in the USA the Irish immigrants introduced the word muley.
‘Moiled’ is an anglicised adjective from maol.
It seems that polled cattle existed in Ireland long, long before any invaders would have introduced polled Scandinavian cattle, though it is tempting to assume that polled cattle, especially if they are colour-sided or dun, have Scandinavian origins.
The main home of the Irish polled cattle used to be in the north west.
In the nineteenth century most of the ‘moilies’ were red (for example, the Donegal Red ) with brown ears and noses, and they gave a good yield of milk rich in butterfat.
By the twentieth century they were mainly in Tyrone, Armagh and Sligo but were still not classifiable as a breed: they were simply polled Irish cattle.
In 1926 breeders had managed to set some standards and formed a society, opening a herdbook for the Irish Moiled in that year, and by 1929 they had decided that the preferred colouring should be red or roan with a white dorsal line, white tail and underline and white udder.
There were two old linebacked bulls and seven bull calves at the time to help fix the colour, which was not unlike that of the Longhorn, an English breed which had been widespread in eighteenth-century Ireland (there was said to be a ‘hornless Longhorn’ in Cumberland in the nineteenth century).
The lineback pattern was also seen in other Irish breeds.
For a while the breed flourished and became a regular winner of dairy-class prizes, but the Second World War saw the start of a decline, though the breed society was revitalised in 1948.
In 1950 a polled Finnish bull was imported — and more than one Irishman has claimed that it was in fact an Irish Moiled, in the firm belief that all polled Scandinavian cattle were descended from polled Irish cattle seized by raiding Norsemen and Danes.
By the late 1950s the breed was again in decline and part of the blame could be put on the 1949 Agricultural Act, which set guidelines for bull licensing and required bulls' dams to have high recorded milk yields.
Moiled breeders rarely recorded yields and, like the worthy old Italian breeds which dwindled drastically in the face of Italy's similar bull-licensing laws in the
1960s, the Irish breed's population plummeted.
By the early 1960s only two small herds of perhaps a dozen pedigree animals remained and it was from these that the society, revived yet again in 1982 and with the help of various organisations including the Rare Breeds Survival Trust, formed a new herdbook in 1983 in an attempt to save the breed from extinction.
Even now there are perhaps only 100 Irish Moiled cattle.
The standards today give preference to a rich red with white lineback, tail and underline, though yellow dun, plum and red-eared white (with or without red, dun or plum on their sides) are acceptable as long as they have the white finching.
Black hairs in the coat are not acceptable.
The colour of the head should be lighter than that of the body but mottled (not wholly white) and with dark ‘eyebrows’ and some brown colouring around the muzzle.
The muzzle itself is pinkish grey and fairly broad, the ears quite large and the high-set eyes prominent with a docile expression.
The conformation should reflect the breed's dual-purpose nature, and quality is more important than size.
CHANNEL ISLANDS
The Jersey and Guernsey breeds, along with England's South Devon, are unique among British cattle (and unusual among those of all Europe) in possessing the bovine haemoglobin B allele, which is prevalent in African and Asian cattle.
Yet blood-factor studies reveal a surprising genetic distance between the two island breeds which is almost as wide as that between, say, the Jersey and the Holstein.
The Channel Islands are physically much closer to the French coast than to the English and the island breeds have a certain affinity with the breeds of Brittany and Normandy.
Being island cattle, however, they have developed to some extent in isolation, especially on Jersey, a tiny island which has managed to breed a cow whose fame is worldwide, and with justice.
The northernmost of the islands is Alderney and in times past it was common to describe all Channel Island cattle as being of the Alderney breed, even when they were clearly Jersey, Guernsey or small French dairy types.
In the nineteenth century they were all categorised together as ‘the Alderney or French breed’ said to be bred chiefly on Alderney and to a lesser extent on the other islands.
The Alderney of the period was considered to be the best of all milch cows.
Yet the different types found on Jersey and Guernsey had long been well known in England, which had imported Jerseys (under the Alderney name) since at least 1789.
In 1763 the state of Jersey placed a ban on all imports of live cattle to the island, Guernsey following suit in 1789, and thereafter the breeds developed in isolation.
Traditionally these island cows were tether-grazed by the horns and were accustomed to handling, a factor which contributed substantially to their affable temperament.
They were also used to living out, tolerating salt-laden Channel weather and forage, both of which no doubt contributed to the development of the breeds.
GUERNSEY
Golden brown and white.
Short-horned.
Dairy.
[Plate V]
In general it would seem that the now-extinct Alderney was fairly similar to today's Guernsey but smaller (in 1800 bulls stood at 119cm, cows 112cm and oxen 140cm) and with short, ‘crumpled’(curled) horns, fine bones, a long, thin neck and protruding, raised hips.
Its coat was light red or dun mottled with white.
No doubt the Alderney and the Guernsey had a shared ancestry: both islands were colonised by Normandy monks in the eleventh century.
There is a rare Brittany breed which is very similar to the Guernsey and possibly formed the ancestral stock.
It is the slender, wheat-coloured, lyre-horned Froment du Léon , which looks very like the old dun Shetland cows of the early twentieth century and almost identical to the modern Guernsey in conformation but not in horn.
This French breed, which produces high-fat milk, was probably not distinguished from other breeds of northwest France until the nineteenth century, including the Contentin type (later absorbed by the Normandy breed ), which probably also came to the islands, and the now-extinct brindled Isigny draught breed of Normandy, which was also a famous butter-maker but much larger than the Léon and with horns which curved forward and inward rather than outward and backward.
The Guernsey's horns today are more commonly like those of the Isigny but perhaps the smaller Alderney owed little to the Isigny and more to the Léon.
At one stage the Guernsey was used as a draught animal and later for beef, but its prime role was always as a milk producer.
By the end of the nineteenth century the Guernsey was described as native to Alderney, Sark and Herm as well as Guernsey and was still kept pure by restrictions on imports.
Pure herds were also found in the Isle of Wight and Guernseys also spread to several English and Scottish counties to decorate parkland or supply house milk and butter.
They had come to England during the eighteenth century through the southwestern ports and an English breed society was formed in  1884.
The colour was described as rich orange-and-lemon with white patches, and yellow in the ear was deemed important as a sign of potential milk quality.
The body was wedge-shaped,, big of belly, narrow-chested, with a very large udder spreading the hindquarters apart and yielding large quantities of yellow, fat-rich milk for butter-making.
The curving flesh-coloured horns were yellow at the base, those of the Alderney often brownish, and the skin and body fat were as golden as the milk.
By the mid-twentieth century the Guernsey was no longer a park decorator in England but in great demand as a commercial dairy cow.
It also found favour in North America (with a polled strain in the USA), Australia, Egypt, eastern and southern Africa and, to disprove any lingering doubts about its hardiness, it accompanied Admiral Byrd's polar expedition.
But, like so many other dairy breeds, the Guernsey suffered a sharp decline in the UK when Friesians became dominant.
The breed today has a fine head, typical dairy wedge-shaped conformation with a deep body, wide pelvis for easy calving and roomy abdomen for roughage and carrying the calf.
There is rich golden pigmentation in the ears and skin and around the eyes; the muzzle is buff, the hoofs amber and the coat shades of fawn with or without white markings over a thin, loose hide.
It is a fast-growing breed and can produce a more acceptable calf for beef than the Jersey.
Cows weigh up to 500kg and average milk yields are 4,500kg at 4.6 per cent butterfat.
There are breed societies in Guernsey (1842,; herdbook 1878), England, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Ireland, Kenya, South Africa, the USA and Zimbabwe.
JERSEY
Various shades of fawn.
Short-horned.
Dairy.
[Plate V]
This is a very special breed, the smallest of those of the Channel Islands, with some unusual features and a remarkable ability to adapt to extreme climates, especially those far hotter than it ever experienced on the island of its isolated development.
The indirect link with Asian and African cattle by virtue of the possession of B-allele haemoglobin has already been mentioned but the Jersey seems to have more links with non-European cattle.
Its heat tolerance is so exceptional for a temperate breed that many people have tried to prove a more direct relationship with the zebu, even detecting the slight trace of a hump.
The Jersey is certainly recognised in tropical countries as giving better results than other temperate breeds.
The face of the Jersey is noticeably dished (concave) and there is something about it that is strongly suggestive of the humpless short-horned ‘Iberian’ breeds of the Middle East, Egypt and the coast of North Africa.
The dished face is also seen in Spanish cattle along with the typical ‘mealy’ or ‘deer’muzzle — a pale halo surrounding the dark-skinned nose, found too in Alpine and humpless West African breeds and in the ancient aurochs itself.
The whole style of the Jersey is dainty, aristocratic and almost deerlike and very few of the world's cattle have this quality or have calves that are so like fawns.
The Jersey's ancestors were probably of the Celtic type (there is certainly a hint of a likeness with the dainty dairy Kerry of Ireland), coming to Europe from Asia and North Africa.
Some suggest a tropical origin for the breed, probably Indian; some talk about a yellow Caspian type drifting through the Balkans and into Spain, and thence into France and the Channel Islands — bearing in mind that Jersey was directly linked with mainland France by a landbridge or causeway until the year 709.
Whatever the original stock, the breed has developed in isolation during the last two centuries.
No French imports were allowed from 1763 and no imports of any kind, even English, from 1789.
However, from such a small island herd the exports have been phenomenal and it has spread from the tropics to the Arctic.
The worldwide population of pure Jerseys is now huge and, apart from the Friesian group, it probably outnumbers any other single breed, even without taking into account the many breeds enriched with Jersey blood or created from Jersey crosses (see Table 6).
In particular, the   pretty, milky little Jersey seems to be successful in the tropics, especially if boosted with a small proportion of zebu blood; these zebu-Jerseys are described in the sections for the appropriate countries of origin such as India, Jamaica and Brazil.
The tethered island milch cow and the deerlike beauty which decorated many of the great English estates is today a highly successful and adaptable commercial dairy breed.
The colours of the Jersey are far more varied than those of most European breeds and the full range spreads from almost black to the palest greys and biscuits, with all kinds of fawns, browns, chestnuts, golds and smokes in between, sometimes broken with white, sometimes broadly whole-coloured but never solid: there is shading over the body so that the tones are generally darker on face, neck and shoulders (especially in bulls), much darker on the front of the forelegs and much paler on the underparts in the typical manner of wild creatures such as deer.
In 1815 the colours included cream, cream-and-white, red, red-and-white, black, black-and-white, and black with a dingy brownish-red back stripe.
The 1834 breed standards set by the Royal Jersey Agricultural Society and drawn up by distinguished island breeders showed parti-coloured engravings of the breed but made no reference to the colour of the coat as no importance was attached to such a superficial factor; however, the light-coloured muzzle ring was specified, and a deep orange colour within the ears, while the skin was of a ‘good’ colour.
In 1859 the favourite colours were light red-and-white, brown or fawn, but brindles were despised.
By 1875 fashions in England and the USA decreed that coats should be whole-coloured rather than broken and that the skin should be yellow, the muzzle dark and the tongue and tail switch black, but the revised breed standards still did not specify colours.
In the late nineteenth century the Jersey colours included tawny red, yellow, pale fawn, lemon fawn, smoky fawn, grey fawn, silver to frosty grey, brown, dun or black and these could be whole-coloured or broken by separate patches of white, large or small.
Today the colours are more formally described as mostly fawn, mulberry or grey, often with a black-pigmented skin.
The point is that, whereas most British breeds are now basically black or red, with or without white, or roan mixtures of black or red hairs with white hairs, the Jersey has always accepted what might be termed a composite coat, with many more colours, and even then the colour can change according to the season.
This characteristic is shared with several breeds right across Europe from Spain to the Black Sea but especially the brown and grey Alpine and Iberian breeds, whose coats often shade gradually to darker and lighter areas on certain parts of the body.
The same shading, but without such a range of hair colours, is seen in the Podolian greys of Italy and eastern Europe and also in the Indian zebu.
The special characteristics of today's Jersey are its extreme dairy conformation, the wedge shape accentuated by a characteristic sunken area before the hip bones and a natural tendency to show the lie of the ribs.
It is a fine-boned animal, with small hoofs on slender but strong legs, and the very wide pelvis enables easy calving, even to large continental bulls such as the Charolais.
The total milk yield might seem small in comparison with that of a Holstein at an average of more than 4,000kg per lactation, but the solids content is very high, with an average 5.3 per cent butterfat, so that the total yield of solids compares favourably.
(Who needs water?)
The fat globules are large and the cream therefore rises quickly when setting.
It is a most precocious breed, commonly  calving at two years old or earlier, and many individuals seem to be predisposed to fostering alien calves so that they are good multiple sucklers if the milk is not too rich.
They are very friendly and docile with those they know and trust and respond readily to sympathetic handling (which, again, is characteristic of the zebu) but the bulls can be as vicious and spiteful as any Spanish fighting bull.
They have proved themselves to be hardy and disease resistant in a wide range of environments and are efficient food converters but perhaps not as thrifty as less productive breeds.
They are particularly popular as a dairy breed in New Zealand and Denmark and are also widespread in many other countries all over the world.
In Nepal, for example, the descendants of Jerseys imported by nineteenth-century British residents are now used as draught animals in preference to the local hill cattle.
There are breed societies in Jersey (1844; herdbook 1866), Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ecuador, France, Germany, India, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, the UK, the USA and Uruguay.
Scandinavia
FINLAND, ICELAND, NORWAY AND SWEDEN
The majority of the indigenous cattle of Scandinavia are naturally polled: it seems that the northern stockmen, who because of the demands of climate needed to house their animals for long periods, appreciated long ago that horns could be awkward at close quarters and it is clear that polled stock were deliberately bred in Scandinavia from early times.
The colouring of Scandinavian cattle in the past was also characteristic in that many showed variations of the colour-sided cline.
The rest tended to be solid red or dun, except for the black Døle.
In general, animals, herd sizes and farms are small: crop-growing is limited by climate and the short growing season.
Milk is the dominant product from livestock farms, and beef is usually a byproduct of the dairy herd.
Unfortunately for the interesting diversity of the old breeds, the Scandinavian nations have in recent years developed official breeding policies designed to create uniform national breeds by amalgamation, with the result that other breeds have largely been replaced and are now almost extinct, often making way for most untypical horned, pied breeds which have relied to a greater or lesser extent on imported Ayrshires and Friesians.
These national breeding programmes are highly efficient and successful but the diversity has been lost.
A century ago Norway had perhaps 20 cattle breeds but today it effectively has only the Norwegian Red .
In Sweden the native (albeit primitive) Swedish Polled has dropped from a quarter of a million milking cows in the 1950s to perhaps 2,500 today, pushed out by imported Friesians and by the amalgamated Swedish Red-and-White , while the national dairy herd as a whole has dropped from 1.6 million cows in 1950 to about 576,000 in the 1980s, though the average milk yield per cow has doubled.
In Finland, which is probably the world's most northerly agricultural country, there has been a similar fall in dairy-cow numbers to about 607,000 in 1986 and the main milk breed is the Finnish Ayrshire , which now represents about 80 per cent of the national herd, the country's only other breeds being the Friesian (17 per cent) and the amalgamated Finncattle (2 per cent and decreasing).
Only in Iceland are the local Icelandic cattle still maintaining a stronghold of about 33,000 milking cows out of a total of 70,000 cattle in the country as a whole.
FINNISH OR FINNCATTLE (Suomalainen Karja, or SK)
Red, red-and-white, white.
Polled.
Dairy.
[Plate VI]
Polled dairy type created since 1947 by merging three polled breeds, with preference given to light red Western bulls.
The average milk yield is 5,000kg at 4.5 per cent butterfat.
The absorbed varieties, which are now rare, included the red-and-white colour-sided East Finnish (Itä-Suomalainen Karja, or ISK), the red West Finnish (Länsi-Suomalainen Karja, or LSK), which contributed as well to the creation of the Estonian Native in the USSR, and the white colour-pointed North Finnish (Pohjois-Suomalainen Karja, or PSK), which was similar to the Swedish Mountain and is probably now extinct.
FINNISH AYRSHIRE (Suomalainen Ayrshirekarja)
Reddish brown-and-white.
Lyre-horned.
Dairy.
[Plate VII]
Finland's principal breed since 1960, originally derived from 1,600 Ayrshire cattle imported direct from Scotland between 1847 and 1923, since when importations have ceased, though   some semen has been brought in from Britain, the USA and Norway in recent years.
Even in the 1850s the Ayrshire was beginning to dominate the national herd, either as a purebred or crossed with native stock, and Finnish-bred Ayrshires were being exported to Sweden.
The Finnish Ayrshire Society was formed in 1901 to improve the breed systematically and since 1971 breeding has been controlled by FABA.
Milk recording since 1898 has encouraged breeding for performance, initially for milk yield and butterfat but since 1966 for beef potential as well.
The type is basically as described for the Ayrshire of Scotland and average milk yields are about 5,800kg at 4.4 per cent butterfat (the Finnish Friesian averages similar yields but only 4.1 per cent butterfat).
Breeding cattle and frozen semen are now exported to more than 20 countries, ranging from Canada and the USSR to Kenya and Sri Lanka.
ICELANDIC CATTLE
Various colours.
Polled (some horned).
Dairy.
[Plate VI]
The remains of small Celtic-type cattle in Iceland pre-date the Vikings' first visits early in the ninth century and the colonisation of Iceland by Norsemen about AD 930.
However, the majority of those early colonisers were refugees from Dublin via the Shetlands and Orkneys, with only a small proportion coming direct from Norway.
Icelandic cattle today still show some likeness to those of Shetland and have developed under similar environmental conditions; the main differences are that the Shetlands are horned and now invariably black-and-white pied, whereas the great majority of Icelandics are polled and have retained the older colours.
The preference for polling has increased from about 50 per cent 60 years ago to about 95 per cent today, presumably by selection to suit management systems in which the cattle are housed for as much as eight months in the winter.
The most common colour among Icelandic cattle is red (40 per cent); there are also brindles (25 per cent ), dark browns (20 per cent ), black (12 per cent ), grey (3 per cent ) and, rarely, white.
The colours are solid or with various patterns: red-and-white is often seen among the reds.
The average weight of cows is 400–450kg and the average milk yields, with very little feeding of concentrates, are about 4,000kg.
A breed society was formed in 1903.
NORWEGIAN RED (Norsk Rødt Fe, or NRF)
Red.
Horned or polled.
Dairy.
[Plate VII]
This national dairy breed was formed during the 1960s by the amalgamation of several red or red-and-white types after a gradual series of breed absorptions over the last 40 or 50 years.
All the rest of the Norwegian types are now considered extinct as separate breeds or are rare: 98 per cent of the country's cattle are now of the Norwegian Red type, which can be solid red or red with some white.
There is a breed society in the USA as well as in Norway.
The final stages of this long and deliberate government breeding programme occurred when the Red Polled Østland , which was related to the Swedish Red Polled and also had Ayrshire blood, was amalgamated (along with its colour-sided variety, the Jarlsberg of Vestfold) in 1961 with the horned Norwegian Red-and-White (NRF) of the southeast lowlands to form the Norwegian Red.
The NRF had originated from a combination of Swedish Red-and-Whites crossed to Ayrshires (imported since the 1860s), and by 1960 it had absorbed the graded-up Red Trondheim (a horned breed from Ayrshires crossed to local cattle between 1850 and 1891) and the Hedmark , another local type of the Swedish Red-and-White.
During the 1950s the interesting old Døle was graded to the Norwegian Red-and-White and combined into the Norwegian Red in 1963.
In 1968, the national breed absorbed the South and West Norwegian (SVF), a red or dun dairy breed, usually polled but sometimes horned and with a colour range almost as extensive as that of the Jersey, which had been formed in 1947 by  combining the polled red Lyngdal , the Vestland Red Polled and the Vestland fjord , a dun, red or black breed, usually horned, which had originated between 1866 and 1895 from the horned black Hørdaland and the polled grey Møre and Ramsdal .
The Døle , now extinct, was a dairy breed with two colour varieties, the dark-brown Gudbrandsdal and the black Østerdal , and a good proportion of the breed showed a tan-coloured dorsal stripe or a recessive grey-dun colouring.
Its name means ‘valley’ and it was found in the eastern uplands, gaining recognition as a breed in 1880 and opening a herdbook in 1909.
The Målselv of Tromsø is now considered to be a local variety of the Norwegian Red, though it was combined with the Red Trondheim in 1951.
It originated from local cattle in the north crossed with Dutch and Ayrshire imports up to 1900 (the Dutch before 1860) and is a red breed, usually polled.
BLACKSIDED TRONDHEIM AND NORDLAND (Sidet Trønderfe Og Nordlandsfe)
White with black or red sides.
Polled.
Dairy.
Northern Norway.
[Plate VI]
This northern Norwegian breed still exists separately from the Norwegian Red but is rare: there even these are being inseminated by the Red.
It is a polled breed, closely related to the Swedish Mountain and the North Finnish and sharing with them the white colour-pointed coat cline.
It was formed by uniting the colour-sided Blacksided Trondheim with the old Nordland breed in 1943, and the coat is basically white with black (or sometimes red) points and freckling on the sides, often merging to give the colour-sided type of the cline (see Genetics section).
TELEMARK
Red or brindle colour-sided.
Lyre-horned.
Dairy.
Northern Norway.
[Plate VII]
This is the only other Norwegian breed to remain separate from the Norwegian Red but it, too, is now very rare and being inseminated by the Red.
It is a lyre-horned breed which was originally white with red muzzle and ears and a few red freckles on the sides, but the use of Ayrshire bulls during the nineteenth century increased the area of red in the coat and in the 1970s the use of NRF bulls darkened the colour cline to the brindle or red lineback of today.
It is a hardy, thrifty, long-lived mountain breed which was first recognised in 1856; a breed society was formed in 1895 and a herdbook established in 1926.
Its Valdres variety is probably extinct.
SWEDISH RED-AND-WHITE (Svensk Röd Och Vit Boskap, or SRB)
Red-and-white.
Dairy.
[Plate VII]
Sweden's most numerous breed with 230,000 cows in milk (more than half the national dairy herd) and exported to some extent to the Netherlands, Germany, Denmark and the USSR; also semen exported to Finland, Norway, Australia and Britain.
This horned red breed with small white markings was formed in 1928 by the amalgamation of southern red pied Swedish cattle with the Swedish Ayrshire.
The Red Pied Swedish (RSB) had originated in the late nineteenth century from the use of Ayrshire and Shorthorn bulls from Britain on local Herrgård and Småland cows; Ayrshires had been imported from Scotland from 1847 to 1907 and a Swedish Ayrshire cattle association was formed in 1899.
The aim of the amalgamation was a national red breed combining high milk production with good muscular development.
Most of Sweden's beef comes from the dairy herd, so that there is a tendency to breed dual-purpose cows.
The very great majority of Swedish cows are artificially inseminated and average herd sizes are small (about 19, or 26 in recorded herds).
With a fairly short grazing season, especially in the north, recent animal welfare laws stipulate that dairy cows must not be kept indoors throughout the year but at least exercised outside, even if they cannot be grazed.
These new laws are well in advance of those of most other countries.
Thirty-seven per cent of the national dairy herd is of the Swedish Friesian (SLB), which has a long history in the country.
Black-and-white Dutch cattle from eastern and western Friesland and from northern Holland were present in southern Sweden in the eighteenth century but the main imports were of the West Friesland type.
In the 1870s a drive for increased milk production led to an increase in Friesian imports and this typical dairy type settled in the southern lowlands of Sweden.
Imports continued into the 1950s and the black-and-whites began to spread to other parts of the country, continuing to spread and increase during the 1960s when the national herd as a whole was decreasing.
The type changed during the 1940s and 1950s from a typical dairy animal to a shorter-legged, broader dual-purpose cow, but Holstein semen imported from the USA in the 1970s is changing the type once again.
Average yields are about 6,800kg at 4.08 per cent butterfat and the tall type is now preferred.
There are about 156,000 black-and-whites today and a few of the Swedish animals have been exported to Finland, Greece, Spain and Portugal.
Jerseys were first imported in 1893, direct from the Channel Islands, and subsequently from Denmark, with a few from Britain and the USA.
There are now 4,600 Swedish Jersey (SJB) cows, forming only about one per cent of the total dairy herd, and largely in southern and central regions.
Average milk yields are about 4,600kg at 6 per cent butterfat.
Other imported breeds, including Danish Red, Red-and-White Friesian, etc., add up to about 28,000 cows with an average milk yield of 6,440kg at 4.25 per cent butterfat.
Pure beef cattle are rare: there is a handful of Aberdeen Angus, about 2,000 Hereford, 3,000 Charolais, 800 Simmental and a few hundred Limousin, Scottish Highland and Blonde d'Aquitaine.
SWEDISH POLLED (Svensk Kullig Boskap, or SKB)
White with colour points, or red.
Polled.
Northern Sweden.
[Plate VI]
There are two varieties of the Swedish Polled: the colour-pointed mountain type and the red polled of the south.
They are related to corresponding breeds in Norway, Finland and the USSR and have been bred in Sweden for centuries.
In the nineteenth century the breed was rather mixed and mostly horned, with polled types occurring only very locally, and those of the north were mostly described as ‘white pied’ while those of the south were red.
Foreign breeds such as the Ayrshire from Scotland and the Vogtland from Saxony (a variety of the German Red) were imported to increase milk yields but not very successfully.
The state intervened in 1888 to establish the two separate types, which are both now relatively small: the bulls stand at 126–130cm and weigh about 750kg and the cows 118–124cm and 450kg.
In 1979 there were about 3,500 registered SKB cows but today there are about 2,600 controlled cows, only a few hundred of which are really pure (i.e. with less than 6.25 per cent foreign blood); a rescue programme is under way and there is plenty of banked frozen semen.
Average milk yields are about 5,250kg at 4.44 per cent butterfat.
The breed as a whole is described as affectionate, lively, healthy, independent and economical.
The southern Swedish Red Polled variety is similar to Norway's Red Polled Østland and the West Finnish and has suffered badly from competition from the SRB and the SLB.
It was reduced to only two dozen cows during the 1970s but a breed society was formed in 1984 and numbers have increased to about 100, with a large bank of frozen semen; it remains severely endangered.
The northern Swedish Mountain variety is white, with black (or red) ears and muzzle and a few freckles of colour on the neck and sides; it is similar to Norway's Blacksided Trondheim and Nordland and to the North Finnish.
Its herdbook was formed in 1892 and there was a breed society from 1920 to 1938 but it was reconstructed from a few remaining individuals, with the  result that there was considerable inbreeding and a particularly popular bull, widely used for his whiteness, was later found to have spread a serious genetic defect (hypoplasia) correlated to the degree of whiteness.
It has taken a long time to reduce the effects of that defect but it is now under control.
There was plenty of crossing with Jerseys and Friesians in the 1960s and 1970s, so that the pure Swedish Mountain is now rare.
DENMARK
Although geographically a part of continental Europe, Denmark is ethnically Scandinavian and originally its cattle were similar to those of Sweden and Norway.
Today its cattle, found on about half of all Danish farms and reduced in recent years from more than 3 million to 2.5 million, are more typical of the plains of mainland northern Europe: they are large-framed, short-horned pied lowlands and Baltic reds.
In the nineteenth century large numbers of Angeln-type cattle were imported to the islands from Germany and evolved, under the skilled hands of Danish breeders, into the famous Danish Red .
Today this breed is decreasing in numbers along with the Danish Red-and-White , while the Danish Black Pied is gradually increasing and the Danish Jersey is holding its own.
Cattle numbers in general have been declining since 1978 and the introduction of milk quotas has accelerated the rate of decrease
The Danes are traditional dairy cattle breeders, but since the Second World War the dairy herds have followed the British trend towards fewer, larger units and a certain amount of land has become available for beef-rearing on a minor scale.
The first beef breed in Denmark was the Aberdeen Angus, imported in 1950 from Scotland and later from Sweden as well, but veterinary restrictions prevented further imports except in limited numbers in recent years.
Until 1967, all beef breeds in Scandinavia were registered by the Nordic Association of Beefbreeders but since that year Denmark has registered its own beef animals.
The beef industry remains limited to suckler herds on marginal land or the use of commercial beef bulls on dairy cows.
However, extensive and carefully coordinated experiments are being carried out to assess the suitability of more than a dozen beef breeds, including in particular the Hereford and Aberdeen Angus from Britain, the Charolais and Limousin from France and the rare Danish Blue-and-White .
Per capita beef consumption is similar to that of the Netherlands at 16.8kg per annum, but with an annual Danish production of about 243,000 tonnes only Portugal and Greece rank below Denmark in the EEC.
Veterinary standards in Denmark are very high and serious cattle diseases (including brucellosis, tuberculosis and foot-and-mouth) are unknown, so that there is considerable potential for export.
DANISH RED (Rødt Dansk Malkekvæg, or RDM)
Red.
Dual-purpose dairy.
Horned.
Baltic Red type.
[Plate VII]
The Danish Red originated from the North Slesvig Red (an Angeln type with Shorthorn blood) crossed in the nineteenth century with local island cattle including the red Ballum of southwest Jutland.
A century ago it was said that the Danish Red (then one of only two Danish breeds considered worthy of note, the other being the Jutland) needed abundant fodder but with good care it could be an efficient producer: the milking cow put it all into the bag but would fatten readily when dry or barren.
Today the Danish Red is a large breed: the bulls stand at 155cm and weigh an average of 1,050kg, and the cows 137cm and 675kg.
Average milk yields in Denmark are 6,275kg at 4.17 per cent butterfat, with top yielders giving as much as 12,000kg and 4.7 per cent butterfat.
The average age at first calving is 28 months; the average calf weight at birth is 39kg and the growth rate 1,223g/day, giving a weight of 420kg at eleven months old.
The coat is red and the muzzle and hoofs are dark.
The breed is quite   widely exported, especially to the USA, the USSR and New Zealand.
The Baltic Red group, to which the Danish Red belongs, is mainly based on the German Angeln type and includes the Estonian Red, the Latvian Brown, and derivatives such as the Bulgarian Red, Romanian Red and the Red Steppe of the USSR.
The Danish Red has contributed to nearly all the Baltic Red breeds.
The breed was recognised in 1878, and a herdbook established in 1885; there are also breed societies in New Zealand, the USSR and the USA (American Red Dane, 1948–68).
DANISH BLACK PIED (Sortbroget Dansk Malkekvæg, or SDM)
Black-and-white pied.
Dairy.
This Friesian type now forms 60 per cent of the national cow herd: there are more than 370,000 black-and-white cows.
The breed originated from the Jutland Black Pied , which was known a century ago as a hardier but less productive type of the black pied lowland group and had been bred in Denmark for a very long time.
In those days there was considerable emphasis on its carcass quality and 60,000 fat Jutlands were sent to England with another 30,000 lean cattle going for fattening on the German marshes.
The Jutland (also known as the Sortbroget Jydsk Malkekvæg, or SJM) in its old form is virtually extinct, though a herd of about 30 black-and-white and grey-and-white Jutland cattle is being preserved by a family on the island of Fünen.
Until 1949 the Danish black-and-white was known as the Black-and-White Jutland Milk breed but in that year the Jutland was formally joined with local Friesians (mainly Dutch but also some Swedish and East Friesian Danish Black Pied.
More recently the breed has been infused with North American blood as well and is now quite large, the bulls standing on average about 160cm and weighing 1.100kg, the cows 140cm and 700kg.
Average milk yields are about 6,700kg at 4.06 per cent butterfat.
Average age at first calving is 28 months; calf weight at birth 39kg, with growth rates of 1,278g/day to reach 440kg at eleven months old.
Other pied breeds include the rare Danish Blue-and-White (Dansk Blåhvidt Kvæg), which is the same as the Belgian Blue; and also the Danish Red Pied (Dansk Rødbroget Kvæg, or DRK), which is related to Dutch and West German red-and-white breeds, originating in the 1950s from Shorthorns with German Red Pied and Meuse-Rhine-Yssel blood and more recently influenced by red Holstein-Friesian bulls from the USA and Canada.
DRK bulls stand at 152cm and weigh an average of 1,100kg, the cows 135cm and 700kg, with milk yields averaging 5,970kg at 3.9 per cent butterfat.
Age at first calving is 29 months; calf birthweight 39kg, average weight gains 1,317g/day to reach 450kg at eleven months old.
There are about 5,000 Danish Red Pied cows in the country.
DANISH JERSEY (DJ)
The Jersey population is holding steady at about 103,000 cows in spite of the advance of the black-and-whites.
More than 5,000 Jerseys were imported from Jersey and Sweden from 1896 to 1909 but no females have been imported since.
The colours range from light to dark yellow with dark muzzles and hoofs, and a few animals are brindles.
They are typically fine-boned and long-lived, and the cows average 122cm at the withers and 400kg, with milk yields of about 4,700kg at 6.25 per cent butterfat (more than 7 per cent in some cases).
Age at first calving is 26 months on average; calf birthweight 25kg, with weight gains of 906g/day to reach 305kg at eleven months old.
THE NETHERLANDS
The Netherlands is essentially cattle-breeding country: two-thirds of the total agricultural area is excellent grassland and the climate is mild.
Cattle-rearing has been a local occupation for centuries and, traditionally, almost every livestock farmer was a master breeder of considerable skill.
The contribution of their lowland breeds to the cattle of the world is out of all proportion to the size of the country and their success has been phenomenal, with the black-and-white pied dairy breeds in particular spreading in huge numbers all over the world.
Very many of the world's black-and-white cattle today have their roots in the Netherlands, however remotely or indirectly.
In the past there was considerable local intermixing of cattle, partly because of frequent losses from major catastrophes such as flooding and epidemics of disease.
For example, in the eighteenth century pleuro-pneumonia killed about two-thirds of the country's cattle, especially in the low-lying lands in the north, and farmers were forced to restock from less devastated regions such as the offshore Friesian Islands.
The net result was a widening gene pool and an altogether hardier national herd.
Pressure on available land ensured that less productive animals were culled regularly and the combination of these factors, along with what seems to be a natural milkiness among the lowland cattle of northwest Europe, produced dairy stock of the highest quality.
More than half the 12.5 billion kilograms of milk produced annually in the Netherlands today is sold abroad and, of course, Dutch cheeses are renowned as well .
Average milk yields nationally have increased by more than 1,000kg in the last 25 years as the result of a very high usage of artificial insemination and milk recording nationwide, and more recently an increasing interest in embryo transfer as well.
Registration and selection of cattle is on a national basis and there is also a fully automated cattle information system.
Between them the major Dutch breeds (black-and-whites and the red-and-white dual-purpose Meuse-Rhine-Yssel) account for 99 per cent of the dairy cows in the Netherlands today, with the black-and-whites averaging more than 6,800kg at 4.4 per cent butterfat, the MRY 6,000kg at 4.3 per cent and the less common Groningen Whiteheaded about 5,700kg at 4.2 per cent.
There are perhaps 5 million cattle in the country altogether, of which 2 million are dairy cows, 1.3 million of them black-and-white and 700,000 red-and-white (MRY and Red Holstein).
Beef and veal production is about 523,000 tonnes per annum but consumption is low at 16.3kg per capita .
In times gone by Dutch cattle were dual-purpose types, as meat was required from the dairy herd as well as milk, but since the early 1970s there has been an increasing use of American Holstein-Friesians in the Netherlands to increase the milk yields of the Dutch Friesian (which has lower yields than the Holstein type but a higher proportion of solids in the milk).
However, the gain in yields has resulted in a loss of conformation and there is now a hunt for suitable beef sires to boost the dairy herd's waning meat production.
DUTCH BLACK PIED (Zwartbont Fries-Hollands)
Black-and-white pied.
Dual-purpose (milk and meat).
Originator of the Friesian type.
[Plate VIII[
There is considerable confusion about the black-and-white pied lowland cattle which have originated in the Netherlands, not helped by frequent name changes after export to other countries and the very misleading use of the name Holstein: there is no such place in the Netherlands, yet the latter is their country of origin, just as it is of the Friesian .
The Dutch Black Pied, which has many synonyms, is the type from which the Friesian cattle of the world were developed, including the Holstein.
As the influence of the black-and-whites is so massive, it is worth looking in some detail at how they developed and came by their different   names.
The history of the Friesian in the UK is given in the British section and the full story of the Holstein type is given in the American section: suffice it to say here that the Holstein originated from Dutch black-and-whites imported first of all by Dutch settlers in the New World during the second half of the nineteenth century.
A few of the imported cattle were shipped wig-Holstein (on the Jutland peninsula), which has never been a part of the Netherlands, rather than from Friesland or North or South Holland like the majority of the exported black-and-whites, and the Americans named their Dutch cattle ‘Holsteins’ almost by mistake, though for half a century from 1852 95 per cent of the black-and-whites imported into North America came from the Netherlands.
In North America the pied Dutch cows were selected for high yield above all and they became specialist milk producers, with a marked difference in size and conformation.
The main difference now between Holstein and Friesian is that, although both come originally from the same source, the former is a large, single-purpose dairy cow while the latter has always been a dual-purpose type able to produce meat from the dairy herd.
It is perhaps ironic that today the Holstein of North America is rapidly overwhelming the dual-purpose Friesian of Europe, whatever its name.
The Netherlands, Britain and many other countries have switched their preferences to the big Holstein and the rate of the changeover is even more phenomenal than the old Friesian's remarkable spread to dominance in so many countries during the present century.
In the Netherlands the dominant breed today is the Holstein-Friesian, bred to be strong, fertile, productive, adaptable and large: the cows stand 140–150cm at the withers.
The coastal province of Friesland, which is in the Netherlands, was the main cradle for the Dutch black-and-whites, along with the provinces of North Holland and South Holland on the opposite shores of the Zuider Zee.
During the nineteenth century, the cattle of Friesland in particular were being selected locally for black-and-white pied coats at a time when the cattle of   other provinces were of various colours and types.
Importers were beginning to demand more controlled breed purity (especially the Americans) and the Dutch breeders themselves began to move away from crossbreeding, in line with many other European countries, particularly Britain.
This was when most of the older breeds' herdbooks and breed societies were established and in 1874 the Nederlands Rundvee Stamboek (NRS) national herdbook was formed, operating on a provincial basis and registering and describing all breeds and types without differentiating between them.
In 1879, breeders in Friesland set up a separate herdbook, the Friesch Rundvee Stamboek (FRS).
In 1907 the NRS itself divided into three separate registers: one for the black-and-white Fries-Hollands, one for the red-and-white Meuse-Rhine-Yssel and one for the black Groningen Whiteheaded or Blaarkop.
In the nineteenth century the Friesian types (call them what you will) were also exported to Japan, Africa, the Argentine, Russia and virtually every country in Europe.
Table 7 gives some idea of the many Friesian derivatives which have since been developed all over the world.
MEUSE-RHINE-YSSEL (MRY)
Red-and-white pied.
Dual-purpose.
Eastern and southeast Netherlands.
[Plate VIII]
The MRY has always been meatier than the black-and-whites, yet the cows are also good milk producers with average yields of more than 6,000kg at 4.25 per cent butterfat.
It is a more muscular breed and, though the emphasis has always been slightly in favour of milk rather than meat, the breed is continually tested for growth and food conversion rates, especially as veal production is important.
It is the second dairy breed of the country, strong in its constitution and sound in the feet, calving easily and with a gestation period about eight days shorter than that of the Friesian.
The calves are reared for beef, veal or replacements for either dairy or suckler herds, and the best of them can gain about 1,154g/day.
Mature bulls stand 142–147cm at the withers and weigh 1,000–1,320kg, and cows are 130–137cm and 635–735kg.
The coat is red-and-white pied and the Brandrood variety is a darker red.
The milk is notable for a high protein content (3.49 per cent) and this is a factor which is increasingly important in milk production the world over.
The breed is particularly useful for increasing milk production in beef breeds or improving beef production in dairy herds, and is well suited to single or multiple suckling.
It originated in the east and southeast parts of the Netherlands along the three rivers: the Meuse, the Rhine and the Ijssel, whence it spread to sandier areas and to Westphalia, Rhineland, Belgium, Luxembourg, etc., and to Denmark and Brittany in the 1960s.
Today there is interest in the breed in countries such as Yugoslavia, Hungary, Poland, England, Ireland and Spain as well.
The old breeds which were absorbed by the MRY included the red pied Hollander of North Holland which a century ago made up 7 per cent of the country's herd; the red-and-white Zeeland at 4 per cent(a Zeeland type is shown in Paul Potter's painting,The Young Bull ); the Drentish from Over-yssel (1.5 per cent ), which was very similar to the Ayrshire of Scotland; and the red-pied dairy Furnes-Ambacht of Flanders.
Derivatives of the breed include the Belgian Red Pied, Polish Red-and-White Lowland and Danish Red Pied.
There are breed societies in the Netherlands (herdbook 1906), Canada, the UK and the USA.
GRONINGEN WHITEHEADED (Groninger Blaarkop)
Black with white head and belly.
Milk and meat.
Northern Netherlands.
[Plate VIII]
The province of Groningen lies to the east of Friesland and north of Drenthe, on the German border (Lower Saxony).
There are about 16,000 recorded cows and their average milk yield is more than 5,600kg at 4.12 per cent butterfat.
Their numbers have dropped noticeably in the  last five years and very dramatically since the 1880s, when 70 per cent of all cattle in the Netherlands were Groningens while Friesians represented only 18 per cent and were mainly restricted to Friesland and Drenthe.
The immediately recognisable colouring is black with a white head and belly, though 5 per cent are red rather than black.
One reason for the Groningen's demise was the government's policy of concentrating on the major pied breeds and closing the herdbooks of minors such as the Groningen, Lakenvelder and Witrik so that they were unable to give evidence of registered purebred bulls when new bull licensing laws came into force 20 years later — a move which has had devastating effects on minor breeds in other countries where similar laws were introduced.
The rare Witrik is also called the Witrug (white back), Ruggelde (rigget) or Aalstreep (eelstripe), the latter in reference to its colour-sided red or white coat.
The name Lakenvelder means ‘sheeted field’ and refers to the breed's broad white belt on a black or red coat; it, too, is now very rare.
It is the originator of the Dutch Belted in the USA (which is possibly more typical of the original breed) and perhaps of the old sheeted cattle of the Broadlands estate in England, now extinct.
It was assumed by the NRS that the belted and white-faced patterns were merely varieties of the black pied and red pied breeds, with their unusual patterns fixed by selection.
Lord David Stuart, breeder of Belted Galloway cattle at Mochrum in Wigtownshire, Scotland, wrote an invaluable book in 1969 which investigated in great detail the possible origins of the Lakenvelder and the genetics of breeding for belted and white-faced patterns from pied cattle.
He noted that the Lakenvelder has a black tongue, whereas black-and-whites have pink tongues (the same is true of other belted European cattle and also some colour-pointed animals and, oddly, Jerseys), and he quotes the eminent Dutch geneticist, Dr A.L.
Hagedoorn, who states that the Lakenvelders are descended from the original smallish, horned Dutch milk cattle.
Genetically, in the Lakenvelder black is dominant to red, entire colour is dominant to pied and belting is dominant to entire colour.
BELGIUM
The cattle of Belgium owe much to Dutch and British breeds, particularly the Friesian types and the Shorthorn, which were used to improve local stock and create the national Belgian breeds, the most famous of which today must be the double-muscled Belgian Blue .
Double-muscling is the gross enlargement of individual muscle fibres, particularly in the thighs, accompanied by an absence of fat under the skin which therefore fits the muscle like a glove.
It used to be considered a deformity in other breeds and led to automatic culling, but in several continental breeds it is now selected for, although it can lead to problems in calving and perhaps fertility.
Belgium is the third highest consumer of beef in the EEC (nearly 24kg per capita ) but well down the production list at 336,000 tonnes per annum.
Most of the native cattle of Belgium were pied lowland dairy types, though the Flemish breeds also included solid red dual-purpose cattle.
During the First World War, of course, Flanders was transformed into one huge battlefield and the effect on the cattle population was devastating.
There is naturally a close connection today between the Belgian and French Flamande or Flemish breeds, though those of France are dairy types.
The only recognised Belgian breeds today are the Black Pied, the Blue, the Red, the  Red Pied and the White-and-Red.
BELGIUM BLACK PIED (Zwartbont ras van België, Pie-noire de Belgique)
Black-and-white pied.
Dairy.
The Belgian Black Pied was formed in 1966 by the amalgamation of two black-and-white breeds, the Hervé and the Polders .
Both of them had been influenced by Dutch stock: the Hervé of central Liège originated from Dutch Friesians crossed to local red-pied cattle in the mid-nineteenth century, while the Polders of western Antwerp and northern Flanders was in effect the Dutch Black Pied in Belgium.
The Belgian Black Pied is now found throughout Belgium.
BELGIUM BLUE (Witblauw, Blanc-Bleu)
White, white-and-blue pied, blue roan.
Beef.
[Plate X]
For a half a century from the 1840s, Shorthorn bulls from Britain and Dutch Black Pied bulls were used to improve local red and red-pied cattle in central and southern Belgium; they were also used on the black-and-white Charleroi (which also had some Charolais influence later).
In 1919 a herdbook was established for this breed of Central and Upper Belgium and its name was changed to Blanc-Bleu or Witblauw in 1971.
Its major development as a dual-purpose breed took place between 1920 and 1950, but during the 1960s it was developed instead as an extreme beef type, benefiting from a degree of marbling in the meat bequeathed by its Beef Shorthorn ancestry.
It is the originator of the Danish Blue-and-White and is similar to France's Bleu du Nord.
The coat colour can be all white, blue, blue roan or pied and it owes this variety to the Shorthorn; the ‘blue’ is the equivalent of the Shorthorn's roan.
It is sometimes still bred as a dual-purpose animal, giving milk as well as meat, and in that capacity is often used as a suckler, but it is now essentially a beef breed.
A big animal, it is early maturing, rapid in growth and good for intensive rearing without putting on fat, but its major characteristic is its extreme double-muscling, which is an advantage in the eyes of the butcher (the meat is very lean) but a considerable disadvantage for purebred cows, who in almost all cases must be calved by caesarian section: the muscling interferes with natural calving.
The muscling of the shoulders and especially the thighs is almost obscene but the  small-boned carcass and large body produce an abundance of lean meat.
Average weights are 1,200kg for bulls and 700kg for cows, and their heights are, respectively, 150cm and 134cm at the withers.
Average weight increases are 1,420g/day.
The average age at first calving is 32 months and the average birthweight of the calves is 44–48kg.
Milk yields in Belgium average 3,400kg at 3.36 per cent butterfat but are decreasing.
BELGIAN RED (Rood ras van België, Rouge de Belgique)
Red.
Dual-purpose (milk and meat).
West Flanders.
[Plate X]
In 1772 Butaye wrote that the border region of southern West Flanders formed, with a region of North Flanders in France, between Lys and Yser, the breeding centre of a most homogeneous red race which comprised 95 per cent of the region's cattle.
In other parts of western Europe at the time, such homogeneity was not typical.
The cattle of the region north of Roulers (Roeselare) and in the Polders were almost all black or black-and-white pied and this limited area of reds was therefore all the more notable.
At the time, the south west of the province was the only breeding zone for the red Cassel .
In the nineteenth century (mainly during the latter half) some Durham Shorthorns were imported to make the local type heavier in build and some Cassel bulls were also imported from France.
In 1906 a herdbook for the ‘race rouge flamande’ was opened, with members all over West Flanders, and it included red animals found to the north of the main breeding zone as well: only external appearances were taken into account until 1920, when a breed society was formed.
In France the breed is still known as the race rouge de flandre occidentale (West Flemish Red) but France has its own Flemish Red (similar to the Belgian Red) and also a mahogany dairy breed known simply as the Flemish or Flamande .
The Flamande, with its own herdbook since 1886, has been the subject of a conservation programme in France since 1977.
A century ago it was considered to be as good as the Normande, and better as a butcher's beast, but a combination of war and frontier changes led to its deterioration; it was crossed with Danish Red as well as Belgian Red to form the Flemish Red, which is usually whole red, though some have mottled or blazed faces.
The dairy type is from Flemish cows to Flemish and Danish Red bulls, while the beefier dual-purpose type is from Flemish cows to Belgian Red bulls.
There used to be two varieties known as the Maroilles and Picardy in France.
Many breeds and factors influenced the cattle of West Flanders.
Before the First World War there were two major types: the reds of West Flanders including the pure Cassel (without Durham blood); and the ancient Furnes-Ambacht of the Polders, heavily crossed with Durham and Dutch and either black-and-white pied or red.
After the First World War, the Cassel had almost completely vanished and its remnants were absorbed into the Furnes-Ambacht.
There was then a single race, the Rouge Flamande, but plenty of argument about whether it should be uniform red or pied.
Eventually the breeders settled for solid red, though small touches of white were acceptable, and a dual-purpose type with the emphasis on milk.
The Cassel influence soon disappeared and by 1927 the type was large, long and heavy but with a certain finesse and nobility.
Today the Belgian Red is still a dual-purpose red breed, with an average milk yield of less than 5,000kg at about 3.95 per cent butterfat.
Bulls stand at about 153cm and weigh an average of 1,200kg, cows 138cm and 700kg.
Numbers have been gradually declining since the 1970s.
BELGIAN WHITE-AND-RED (Witrood ras van België, Blanc-rouge de Belgique)
White with some red.
Dual-purpose.
East Flanders.
[Plate X]
This colour type has been known in the lowland regions bordering the North Sea, especially in south Dendre valley, since before 1600.
It is predominantly white, with some red markings about the neck and cheeks in particular, and is a dual-purpose type.
The main emphasis is now  on milk, but it retains a fast rate of growth and the calves weigh 46–50kg at birth.
Bulls stand about 157cm and weigh on average 1,200kg; cows are 136–140cm and 750–850kg.
Average milk yields are about 4,900kg at 3.9 per cent butterfat and the national population is about 115,000 dairy cows.
Unusually for the time, in the eighteenth century there were numerous lists describing the cows of Flanders and Liège with details of more than 71,000 individual animals, including their coat colour and details of the patterns.
In 1770 there were frequent references to the white-and-red type in the Dendre valley, whereas in the south of East Flanders the population was uniformly red.
The white-and-red type remained unchanged for the next two centuries and it has elements of common origin with the Ayrshire of Scotland (which is basically white with brown markings, especially on the neck and face).
Both the white-and-reds and the Ayrshire, it has been suggested, were linked in the late 1700s with Dutch cattle.
During the nineteenth century many foreign cattle were brought into Belgium to improve local types and the population became thoroughly mixed, to the extent that any homogeneity of coat colour became very rare, but the white-and-red type persisted and there are now about 115,000 cows of the type in Belgium.
Its name until 1971 was the East Flemish Red Pied.
BELGIAN RED PIED (Rootbont ras van België, Pie-rouge de Belgique)
Red-and-white pied.
Milk and meat.
Northeast Belgium.
The Belgian Red Pied is also a dual-purpose type but has a great deal more red in the coat than the White-and-Red.
It originated between 1838 and 1888 from the Meuse-Rhine-Yssel crossed with local cattle, with some Shorthorn blood in the 1840s.
Until 1971 it was called the Campine Red Pied .
It has absorbed the Eastern Red Pied of eastern Liège, which was in effect the MRY in Eupen and Malmédy.
France
The increasingly influential breeds of France fall broadly into four categories: the pied, yellow and red dairy breeds of the north, the dual-purpose Alpine breeds, the yellow, chestnut and grey Pyrenean breeds and the solid-colour old draught breeds of central France whose colours range from cream, grey and fawn to yellow-red and mahogany.
Several of the old dairy breeds and some of the Pyreneans are now classified as rare, along with one or two of the old draught breeds which are being heavily crossed with Charolais and Limousin.
As early as 1968 steps were being taken by the Ministry of Agriculture to conserve two of them (the Bazadais and the Aubrac), while a national commission was set up in 1976 to consider the need for wider conservation measures.
Since then programmes have been launched to help secure the future of other endangered breeds in co-ordinated schemes involving several national and regional organisations, with the backing of public funds.
In the meantime, however, many old breeds have already become extinct, largely because they have been absorbed by other breeds.
During the nineteenth century the majority of the cattle of northern France were dairy breeds, whereas in central and southern areas they were draught animals used for work on smallholdings.
Beef was usually imported, mainly from Italy, Sardinia and Africa.
Today the big draught breeds, especially in the Massif Central, have found new roles in the beef industry and over the last few years they have been exported in increasing numbers to boost beef production in several parts of the world, sometimes displacing some of the famous traditional British beef breeds.
Being used for draught work until quite recently, the French animals retained their size at a time when British cattle were deliberately bred smaller and more short-legged, and these bigger, muscular, fast-growing and later maturing French types now meet today's demands for lean ‘supermarket’ meat cuts.
However, the British breeds are considered better for meat quality and taste and also for thrift and adaptability; they remain in demand as sucklers, whereas the French and other large continental breeds are perhaps better suited as beef sires for commercial crossbreeding in dairy herds.
France is the EEC's leading producer of beef and veal (2 million tonnes per annum) and also its leading consumer at 31.7kg per capita .
DAIRY BREEDS OF NORTHWEST FRANCE
Some of the French dairy breeds, particularly in Brittany, have very old origins and they have links with the Channel Islands breeds which, some believe, are linked with the typical brachyceros types of the eastern Mediterranean and North Africa.
There is also Scandinavian blood, introduced by Norse settlers, and the typical mottled faces of Scandinavian cattle can still be seen in Normandy.
It is possible that the cattle of Brittany also have Viking and Cornish blood.
BRETON BLACK PIED (Breton Pie-noir)
Black-and-white pied.
Dairy.
Southern Brittany.
[Plate IX]
This rustic breed of ancient origin is quite small: bulls stand about 120cm and weigh an average 750kg, and cows 115cm and 450kg.
Originally an all-purpose type, it was later developed for milk and yields now average about 3,500kg at a little over 4 per cent butterfat.
It is very hardy and able to make good use of poor forage so that it is an economical breed to keep.
Its breed society and herdbook were formed in 1919.
In 1957 there were still some 300,000 Bretons but the breed was heavily crossed with the similarly coloured but unrelated Friesian, in much the same way as the red-and-white Bretons had been crossed with Shorthorns and eventually replaced by the Meuse-Rhine-Yssel.
In 1975 there were about 15,000 Breton cows and by 1980, in spite of an intense conservation programme, it was considered to be an endangered breed numbering perhaps 2,500 cows.
Today it remains rare and is confined to a limited area.
Yet in the nineteenth century the ‘Breton pie-noir’ was so numerous that it was found far from its native area — for example in southwest France to make amends for the inadequacies of the local Gascon as a milker.
However, even a century ago the Breton type was being crossed with the Friesian, though the pure Breton was regarded as the ‘Ayrshire of France in its role as a good yielder on poor grazing.
At the time it was, in fact, France's most numerous breed, though often poorly cared for and lean.
(Too often a breed which can claim to be productive even on poor quality fodder is given just that and expected to thrive.)
For a while Ayrshire and Durham Shorthorn bulls were used on the Breton cows but the results were not worth while.
There was also a Bordelais in the Bordeaux coastal region of southwest France.
It had Breton blood but, like the Breton, was heavily crossed with the Friesian and became extinct by the 1960s.
Together with the Normande, the cattle of Brittany helped to create breeds as geographically distant as the Canadian and the colour-pointed Mauritius White , both of which are descended from stock of the old types: the Canadian was developed from cattle which accompanied French settlers in the seventeenth century and the Mauritius White in the eighteenth century.
FROMENT DU LÉON
Corn-coloured.
Dairy.
Côtes-du-Nord.
Probably extinct.
[Plate IX]
This is another ancient Breton breed, famous for its butter-rich milk.
Its coat is whole wheat (light or dark), sometimes with white patches, and many animals of the breed were crossed with the closely related Guernsey (see Channel Islands section).
Today it is probably extinct, although there might still be a few around St Brieuc.
Its horns are lyre-shaped and it is considered by some to be the ancestor of the Guernsey.
The Léon type was first formally distinguished from other Breton cattle in 1859 and it resisted the ubiquitous crossing to the Durham Shorthorn.
By 1907 it had its own herdbook and numbered about 35,000.
Yet by 1962 the population was no more than 5,000 and by 1976 only a few dozen.
In spite of determined efforts to rescue the breed, there were only perhaps 150 cows in 1983 but no pure bulls at all, so that the cows were put to Guernsey bulls.
The breed probably paid the penalty of being too lightweight and failing to fatten well enough to meet farmers’ demands for beef from their dairy herds.
NORMANDE
Reddish brown and white, or brindled, with red eye-rings.
Dual-purpose (milk and meat).
Normandy.
[Plate IX]
In contrast with the old Brittany breeds, the Normande or Norman is still flourishing today and even has breed societies in North and South America.
It is one of France's largest breeds, large in the chest and pelvis and with a well-developed udder, yielding perhaps 4,500kg at about 4 per cent butterfat and capable of growing into a well-fleshed animal for beef.
The coat used to be described as tricoloured (flaxen, white and brindle) and is black and dark reddish brown, brindled and spotted on white, with a white brockle face which has coloured ‘spectacles’ around the eyes.
The face is dished, like that of the Jersey, and it probably has some Jersey blood from the nineteenth century, while the brindling probably comes from the old Normandy Isigny variety, a good butter producer and big enough to be used as a draught ox on Alderney and Guernsey, whither it was taken by monks in the time of William the Conqueror.
The Normande is basically an indigenous coastal type, possibly with Viking origins, which was crossed with Durham Shorthorn and Channel Island cattle from about 1845 to 1860.
In its time it has been claimed as one of the best dual-purpose breeds in the world; no doubt the Shorthorn contributed to its early maturity and improved the carcass quality of what was once a rather coarse-boned large beef bullock, while the Jersey presumably contributed to its relatively high butterfat (a Normande cow, many years ago, held the world butterfat record).
It is Normande milk that makes Camembert cheese.
In France, a breed society was established in 1883 (reorganised 1926); there are also breed societies in Colombia, Uruguay and the USA.
PIED DUAL-PURPOSE BREEDS
Lowland
The French pied lowland cattle, like those of the Netherlands and other parts of northern Europe have on the whole been more successful than the Bretons and are mainly dual-purpose breeds of composite origins.
Apart from the Bleu du Nord (which is the French dual-purpose version of the beefy Belgian Blue) they are all red-and-white, or roan, or red, and owe much to the Shorthorn of Britain.
ARMORICAN
Red, red-and-white or roan.
Dual-purpose (milk and meat).
Northern Brittany.
[Plate X]
Like its black pied Breton cousin, the Armorican is now a rare breed, largely because of grading up to Meuse-Rhine-Yssel: there were only 50 purebred animals in 1983.
The most common colour is solid dark red and the breed originated from local red-and-white Breton cattle (such as the Breton Red Pied and possibly the Froment du Léon) crossed with Durham Shorthorns from 1840.
It was combined with the similar but larger Maine-Anjou in the 1960s to form the Rouge de l'Ouest , and then virtually lost its separate identity in 1970 when it was crossed with the MRY and the German Red Pied (itself a composite) to become part of the combined group known as the Pie Rouge des Plaines in northern Brittany, in which the MRY is dominant.
It is thus part of the red-pied lowland group of northwest European cattle which also includes the Belgian Red Pied (or Campine) and the Polish Red-and-White Lowland.
MAINE-ANJOU
Red, red-and-white or roan.
Dual-purpose (meat and milk).
Northwest France.
[Plate X]
This medium-sized breed is a larger version of the Armorican with a similar Shorthorn colour range, though it is usually dark red with small patches of white.
It originated from the crossing of Shorthorns with the local Mancelle from 1830 and it used to be known as the Durham-Mancelle.
The Mancelle was already rare a century ago and soon became extinct; it had been a white-faced breed similar to the Normande but quicker to fatten.
In 1960 the Maine-Anjou was federated with the Armorican to form the Rouge de l'Ouest.
It is a successful breed and has been exported to North America, Australasia and European countries.
The emphasis is on beef but its milk yield remains adequate and it can still be considered a dual-purpose type.
Bulls stand about 152cm at the withers and weigh an average 1,250kg, and cows 142cm and 900kg.
There are breed societies in France (1925) and also in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the UK and the USA.
Upland
The French red-pied upland breeds have been even more successful than those of the lowlands, perhaps because of their Simmental blood.
ABONDANCE
Dark red with white extremities.
Dual-purpose (milk and meat).
Haute Savoie.
[Plate XI]
Named for La Chapelle d'Abondance, this mountain breed was originally a triple-purpose type used for draught work as well as milk and meat.
Its coat pattern is not unlike that of the Hereford: it is basically dark red with white on the legs, tail and underside and a white face with red eye-patches.
It is not very large: bulls stand about 140cm and weigh 900–1,100kg, and cows 130cm and 540–620kg.
Milk yields average 4,000–5,000kg at 3.7 per cent butterfat.
It is similar in type to the Czech Pied and to the Aosta Red Pied of Italy, and is related to the Montbéliard.
Its breed society and herdbook were established in 1894.
MONTBÉLIARD
Bright red and white.
Dual-purpose (milk and meat).
Haute Sâone-Doubs.
[Plate XI]
Also known as the Alsatian, this is a progressive breed which has expanded into Switzerland.
It is the best milker in the French upland red-pied group, with yields averaging 5,500kg at 3.7 per cent butterfat.
It is similar in type to the Simmental, though more elegantly built and the coat colour bright red rather than yellowish tan, and it shares the same origins in the old Bernese brought in by Mennonites during the eighteenth century (see Alpine section).
The breed was recognised under the Montbéliard name in 1870 and the herdbook and breed society were established in 1889.
At the turn of the century it absorbed the coarse, dark red-and-white Comtois or Tourache (the name means ‘bullish’).
In neighbouring Alsace there is the Vosges , a black-and-white colour-sided mountain breed which, like most of this upland group, was originally triple-purpose and is now a milk-and-meat type.
It has the typical mottled white face of the colour-sided cline and is a thoroughly practical type, healthy, fertile, ‘rustic’ and very good at utilising the type of forage found in the Massif Vosges.
It was not officially recognised after 1955, but by 1983 there were 3,000 of the breed, including 400 milk-recorded cows, and a successful conservation programme was under way.
It is a Germanic breed, known for the production of Munster cheese, though its milk yields are rather low, averaging only 2,500kg at 3.7 per cent butterfat, and it is related to the Black Forest cattle of Germany.
It is quite small, perhaps 125–128cm at the withers and weighing 500–700kg on average.
PIE ROUGE DE L'EST (French Simmental)
Red-and-white pied.
Dual-purpose (milk and meat).
Jura, Bourgogne and Alsace.
[Plate X]
This is not the same as the Pie Rouge de l'Est of Belgium (which is the Campine Red Pied).
It is in fact the French Simmental but larger than the Swiss Simmental, averaging perhaps 149cm in the bull (140cm in the cow) and weighing
1,130kg (750kg).
The emphasis is more on milk than meat and yields average 4,400kg at 3.7 per cent butterfat.
It originated early in this century by crossing Simmentals with the fawn or red dairy-type Fémeline of the Sâone valley (its name reflects its more refined, ‘feminine’ appearance in contrast to the bullish Tourache) and also with the yellow Bressane of Ain.
The herdbook of the Pie Rouge de l'Est was established in 1930 and in 1945 it absorbed the Alsatian Simmental and the Gex (another Swiss Simmental derivative, in northeast Ain).
FERRANDAIS
Brick-red-and-white.
Dual purpose (milk and meat).
Puy-de-Dôme.
This is a rare breed in the Massif Central, numbering only 400 by 1978 when a conservation programme was set up under the auspices of the Parc Naturel Régional des Volcans d'Auvergne.
It is a hardy colour-sided breed, brick-red on white, and remains dual-purpose but with the emphasis on milk.
It has gradually been lost by crossing with the Pie Rouge de l'Est and the neighbouring Salers.
MOUNTAIN BREEDS
Apart from the Simmental-type pied upland cattle, there are two French Alpine breeds and several more French mountain types in and near the Pyrenees.
FRENCH ALPS
The French Brown originates from the Swiss Brown, imported since 1827 and with its own breed society and herdbook in France since 1911; its appearance and qualities are described in the Alpine section, which also includes details of the Simmental group.
TARENTAISE
Fawn.
Milk/meat.
French Alps.
[Plate XII]
This is the second of the French Alpine breeds and is a hardy dairy and beef breed in southeast France and the Italian Piedmont.
Its coat is light brown-red, fawn or yellowish, with no white and, like other upland breeds, it was originally used also as a draught animal.
There are two types: a smaller one in the mountains and a larger in the valleys (the bulls stand at 141cm and weigh 800–1,200kg, the cows 130cm and 540–600kg).
It was low in numbers a century ago, when the Piedmonts of Italy were being imported for beef and good red milking cows came from Bergamo, but by 1979 it numbered 150,000 and is now a well-established milk and meat breed in France, though almost extinct in Italy, where it is known as the Tarina.
The Tarentaise has also been exported and has breed societies in Canada and the USA as well as its own herdbook established in France in 1880.
French Pyrenees
Most of the Pyrenean breeds, originally bred for work and naturally found also on the southern slopes with spanish breeds, are now rare.
Three of them have been grouped together under the protection of a united association of breeders: the blond Bénais , the chestnut Aure et  Saint-Girons in Auroise and the white Lourdais milking breed.
The combined numbers of these three are perhaps 100 or 200 at the most, although an urgent conservation programme has been under way since 1980.
The last two breeds are both of the Haute Pyrénées; there were only 50 Aure cows and 12 Lourdais cows in 1979.
The Béarnais of Pyrénées-Atlantique is the only purebred remnant of the original yellow-brown, pink-muzzled Pyrenean Blond , a breed which was otherwise absorbed by the Blonde d'Aquitaine; indeed the Béarnais itself is registered in the latter's herdbook.
GASCON
Grey.
Beef/work.
Gascony, southwest France.
[Plate XII]
The Gascon, a wheaten or grey meat-and-draught breed, has two types.
The smaller, darker mountain type with black points and mucosae is very like the Piedmont of northwest Italy and is ideal for extensive systems, but it has been declining in numbers over the last 50 years and by 1980 was down to about 35,000.
The larger ‘aréolé’ or Mirandais variety, which has pink mucosae, is nearly extinct and has fallen sharply from about 1,000 in 1979, mainly through crossing with the Piedmont, the old Garonnais and the black-mucosae variety.
The long-horned Gascon's calves are red, a trait it shares with the Podolian types in Italy.
BAZADAIS
Grey.
Beef/draught.
Gironde-Landes.
The Gascon was clumsy as a working ox but very strong for heavy land, whereas the Bazadais, a grey or greyish-brown breed with pink mucosae like the aréolé, was more active and suited for roadwork.
It is a meaty breed, similar to the Limousin, and was one of the first of the declining breeds to be conserved by the government 20 years ago.
By 1980 it had increased slightly to about 7,000, the victim of its reputation for boucherie calves.
FERAL CATTLE
At the other extreme, on the eastern Pyrenees, is the rare, semi-wild Alberes or Massanaise, which has more in common with the primitive Iberian cattle of Corsica, Sardinia and the Camargue.
CAMARGUE
Black, brown.
Bull fights; semi-wild.
Rare.
[Plate XI]
The Camargue of the Rhône delta is quite unlike other French cattle: it is black or brown and is bred in feral herds known as manades .
Its numbers had increased by 1979 to 3,000 from only 800 a century ago, when it had been expected to disappear: its only use was for bloodless bull-fighting in which ribbons are snatched from the bull's horns.
It is lightly built and agile, with light hindquarters, heavier shoulders and long horns curving up — in fact it is very similar to the fighting bulls of Spain and Portugal, and just as alert and aggressive, but much lighter in build, with the bulls weighing only 400–475kg and the cows 325–350kg, and standing about 130cm at the withers.
They are in the same ‘Celtic’ group as other lively, dark remnant breeds in Ireland (Kerry), Switzerland (Hérens), the Austrian Tyrol (Tux, Zillertal) and Sicily.
They are related to the larger group of long-horned cattle in Andalusia and perhaps also the longhorns of Britain and the ancient Hamitic long-horned cattle which migrated into Africa.
CENTRAL AND SOUTHERN FRANCE
The solid-coloured, hardy breeds of central and southern France include some traditional dairy breeds now developed as suckler cows for commercial crosses, and the massive traditional draught breeds which are now so important as sires for those beef crosses, a role in which their influence has become widespread in Europe and elsewhere in recent years.
BLONDE D'AQUITAINE
Yellow or yellow-brown.
Beef.
Southwest France.
[Plate XII]
This corn-coloured type has been formed in the last 20 or 30 years by absorbing several of the Pyrenean breeds and it was recognised as a breed in its own right in 1962.
It is still not uniform in type but has a tendency towards beefiness and size, with bulls averaging 145cm and 1,200kg, and cows 140cm and 800kg.
However, it has been subjected to a most rigorous French testing and evaluation scheme since its formation in the 1960s and the emphasis is on fast growth rates, lean meat, a high proportion of meat to bone and ease of calving.
It is not a colour-marking breed, but has been exported to several countries in Europe, North America and Australasia.
There is a slight question-mark about low fertility in the breed.
It was created in 1961 by an amalgamation of the Garonnais of Lot-et-Garonne and the Quercy of Tarn-et-Garonne, two similar meat-and-draught breeds with down-turned horns.
They were known as the Garonnais de plaine and the Garonnais de côteau, respectively, until 1922 when the Quercy, which had Limousin blood at the turn of the century, became separate.
There is documentary evidence that considerable numbers of Garonnais cattle went to England during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries and it is possible that they influenced the big, yellow-red South Devon .
The Garonnais is the dominant type in the Blonde d'Aquitaine herdbook, which also includes some Villard de Lans cows, a pale corn-coloured milk-and-meat breed from the Vercors plateau of Isère.
This had dropped to fewer than 200 animals in 1979 in spite of a conservation programme since 1976, largely because of its relative similarity to the Blonde which led to a high degree of crossing.
However, without the programme it would have been extinct by 1977; it still exists today as a special branch of the Blonde d'Aquitaine, low in numbers but acting as a precious reservoir of interesting dairy-type genes.
Incidentally, the cattle of Landes used to be treated with great care as draught oxen (they were never overworked and were given special headgear to ward off flies) but were also used in amateur ‘bull races’ in which bad-tempered oxen and cows were teased into charging at people.
The Villard de Lans absorbed the white Mézenc of Cévennes, which by 1960 could boast no bulls at all.
The Blonde d'Aquitaine also absorbed the French Pyrenean Blond of the Hautes- and Basses-Pyrénées, a similarly coloured breed with pink mucosae.
This was effectively the same as the Spanish Pyrenean of northern Navarre and had already been crossed to a large extent with Limousin and Garonnais before it finally disappeared into the Blonde during the 1960s, leaving only the rare Béarnais as a purebred remnant.
A herdbook was established in France in 1961; breed societies also exist in Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Ireland, New Zealand, the UK and the USA.
AUBRAC
Fawn to brown.
Beef.
Middle-horned.
Aveyron-Lozère.
[Plate XII]
Originally a triple-purpose breed developed in the seventeenth century at a Benedictine abbey, the sturdy Aubrac (or Laguiole) is now primarily a beef type, though of no great size, the bulls averaging 130cm tall and 825kg, and the cows 125cm and 600kg.
Average milk yields are now   about 2,200kg at 4.1 per cent butterfat, and the main use of the Aubrac today is in extensive suckler herds in which the cows are put to Charolais bulls.
During the nineteenth century attempts were made to improve the monks' breed by using various imported bulls, including Durham Shorthorns, Scottish Highlands, red North Devons and, in particular, Swiss Browns, at a time when the Aubrac's main roles were in milk production and draught work.
The crossings did indeed help towards quicker maturity and a breed society was formed in 1914.
The breed was one of the first to be the subject of a government conservation programme and a five-year scheme was set up in 1976; by 1979 there were 80,000 animals.
However, in that year, the scheme came close to disaster when nearly 20 per cent of the breed was found to be infected with brucellosis (in comparison with a national rate of less than 5 per cent).
SALERS
Mahogany.
Dual-purpose (milk and meat).
Middle-horned.
Cantal, Auvergne.
[Plate XII]
This is a very hardy mountain breed which thrives in rough climates and on poor soils; its native region is at 750–2,150m above sea level, exposed to the western winds.
Its curly conker-red coat is thick enough to protect it against the cold and wet but becomes smooth and sleek in warmer weather.
There is a recessive black gene in the breed as well.
The dark pigmentation of the skin gives further protection in hot climates, reducing the risk of problems with eyes and udder, and there is a theory that it might have a touch of Bos indicus blood in it.
Like the Aubrac and the Gascon, its horns are quite long (indeed, a feature of the breed) and grow outwards and rather pertly upwards, then curving backwards and outwards.
The black hooves are hard and the legs sound, as is to be expected in upland cattle.
The Salers is quite large for a mountain breed: mature bulls stand at 152cm and weigh 1,000–1,200kg, and cows 142cm and 650–800kg.
Originally a triple-purpose breed, it is often used as a suckler cow which has excellent fertility and calves easily (the pelvis is unusually wide), with enough milk for her fast-growing, early-maturing calf.
The carcass has a high proportion of meat to bone and the meat is well marbled.
The breed was recognised in 1853 at a time when Tyssandier d'Escours did much to improve it, partly by using the red Devon which, in turn, is now being boosted with Salers blood.
Shorthorns and Highlands also helped in the nineteenth-century improvements, and today the Salers is often crossed with the Charolais.
A breed society was founded in 1908 and today the Salers also has breed societies in Canada and the USA.
LIMOUSIN
Dark yellow-red.
Beef.
Middle-horned.
Limoges, central France.
[Plate XII]
Traditionally a strong, fast draught breed (and therefore horned) the Limousin is now an important and popular beef and veal breed which has been widely exported to European countries and to North America, Australasia and South Africa.
It is a thrifty, hardy breed which matures very rapidly and has become much heavier in recent decades (average weight of bulls about 1,200kg), and it is now one of France's two major beef breeds with well-muscled hindquarters and an excellent ratio of lean meat to bone.
The bulls are in demand for use as beef sires in dairy and suckler herds and the calves are small enough to cause far fewer calving problems than the offspring of breeds such as the Charolais, Blonde d'Aquitaine or Maine-Anjou.
The average birthweight of pure Limousin calves is 39kg (males) and they are small-headed as well.
The cows are not as good for milk as the Aubrac or Salers: there was crossing with Durham Shorthorns in the eighteenth century to help milk yields from an essentially draught-and-meat animal but this was discarded when it was decided to concentrate on beef from the end  of the nineteenth century.
However, the cows are hardy sucklers and economic feeders; they breed regularly for many years on extensive systems and are said to ‘age gracefully’.
For several years there has been a major breed improvement and production scheme in France to increase its genetic merit and select the best breeding stock from a nucleus of 45,000 recorded cows.
More than 1,000 pedigree breeders are involved in the scheme, which is based at Lanaud, near Limoges, and it seeks to create an identity and premium markets for the fine-grained, well-marbled lean Limousin beef: that is, genetic improvement with a commercial objective.
A tendency towards rather flighty behaviour in the breed is being overcome by careful selection.
It is a sign of the programme's success that in the UK in the mid-1980s there were 283,000 Limousin inseminations (from 40 bulls), representing more than 10 per cent of all artificial inseminations.
The medium-length horns grow outwards and forwards.
The coat is described as wheat-red, with lighter colouring around the eyes and muzzle (which is pink) and on the lower legs, underparts and tail switch.
It is constantly compared with the ancient rock paintings in the Lascaux caves, which happen to be within the breed's native region.
The Limousin and Charolais have between them absorbed the dual-purpose Marchois of La Creuse.
Former varieties of the Limousin included the Meymac (which originated from a cross between the Limousin and the Marchois), the Meyssac , the Treignac and the Vendonnais .
It is likely that there is a common ancestry with the types which formed the Blonde d'Aquitaine and there is also a possible link with the yellow breeds of Austria and Germany.
Derivatives of the breed include the Renitelo (Madagascar) and the Volynsk (USSR).
A herdbook was established in France in 1886; breed societies are also in Australia, Canada, Denmark, Ireland, New Zealand, South Africa, the UK and the USA.
CHAROLAIS
Cream or white.
Beef.
Charolles, central France.
[Plate XI]
The town of Charolle, about 100km to the north west of Lyons, is the ancient capital of the old province of Charolais (note that the cattle breed has a single ‘l’, though the region's sheep breed retains the double ‘ll’).
In the mid-eighteenth century, the pure Charolais cattle were bred only by nine communes of progressive farmers in a small area with a good climate and good soil.
The breed was rather too heavy for a draught animal and was therefore maintained mainly for meat at a time when most French cattle were workers.
It began to spread to other areas after 1770 but it was not until about 1830, when roads were improving, that this relatively isolated breed was gradually developed for dray-pulling as well.
It had therefore retained, almost uniquely, the suitably balanced carcass of a true meat breed, in contrast to the strong-shouldered, strong-necked draught types in which all the bulk was thrown forwards into the cheaper meat-cut areas.
Nor was the Charolais greatly influenced by the British breeds.
There was some experimental crossing with Shorthorn bulls in the nineteenth century to improve its maturity rate, but it remained essentially of the group which includes Simmental, Montbéliard and Aosta cattle.
However, it was noted even in 1863 that the Charolais had certain features in common with Colling's ideal Durham Shorthorn — a light head, fine skin, large hindquarters, straight back, well-fleshed limbs and barrel-shaped body — but the Charolais had stronger bones and limbs and was much hardier than the Durham; it was traditionally raised on grass alone and was brought inside only in the depths of winter.
A breed society was established in 1864, and a herdbook in 1887; by the 1880s the Charolais was recognised as one of France's most important breeds.
It could fatten on coarser feed than the Durham and was early maturing for beef, and the oxen could be good draught workers as well as slaughter beasts, though the cows were not good milkers.
The work aspect was never important — the breeders continued to concentrate on beef and the policy has since paid great   dividends.
Today it has a distinct weight advantage over its rivals, its 400-day weights equalled only by the Simmental, and the meat is very lean.
There is also some double-muscling and, inevitably, some calving problems if ill-chosen bulls are used on dairy or suckler cows, especially heifers.
The purebred Charolais calf is not as heavy as those of the Maine-Anjou and Blonde d'Aquitaine at an average birthweight of 45.5kg (males) and 41.8kg (females), but it is larger than the Limousin calf and crossbreds are usually larger than those sired by Limousin or Simmental.
However, breeders have been taking steps to reduce calving problems and also to breed longer, taller animals.
In spite of the attempt to introduce earlier maturity by means of the Shorthorn, the Charolais remains a late-maturing breed with the advantage that the animal is heavier before it begins to deposit fat, nor does it need hormones to put more meat on its hindquarters.
Its characteristic musculature is strongly marked in crossbred offspring, especially from the age of six weeks, and it is also a colour-marking breed: reds and blacks are diluted to salmon pink and a ‘creamy soot’(pale coffee to agouti) while whites are often diluted to off-white, but the coat pattern of the dam is often transmitted and a white dorsal stripe is dominant, though ghostly.
The pure Charolais is white or light wheat in the coat, with pale pink mucosae and very white fat.
The round, tapering horns are white and can be quite long, growing outwards and forwards, curving up at the tips.
The eyes are large and prominent, the cheeks heavy, the neck short, the chest deep and the back well muscled.
Average heights are 148cm in the bull and 137cm in the cow, and weights 1,100–1,200kg and 800–900kg, respectively, but both are being increased.
There is also a polled Charolais, generally bred to be lighter boned than the traditional type, and some breeders used the Lincoln Red to introduce the polling factor.
This massive, muscular breed is now known all over the world and over the last quarter of a century it has seen herdbooks or breed societies established in 24 countries in addition to France (Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Paraguay, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the UK, the USSR, the USA, Uruguay and Zimbabwe).
Its main role is as a terminal sire for suckler herds or as a beef sire for dairy herds.
It has also had an influence on many other breeds (see Table 9).
PARTHENAIS
Fawn.
Meat (and milk).
Deux-Sèvres, western France.
This old yellow-brown, black-muzzled breed from the Poitou region numbered 728,000 in 1932, but since 1945 the breed has been declining rapidly and by 1977 there were only 35,000; three years later the population had dropped to about 20,000.
There has been a great deal of crossing with the Charolais.
It was originally a triple-purpose breed, particularly valued for work and meat, but the cows were not good yielders (average milk yield  overall about 3,000kg) except in individual cases, though the milk was of high quality and there are still some good milking strains in the breed.
However, it has been replaced by Friesians for milk and is now bred more for beef.
A small group (two bulls and six heifers) was exported to an English agricultural college in 1988 on an experimental basis, and here it was described as looking rather like a South Devon or a beefy Jersey; the bulls are being used on the college's Friesian dairy herd to produce beef calves.
It is a late-maturing breed and bears a superficial resemblance to the Limousin, whose region is fairly close to that of the Parthenais, but it is larger, bulls standing at about 138cm and weighing on average 1,050kg, and cows 135cm and 775kg.
The breed society was formed in 1893.