

Front cover:A free electron laser under development at Los Alamos in the US (see p 334).
(Photo: Alexander Tsiaras, Science Photo Library.)
Talking Points
The Society is not responsible for individual opinions expressed in articles and reviews or in reports of any kind.
Editorials do not necessarily express the views of the council.
Election fever
Chemistry in Britain invited the major political parties to outline their policies for science, with reference to R&D funding, education, environment and overall strategic planning.
Conservative
Conservative Central Office writes:
The Conservatives believe that a science base is a vital resource for the nation.
Our mission is three-fold:
To undertake basic research to advance knowledge for its own sake.
To undertake strategic research, which takes the new ideas coming out of basic research and develops them to the point where the possibility of commercial application can be identified.
To produce highly trained people with scientific knowledge and technical expertise at the highest level, not just within the science base, but throughout the economy.
The Conservative commitment is real.
It can be measured in crude cash terms — the one which politicians focus on — as well as the real innovations of the past decade.
Since we came into office, we have increased the funds available to the research councils and other bodies funded through the science budget by 25 per cent in real terms.
This year we are investing a record £1000m in science, an increase of seven per cent on last year, and the budget will continue to rise in real terms for the next three years.
Overall funding for universities has increased by 10 per cent for the second year running.
It is a source of pride to know that overall government spending on civil R&D in this country as a proportion of GDP is greater than in either the US or Japan.
The right way to increase the resources we can devote to science is through economic growth.
International studies have shown that increased tax incentives to companies for R&D would be ineffective and wasteful.
The evidence is that beyond a certain point tax incentives only increase industrial R&D by an amount that is roughly half, or even less, of the value of the revenue  forgone by the government.
The science base is an essential seed-bed for ideas.
The Conservatives believe that the government's role is to ensure that we continue to have a good foundation of basic and strategic science on which industry can draw, to encourage a good supply of up-to-date and creative scientists, and to encourage the right climate for successful innovation.
As part of that task we have promoted improved contacts and technology transfer between industry and the academic world through a number of special schemes, such as the LINK scheme which funds collaborative research work between HEIs and industry.
The nation's scientific success depends also on the ability of our schools to instil in our young people a good basic scientific knowledge and an enthusiasm for further work in science.
Here the Conservatives have made an invaluable contribution through the creation of a national curriculum with science as one of the three core subjects.
In addition, our white papers on education and training for 16–19 year olds and on higher education are designed to bridge the divide between academic and vocational qualifications and to improve opportunities for all our 16–19 year olds.
These, together with the impact of the national curriculum, will, we are confident, encourage more young people to study science and technology post-16, whether on the academic or the vocational track.
Under the system of research funding proposed in the White Paper the principle of plurality of research funding will be maintained, giving institutions access to block funds for research alongside targeted funding for specific projects from the research councils.
Labour
Dr Jeremy Bray, MP, opposition spokesman on science and technology, writes:
‘A firm strategy for science is a major determinant of the success or failure of a modern economy’.
These were the words of Neil Kinnock in his speech to the Parliamentary and Scientific Committee two years ago.
In the intervening months the Labour Party has built up a range of policies for education, science and industry which will help Britain build the strong, competitive economy it so desperately needs.
Our efforts must start in our schools.
We wish to see all pupils having the opportunity to study balanced science as 20 per cent of the curriculum and also to include technology as a core subject.
In this way pupils can study and maintain motivation in science to post-16 level.
With our proposals to reform A-levels in the way recommended by the Royal Society and others, the broader range of subjects that will be available will enable those who do not specialise in science to maintain an interest.
Public understanding of science initiatives do much to enthuse young people.
Our plans for a permanent expo of contemporary science will provide a focus for the public and be a major resource for schools.
Basic research is an essential foundation for applied research and for the exploitation of technology in a society that seeks to be industrially competitive in a rapidly changing world.
We believe a reasonable target is for civil R&D to increase from the present 1.8 per cent to 2.5 per cent of GDP.
This increase also implies shifts in R&D expenditure.
These include: an increase in civil R&D carried out in industry; an increase in R&D on the environment, transport, services, non-nuclear energies and technologies for developing countries; and a diversion of resources from defence to civil R&D.
The substantial increase sought in industrial R&D will strip dry its sources of people and ideas if there is not also an increase in funding of the science base through the research councils and universities.
We also need to develop bridges between academic research and its application.
This is why we recently proposed the development of ‘Newton Institutes’ based on the model used in other countries to build on the strengths of basic research to encourage innovation in industry.
But it is not only in the UK where we must have a more positive attitude to science.
Britain has a poor track record in international collaboration.
We need to ensure that there is a well developed strategy for science in Europe, particularly in those areas where major efforts are required such as environmental research.
To ensure that our plans for science and technology diffuse throughout government Labour will appoint a minister for science.
Based in the Cabinet Office he will have responsibility, amongst other things, for the research councils.
His role will be to help develop with other departments a strategy to bring about the transformation in our understanding and use of science and technology in our society that is so important to the country's future.
Liberal Democrat
Matthew Taylor, MP, education spokesman, writes:
If Britain is to survive as an advanced industrial nation then we must now develop and use our human talents in science and technology to improve our economic performance.
At a time when Europe is moving ever closer towards economic union we are faced with a stark choice of either improving our economic performance or watching the UK become a marginalised and minor economic player.
Liberal Democrats believe that expanding and utilising to the full scientific and technological talents offers the only chance of improving our performance and reversing the long tale of our relative economic decline.
We believe that the government's relationship with science should be one of partnership, not confrontation.
If, as a nation, we are to improve our performance then industry must look to the future and not concentrate on short-termism.
In turn, government should provide industry with incentives to invest in innovation.
This route has been followed by many of our European competitors — notably Germany.
Liberal Democrats believe that there are a range of initiatives which could be introduced in the UK along the same lines.
We would reintroduce the Support for Innovation scheme, which proved a highly popular measure and helped firms to overcome the pre-production finance gap.
We would expand the Smart award scheme for small companies which has been constrained by funding resources.
Liberal Democrats would introduce a 50 per cent subsidy tapered over five years (ie 50 per cent in year one, 40 per cent in year two etc ) for salaries of scientists and engineers working on R&D in small and medium sized companies.
This mirrors a highly successful scheme previously used by the Germans.
We would give tax allowances on R&D partnerships to encourage large firms to take a minority equity stake in smaller firms where a smaller partner is primarily a research contractor.
This has proved very successful in the US, locking the larger firm into what is often state-of-the-art R  and providing vital, long-term finance for the smaller firm to develop its capabilities.
There is of course the question of who would implement such policies.
It has been suggested that a minister for science and technology is needed to take charge of this programme and argue the case for science and technology.
However, Liberal Democrats believe that the cabinet is already too large and that such a proposal risks sweeping the issues that need to be addressed into the corner.
These issues of how to shift Britain towards a sustainable path of development are sufficiently important and wide-ranging to be addressed by many cabinet ministers, not just one.
The funding of R&D, the encouragement of good environmental practice and the encouragement of children to obtain science qualifications.
We believe that the basic responsibility for science should remain with the DES, but that the implementation and monitoring of this programme must be in the hands of a cabinet committee chaired by the prime minister.
After three or four years, when its objectives are well on the way to being achieved, then this decision will be reconsidered.
One example of how science clearly falls within the remit of another department is in environmental policy.
Liberal Democrats do propose to create a network of environmental grants, subsidies and tax allowances to encourage better environmental practice.
For example, we would tax fuel according to emission rates and establish systems of tradable emission licenses for industry, setting ceilings on the permitted emissions,eg sulphur dioxide.
Liberal Democrats recognise the importance of science across our lives.
We realise that if Britain is to improve and succeed in the future then a continued investment and interest in science is of paramount importance.
We believe we have the policies and the will to achieve it.
The Green Party, Scottish and Welsh Nationalist parties were also invited to contribute their policies, but declined.
Waste disposal — a duty of care
This month the ‘Duty of Care’ was added to the maze of environmental responsibilities facing the chemical industry.
The duty of care concept was first expounded in 1985 by the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution, which held that the duty owed to society to handle and dispose of waste properly rested with the individual or organisation producing it.
The commission considered that ‘no producer should be entitled to rid himself of all responsibility for the waste simply by handing it over to a contractor for disposal’, and it recommended that the duty should be enshrined in legislation.
This duly came about with the Environmental Protection Act 1990 (EPA).
Section 34 of the EPA requires a broker in waste or any person producing, importing, carrying, keeping, treating or disposing of waste (other than a householder) to ‘take all such measures applicable to him in that capacity as are reasonable in the circumstances’ to:
Prevent an offence by anyone else of disposing, treating or sorting waste at a site that does not have a waste management licence, is operating in contravention of the conditions of any such licence, or is operating in a manner likely to cause pollution or harm to health.
Transfer waste to authorised waste carriers who are registered under the Control of Pollution (Amendment) Act 1989, or who are exempt.
Prevent the escape of the waste by ensuring it is properly contained.
Provide a written description of the waste prior to its transfer which is sufficient to enable the next (and possibly subsequent) holder to comply with the duty.
Explosives, most radio active waste, mine and quarry waste, and waste discharged under a valid trade effluent consent have their own regulations.
But the written description will have to be provided by all other commercial and industrial waste producers.
The information required includes quantity, nature of container, time and place of transfer and details of the status of the transferor and transferee.
Such a transfer note will be needed for each waste type which is being passed to a given transferee.
How specific or broad a range of wastes constitute a waste type is debatable.
However, it should prevent anyone from mismanaging the waste and may include details of the business or process producing it in addition to a description of the physical (or chemical) nature.
The Department of the Environment (DoE) says that each individual transfer need not require a transfer document and repeated removals of the same waste by the same contractor (multiple transfers) may be covered under a single document for up to one year.
Copies of the transfer document must be kept by transferor and transferee for two years.
The Waste Regulation Authority (WRA) may require copies of the transfer documents after service of notice.
For Special Waste a documentation system for carriage and disposal of each load is already in place.
The DoE advises that the information contained in special waste consignment notes may be sufficient in most cases to comply with the duty of care and negate the need for more documentation.
Guidance on how to comply with the duty of care has been provided by the DoE in the  form of a code of practice.
This has similar status to the Highway Code — while breach of the code is not an offence it may be cited as evidence in cases of a breach of the duty of care.
(A conviction under section 24 of the EPA is punishable on summary conviction to a fine of currently £2000 or on indictment to an unlimited fine.)
The code provides advice on deciding which wastes fall within the duty of care, how far the duty of care extends, and the contracting, documentation and checking procedures necessary to demonstrate compliance.
The DoE sees the duty as self regulating, since each holder of waste checks on the next (and sometimes previous) holder in the chain.
For an industrial waste producer, a college, hospital etc , the extent to which the duty applies will vary according to the arrangements it has made for the disposal of the waste (see box ).
As a result of these additional responsibilities, an increasing number of companies will wish to have properly drafted contracts and may wish to inspect disposal sites where their waste goes if they want to be perceived as ‘environmentally friendly’ and be assured of complying with the duty of care.
Whether the aims of the Royal Commission to define the responsibilities of waste producers will be achieved awaits scrutiny and testing in case law.
One thing that is certain is that there are thousands of waste producers (and carriers) who will have to start paying attention to what is in the skip.
John A Galvin
References
Example
Consider the possibilities for a general waste described as ‘packaging and empty paint and solvent tins’, contained in an open skip.
Option 1:
The producer takes the skip to a licensed waste transfer site.
In this case the producer is also the carrier.
Here the producer does not need to be a registered carrier.
The producer must provide a description, checking that it is accurate (no identifiable solvent residues), prepare a transfer note, ensure that the skip is secure, check that the waste transfer site is appropriately licensed to accept all the wastes in the skip, transfer the waste to the site suitably contained (in this case by sheeting over the skip)— and finally retain the transfer document for two years.
Option 2:
Producer has a skip provided by a skip company.
The producer's responsibilities include description/transfer note, checking description against contents, ensuring that the skip driver leaves with the load suitably secured and the retention of transfer documents.
In this case the disposal site has not been stated (the transfer note does not require it).
The producer's duty ends here unless there is cause to suspect a subsequent breach.
How culpable, if at all, the producer would be if the load was illegally dumped (fly-tipped) is not clear.
Option 3:
Producer has a contract with named licensed disposal site.
The producer's responsibilities are the same as in option one although the producer does not carry the waste to the disposal site.
The legacy of the Geneva conference
One hundred years ago this month a distinguished group of chemists met in Geneva to resolve a crisis that had been developing in organic chemistry.
Over the four days of Easter in 1892, 34 European chemists established a systematic set of rules for naming organic compounds, known as the Geneva rules.
In celebration of the centenary conference being held this month, Dr Gerry Moss, a former chairman of the IUPAC Commission on the Nomenclature of Organic Chemistry, reports on the background to the inaugural Geneva conference, the decisions that were taken there, and the successors to the Geneva rules.
Towards the end of the 19th century, a crisis had been building up over the names of organic compounds.
Before much was known about the structure, trivial names were the only way to identify compounds.
That is not to say that the trivial name was not without some information on, for example, its origin — formic acid from ants (formica ) for instance .
However, by 1892 the immense amount of work on the structure and synthesis of organic compounds over the previous 25–30 years made a more systematic approach to naming these compounds necessary.
In 1893 it was estimated that 60 000 organic compounds were known.
The problem can be equated to the situation today over natural products.
There are a similar number of natural products known today, most of which are called by trivial names, or as derivatives of a trivially named substance.
For the expert in the field, trivial names are short, convenient and an efficient means of communication.
However, to the outsider they obscure the chemistry involved and inhibit the cross-fertilisation of ideas from one area to another.
The intention of the Geneva rules, therefore was not to supersede trivial but to provide an ‘official name’ for indexes and dictionaries.
Before such an objective could be achieved much work was required.
Even with the optimism of the participants they could not expect to solve such a problem in four days.
In fact, the origins of the Geneva conference go back to the international chemistry conference held in Paris in 1889.
Charles Friedel from the Sorbonne was president of the organising committee of the conference and put ‘the study of the reforms to be brought to the nomenclature of organic chemistry’ on the agenda.
The main consequence of these discussions was to set up an International Commission of Chemical Nomenclature to continue the work started at the conference.
As the name implies, the initial intention was more general than the agenda item and inorganic chemical nomenclature was included.
However it was soon decided that the time was not right to consider this as well.
The commission created a subcommission of members in Paris with Friedel as chairman to work on the document.
After inorganic nomenclature was omitted, the subcommission comprised Friedel, Béhal, Bouveault, Combes, Faconnier, Gautier and Grimaux.
They met 45 times over two years and prepared reports which were circulated to the other members of the International Commission and to the editors of the more important chemistry journals.
These were then revised into a final report by the subcommission plus an appendix by Bouveault on the nomenclature of the compounds of the fatty acid series.
The Geneva conference was set up to discuss the report.
Thirty-four people accepted invitations to the meeting (see photo ) and 37 are known to have declined.
Only 12 of the 1889 commission attended.
In his account of the conference Armstrong (secretary of the Chemical Society) noted that participants only received copies of the report on the first morning of the meeting (19 April 1892).
In the course of eight sessions under the presidency of Friedel a list of 62 rules was formulated.
The most complete report of the conference with the accepted text of the rules (in French) is by Pictet.
Armstrong gives 46 rules (in French) and a German version with additional commentary and proposals was published by Tiemann.
Other less accessible sources are given by Verkade.
Curiously, no English version was prepared, although the Chemical Society in some ways anticipated the Geneva rules in its guidance to contributors and abstractors.
The rules were more limited than the report of subcommission.
It was concerned almost exclusively with acyclic ‘functionally    simple’ compounds ie acyclic compounds with only one type of functional group.
There was a rule dealing with cycloalkanes and a few on simple aromatic compounds.
The conference decided the problems of ‘functionally complex’ compounds needed further study and referred it back to the commission.
The nomenclature of heterocyclic compounds was also deferred for further study.
*Note Chemical Abstracts Service still prefer the longer chain in this case ie 4-ethenylheptane.
Based on name given by Armstrong.
Many of the problems that concerned the conference are still being argued today.
The need for an ‘official name’ for indexes and dictionaries contrasts with the desire of others for a set of rules for different names leaving the choice between them to the user.
Today the argument is over rules for a unique IUPAC name versus the range of names provided by the Blue Book.
The commission, in its first rule, hoped that authors would mention the official name in parenthesis next to the name chosen by them.
The rules were based on the principle of substitution using a common ‘radical’(we would now call it a parent) to denote members of the same family.
The characteristic functional groups were then indicated by prefixes and suffixes with numbers to indicate their positions.
In essence this is still the procedure used today.
However, the detailed rules have changed.
In a sense, the Geneva rules are even more systematic than the present IUPAC rules.
The conference decided to retain the trivially named hydrocarbons methane, ethane, propane and butane but decided not to adopt formic, acetic, propionic and butyric acid, although a substantial majority wanted their retention.
They key to the parent was the longest chain of carbon atoms.
Then any additional carbon atoms forming the skeleton were added and finally the functional group.
Unsaturation was indicated using the system devised by A. W. Hofmann to show the number of chlorine atoms that could be added: -ane (0), -ene (2) and -ine (4)(and originally -one (6), -une (8), -eane (10), -eene (12)etc ).
The Geneva rules retained -ane for saturated hydrocarbons and used -ene, -diene and -triine for triple bonds, with locants as necessary.
The conflict with -ine meaning a basic group (especially alkaloid names) does not seem to have worried the participants, although it was commented on by Armstrong.
Subsequently -yne replaced -ine and in the Liege rules of 1930 -ine is exclusively reserved for nitrogen bases.
Functional groups were designated by suffixes (prefixes were not required, because only one functional group was considered at a time).
These are quite familiar, with -al, -amine, -oic acid, -ol, -olide, -one, -quinone, -thial, -thiol etc .
Lactones are interesting in using the Beilstein system of labelling the chain after the carboxyl group with α ,β ,γ δ eg 1,4- γ -pentanolide.
The need to indicate both atoms is due to the order of operations which results in a branch having priority over a functional group (see Table ).
Ethers were treated in an almost conjunctive style with pentane-oxy-ethane for 1-ethoxypentane.
Armstrong also expressed his worry over the inconsistency between benzene-diazo-chloride and benzene-azo-benzene, both with two nitrogen atoms.
With aromatic compounds the adoption of the English benzene instead of the German benzol or French benzine was a consequence of the agreed significance of these ends (cf -ine above ).
The appendix by Bouveault considered carboxyl groups and its derivatives and substituents.
Hence he advocated propane- α carboxylic acid for butyric acid and propane- β -carboxylic acid for isobutyric acid.
Although rejected by the conference, it is noteworthy that the system is now used when the carboxyl group is attached to ring and for some acids (eg citric acid is 3-hydroxypropane-1,2,3-tricarboxylic acid).
The adoption of the Geneva rules by Beilstein no doubt boosted their success.
However, the participants of the Geneva conference recognised the incomplete nature of their work and they hoped to follow it up with another conference.
This was not to be.
Nevertheless, several groups continued to work on nomenclature problems and one can point to the French Saint-Etienne meeting of 1897, and the independent work of Hantzsch, Widman and von Baeyer, which laid the foundation of modern organic nomenclature.
The death of Friedel in 1899 probably resulted in a pause in an international activity until the creation of the forerunner of IUPAC, the International Union of Chemical Societies, in 1911.
Dr G. Moss is a senior lecturer in organic chemistry at Queen Mary and Westfield College, London.
Overheard
‘The First Amendment guarantees that every citizen, organisation and news agency has the right to express an opinion about science, even if it is untenable or inane’.
‘Policy formulation is a democratic process, not a scientific process.
The number of people supporting an idea is more important than the quality of the idea.
When you testify before Congressional committees, they are counting votes’.
‘The general public has a deepseated distrust of science and technology, and insists  on ‘civilian control’ of science and scientists just as it insists on civilian control of the military’.
Thomas Orme of the American Council on Science and Health, speaking at the American Association for the Advancement of Science, Chicago, 1992.
‘The full name of dioxin, as we all know now, is ‘dioxin — the most toxic substance known to man’.
It has become a ‘social poison’ like PCBs or asbestos, regardless of its real health effects.’
Peter Daley of Chemical Waste Management, speaking at the AAAS   
PERSPECTIVES
Bloody miracle
At regular intervals each year thousands of worshippers flock to Naples Cathedral to witness the ‘miracle’ of the liquefaction of a small phial of blood purportedly from Saint Januarius, martyred by the Romans in 305.
The miracle has been performed by the Archbishop of Naples since 1389 when the phial mysteriously first appeared.
On the saint's two feast days, in May and September, the phial is shown to the public and handled by the Archbishop, whereupon the congealed blood  liquefies .
Only now have scientists begun to offer rational explanations for this phenomenon.
In a recent letter to Nature (1991,354 , 114) three Italian scientists claimed that thixotropy, a property of certain gels to become liquid on the application of some external force, could account for the ‘congealed blood’ becoming liquid as the Archbishop agitates the phial.
The Italian team went on to suggest a solution they had prepared from simple chemicals available in the fourteenth century.
The mixture consisted of a dialysed solution of FeCl 3 (parchment or animal gut could be used for this) resulting in a solution of FeO(OH) to which NaCl was added — this mixture gave a thixotropic sol that set in about an hour and closely resembled the brown-coloured holy relic in Naples.
Other ideas stemmed from this original one and there have been suggestions that the reliquary contains other combinations of materials, some with thixotropic properties, including inorganic pigments in castor oil, real blood in a thixotropic honey, or a mixture of spermaceti, ether and red dye which is solid at 10°C but melts with body heat and froths due to the ether, a characteristic noted in the Naples liquefaction.
Sadly the real contents of the phial will have to remain a mystery as the Roman Catholic church adamantly refuses to open the phial for scientific investigation, but as the Archbishop performed the rite last year and said ‘…no chemist has yet been able to reproduce this phenomenon’, the Italian chemists were chuckling.
Science and The Church are caught in a bloody feud dating back to the 14th century.
Star Wars for VOCs
When Admiral James Watkins, US secretary of energy, instructed his Department of Energy (DoE) laboratories to clean up their heavily contaminated sites, he set in motion an elegant synergy that is leading to new ways of destroying pollutants.
As well as the obvious problems of radioactive waste from 40 years of nuclear weapons and energy research, several of the laboratories' sites suffer from groundwater polluted by volatile organic compounds (VOCs).
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) in California, for instance, was once a naval air station, where in more innocent days the ground crews cleaned engines by hosing them down with carbon tetrachloride and trichloroethane (TCE).
Not surprisingly, this washed into the soil and hence into local groundwater.
But the DoE labs also have those huge amounts of radioactive waste; could they make use of this to irradiate the VOCs and destroy them?
Certainly there is plenty in the literature about using cobalt-60 sources for sterilisation and DoE researchers found that spent reactor fuel rods did the job quite effectively..
However, such a scheme would never wash with the public — who wants their water supplies to have been treated this way?
Certainly not the California vineyard owners whose irrigation supplies are threatened by the creeping contamination from below LLNL.
But LLNL has another string to its bow: it is a centre for particle beam technology under the ‘Star Wars’ initiative.
Fire a high energy electron beam at a metal target and bremsstrahlung effect produces intense X-rays.
And the public are familiar with X-rays and find them acceptable.
So Stephen Matthews and his colleagues at LLNL have been trying out their linear accelerators.
For instance, they take an electron accelerator designed to boost a Star Wars free electron laser (see p334), ‘step it down’ to produce intense X-rays and strap sample bottles containing contaminated water around the accelerator barrel so that they are thoroughly irradiated.
The VOCs in the samples are destroyed — Matthews likens the process to incineration at room temperature, with no problems of flue gases or thermal inefficiencies.
LLNL's samples contain up to 15 ppm of carbon tetrachloride, TCE, perchlorethylene and chloroform, as in the groundwater.
The researchers are trying out different X-ray sources, including laboratory non-destructive testing rigs and a truck-mounted X-ray unit, and are working out the doses required.
Interestingly, the does rate, as well as total dose, can be important.
For instance, only 1–2 krads are need to clean up a sample using an accelerator producing 10&sup15-; 10&sup18; rad s&sup-1;, but at 10&sup4; –10&sup5; rad s&sup-1; a higher dose is required.
Matthews and his coworkers have also been trying high concentrations of VOCs in water — up to 100 ppm of each chlorinated solvent.
They find that chloroform requires more irradiation than the others, but all are decomposed effectively.
A separate LLNL project is using high intensity UV light to destroy VOCs in water, but this has trouble with C=C bonds; however X-rays destroy these just as well as single bonds.
The actual chemistry is still obscure.
‘We don't really understand how it works’, Matthews admitted at a recent meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Chicago.
Formation of OH radicals in the water, hydrolysed electrons or direct x-ray effects are all possible.
What is important is that all the chlorine in the VOCs ends up as chloride ion rather than other potentially hazardous chlorinated compounds.
LLNL is working with the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory to try out the process on polychlorinated biphenyls, which are such a problem for conventional incineration.
Here the X-rays knock off chlorine atoms one after another until there are only VOC-like compounds left, which are finally destroyed.
Another contamination at LLNL is at its Site 300, where conventional explosives were tested.
Residues of HMX and RDX are also leaching into the groundwater.
Matthews and his group have found that X-rays work well on these — they produce reaction products, but like PCBs these are amenable to further X-ray destruction.
Matthews has big plans for the X-ray destruction technology.
He foresees truck-mounted accelerator X-ray units being driven to contaminated sites.
These could be where groundwater is pumped out for clean-up, or even at the US's notorious Superfund waste sites.
He predicts that intense X-rays will destroy hazardous organic wastes without ever having to take them out of their 55 gallon drums — a much safer and cleaner operation than most clean-up techniques.
The high concentrations should not be a problem.
Although most of the work has been done at concentrations of less than 500 ppm, the LLNL workers have found that the same dose that destroys 500 ppm of TCE will reduce 10,000 ppm to 500 ppm — in other words the X-rays are more effective on higher concentrations.
Matthews estimates that a truck-mounted unit would require a 350 kW accelerator operating at 10 MV. At present, commercial machines only reach 40kW, but the Star Wars equipment could be built commercially for about $3.5m.
Capital and energy costs together would come out at about $25 per barrel to give it a dose of 2.5 Mrad for 2–3 minutes, which would be highly competitive with incineration.
‘We're only just beginning to open the door’ Matthews said.
One application for the X-ray destruction method could be in the politically sensitive area of destroying chemical weapons.
At present, the US army intends to build incinerators at each of its eight chemical weapons storage sites — it already has a pilot unit in operation at Johnston Island in the Pacific.
However, there is intense public opposition both to incinerators and to moving the old shells and bombs around.
Matthews feels that X-rays could do the job more cheaply and safely — the shells would not even need to be opened up.
Already LLNL has tried it out on nerve gas surrogates such as dimethyl methyl phosphonate and methyl phosphonic acid, and it seems to work on the crucial C-P bonds.
Mustard gas, with its C-Cl bonds, should be as easy as VOCs to destroy.
At the moment LLNL is working with a small Californian company to see if X-ray destruction can be made to work on contaminated soil.
Already they have had some success with soil around a leaking petrol tank at LLNL, and Matthews' group thinks that TCE-contaminated soil should be a practical target.
However this work is shrouded in secrecy because of the patent lawyers.
X-rayted movies of naked catalysts
Synchrotron radiation, such as the X-rays available from the Science and Engineering Research Council's Synchrotron Radiation Source (SRS) at Daresbury, can provide researchers with a whole range of structural information, including both absorption spectra and diffraction patterns.
Recently, Sir John Thomas's group from the Royal Institution, London, has used an instrumental arrangement at Daresbury that allowed them to capture both types of information on the same sample while it was actually undergoing a chemical change.
This has given them a movie picture of the structural changes, built up from snapshots taken only a few seconds apart.
The apparatus consists of a curved silicon crystal, which disperses the X-rays from one of the beams and deflects them through the sample in an environmental cell.
A curved position-sensitive detector picks up the X-rays diffracted by the sample while its transmission spectrum is recorded by a photodiode array.
In principle, both measurements could be taken simultaneously, but in practice the group gets its best results by recording diffraction and absorption sequentially with a very short time delay.
They use a slightly different X-ray bandpass (energy range), ΔΕ) for absorption and diffraction to reduce spectral interference from diffraction noise and from fluorescence.
To do this they arranged a movable slit to open for a wide ΔΕ when the photodiode array is operating and close up for a narrow ΔΕ for the spectral detector.
Thomas's group have illustrated the power of the instrumental arrangement by tracing the thermal conversion of the catalyst precursor aurichalcite, a mineral phase of unknown structure, into an active Cu-ZnO methanol catalyst (J.W. Couves et al, Nature , 1991,354 , 465).
When aurichalcite (Cu 5-x Zn x (OH)6 (Co 3 )2 ) is heated to 450°C it converts into a copper-on-zinc oxide material that can be prepared as a catalyst for the water-gas shift reaction (CO 2 + H 2 CO + H 2 O).
The RI group took aurichalcite through this conversion in environmental cell on the Daresbury SRS.
They found that there is essentially no change in the immediate environment of the copper ions when the solid loses crystallographic order at ca 310°C when the carbonate and hydroxyl ions break down.
Nor is there any perceptible change when the decomposed ultimately crystallises at ca 450°C into a mixture of CuO and ZnO.
However, when this calcined material is put through the catalyst preparation step of heating in a 10:90 mixture of H 2 and N 2 , the CuO peaks vanished and the two-peak signature of metallic copper appeared at about 270°C.
From the combined results Thomas's group estimated an average particle size of 100  for the copper metal aggregates.
At higher temperatures (ca 500°C) the linewidths and peaks change, which they put down to disorder as some zinc enters the copper particles to form a dilute brass.
However, through all this the ZnO remains unchanged.
This conflicts with earlier reports that Cu(I) gets incorporated into ZNO in the methanol synthesis catalyst (but as Couves et al write, ‘absence of evidence is not evidence of absence’).
Absorption and diffraction could help industrial researchers get a better handle on the materials they use.
Containing nuclear waste
Anti-nuclear campaigners sometimes claim that nuclear fission and its dangerous products are a purely manmade phenomenon.
Do not believe it.
Geologists have known for decades about ‘natural fission reactors’ in very ancient rocks at Oklo in Gabon, West Africa.
Some 1950 million years ago, sufficient uranium was precipitated from solutions in the rocks at Oklo to reach critical mass.
Nuclear fission chain reactions began in patches of ore with concentrations of 25–60 per cent U, and lasted for 10&sup5; –10&sup6; years until too little fissile material remained.
The greatest importance of the Oklo reactors is that they are still there — after almost 2000 million years we can still find the fission products and demonstrate what happened.
Their preservation could have an important lesson for nuclear waste storage.
A recent study (B. Nagy et al, Nature , 1991,354 , 472) has concentrated on the organic matter in some of the Oklo ‘reactors’.
In some sedimentary uranium ores, such as those in the southwestern US, oxidising solutions percolating through U-rich rocks dissolved U(VI) and transported it until the redox conditions changed and uranium precipitated as the U(IV) mineral uraninite.
Organic material promotes this redox reaction, which probably accounts for the presence of uraninite in the black organic-rich shales of Sweden.
At Oklo, too, organic material played an important part in the process.
Not only will it have moderated the neutrons like the graphite rods in a reactor, but when the uranium pockets went critical the organics were cooked in temperatures reaching 160–360°C.
This turned the organic matter into liquid bitumen, which squeezed into pores and fractures in the rock.
As the temperature rose, the bitumen was further cooked into a solid char containing graphite.
Today, crystal so uraninite and lead mineral galena (representing the lead products of uranium decay) can be found in the solidified bitumen.
Nagy and his coworkers have shown that the bitumen did not travel very far from the heat source before solidifying, so it did not move the uraninite away from the reactor site.
They point out that the bitumen consists of highly condensed aromatic hydrocarbons and abundant graphite: there are no detectable carboxyl groups and the bitumen did not form colloids.
This contrasts with humic acids which are rich in carboxyls and are known to complex radio-nuclides to form colloidal suspensions, which can be moved long distances by groundwater.
Laser Raman spectroscopy revealed that near to the rector cores, the bitumen is less graphite and pyrolysis GC-MS showed that the aromatics are less condensed here too.
Nagy's group put this down to hydrothermal reactions and hydrogenation as a result of irradiation.
However, this weaker bitumen trapped uraninite and radio-nuclides just as effectively as the surrounding harder material.
Radiogenic Ag, Te, Nd and Sm are trapped at a distance of about 50 metres from the reactor core — probably transported there by convection in aqueous solutions before enough bitumen had been generated to precipitate uraninite and trap them in its crystal lattice.
In reactors where there is a little organic matter, the fission products are trapped on clay minerals, but these have been less effective than bitumen — about 30 per cent of the ND has been lost and other lanthanides have migrated away from the core.
Long after the Oklo reactors cooled, their products were disturbed by geological events.
Some uranium, lead and fission products were lost some 722 ± 30 million years ago — Nagy et al calculated the date from the remaining U/Pb isotopes.
But such loss is hardly surprising — the samples were 200 m from the reactor core but only 50 m from a major intrusion of volcanic rocks, which have been separately dated to 750 ± 150 million years ago.
No manmade nuclear repository could hope to cope with this kind of natural event either.
Engineers designing disposal sites for nuclear waste can learn from Oklo.
Solid organic matter seems to be better for encapsulating the material than clay.
And it is possible to predict with fair accuracy the behaviour of the site (volcanoes and earthquakes permitting) over billions of years.
news review
Sir Denys is visibly gloomy
If there are signs of an economic upturn ‘they are so faint as to be virtually invisible’, Sir Denys Henderson, chairman of ICI, said recently.
Sir Denys's comments came as he revealed that ICI's profits in 1991 fell by 10 per cent to £843m.
‘All the major chemical companies are being adversely affected by the worldwide recession’ he added.
‘The commodity chemicals cycle may not begin to pick up until 1993, with the pace very much dependent on the strength of the world economic revival which has not yet begun’.
Sir Denys had little doubt that the coming months seem set to be as difficult as 1991 was for most countries, ‘It would not be prudent at this stage to attempt to predict when recovery might begin’, he said, ‘But when it comes, it is very likely to be gradual’.
ICI saw turnover fall 3 per cent to £12900m over the year.
‘1991s figures cannot be viewed as satisfactory’ said Sir Denys, ‘but it was a solid performance…’.
He added that while ICI's vigorous reshaping programme last year helped the company weather the storm slightly better than some of its rivals, the recession still remains its greatest problem.
ICI's results looked worse still after taking into account its restructuring and disposals; indicating that underlying profits were down almost 30 per cent.
Ronnie Hampel, chief operating officer, said ICI was over half-way through its reshaping plan.
The group boosted profits by £140m in 1991, in line with its profit improvement plan of £400m pa by mid 1993.
Disposals during the year raised over £500m.
15000 jobs were shed worldwide, including 4000 in subsidiaries that have been sold.
The company is not saying how many job losses are forecast for 1992.
Such rationalisation initiatives created a turbulent period for ICI in 1991, and Hampel reported that this process would continue in 1992.
The business sectors had varying successes throughout 1991.
Pharmaceuticals, the star performer, had a record year, with profits up 10 per cent to £538m (see table ).
US sales were particularly strong, accounting for 40–50 per cent.
Spending on R&D rose 10 per cent to £220m, and is expected to increase further in 1992 to £250m.
In the Agrochemicals and Seeds businesses, profits rose 31 per cent to £144m on steady sales, despite a difficult market place.
Within the Speciality Chemicals and Materials sector, paints saw profits rise by 9 per cent to £118m and explosives’ profits rose by £4m to £54m, despite depressed markets in the US and Europe.
However, speciality chemicals turned in poor profits of £35m, down from £54m in 1990, the colour and surfactant markets deteriorated, while consumer effect businesses weathered the economic cycle well.
The material group saw losses double to £20m in 1991 —‘This is not acceptable’ said Hampel.
Major rationalisation in the ICI Fibres business during 2991 has increased market share in Europe, but margins have still not been sufficient.
A major ‘down-sizing’ operation was also carried out in Advanced Materials and in the Films businesses.
Polyurethanes has been the strongest business within the group and has shown continuing profits in spite of the downturn.
Acrylics is a growing business, with unexpanded operations in the US and the Far East — and two new MMA plants, one in Taiwan and one on schedule at Teesside.
The group's industrial chemical business was significantly affected by the cycle and Chemicals and Polymers was in loss in the fourth quarter of 1991.
Hampel said he saw no sign of improvement in market conditions in 1992.
While divestments are taking place in the basic businesses of soda ash, lime and salt, ICI is increasing investment in its CFC replacement, Klea 134a.
Further investments are also planned for Tioxide and Quorn.
ICI's strategy for 1992 is to continue concentrating on higher added value businesses and to reduce its exposure to commodity chemicals.
More disposals are likely in 1992, although not at the same rate as last year.
The immediate emphasis will be on cost containment and cash conservation.
Sir Denys again attacked electricity prices in the UK.
‘Despite intensive efforts for nearly a year, we have not been able to find a satisfactory formula either in terms of price or consistency of supply’ he said.
‘The prices we see ahead are not going to make industry competitive’, he added.
Rhône-Poulenc tries to make sense
1991 was a ‘peculiar’ year compared to 1988 and 1990, Igor Landau, senior executive vice-president of the French chemical group Rhône-Poulenc, said recently, ‘We had to begin to prove that everything that we had done makes sense’.
Landau was speaking at the announcement of Rhône-Poulenc's 1991 results in Manchester, where he revealed a 3.2 per cent increase in net profits to FFr 2004m (£1 = FFr 9.5), and a 6.9 per cent rise in turnover to FFr 83817m.
Operating profits rose 37 per cent to FFr 6272m.
Much of Rhône-Poulenc's effort in 199 was focused on integrated the large number of acquisitions it has made over the past five years.
The group's strategy was to reach a position comparable with the market leaders in terms of size.
By 1991 Rhône-Poulenc had achieved this —‘we wee beginning to try to be the leaders in terms of quality and performance’, said Landau.
In terms of financial results, Landau reported that 1991 had been ‘a tough year’, hampered by the low value of the dollar as well as recession.
However, the company achieved its goal of reducing its financial debt to capital radio from 0.92 in 190 to 0.78 last year.
The group's integration of the US pharmaceutical company, Rorer, has been successful, noted Landau: net profits more than doubled to $326m on a pro forma basis.
The productivity improvement programme launched in 1990 in the fibre and chemical businesses has also yielded positive results, while decreases in profitability in some areas were compensated by increases in profits within life sciences.
Looking ahead, Landau does not see the general environment about to change drastically.
‘In late 1992 we think we might see some signs of improvement in the US or some European countries’.
Nevertheless, Rhô-Poulenc is optimistic for 1992–94, when the full benefit of recent acquisitions will bear fruit, Landau explained, and the profitability programme for fibres will show greater impact.
‘We are convinced that we will have an increase in operating results of 20 per cent pa in 1992 and 1993’.
Divestment, valued at FFr 4000m in 1991, will continue in 1992 and 1993.
The company also plans to improve its debt to capital ratio further, to 0.5.
Rhône-Poulenc UK's turnover rose 3.1 per cent to £746.5m.
SB breaks £1000m barrier
SmithKline Beecham (SB) made a record £1002m pre-tax profits in 1991, up 17 per cent on the previous year.
This was the second full year of operations for the company and chief executive, Robert Bauman, commented, ‘the key objectives of the merger have been achieved and we are now focusing on growth and we have made dramatic strides in our new product programme’.
Turnover rose 4 per cent to £4685m.
By sector, pharmaceutical sales were up 4 per cent to £2470m, while trading profits in the sector rose 13 per cent to £694m.
Of the company's remaining operations: clinical laboratories saw the greatest profit and sales rises, at 26 per cent and 13 per cent respectively.
Animal health profits rose 5 per cent on a 4 per cent higher turnover, and consumer brands' profits were up 1 per cent, on a 12 per cent higher turnover.
Shell Chemicals slumps
Shell Chemicals saw profits fall by a dramatic 95 per cent from £519m in 1990 to £23m last year.
The fourth quarter's results showed a £90m loss against a £86m profit in 1990.
Turnover for the year fell 9 per cent to £5995m.
In the US, profits for the full year were down to £83m from £155m, while the company's activities in the rest of the world saw losses of £60m against £364m profits in 1990.
The company blamed intense price-cutting in depressed markets which further eroded petrochemical margins.
Trust to sell Wellcome control
The Wellcome Trust plans to reduce its majority shareholding in Wellcome, the pharmaceutical company.
The sale could raise more than £4000m, with medical research the likely beneficiary.
The Wellcome Trust owns about 75 per cent of Wellcome and intends to reduce this shareholding to less than 50 per cent.
The company, whose stock market value has doubled over the past year, is currently valued at about £9700m.
The Trust's share of Wellcome represents 95 per cent of its income-producing to seek a larger and more broadly based income.
The Trust is one of the world's leading non-government supporters of medical research.
In the year to 31 September 1992, it will have supported projects to the value of £100m.
The rapid growth and increasing expense of medical research have led the Trust to review its sources of income and research will benefit from the Trust's increased income after the sale.
However, before the sale can go ahead the Trust must obtain permission from the courts to modify the will of the Trust's founder, Sir Henry Wellcome.
The Trust has already obtained such permission once, when in February 1986 it divested some 21 per cent of its holding in Wellcome.
It must also seek the permission of the Charity Commissioners, because of a scheme set up in 1986 under which the Trust must not hold less than 50 per cent of the voting rights of Wellcome.
As a result of these constraints the first practicable date for the sale is this July.
The sale has the complete support of the Wellcome board, and John Robb, chief executive of Wellcome, said that the board believed Wellcome has ‘an excellent future as an independent global pharmaceuticals group’.
Wellcome shares have been performing strongly over the past year and the value of the company has almost doubled.
Currently only about two per cent of Wellcome's shares are held by US investors compared with 26 per cent of Glaxo and 35 per cent of SmithKline Beecham shares, despite the fact that half of Wellcome's pharmaceutical sales are in North America.
Wellcome sells over 100 prescription products including Retrovir (AZT or zidovudine) and Zovirax (acyclovir), both of which are anti-viral drugs.
Wellcome recently published preliminary results indicating that Retrovir halved the likelihood of healthy HIV-positive people developing Aids and related illnesses.
Wellcome's share price rose earlier this year after the suggestion that a combination of Retrovir and Zovirax halved the number of deaths in Aids patients compared with Retrovir alone (Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 107).
After the announcement of the sale Wellcome shares dropped, although analysts thought the fall would be temporary.
Wellcome has sold its diagnostic business to International Murex Technologies, Canada, for £15m.
Dr Bridget Ogilvie, director of the Wellcome Trust since 1991.
CFC withdrawal rushes on
New evidence of ozone layer thinning in the Northern Hemisphere has spurred governments to tighten still further their timetables for CFCs to be withdrawn from industrial use.
Early in February Nasa announced that its new Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) had shown exceptionally high levels of chlorine monoxide (ClO) in the stratosphere above populated areas of the Northern Hemisphere.
ClO is the ‘smoking gun’ that atmospheric scientists now look for.
It forms when chlorine-containing compounds such as CFCs break down in the stratosphere and then it triggers photochemical chain reactions that can destroy as many as 100000 molecules of ozone per molecule of ClO.
UARS's microwave equipment detected levels of ClO as high as those within the Antarctic ozone hole — but these were over Scandinavia and Northern Eurasia, not over uninhabited polar regions.
The results of ozone thinning are now beginning to be documented.
Recent work published in Science (1992,255 , 952) shows that during the south polar spring of 1990 there was a 6–12 per cent reduction in photosynthesis by phytoplankton as the ozone layer thinned: such inhibition is an effect of UVB radiation.
Immediately after Nasa's results had been announced, President Bush declared that the US would ban CFCs five years earlier than previously planned.
In fact, this decision was less revolutionary than it appeared: Bush has brought the deadline forward from 2000, as laid down under the Montreal Protocol, to 1995, but the EC had already decided to adopt a 1997 deadline and the US had been lagging behind world opinion.
On 21–22 February EC environment ministers considered an EC Commission proposal to phase out CFCs, halons, carbon tetrachloride and 1,1,1-trichloroethane by the end of 1995, with an 85 per cent cut by the end of 1993.
This was in line with the UK position set out by David Trippier last December (Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 108) and was backed by European Parliament's environment committee.
The environment ministers were due to make their decision late last month.
UK industry has already agreed to an 85 per cent interim cut in CFCs and carbon tetrachloride for 1993 and representatives of user industries and manufacturers have been meeting Department of the Environment officials to discuss the practicalities of cutting 1,1,1-trichloroethane and halons.
Despite the garbled report in The Engineer , Trippier has not tried to impose any tighter deadline than 31 December 1995 for a total ban — which would be almost impossible for UK industry to meet.
Austria, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands and Norway have already unilaterally imposed a 1 January 1995 deadline, and the German chemical industry federation, VCI, has called for a uniform phaseout timetable to be adopted by all signatories to the Montreal Protocol, who will be meeting in Copenhagen later this year.
ICI will be able to stop manufacturing CFCs 11 and 12 in the first quarter of next year, having secured supplies for its remaining customers through a deal with Akzo.
The Dutch company's small production plant at Weert will be able to continue running efficiently while supplying the diminishing demand for both companies — small amounts of CFCs will still be permitted in essential medical uses after the deadline.
ICI has said that it will complete its plant closure programme by the end of 1995.
By then, the replacements will be in full production.
Last month ICI announced that its third Klea ICI 134a (HFC134a) plant will be built at Mihara, near Hiroshima in Japan.
The plant will be built in partnership with Teijin, a long-standing joint venture partner of ICI in agrochemicals.
The JV aims to link ICI's process technology and application expertise at its Japan Technical Centre at Tsukuba Science City with Teijin's production experience.
The plant will have an initial capacity of 5000 tonnes pa when it comes on stream in 1993, supplying the Asia Pacific refrigeration markets.
results
Proteus International , specialists in computer aided molecular modelling and drug design, announced a loss of £1.27m for the six months ended 30 September 1991, compared with losses of £520000 in the five months to 30 September 1990.
Unilever announced a 4 per cent rise in net profits to £1152m for the year ended 31 December 1991.
Turnover was up 2 per cent to £23163m.
Speciality Chemicals division saw a slight rise in operating profit from £223m in 1990 to £225m.
Low & Bonar , the packing and specialist material group, announced pre-tax profits of £24.3m for the year to 30 November 1991, down 4 per cent on 1990.
Turnover was £307.7m, against £310.9m in 1990, despite adverse economic conditions.
Indena , Italian manufacturer of botanical derivatives for the pharmaceutical, cosmetic and health food industries, turned in a 20 per cent rise in profit in 1991, on a $6.7m (£1 = $1.75) turnover.
Pfizer reported net profits of 4900000 for the fourth quarter of 1991, including compensatory heart-valve charges of $195m, compared to $154m last year.
Turnover was $1850.2m ($1785.3m in 1990).
For the full year, net profits fell 10 per cent to $722m and turnover rose 8 per cent to $6950m.
Abbott Laboratories achieved its 20th consecutive year of record sales and profits in 1991.
Net profits rose 12.7 per cent to £1089m, and turnover rose 11.7 per cent to $6877m.
Union Carbide suffered a $28m loss in 1991 compared with a $308m net profit in 1990.
Turnover was 7 per cent down at $4880m.
Sterling Chemicals announced a 97 per cent fall in net profits to $700000 for the first quarter of 1992 compared to the previous year.
Turnover was down 36.5 per cent to $115.9m.
Norsk Hydro made a net loss of Nkr 498m (£1 = Nkr11) in 1991, against net profits of Nkr 2901m in 1990.
Turnover rose 0.73 per cent to Nkr 61423m.
Akzo reported net profits of Dfl 568m (£1 = Dfl 3.2) for the year 1991, against Dfl 652m in 1990, on a turnover of Dfl 16851m (Dfl 17246m).
Rohm & Haas reported net profits of $29.5m last year, a 20 per cent decrease from 190.
Turnover of $658m was 3 per cent lower than 1990 revenues.
Fisons announced a 17 per cent decline in pre-tax profits in 1991 to £190.5m.
The Pharmaceutical division saw profits fall by 20 per cent to £120.8m, on sales of £484.1m (£478.5m), while profits rose in Scientific Equipment division from £67.2m to £68.4m, and in Horticulture division from £10.4m to £11.5m.
Ares-Serono Group reported net profits of $71.2m in 1991, representing a 12 per cent increase on 1990.
Turnover rose 15 per cent to $751.1m.
BP's double whammy
‘The worst possible combination for BP’ was how Bryan Sanderson (right ), chief executive officer of BP Chemicals, described the two principal economic factors affecting its performance in 1991: recession and lower profits downstream.
Relatively low oil prices meant that exploration costs could not be offset and this, together with the on-going recession, hit BP hard.
Pre-tax profits fell from £1204m in 1990 to £1035m in 1991.
‘Besides that we did not do too badly’ said Sanderson.
Refining and Marketing had the best results since 1986, and Exploration and Production's results, excluding divestment profits, were at a similar level to 1990.
BP Chemicals, meanwhile, saw a replacement cost loss of £7m against a profit of £129m in 1990.
Turnover for the year was £3064m, down 3 per cent on 1990.
‘We got hit hard on basic ethylene cracking, and the polyethylene business, aided and abetted by overcapacity’, said Sanderson.
‘However, 1991 was relatively successful for the acrylo and acetyl business, as well as some of the specialities’.
Advanced materials, however, which are defence-related in the US, had a hard year.
1991 was a ‘bad year on the financials but a good year on the controllables’ said Sanderson.
‘Capital expenditure is being managed just under $1000m (£556m) against $839m in 1990, he reported.
A number of projects peaked in 1991, for example the NGL-based cracker in Grangemouth, due on stream this autumn.
A Korean acetic acid plant will be completed on time.
‘All projects are on time, on budget or even better’, he said.
Looking ahead, Sanderson believes it is ‘difficult to be very optimistic about 1992’.
He said, ‘we are just at the end of the recession and we are about to come out on some sort of curve’.
However, he added, ‘there is not much evidence that we will bounce back out’.
BP Chemicals' objective for the future is to look at its cost base.
An energetic bench marking study is part of the plan, and a cost reduction exercise has begun, with a target to improve costs by £150m by next year.
This involves staff cuts, 850 of which have already been announced: 400 jobs are to go out of 1700 in Hull, 130 out of 650 in Baglan Bay, 200 out of 1300 in Antwerp and 120 out of 600 in central office.
These targets were decided at each location by a management team drawn from right across the site.
Each team's goal is to determine what it would have to do to be first class and then to handle things its own way.
BP Chemicals' key strategy for 1992, stated Sanderson, is to improve its performance, beat the competition, focus capital expenditure, manage its major projects, deliver agreed divestment and explore JV and alliance opportunities.
Targets already announced for the year are 4705m capex, and savings of $150m, which will include job cuts and savings across the board.
For 1992, an estimated 15 per cent of jobs could be shed,ie 3000 jobs before divestment.
‘The areas we are looking at for divestment are employee heavy’ said Sanderson.
Nevertheless, the real benefits form this will come in 1993 and 1994.
New science degrees
The Polytechnic of West London will introduce two new science degrees in September 1992.
The Council for National Academic Awards' degrees in chemistry or applied biology will be available on a part time basis with attendance, either as day release or part time day or evening, spread over three year.
The degrees have been designed primarily for those already employed in the chemical or biological industries for whom a degree is necessary or desirable for promotion to a more senior appointment.
BTG buy-out
The government has sold the British Technology Group (BTG) to the consortium led by BTG's management.
The decision came last month after the government had been considering bids from the remaining two consortia interested in BTG.
The consortium formed by BTG's management and staff is led by CINVen, one of Europe's largest investment funds and, according to a statement from Ian Harvey, BTG's chief executive, is composed of a group of well-known and highly respected financial and academic institutions.
Harvey said that ‘BTG's independence and integrity will be protected because there are no industrial investors [in the consortium]who may have a vested interest in our technologies; nor will any investor hold a stake larger than 15 per cent’.
The other consortium bidding for BTG was led by Dr John Ashworth, director of the London School of Economics, and included BTG's US rival Research Corporation Technologies.
Glaxo grows
The introduction of a new series of medicines, together with the strong and continuing growth of established products, were significant factors in Glaxo's favourable results during the first six months of 1991.
The group's profits increased by 14 per cent to £703m and turnover increased by 24 per cent to £1976m (although exchange rate movements overstated the real increases).
If exchange rates had remained constant, total turnover for the period would have increased by 18 per cent.
The increase in sales is almost entirely attributable to growth in volume, not to price increases, reported Glaxo's chairman, Sir Paul Girolami.
Sales of Zofran, the anti-emetic product introduced in March 1990, were £120m, while Imigran, used to treat migraine, achieved sales of £13m.
Other new drugs now available include Serevent, an important advance in asthma treatment, Flixonase for hayfever, Cutivate for skin disorders and Lacipil for high blood pressure.
Lacipil has produced £9m sales in Italy since its launch there last September.
Biotech lab for Huddersfield
Huddersfield Polytechnic has opened a new biotechnology laboratory which will carry out research in to the manufacture of chemical products using biotechnology instead of traditional chemical routes.
The laboratory was funded under the Link scheme of the Department of Trade and Industry and the Science and Engineering Research Council, with support form Allied Colloids, Bradford.
Glasgow graduates
Glasgow Polytechnic has set up a graduates association and would like to her from any graduates or diplomates.
Further details from G. Murdoch, alumni relations officer, Glasgow Polytechnic, 70 Cowcaddens Road, Glasgow G4 0BA.
industry
Neste Chemicals and Bharita , India, are to establish a joint venture company in Indian to produce polyethylene compounds to be used in the manufacture of power cables.
Du Pont is to build the first hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) -125 plant on a commercial scale at Deepwater, NJ.
HFC-125 is non-ozone depleting and can be used as a low temperature refrigerant.
The plant is scheduled for start-up in mid-1992.
Mobil Badger is to offer for license a novel technology for reducing the benzene content of light reformate, the Mobil benzene reduction process.
Mallinckrodt Medical , a unit of Imcera , is to increase its production capability of ioversol by expanding its existing plant in St Louis, US, and building a new one in Ireland.
BP is to sell its refining and marketing activities in West Africa and Tunisia to Elf Aquitaine .
As part of the Black Country inward investment programme,Laporte is to invest £4.4m in relocating its cleaning chemical company,Gramos Chemicals , to Spring Road, Smethwick.
Another subsidiary,Remtox , will move to a site next to the M5 motorway.
Laporte will sell the ceramic division of its subsidiary Southern Clay Products to United Clays of Texas , for $5.1m (£3m).
Messer Griesheim has awarded a second order to Air Products to supply a 1710 t per day oxygen plant, to be built at Dormagen, Germany.
Dow has bought the remaining minority interests in Donichem , its joint venture with the Hungarian Nitrokemia and Chemolimpex .
The Styrofoam plant is now wholly owned by Dow.
ICI is to invest £10m on a production lines at its plant in Dumfries for Kaldex, a new high performance film.
Following the closure of its Styrene 1 unit at Terneuzen, the Netherlands, in 1991,Dow Europe will further rationalise styrene monomer capacity by shutting down its old Styrene II unit.
This follows the start-up of the Styrene IV unit last year.
BASF Lacke , Germany, and Yasar Holding , Turkey, have agreed to licence the use of BASF's know-how in the field of automotive OEM paints to a Turkish company Dyosad , a subsidiary of Yasar Holding.
The four joint venture partners in IBN ZAHR, Sabic, Ecofuel, Neste and Apicorp , have signed contracts officially amending their partnership to reflect the expansion of methyl tertiary butyl ether capacity and the introduction of polypropylene production next year.
Shell UK has sold International Biochemicals Group , which specialises in environmental clean-up, to Environmental Remediation , Baton Rouge, US, for an undisclosed sum.
Parties beg to agree
While the major political parties are at each other 's throats over most areas of policy, they seem to agree on one idea to aid innovation — probably it is from an independent body.
A new report from a working party set up by the Prince of Wales recommends that an intermediate tier of research organisations, between higher education (HE) and industry, should be set up to assist technology transfer.
The report suggested that these could be called Faraday Centres.
Within days of the report's appearance, the Labour Party — after a two-years study that inevitably consulted many of the same people as the prince's working party — announced a very similar plan, calling them Newton Institutes.
The same day the secretaries of the state for trade and industry (Peter Lilley) and for education and science (Kenneth Clarke) announced a pilot scheme to build up partnerships between HE and industrial research organisation
The Prince of Wales established an award for innovation in 1985 and his working group on innovation was set up after a conference at Highgrove last year.
Under the chairmanship of Sir John Fairclough and working in conjunction with the Centre for Exploitation of Science and Technology (CEST) the group produced its interim report in February this year.
Its main recommendations is that ‘the status, role and capability of organisations engaged in technology development and transfer be substantially enhanced’.
The report pointed out that in Germany the role of channelling knowledge and technology from HE to industry is fulfilled in part by the Fraunhofer institutes, bridging the divide between the aspirations of academia and industry.
The Fairclough report suggests that suitable UK institutions could be offered Faraday Centre status, becoming foci for technologies and expertise of industrial relevance, in which graduate scientists and engineers could work for a higher degree while engaged on contract research before moving into industry.
Launching the Labour Party's policy document on science and technology, the shadow science and technology spokesman, Dr Jeremy Bray, said that ‘we are persuaded that there is a need for a new system of intermediate institutions — which will be called Newton Institutes — to form a bridge between the world of academic research and its application’.
He explained that many of the independent research and technology organisations, government labs, defence labs moving into civil fields and some research council institutes have the makings of these intermediate institutions.
What they need is ‘rounding out and development into a coherent national system’.
Simultaneously, Lilley and Clarke announced a similar scheme to allow students to gain higher degrees while working on industrial research, thereby fostering an increased flow of people and technology between academia and industry.
The DTI and the DES have provided £2m to set up a pilot scheme.
HE institutions and industrial research bodies are being invited to submit proposals for partnerships involving 20 students each in the first year, and the five best schemes will be funded in 1992–93.
The Labour Party document did not confine itself to proposing Newton Institutes.
As well as a sideswipe at the DTI's failure to spend all the money it had available for industrial-academic arrangements such as the Link scheme, the spokesmen promised various schemes to improve public understanding of science.
These include a permanent exhibition of contemporary science, showing ‘what science is today, how it is being applied, and where it is going’, Bray said.
Another idea is ‘a national network that will link working engineers and scientists with every school in the country…so that our boys and girls can see role models and learn about the work of engineers, scientists and industry’.
The Labour document also proposes a Continuing Professional Development Scheme to try to free the skills of the 8000 postdoctoral researchers in temporary appointments whose careers are blocked by the poor career structure for academic researchers.
The Working Group in innovation,Interim report , available from CEST, 5 Berners Road, London N1 0PW.
Jeremy Bray,Competitive strength: Labour's proposal's proposals for a new system of scientific institutions , available from Labour Party, 150 Walworth Road, London SE17 1JT.
Sheep and goats in HE funding
Some years ago the Advisory Board for the Research Councils (ABRC) proposed its notorious ‘RTX’ scheme whereby some universities would be major research institutions (R), while others would become teaching-only (T) establishments.
Although the scheme seemed to be quietly dropped after the outcry about separating sheep from goats, in essence it lingers on in the policies of the Universities Funding Council (UFC).
The UFC's recently-announced grant allocations for 1992–93 hand out rewards and penalties to different institutions, and the allocations for research are markedly different from those for teaching.
Overall, the university system is projected to grow, and those institutions that can delivery the largest number of ‘fees-only’ students (ie those whose numbers are not linked to infrastructure or staffing ratios) are getting the biggest increases in teaching funds.
Research funds, however, have been awarded on the basis of UFC's research rating.
The trend has been to increase differences between institutions rather than to treat them equally.
Cambridge, for instance, has received a 19 per cent increase in UFC research, but only 2.7 per cent in teaching funds.
Keele, on the other hand, gets over 32 per cent extra for teaching (rewarding a 48 per cent increase in fees-only students), but only 2.5 per cent for research.
Bottom of the heap comes Aston, which gets 2.5 and 2.0 per cent respectively.
The UFC has launched its new research quality assessment, which will be taken into account when calculating funding for 1993–94.
For the first time the exercise will involve the whole of higher education — some 150 universities, polytechnics and colleges of further education which will come under the new Higher Education Funding Councils.
UFC has published a document setting out how the peer review process will work, with 50 panels of 8–10 experts producing ratings for activities across 72 subjects.
The committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals (CVCP) has welcomed the increase in university research funds, which represents 11 per cent more over two years.
CVCP had maintained that ‘an expansion driven wholly by the recruitment of extra students, many of them at marginal cost, could threaten research’, but says that the research funds mean that some universities can ‘increase their income without recourse to student recruitment alone’.
The UFC research money only represents one leg of the dual support system.
New statistics show that from 1988–89 to 1989–90 the universities gained an extra £100m through research council grants and research contracts.
The increase was from £629m to £752m, with the overseas elements (including EC funds) rising by 31 per cent.
CVCP has published a briefing paper for universities to identify and explain key elements of environmental law.
The document focuses on two areas: changes with which universities will have to comply, and changes that offer them the chance to market their skills.
Richard Macrory,Universities & the environment: environmental regulation — opportunities and obligations , is available price £5.00 from CVCP, 29 Tavistock Square, London WC1H 9EZ.
in brief Digi Table has appointed the Technical Equipment Company as exclusive distributor of its safe process instrumentation products in Southern Ireland
British Bio-technology 's laboratory products division has been incorporated into a wholly-owned subsidiary of British Bio-technology Group.
The new company is called British Bio-technology Products .
Elga Group has changed its name to Protean and has acquired Carbolite , the electric furnace and oven specialist.
Sanyo Gallenkamp has moved to Park House, Meridian East, Meridian Business Park, Leicester LE3 2UZ; tel: 0533 630530.
Holographic edge filters for Raman spectroscopy are now available from Optilas , the laser and optical specialist.
Oslo-based Det norske Veritas (DNV) has acquired the Technica Group .
Under the name DNV Technica , the new company will take on the current operations of the Technica Group and the risk and reliability services of DNV.
Mattson Instruments , a subsidiary of Analytical Technology , US, has bought Cahn Instruments , California, the micro balance specialists.
Pall , US, and Asahi Chemical , Japan, have formed an agreement under which Asahi's industrial membrane division will supply Pall with its advanced hollow fibre ultrafiltration modules and application skills for sale in Pall designed systems.
Asoma Instruments has moved to 11675 Jollyville Road, Austin, Texas 78759, US.
The new building will house its manufacturing, research, laboratory, sales, marketing and administration departments.
Contamination control specialist MDH has bought the remaining share capital of Cambridge Isolation Technology , manufacturer of flexible film isolators.
This adds to the substantial shareholding MDH bought in 1991.
Hallcrest USA , formulator of thermochromic liquid crystal mixtures, has opened a new office at Unit 14, Dorset Business Centre, Dawkins Road, Poole, Dorset BH15 4JY, to service its European accounts.
VSW Scientific Instruments has become the exclusive European distributor for the Dennis Leigh Technology range of mass spectrometers.
Labspace has brought Sintacel , the manufacturer of school laboratories.
This addition complements Labspace's existing business in the manufacture of lab furniture, fume cupboards and associated equipment.
Spectrophotometer specialist Milton Roy has appointed Lightpath Optical , the glass and silica cell supplier, as its agent in England and Wales.
Aldrich Chemical has introduced Chem-Flex, tubing composed of a thin wall, Teflon inner tube with an outer sheath of clear PVC to give a chemically inert, flexible, strong tube.
profile
Morton grows despite recession
The paperweight on Thomas Russell's desk at Morton International is a heavy amber-coloured prism.
Made of zinc selenide, it was produced by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) as a trial piece of the US Department of Defense.
Despite the prototype's success, the project (a targeting system) was suspended was suspended by the Pentagon.
Although disappointed, Russell still believes that CVD technology holds promise for commercial applications.
The company at one time had a significant tie to the defence industry, but in recent years it has focused on what it knows best — speciality chemicals.
Between 1983 and 1989 the company was part of the Morton Thiokol merger.
‘The idea was to create a world class speciality chemical business’, Russell recalls, and he believes they were successful in doing that.
But by 1989 the company recognised that the interests of the aerospace business and its commercial businesses would be best served separately.
So the board spun off Morton International as a separate business.
Morton goes back much further, however.
Joy Morton incorporated his Morton Salt company in Chicago in 1910, based on a business dating from 1848, and his ‘umbrella girl’ trademark is still familiar on American dining tables.
Road salt is a big business in the northern US and Canada, and home water softeners provide another steady market.
As early as 1931 Morton Salt got into chemicals with brine extracts used by the pharmaceutical, photographic and rubber industries.
It launched a hydrocarbon-insoluble liquid polysulphide polymer (tradenamed LP) in 1935, which is used to seal fuel tanks, and rapid expansion followed during the postwar years.
Morton's first overseas venture was in the UK in 1964, when it set up a joint venture in Coventry to distribute the LP polymer.
Another diversification in the 1960s turned into one of today's moneyspinners: Morton developed airbags to protect drivers and passengers in car crashes.
A sodium azide-based gas generator inflates the bag with nitrogen in a fraction of a second when a sensor detects a sudden deceleration.
These are the main choice for passive safety restraints, which are now mandatory for drivers in the US and from 1994 will be a legal requirement on the front passenger's side as well, potentially doubling Morton's projected $500m business.
The company has links with Bosch to introduce the technology into Europe and hopes that the EC will insist on airbags by the end of the decade.
As currently constituted, Morton International consists of three businesses: Automotive Safety Products; Salt; and Specialty Chemicals.
By turnover, the speciality chemicals constitute the largest part ($1215m out of the $1906m in 1991) but the airbags are now a significant contributor, up from under $8m sales in 1987 to $225m last year.
The salt business is highly profitable (£91m on $466m sales in 1991, representing a significant proportion of the company's pretax profits of £214m) and provides much of the cash for growth.
The Specialty Chemicals business comprises four product groups: adhesives and speciality polymers, coatings, electronic materials and speciality chemical products (a small food and cosmetic colour business was sold to Universal Foods last year).
Of these, coatings and electronic materials have been under pressure due to the recession in user industries such as cars, computers and construction.
In the case of powder coatings Morton combined two businesses that it had acquired separately from Philip Morris and Chesebrough-Pond's in the 1980s, and it did not go smoothly.
Now ‘we are resuming the kind of growth we should have had’, says Nancy Hobor, vice-president of communications and investor relations.
Powder coatings, because they require no solvents, are environmentally friendly products whose market share is growing even in a period of overall slack demand.
Morton was also a pioneer in coil coatings and its industrial coating group is a leading supplier.
In this process the solvent is captured at the point of use, making it acceptable on environmental and operator safety grounds.
The industrial coating group has also developed a water-based paint for road markings, with sales heavily based on the environmentally-conscious West Coast of the US.
Another paint business is liquid coatings for plastics — mainly car parts — and Morton has a European position in this through its acquisition of the Dr Renger company.
‘Clearly there is an opportunity for us to grow in Europe as more and more of the automobile is made from plastic and we can pick up a fairly good part of the business’, Hobor said.
Dr Renger brought with it a coating for compact discs, which Morton has introduced to US manufacturers.
The US electronic industries have been in recession for about four years, and Morton's business in this area is driven by computers, telecommunications and consumer electronics including components for cars, all of which have been hit.
Morton mainly supplies photoresists and process chemicals for manufacturing printed circuit boards and in semi-conductor photoimaging.
The speciality chemical products include sodium borohydride, a ‘green’ paper bleach, which Morton makes at two plants, one in Washington state supplying US and Canadian paper mills, the other in Delfzjil in the Netherlands, supplying the Scandinavian newsprint industry.
The product has a number of environmental pluses, because it can be used to bleach recycled paper and also used to purify wastewater by removing heavy metals.
Morton's Adhesives and Specialty Polymers group probably has a greater diversity of products and markets — both in terms of end uses and of geography — than any other part of the company.
Russell is the president of this group and says that it is unique within Morton because of its proportion of sales in Europe — some $200m out of $440m.
In fact, the largest segment, adhesives, is actually larger in Europe (some $160m against $130m US).
Except for a Japanese joint venture, Russell's group does not manufacture in the Far East, and sales there can come from either US or European production, but generally Morton prefers to manufacture close to the customer for improved service and to reduce tariff costs.
The Adhesives and Specialty Polymers group has seven production sites in the US, one in Canada and six in Europe, and is getting to the stage of having the same production capability in either region.
Much of Morton's expansion in Europe has been achieved by acquisition, and these companies are being integrated not by imposing a monolithic European headquarters, but by an operating group taking responsibility for that product throughout Europe.
For instance, the chairman of an Italian company that Morton acquired in the 1970s has been given responsibility for adhesives throughout the region.
Russell firmly believes that marketing should be done locally, in the language and culture of the customer.
Packaging and industrial adhesives account for $300m or so of sales, and the packaging markets are intensely regional.
Russell explained that as these industries move towards solvent free and high solids materials, Morton is spending considerable amounts on research to develop new products.
The products are mainly adhesives and coatings for laminates of foil and films.
In Western Europe and the US, new opportunities include microwave-packed foods, but those regional markets are essentially mature.
For Russell the excitement in packaging is the block of potential consumers in Eastern Europe.
As he points out, a large part of the former Soviet Union's food shortages could be eased by better packaging of agricultural products.
Elsewhere, environmental concerns provide opportunities.
The water based polymers, mainly styrene and acrylic resins, allow the textile, ink and graphic art industries to move to solvent-free methods.
Morton is expanding its operation at Dewsbury in the UK to make the solid resin where previously the resin was shipped in from the US and was only put into solution in the UK.
The $60m pa thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) business of which some 40 per cent is manufactured in Germany, produces a wide range of specific products, including binders for magnetic materials on recording tapes, extruded materials, adhesive materials etc .
‘We are a speciality chemical manufacturer — we sell our product by performance, by meeting certain expectations and by technical service.
Very often we have to teach our customer show to operate their equipment — it's technical selling, not catalogue sales’.
Two TPU products are currently causing excitement within Morton.
Krystalflex is an aliphatic TPU resin extruded into an optical grade film that can laminate poly-carbonate to glass to form a light-weight bulletproof glass.
The TPU provides a flexible layer, allowing the materials to expand and contract at different rates without delaminating.
Not only will the material have uses in banks, prisons, security vehicles etc , but it could provide unbreakable windows for ordinary cars to prevent break-ins without increasing the weight of the car.
Also in the TPU area is Vitani, a line of urethane resin products for making artificial leather.
This came from Morton's Italian subsidiary  and used to have a good market in Eastern Europe, though this has recently collapsed, and is widely used in sport shops and luggage, being washable and breathable — and cheaper than real leather.
Russell sees good opportunities in synthetic leather clothing, particularly if Morton can tie in with a European designer.
For the future, Morton sees its salt business as a cash generator to fund other high growth areas, while the company's biggest boost will come from airbags.
Meanwhile Hobor predicts that the speciality chemical businesses will continue to grow through small niche acquisitions as well as internal growth through new products.
Once the recession is over, ‘our feeling is that we're talking about 10–15 per cent annual sales growth through the decade’ in chemicals.
‘We see ourselves as a specialty chemical company and the strategies are to invest in facilities and R & D, to emphasise Europe as we go forward and to continue to improve the quality’.
Much of this year's spurt in capital spending (up from around $150m to some $220m) is related to airbags, but the speciality chemical businesses have also seen a big increase, spread over a number of small projects.
‘Because of the financial strength of the company’, Hobor said, ‘it doesn't have to constrain itself during a downturn — in fact its philosophy has always been the opposite: when you're in a downturn, that is when you should be investing in plant and equipment’.
In a business selling on the performance of its products this is essential.
Russell's definition of what speciality chemicals are about could be a touchstone for the industry: ‘We strive to make our products obsolete — if we don't then our competition will!’.
Morton's TPUs find uses from ski boots and hoses to shoes and binders for magnetic tapes.
environment
Heseltine on EC environment
Michael Heseltine, secretary of state for the environment, has said that implementation and enforcement of EC legislation will be ‘very much in the front’ of environmental issues dealt with during the UK's EC presidency.
Giving evidence before the House of Lords environment subcommittee, Heseltine said that other issues to be tackled include integrated pollution control, eco-auditing and the possibility of an audit inspectorate.
He said that the inspectorate would probably take the form of an ‘inspectorate of national inspectorates’.
It would report to the Commission and the role of the European environment agency would be to collect statistics and provide background information on decisions to be made.
The setting up of the European environment agency has stalled because of a lack of agreement over where its headquarters should be.
The agency, said Heseltine, has become ‘a pawn in the negotiations of the French’, although an alternative way forward had been proposed in which the agency would have a secretariat in Brussels and the leadership of the agency would rotate in the same way that the EC presidency does.
Heseltine said that the government ‘carefully evaluates directives’ before agreeing to them and on occasion had needed to question whether other countries were honouring their commitments.
When asked if he thought a ‘level playing field’ would ever be achieved Heseltine said that he thought change would take place, but not just because politicians wish it.
He said that the increasing number of pressure groups in other EC countries (which at the moment have fewer groups than the UK) would influence both public and political opinion and thus contribute to a situation in which implementation and enforcement of EC environmental legislation would improve.
Responsible energy launch
The Chemical Industries Association (CIA) chose the third anniversary of its Responsible Care scheme to launch an initiative for Responsible Energy.
The Responsible Energy scheme, which will form part of the Responsible Care programme, follows the same principles as its parent scheme, in that chief executives and business or site managers fill in questionnaires which can then be used to assess improvement within the company in the area of energy conservation.
The CIA has produced a guide, in conjunction with the Energy Efficiency Office of the Department of Trade and Industry, to assist companies in introducing, assessing and reviewing programmes for energy management and to focus attention on energy use and its environmental implications.
At a conference for chief executives to mark the third anniversary of Responsible Care, David Heathcoat-Amory, under secretary of state for energy, said that he was ‘very impressed with the way that the [chemical]industry is moving forward to grasp the environmental challenge’.
He pointed out that collectively the chemical industry was the largest industrial user of energy, spending around £1000m a year.
He said that he was particularly interested in the use of combined heat and power technology and suggested that the industry could install equipment to generate about 2000 MW more energy using this method.
John Matthews, chairman of the CIA energy committee, said that a recent CIA investment survey had shown that although investment had dropped from £2000m in 1991 to £1600m–£1800m in 1992, the amount invested in health, safety and the environment had gone up considerably and the amount invested in energy efficiency had remained level.
By next year CIA companies will have submitted three sets of data as indicators of performance and the data would be shared with the public whether they are good or bad.
Environmental management
Croner has published Environmental management , to help industry identify and meet its increasing environmental obligations.
Produced in a loose-leaf format to allow for updating, this reference work is aimed at anyone with responsibility for ensuring compliance with new legislation.
It encompasses UK and EC environmental legislation, the objective and implementation of environmental management policies, integrated pollution control, waste management and the market forces that necessitate better environmental management by UK industry.
Details from Croner Publications, Croner House, London, Kingston upon Thames, Surrey KT2 6SR.
Environment agency views
The RSC, Ofwat and the House of Commons Environment Committee have submitted responses to the government's proposals for a single environment agency.
The RSC and Ofwat, the water industry watchdog, favour the inclusion of HM Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP), the National Rivers Authority (NRA) and waste regulation responsibilities in a single agency.
The Commons environment committee recommends splitting the NRA's functions.
The RSC says that although the combination would create a very large body and might result in a ‘loss of focus’ on pollution control, it would avoid serious disruption of programmes and would provide integrated operations at the ‘delivery end’of its service.
The RSC points out that the proposals to create a single environment agency are rather unfortunately timed, because both HMIP and NRA are relatively new.
The RSC suggests in its response that the new agency could have a useful policy-making role to reflect its range of interests and expertise and should have its own in-house R & D capacity.
Ofwat also favours the combination of the NRA and HMIP, which it says, would achieve quicker and more cost effective decisions and would be a ‘one stop shop’ for industry and the public.
However the Commons environment committee has a different view.
It has heard and seen evidence from witnesses including the minister of agriculture, fisheries and food, the chairman of the NRA, the Chemical Industries Association and the Institute of Wastes Management, and has recommended that the government take the fourth option of its consultation paper (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 1000) and separate the NRA's pollution control functions from its other functions.
The committee says that it would strongly prefer that the integrated management of river basins remains with the NRA.
Both the RSC and the environment committee also felt that the formation of a single environment agency covering Scotland as well as England and Wales deserved serious consideration.
Duty of care
1 April 1992 saw the introduction of the government's new Duty of Care regulations under which most companies who produce or handle waste will become directly responsible for its safe management from ‘cradle to grave’.
In response to this BFI Wastecare has produced a leaflet,Don't end up on the wrong side of the law , which outlines what will be required of these companies under the new regulations.
Free copies are available from Tony Butterfield, BFI Wastecare, Packington House, Packington Lane, Little Packington, Meriden, Coventry CV7 7HN.
The Department of Environment has produced a leaflet for businesses that introduces the provisions of the duty of care for waste under the Environmental Protection Act 1990.
Free copies of the leaflet are available from the Department of the Environment, PO Box 135, Bradford, W York BD9 4HU.
markets
Nonwoven materials
Nonwoven modern materials include materials produced from synthetic, natural or manmade fibres or filaments, used in, for example, the soft veil at the outer surface of a disposable baby nappy, heavy geotextiles used in civil engineering, or landfill.
A new report has been published on the market for nonwovens, aimed at users and manufacturers as well as unfamiliar industrialists.
It examines the raw materials, manufacturing techniques, suppliers, performance, applications, end use markets, and the structure of the industry.
The report addresses all the major markets: Europe, US and Japan, which currently represent an annual market of over $5000m.
It also considers regulatory concerns and environmental issues, and a directory of suppliers is appended.
Nonwoven materials applications and markets is available, price £430, from World Business Publications, 4th Floor, Britannia House, 960 High Road, London N12 9RY.
Styrenics
Chem-facts: styrenics is a new publication from Chem-Intell.
The introduction includes information on the properties, production and uses of styrenics and on Far East styrenic growth.
Country profiles, manufacturers' addresses, licensors of polystyrene technology, a list of tradenames and a company index are all included.
For details contact Chem-Intell, 39a Bowling Green Lane, London EC1R 0BJ.
Engineering polymers
Consumption of engineering polymers in key industrialising nations will increase from 870000 t in 1991 to almost 1.6m t in the year 2000, an average of 7 per cent pa, according to Chem Systems' recent study The engineering polymer business in developing regions .
Growth rates vary according to the polymer type, with ABS/SAN expanding at 6 per cent through the 1990s, compared with 8 per cent for the other engineering polymers.
Taiwan accounted for 29 per cent of aggregate demand in 1991, and this will decrease to 26 per cent by 2000, while South Korea will show strong growth through slower movement of the manufacturing base and increased engineering polymer penetration into automotive applications.
The report evaluates prospects for ABS/SAN, MPPO/PPE, nylon, polycarbonate, polyacetal, polyesters and other performance polymers in South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore, as well as in Brazil, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico and Thailand.
It looks at the economic environment, end-use market and industries, and competition.
For details of The engineering polymer business in developing regions contact J. Virosco, Chem Systems, 303 South Broadway, Tarrytown, NY 10591, US.
Demand for engineering polymers by country.
Source: Chem Systems
Euro plastic additives
Plastic additives will become more expensive over the next five years according to a new report from Frost & Sullivan.
The growing demands and applications being made of plastics are filtering through to the additive market, requiring them to be constantly updated and made more efficient, and thus leading to higher prices, explained the report.
Consumption of plastic additives in the EC, estimated at 1.3m t in 1991, with a value of over $2770m, is forecast to reach 1.74m t by 1996, worth $3050m.
The most widely used plastic additives, in volume terms, are plasticisers and consumption in this sector is expected to increase from 984000 t in 1991 to over 1m t by 1996.
Flame retardants, degradability additives and UV stabilisers will be the best performers, all forecast to grow over 25 per cent in five years.
The European market for plastic additives, Report E1536 is available, price $4250, from Customer Service, Frost & Sullivan, Sullivan House, 4 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W 0HD; tel:071 730 3438.
Consumption of plastic additives in the EC by volume and territory, 1991 (000 t).
Source: Frost & Sullivan
BPF business study
The British Plastics Federation has published the latest edition of its business trends survey covering 139 UK plastics processors and material suppliers.
Material suppliers' levels of plant utilisation have fallen again with 25 per cent of companies reporting over 90 per cent utilisation; the lowest proportion for over five years.
Sales to the UK market continued to fall — half of companies reported a decrease and less than 10 per cent of companies reported an increase.
Plastic processors also reported low levels of utilisation, although levels of exports have held up reasonably well, partially in response to sustained low levels of demand from the domestic market.
Copies of the report are available, price £25 from the Publications Department, British Plastics Federation, 5 Belgrave Square, London SW1X 8PD.
Immune disease
The worldwide growth in the immune disease treatment market will slow at the end of the decade according to a new report published by Business Communications.
The study provides a detailed analysis of each immune disease, currently available treatment, status of new drugs under clinical development, early R&D of new treatment modalities, companies leading in research and development of immune-based drugs as well as companies currently having leadership positions in the present form of treatment.
Further information can be obtained from RauCon GmbH, POB 1069, W-6912 Dielheim, Germany.
Carbohydrate-based drugs
Carbohydrate-based drugs will become a new class of pharmaceutical product during the next decade and will be used in treating autoimmune diseases and as anti-inflammatories.
The first application will most likely be in treating rheumatoid arthritis.
These are the predictions of a new report from Technology Management Group, entitled Emerging markets for carbohydrate-based pharmaceutical products — a worldwide study .
Carbohydrate-based drugs fall into several categories including polysaccharides, oligosaccharides, monosaccharide derivatives and cyclodextrins, and each category is likely to have distinct applications including anti-viral, anti-bacterial and anti-thrombotic uses in various cardiovascular applications.
The report is available from Technology Management Group, 25 Science Park, New Haven, Connecticut 06511–1968, US.
europe
Biotechnology patents delay
Long-delayed EC legislation on biotechnology patents suffered a further setback in Strasbourg when the February session of the European Parliament (EP) voted that still more time is required for detailed consideration of the ethical issues involved.
When the first draft was published in October 1988, the Commission presented it more as an EC contribution to wider European agreement on patent law, seeking uniform protection for what Brussels termed ‘inventions in biotechnology’, rather than an attempt to create an ethical framework.
‘By ensuring that these inventions can be patented in all Community countries, this measure aims to encourage research in the context of the large market and to help European industry compete on equal terms with its American and Japanese rivals, who already enjoy such a facility’, the Commission declared.
The directive suggested ‘patent-ability’ for living matter — plants, animals and micro-organisms — and Commission officials pointed to the scope of biotechnology in foodstuffs, pest control and agricultural production.
Almost from the outset, the measure provoked fierce ethical debate, and while the 12 nations of the European Community continued to grapple with commercial aspects of biotechnology, the 26-nation Council of Europe has been working toward an international convention on human rights questions in bioethics.
In February the Council published recommendations on codes of conduct for bioethics in health care and DNA analysis in forensic science which, once transposed into a Convention, and then ratified by signatory states, would acquire legal weight.
The EP, concerned about moral implications of patenting human and animal life, has supported the Council of Europe efforts, most recently through a joint declaration urging that the Convention should be produced ‘as speedily as possible’ and supporting the principle that ‘the human body should not be used for commercial purposes’.
The Council guidelines on bioethics in health care cover considerations such as confidentiality and data protection and insist that no-one should be compelled to undergo testing for social benefits, employment or education.
Insurance companies should not be able to demand genetic data as a condition of issuing health or life cover.
A panel of experts, appointed by the Council of Europe last November to advise the Community, found that some European states have yet to develop rules on recourse to DNA analysis in forensic work — a shortcoming they set as the first priority.
They also sounded a note of caution on the technique.
‘It is not…possible to generalise over the use of DNA analysis as the sole basis for conviction; it will be for the court to decide in any particular case’.
Immobilised microbes: commercial value in danger.
Single market for drugs
A key part of EC proposals for a single European market in pharmaceuticals has stalled in a dispute between the European Commission and the Council of Ministers.
The European Parliament recently endorsed a package of four measures, laying down Community rules on advertising, labelling, wholesale distribution and legal classification of drugs into categories of prescription-only and over-the-counter.
But MEPs complained that the package had reappeared for a second reading minus the crucial proposal to create a European Medicines Agency.
Without the agency to exercise a central monitoring role, they said, the effect of the other measures would be incomplete.
Commission vice-president Martin Bangemann explained that the measure had been framed under Single Market ‘fast-track’ procedures in which final approval is subject to qualified majority in the Council of Ministers on matters necessitating a high level of public protection.
But the ministers favoured a more gradual approach, entailing unanimity at each stage.
The Commissioner said that unless ministers relented, the issue might have to be resolved by an appeal to the European Court of Justice.
Meanwhile, he saw no reason to delay other measures in the package: ‘We have, after all, made extraordinary progress in the four years since these proposals were listed in the White Paper as part of the programme required for the Single Market.
If this package had had to go through national parliaments, it would not have been achieved in a hundred years!’
European pharmacopoeia
With new premises costing £5.2m, and a doubled budget, the European Pharmacopoeia organisation in Strasbourg plans to step up its work rate on medicinal product standards — and to extend its activities.
The Pharmacopoeia has played an increasingly important role in defining common criteria and control standards for medicinal substances and is now developing analytical methods for solvent and pesticide residues and strengthening its role in the standardisation of biologicals such as blood products and vaccines.
The Pharmacopoeia works in collaboration with the EC, which has recently extended its legislation to these products.
Some 750 active or auxiliary substances are now covered by European monographs which have replaced national standards.
Depending on the country in question, between 60 and 90 per cent of the monographs, and up to 100 per cent in Scandinavia and Spain, already bear the 12 stars symbolising European publication.
These monographs are not only binding in the member countries, but also carry the force of law in the British Commonwealth and in former colonies of France, Spain and Belgium.
Currently, 350 experts working in specialist groups are preparing 300 new monographs, while continuing updating existing texts.
The range is vast, from simple inorganic substances to the most recent biologicals.
The Pharmacopoeia is now aiming, quite literally, to redouble its efforts by setting itself a target of 1500 monographs, covering the main existing pharmaceutical substances.
The 1992 budget of £3.8 million similarly reflects a 100 per cent increase on 1991.
Institutionally, the Pharmacopoeia represents an important bridge between the 126-member Council of Europe organisation and the 12 nations of the European Community.
All EC Single Market directives on closer alignment of national pharmaceutical legislation now require compliance by medications, substances and analyses with European Pharmacopoeia convention in its own right emphasises the symbiosis between the two institutions.
Mme Catherine Lalumière, secretary general of the Council of Europe, explains: ‘Adoption of the Council as the framework for the Pharmacopoeia rather than the creation of a European pharmacopoeia was a quite deliberate choice.
It enabled a larger number of European countries to be included at the outset.
‘Countries such as Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria are already able to apply for observer status before becoming, in due course, parties to the Pharmacopoeia Corporation’.
In its new location, close to the pharmaceutical faculty of Strasbourg University, laboratory and reference substance facilities are now being fitted out and the transfer or the organisation's secretariat should be completed by the autumn.
Chemistry and physical chemistry laboratories will later be supplemented by biology and pharmaceutical technology laboratories.
Animal tests opposed
After overwhelming 202:60 vote in the European Parliament for a ban on cosmetic testing involving animals, fresh negotiations will be held between the assembly and the EC Commission to seek a compromise.
The assembly's February session in Strasbourg was debating draft legislation that would create an EC inventory of the estimated 8000 ingredients already in sue and establish a common system of nomenclature.
In addition to creating a common list of ingredients, the proposed new directive will require that ingredients be listed on labelling.
Manufacturers would be required to maintain dossiers in a standard format on each product, a measure designed to facilitate safety checks.
Animal protection groups claim that the EC cosmetic industry accounts for about 50000 of the 200000 tests carried out worldwide on animals.
In the UK the figure is put at around 4000.
‘While public opinion is in favour of keeping tests for animals for medical research, there is a strong and increasing opposition to use of animals for cosmetics’, said the spokesman for the assembly's Environment Committee, German MEP Mrs Dagmar Roth-Behrendt.
Nevertheless, accurate figures are not available on the number of tests conducted, she said, since most EC member states had failed to comply with EC legislation dating back to 1986 requiring reporting of test statistics.
The legislation, in any case, failed to make a distinction concerning cosmetic testing.
Steps already taken by some manufacturers to phase out animal testing were welcome, as was the EC's encouragement for the development of alternative tests.
awards
Society for Drug Research awards
Three ICI Pharmaceuticals scientists have received the Society for Drug Research 1991 award for drug discovery in recognition of their contribution to the discovery and development of Zoladex, ICI's treatment for prostate cancer and breast cancer.
The award is given every two years and it is generally a requirement that the discovered drug is in therapeutic use.
Processing waste award
A British Aerospace Engineering Design prize, administered by the design Council, has been awarded to Stuart Holliday and Gillian Supple from the University of Leeds.
Working on a project sponsored by ICI, Holliday and Supple designed a way to treat the 300000 t pa of waste acid generated from methyl methacrylate processing.
Currently the waste is disposed of in the North Sea.
The process uses a natural gas flame to break down the effluent into sulphur dioxide.
This gas is then cleaned and converted into sulphur trioxide via a vanadium pentoxide catalyst.
The sulphur trioxide is in turn dissolved in oleum and sulphuric acid, with water added to dilute the solutions to the desired product strengths.
Heat recovered from the process can be re-used in other parts of the plant.
The prizes are awarded every year to undergraduate students who have demonstrated original thinking in their approach to developing designs, project management and presentation.
Wolf prize laureate
Prof John Pople (Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 138) has been awarded the Wolf prize, Israel's top medal for chemistry.
Pople is a member of a close knit community of theoretical chemists who have spent the past 40 years applying rigorous mathematical discipline to the theory of chemical bonding.
Since the 1950s the growth in power of computers has helped scientists like Pople give accurate pictures and make telling predictions about how simple molecules and their atoms stay together.
It all stemmed from the work of Irwin Schrödinger and his celebrated wave equation, which gave a direct quantitative predictive method for most, if not all, chemical phenomena.
Pople seized the opportunity and applied his mathematical skills to carbocations — renegade molecules that violate conventional structural rules, square planar as opposed to tetrahedral four coordinate carbon.
Pople has been instrumental in setting up computer programs like Polatom, Hondo and Gaussian and giving access to computer graphical methods for representing simple molecules.
The Wolf prize also carries cash award of £60,000.
Training
The National Training Awards are run by the Department of Employment and are intended to recognise and reward examples of effective training which have resulted in improved business or organisational performance.
An NTA regional commendation was awarded to Hickson & Welch, fine chemical specialist, for its training initiative to develop multi-skilled employees and ‘world-class’ standards in safety and efficiency.
Winners of the Patron's award (HRH, The Prince of Wales) were the employer British Gas Southern, and individuals Ken Smith and Bob Walters/ICI Chemicals and Polymers Teesside.
Award winners in category one employers included ACE/Chemical-Resist Plastics from Dewsbury; Allen & Hanburys, London; BP Chemicals, Grangemouth; Cardiff Laboratories, Amersham International; and ICI Pharmaceuticals, Macclesfield.
Queen's awards
The Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce (RSA) has outlined new plans for its Better Environment Awards for Industry following the prime minister's announcement that there will be a new Queen's Award for Environmental Achievement.
The national awards will offer two categories: the first will recognise management initiatives that bring environmental benefits to Britain, while the second award will be for the export of appropriate technologies that bring environmental benefit to developing countries.
Applications for the new Queen's award will be sought in the summer, with the first winners announced on 21 April 1993.
Overseas students
The Overseas Research Students (ORS) Awards Scheme was set up by the secretary of state for education and science in 1979 to provide awards for partial remission of tuition fees to overseas post-graduate students of outstanding merit and research potential.
Applications for the 1992 award are now being accepted and can be made through only one academic institution.
The closing date for the receipt of the application at the institution concerned is 30 April 1992 and the results will be announced in July 1992.
For details contact Overseas Research Students Awards Scheme, Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals, 29 Tavistock Square, London WC1H 9EZ.
Solar silicon
The Guido Donegani Institute, the corporate R&D arm of EniChem, in conjunction with Italsolar and the University of Milan, has been awarded the 1991 Philip Morris prize for scientific and technological research.
The award was made for their development of a low cost process for producing Solar Grade Silicon, SoG-Si, and a new technique for growing polycrystalline ingots which can then be used to obtain square wafers for the manufacture of solar cells.
The polycrystalline silicon produced has been chosen by the European Community for the manufacture of high efficiency solar cells in the European project.
Photomicrography prizes
Consultant microscopist and photomicrographer Spike Walker achieved fifth place in the annual international Nikon Smallworld photomicrography competition with a slide of desmid, a freshwater algae, and 19th place with the slide of vitamin C .
1991 Nikon International Smallworld Photo competition
Maison G. de Navarre
The International Federation of Societies of Cosmetic Chemists (IFSCC) has called for applications for the Maison G. de Navarre award by 1 June 1992 .
The 1992 award will contribute up to SFr5000 toward the cost of a young cosmetic scientist attending the IFSCC 1992 congress to be held in Yokohama, Japan, in October.
For details of eligible applicants and 500-word essay to be submitted, contact the general secretary, IFSCC, Delaport House, 57 Guildford Street, Luton, Bedfordshire, LU1 2NL.
Freedom of information
Norsk Hydro (UK) is the first company to receive an award from the Campaign for Freedom of Information following publication of an environmental report, verified by Lloyd's Register, which reviewed Norsk Hydro (UK) 's operations, ‘warts and all’.
The award recognised Norsk Hydro (UK) 's open door approach to its safety record and the environmental impact of its companies.
Water quality
Conoco Speciality Products and Southampton University are the first winners of the Hydro Award 1991, for outstanding achievement in the field of water quality improvement in the UK.
The award was presented by Norsk Hydro (UK) in association with the Fellowship of Engineering.
The award was made for the development of the Vortoil hydrocyclone unit for separating oil droplets from water.
The process was developed by Martin Thew following the Torrey Canyon disaster of 1967.
An important environmental application is the cleaning of oily water in the offshore oil industry.
Anglo-Dutch enterprise
Speciality Chemicals Services (SPECS) has been awarded a runner-up prize in the Netherlands — British Chamber of Commerce Award for Enterprise (Dutch small business category).
The citation mentions that the trust and respect that SPECS has in the industrial and academic communities in which it acts as intermediary in the supply of new and unusual chemicals.
Pocket-size microscope
A fully equipped microscope that is small enough to fit into a pocket has won a BBC Product Design award.
Available from BDH Laboratory Supplies, the Lensman combines computer aided design with state-of-the-art folded optics to provide a range of operations at home, at work or in the field.
In addition, the Lensman can access Micropage, a database assembled in collaboration with the publisher Collins, to provide an instant colour reference material, based on the Gem series, for use in the field.
Partnership award
The University of Glasgow has won the Glaxo Prize in analytical chemistry in the 1991 Partnership Awards for its development of new laboratory teaching techniques.
The development has been in conjunction with the Centre for Science Education an involved seven members of staff.
The redesign of the course manual, and the introduction of separate laboratory and problem-solving components, were carried out as part of a PhD project.
Power for efficiency
Comma Oil & Chemicals has won a Power for Efficiency and Productivity (PEP) award — part of Seeboard's annual Business Energy Efficiency awards — following the installation of thermosafe induction heaters developed by LMK Engineering.
Comma Oil & Chemicals, which blends and manufactures oils and lubricants, replaced its steam heated oven with induction drum heaters, so reducing the heating time for drums of chemical additives from eight hours to as little as two hours.
The changeover resulted in a £6000 pa saving in energy costs.
databases
Analytical Abstracts.
SilverPlatter and the Royal Society of Chemistry have announced the availability of Analytical Abstracts (AA)on CD-ROM.
AA was set up as a monthly hardcopy abstracts journal in 1954 and an online database was introduced in 1986 containing material from 1980 to date, giving easy access to abstracts spanning the discipline of analytical chemistry.
This same database is now available on one CD-ROM disc, incorporating SPIRS — SilverPlatter's search package.
It will be updated at quarterly intervals.
Circle 156 
Data access.
Molecular Design and Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) have signed an agreement giving access to scientific data through integrated services for data searching and communication.
Scientists will be able to use a single system — the new Integrated Scientific Information System (ISIS) from Molecular Design — to access, review, store and communicate scientific data.
ISIS will offer broad access to public databases through STN International as well as in-house databases to give scientists chemical structures, related text and analytical and test data contained in relational database systems.
Circle 157 
Accident database.
An up-dated version of the existing online MHIDAS database is to be released on CD-ROM.
The new MHIDAS, which relates to over 4000 accidents in 95 countries since 1965, is being marketed by a joint venture consisting of AEA Technology's Safety and Reliability consultancy, the Health and Safety Executive and SilverPlatter.
The information contained is intended to aid emergency planning and complement the theoretical framework used in safety assessments.
The new CD-ROM format will be faster to access and easier to manipulate.
Circle 158 
Medical treatments.
The online journal of current clinical trials , a scientific electronic journal, is to be launched this month.
It is designed to give physicians faster access to results on new and re-examined medical treatments.
It is a joint venture of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the OCLC (Online Computer Library Centre), a non-profit corporation links 13000 libraries in 46 countries.
It will be the first journal to make immediately available findings that could save or extend the lives of critically ill patients.
Circle 159 
Multi-language Chemdata.
The Belgian government has ordered the first multi-language version of Chemdata from the National Chemical Emergency Centre.
The four installations ordered will provide Chemdata's facilities in English, Dutch, French and German.
The latest system lists over 68000 chemical substances, their hazards and remedial actions.
It has full interlinking of languages and computing capabilities and can, for example, search for a chemical substance in one language and print out information covering hazards and remedial actions in another.
Circle 160 
services
Coating and analysis.
The Surface and Materials Engineering Division of Salford University Business Services is offering a range of services in the field of vacuum coatings, including contract R & D, coating characterisation, consultancy, design, routine coating service and technology transfer.
State-of-the-art deposition facilities include magnetron sputtering, reactive ion plating, ion-assisted deposition, electron beam and thermal evaporation, and RF and DC sputtering.
The division aims to work with clients to provide complete, rapid and cost effective solutions to industrial surface and materials engineering problems.
Circle 161 
Mass spectrometry.
M-Scan , the mass spectroscopy consultant and analysis service, has opened a new laboratory in Switzerland equipped with a VG Biotech Bio-Q electrospray mass spectrometer.
M-Scan has also installed a new VG Analytical Autospec mass spectrometer at its laboratory in Ascot.
M-Scan specialises in using MS to solve problems in biochemical, pharmaceutical, environmental, petroleum and chemical areas.
Circle 162 
Environmental consultancy.
Aquatic Environmental Consultants has launched Enviroscope, a service for industry, commerce and local authorities.
Enviroscope specialises in scoping environmental impact assessments and environmental audits and assisting companies with environmental communications and policy.
One area of special interest is helping companies to predict what environmental demands will be made of them in the future.
Circle 163 
Chlorine.
ICI Chlor-Chemicals has launched a Chlorine Information Service as part of its commitment to Responsible Care.
The service is intended as a source of factual information on chlorine and its derivative products and aims to reduce the confusion which surrounds the chlorine industry.
Circle 164 
Japanese information.
The British Library has reinstated its Japanese information service.
The service will concentrate on the provision of business and statistical information about Japan for UK users and will work alongside the library's existing business information service.
Circle 165 
On-site services.
British Rema , the particle size reduction and classification and thermal processing equipment specialist, provides an on-site service that includes unit surveys and report as well as installation of new or refurbished units.
Its technical expertise is available to provide laser and optical alignments, section replacements, tyre, roller and girth gear changes and drive alignments.
British Rema will also provide spares for materials processing equipment.
Circle 166 
new on the market
pH testers .
Cole-Parmer has launched two pH testers, the pHTestr 1 and pHTestr 2.
Both have their own microprocessor, are accurate to ±0.2 pH with a resolution of 0.1 pH in a temperature range of 0–50°C, and pH range of -1.0 to 15.0.
The pHTestr 1 may be push-button calibrated with pH 4.0, 7.0 or 10.0 buffer whilst the pHTestr 2 has a user selectable one, two or three push-button calibration.
This model also has automatic temperature compensation.
Circle 123 
Bench tops.
The Trespa TopLab from Hoechst is a hard wearing, decorative material for laboratory bench tops.
The surface is comparable with cast epoxy resins for chemical and stain resistance, whilst offering the mechanical qualities of solid phenolics.
The Trespa TopLab has shown resistance to almost all concentrated acids, solvents, non-abrasive industrial cleaning agents and dyestuffs.
With a high structural rigidity the TopLab is ideal for supporting heavy equipment.
Circle 121 
Luminescence.
A new microplate luminometer is available from Berthold .
The model LB 96P is designed to give very high sensitivity, virtually free from cross talk, whilst offering automatic reagent injection and rapid measurement.
The instrument is also able to measure all types of bio- and chemiluminescence, and can accommodate both flash and glow types of luminescence measurements.
Circle 122 
Immunoassay.
The Opus immunoassay system is a product of the joint venture between Polaroid and Behringwerke .
It is a fully automated benchtop system that offers random and continuous access using single test, self-contained reagent modules.
Current tests available are assays for the therapeutic drugs theophylline, phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, valproic acid and digoxin, with a total of around 40 analytes planned.
Circle 124 
Pressure vessels.
Tanshire Equipment has developed a range of mobile, self-contained, refrigerated pressure vessels for the handling of thermolabile products.
The vessels are available in sizes of 30 to 500 litres and can cool their contents to a temperature in the range of 10°C to +20°C, accurate to ±2°C, within two hours.
Circle 125 
Sample preparation.
Prospekt, a programmable on-line solid phase extraction kit from LDC Analytical , is a fully automated sample clean-up and injection system.
The entire system is modular with the Prospekt module at the heart containing the cartridge transport and sealing mechanism, and a microprocessor to control all the modules that can be added, for example a solvent delivery unit.
Circle 126 
Effluent monitoring.
The PP-MOS sampler from Buhler is a mains operated stationary device for monitoring effluent streams.
The sampler uses a pneumatic dosing system that is capable of a suction height of 8m, and the sampler is capable of taking probes form sewage plants, rivers, sewers and factory effluent with sample volumes ranging from 20 to 330 ml.
Circle 127 
Electrolyte analysers.
Nova Bio-medical has updated its series of ISE based electrolyte analysers that it first launched in 1977.
The Novas 1, 4, 5, 11, 12 and 13 have new electrode designs, electronics, software and mechanical components and their improved capabilities include smaller sample size, upgradable test menus and automatic flagging of abnormal results.
Tests available range from sodium and potassium to total CO 2 .
Circle 128 
Portable equipment.
HNU Systems has launched a range of portable analytical equipment.
The model 311 gas chromatograph is a self-contained unit with an isothermal oven, heated injector and detectors.
Its function is landfill gas monitoring and it is available in single or dual-detector configurations.
The model DL-101 portable photoioniser with datalogging incorporates an ion chamber that enables the user to zero electronically without the use of zero gas.
The software is specially designed for surveys, hazardous waste investigations, industrial hygiene applications and leak detection.
The model SEFA-P portable X-ray fluorescence analyser is for safe screening of waste oil samples for heavy metal contaminants prior to recycling.
Elements can be detected in the low ppm levels in less than one minute with simultaneous detection of all elements, AI to U.
The model HW-101 portable photoioniser for waste and soil gas applications has weatherproof seals which allow operation under virtually all environmental conditions.
THE HNU-Hanby environmental test kits are suitable for measuring low levels of petroleum hydro-carbons in water and soil.
Circle 129 
Precision balances.
The AP-Analytical Plus range of balances is available from European Instruments .
The new range has three analytical models, the AP110, AP210 and AP310 which measure to an accuracy of 0.1mg with a capacity of 110g, 210g and 310g respectively.
For computer connection the range comes fitted with an RS 232 interface as standard.
Circle 130 
Top pan balances.
A&D Instruments has launched a range of top pan balances, the HX series, which is aimed at all laboratory research applications.
Calibration is fully automatic with two motor-driven internal calibration masses.
A novel feature is that the display and key pad is detachable and can be placed away from the weighing area.
Circle 131 
Atomic absorption.
ChemTech Analytical has launched the CTA-2000 atomic absorption spectrophotometer which is controlled by a 20MHz computer, with operations performed by a simple ‘point-and-click’ mouse.
Safety features include burner recognition, fuel and air pressure viability, water trap and diaphragm integrity indication.
Start-up and shut-down are reduced to a single button operation and full diagnostic status information is provided.
Circle 132 
Melting points.
The SMP2 digital melting point apparatus from Stuart Scientific has been designed for ease of use with preselectable starting and ramping temperatures.
It has an inclinable viewing lens and automatic cooling facility.
Circle 133 XRF.
Asoma Instruments has introduced a bench top ED-XRF analyser, the model 200T, that uses an X-ray tube for sample excitation rather than radio-isotopes.
This results in better detection limits in the AI to K region, and a wide range of elements (AI to U) can be analysed with a single source.
Circle 135 
High performance XRF.
Scientific and Medical Products are offering Asoma's model 60000 XRF spectrometer for measurement of atomic elements in foods, pastes, foams, films, coatings, suspensions, slurries, liquids, solids and powers.
The concentration range is from ppm to 100 per cent.
The spectrometer has dedicated tube secondary target excitation for enhanced reliability.
Circle 136 
UV-Vis spectrophotometer.
Cecil Instruments has introduced the series 3000 UV-Vis scanning spectrophotometers which it claims have a specification and performance surpassing its main competitors, at up to half the cost.
The instruments have a narrow 2nm optical band width over the wavelength range 190–1000nm.
Stray light and stability have values of 0.01 per cent at 220nm and 340nm and ±0.001Ah&sup-1; respectively, and wavelength reproducibility is ±0.01nm.
Circle 137 
NMR spectrometer.
Hitachi Scientific Instruments has launched the R-1200 rapid scan NMR spectrometer which overcomes the dynamic range problems associated with FT-NMR instruments that arises when the analysis of low concentrations of sample in high concentrations of solvent is required.
The rapid scan NMR allows scanning to take place in selected areas of interest of the spectrum, thus excluding large contributions from solvents, providing they do not overlap the required peaks.
Circle 138 
Wet chemistry analysers.
Alpkem has introduced a new family of automated wet chemistry analysers, the Flow Solution, for environmental, agricultural and food and beverage testing.
The Flow Solution, which comes in five models, incorporates the advantages of both flow injection analysis and segmented continuous flow analysis.
It can also combine techniques on the single test allowing automatic sample pretreatment such as dilution, concentration and filtration on-line.
A powerful UV-Vis monochromator based detector allows very low detection limits by reaching 0.0005 absorbency units full scale.
Circle 139 
Scanning microscope.
The TMX 2000 scanning probe microscope from TopoMetrix , and distributed by J.K. Instruments , is one of a family of instruments derived from a scanning tunnelling microscope.
It can create three dimensional images under ambient, non-destructive conditions.
The TMX 2000 is a product family with interchangeable stages for different analytical modes such as scanning force, scanning tunnelling and large sample scanning tunnelling.
Circle 140 
Reverse osmosis.
The Labpure laboratory reverse osmosis system from Vaponics can provide up to 3785 litres of purified water each day.
It uses cellulosic or polyamide spiral-wound membranes with low pressure operation and high flow rates to remove 90–98 per cent total solids and 99 per cent of all bacteria, viruses, pyrogens and organics with a molecular weight of greater than 150.
Circle 141 UV-Vis spectrophotometry.
The U-3000 and U-3300 series of UV-Vis spectrometers from Hitachi Scientific Instruments feature a novel monochromator to improve the resolution performance and reduce stray light.
The Seya-Namioka type monochromator contains an anastigmatic concave diffraction grating and line spectra produced using this monochromator do not exhibit the characteristic shoulder on the side of each peak that is caused by the coma-type  aberration .
Circle 142 
Titration analyser.
The Slotopal On-Line Analyser from Schloetter is for fully automatic titrations of plating bath constituents and other processes.
All common chemicals such as metal salts, acids, alkalis, conductive salts and buffers can be analysed, and various parameters can be measured simultaneously.
Circle 143 
Electronic balance.
GEC Avery has launched the VA-WA series of electronic balances with remotely operated keypads.
The series is available in five versions (200–50g x 0.1–0.01mg through to 300g x 0.1mg).
The remote keypad eliminates disturbance to the balance caused when operating the function keys.
The chamber doors are available motorised and PIN security protection is provided.
Circle 144 
Quantitative imaging.
Digital Pixel has introduced its System 2000 which is a fully integrated digital quantitative imaging system based on high performance CCD technology.
The system includes image processing and analysis software and provides 12-bit greyscale information, it supports high resolution cameras with up to 2000 x 2000 pixels.
Applications include densitometry, autoradiography analysis, fluorescence, chemiluminescence and bioluminescent imaging, cathodoluminescence, TEM, electron ion imaging and Raman or fluorescence imaging.
Circle 145 
Test tube heater.
The SHT test tube heater from Stuart Scientific consists of an electronically controlled dry bath that heats samples in two interchangeable aluminium test tube blocks to any selected temperature.
Two heating ranges are available, 8°C above ambient to 100°C, or 8°C above ambient to 200°C, with each range fitted with a direct reading platinum resistance controller to ensure and maintain any selected temperature with a fluctuation no greater than 0.1°C.
Circle 146 
Water purification.
The Prestige range of water purifiers from Purite provide purities suitable for rinsing glassware through to ICP and HPLC.
Each of the five versions is available in a choice of flow rates from 4 to 200 litres per hour, and operates direct from any drinking water supply.
The units have a built in prefilter to prolong the life of the reverse osmosis membrane and nuclear deionisation, organic adsorption, ultra-filtration and ultra-violet sterilisation and also available depending on the purity of water required.
Circle 147 
Absorption spectrometer.
The Perkin-Elmer model 4100 atomic absorption/emission spectrometer is a fully automated sequential multielement system providing good analytical performance for flame AA, graphite furnace AA, cold vapour mercury, hydride generation AA and flow injection sampling techniques.
It is also the first system to use self-optimisation of the burner position for flame AA and automatic method development for graphite furnace AA.
The 4100 is controlled by an industry standard PC with Perkin-Elmer atomic absorption laboratory benchtop software.
Circle 148 
Chromatography data station.
The LabQuest data station from Tremetrics frees the chromatographer from the limitations of DOS-based handling systems.
Operating under Windows 3.0, LabQuest utilises the extended memory capability, multi-tasking and networking features of this graphic interface system.
Chromatograms are automatically analysed and detailed reports can be tailored to the application.
Data from four GCs and eight detectors can be acquired and analysed simultaneously.
Circle 149 
Chromatography.
SGE has launched Delta software which allows simultaneous acquisition and processing of data from two chromatographs, each with two detectors, and still allows editing and reprocessing of data.
SGE has also launched two chromatography instruments.
The PT-120 is a tuning system for capillary GC which allows selectivity and polarity control of two serially coupled columns, including backflush function.
The MDS2000 is a multidimensional GC system which has a fully programmable microprocessor unit and is perfect for resolving difficult to separate components.
Circle 151 
Conductivity meters.
Cole-Parmer Instrument has introduced a new range of hand-held autoranging conductivity meters.
The 19600–00 features conductivity, resistivity and temperature measurement ability whilst the 19600–10 can measure conductivity, resistivity, temperature and salinity.
Conductivity is measured from 0 to 199.9 mS across five ranges, and resistivity from O to 5 M .
Sodium chloride can be measured between 0 and 19.99 percentage weight and temperature between 0 and 100°C.
Circle 152 
Keyboard.
Keymat Technology has launched the Storm 800 series keyboard modules, a range of sealed keyboards providing resistance to the ingress of liquids or powders.
The keyboards are available in the 60 key Qwerty, 13 key function, 18 key numeric and LED indicator formats.
Circle 153 
UV-Vis detector.
The Isco UA-6 from Jones Chromatography combines a detector, recorder and fraction cutting peak sensor in a package 28cm wide.
In addition to the standard 254nm and 280nm, 14 other wavelengths span the spectrum from 214nm to 660nm.
The detector has active anti-condensation protection to assure trouble free operation in cold-rooms.
Circle 154 
Densimeter.
The model SD-120L densimeter from A&D Instruments calculates the specific gravity of both liquids and solids quickly with a resolution of 0.0001 and measuring tolerance of ±0.0002.
The specific gravity is measured by Archimedes' principle.
Circle 155 
Evaporator.
The Gyrovap from V.A.Howe is a new centrifugal evaporator.
The forces exerted on the contents of the flask by the centrifuge prevent bumping and thus sample loss of contamination.
The Gyrovap can cope with 240 samples at a time and is appropriate for water as well as organic solvents.
Circle 134 
Aromatic analyser.
Suprex has introduced the Aromatic Analyser which determines the aromatic content of petroleum fuels.
The Aromatic Analyser replaces the current fluorescent indicator absorption methods.
Circle 150 
conferences
NMR.
Recent advances in NMR applications to porous media organised by the Collaborative Project in Magnetic Resonance, will be held at the University of Kent on 14–16 April 1992.
Food industry.
An IFST conference on environmental issues facing the food industry,How green is our industry , will be held in London on 15 April 1992.
Polymer blends.
This NIST workshop will take place in Gaithersburg, MD on 21–21 April 1992.
Energy.
Winning the generation game — where are the opportunities in the UK and European energy markets ?, a conference on the single international energy market, will be held in London, on 27–28 April 1992.
Filtration.
The Filtration Society's meeting Air/dust filtration will be held at Loughborough University on 28 April 1992.
Control and instrumentation 92.
This exhibition for process and industrial measurement, analysis, control and automation technology will be held at the NEC, Birmingham, on 28–30 April 1992.
Life cycle analysis.
Two conferences are to be held in London,Understanding the benefits of adopting a cradle-to-grave approach on the 31 April 1992, and The practicalities of conducting and applying life cycle analysis on 1 May 1992.
Packaging.
A seminar,Update on packaging legislation , will take place at Pira's offices in Leatherhead on 6 May 1992.
Environment.
The Federation of European Chemical Societies' conference Chemistry for the protection of the environment will be held in Budapest, Hungary on 10–14 May 1992.
New devices.
A Bios conference,Development and implementation of the new device directives , will be held in London on 12 May 1992.
Chromatography.
The Chromatography Society's meeting.
Getting more out of chromatography — design of high quality separations , will be held in Manchester on 12 May 1992.
Transportation.
This IBC and Health and Safety Executive conference entitled The major hazard aspects of the transportation of dangerous substances will be held in London on 12–13 May 1992.
George Kenner lecture.
This lecture will be held on 13 May 1992 at Liverpool University.
Artificial weathering.
The Oil and Colour Chemists Association's symposium Progress in artificial weathering of polymeric materials will be held in Slough on 14 May 1992.
Patinnova 92.
The second European congress on patents, trademarks and innovation will take place in Lisbon, Portugal, on 18–20 May 1992.
Micro/ultrafiltration.
This meeting will be held at UMIST, Manchester on 19 May 1992.
Polyethylene — the 1990s and beyond.
This conference, organised by the Plastics and Rubber Institute, will be held in London on 19–20 May 1992.
Surface contamination.
This Sira technology update meeting will be held in Kent on 21 May 1992.
Details from Sira Communications, South Hill, Chislehurst, Kent BR7 5EH.
Powder diffraction.
A NIST conference,Accuracy in power diffraction II , will take place in Gaithersburg MD, on 26–29 May 1992.
Electro analysis.
The congress of the European Society for Electro Analytical Chemistry will be held from 31 May to 3 June 1992 at Langelaan, The Netherlands.
Corrosion.
A conference entitled Condition monitoring and corrosion prevention in refineries and petrochemical plants will be held in London on 1–2 June 1992.
Gordon research conferences.
These conferences are being held from 8 June to 21 August 1992 in New Hampshire and Rhode Island: 13–18 September and 4–9 October 1992 in Germany; and 8–20 November 1992 in Hawaii.
Rubber and Eastern Europe.
This conference will take place on 11–12 June 1992 in London.
Quality management.
The 36th annual conference of the European Organisation for Quality will take place in Brussels, Belgium, on 15–19 June 1992.
Wastes management.
the 94th annual wastes management conference and exhibition will be held in Devon on 16–19 June 1992.
Innovation in the nineties.this conference on policies and priorities for industrial innovation and technology transfer in Europe will take place in Brussels, Belgium, on 22–23 June 1992.
Health and safety.
This conference,Occupational health and safety information — worldwide view , will be held at the Health and Safety Executive, Sheffield, on 1 June 1992.
Organic chemistry.
This European colloquium on Heterocyclic chemistry will be held in Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands, on 12–15 July 1992.
Powder diffraction.
The second European powder diffraction conference will take place in Enschede, The Netherlands, from 29 July to 1 August 1992.
Homogenous catalysis.
This conference will take place in Amsterdam, The Netherlands, on 2–7 August 1992.
Organic free radicals.
The sixth international symposium on organic free radicals will be held in Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands, on 23–28 August.
Drophar 92.
This cosmetic and perfumery trade exhibition will be held in The Netherlands on 24–26 August 1992.
Details from Overseas Trade Show Agencies, 11 Manchester Square, London W1M 5AB.
Environmental industrial catalysis will be held on 9–10 November 1992 in Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
1993
Chemical data.
Computerised chemical data standards — databases, data interchange and information systems will take place in Atlanta, Georgia, on 5–7 May 1993.
A call for papers has been issued and the deadline for abstracts is 4 May 1992 .
Eurotrib 93.
This sixth intentional congress on tribology, focusing on friction, wear and lubrication, will be held in Budapest, Hungary, from 30 August to 2 September 1993.
Abstracts for oral and poster presentations should be submitted by 15 May 1992 .
Adhesion 93.
The Plastics and Rubber Institute's fifth annual conference on adhesion will be held at York University on 6–8 September 1993.
LETTERS
Sulphur allotropy
From Dr J. D. Hobson
Having recently been involved in the revision of about 20 standards dealing with the analysis of iron, steel and ferro-alloys for the British Standards Institution (BSI), I have just learned that in all these documents the spelling of sulphur is to be altered to sulfur, for the element and in the names of all its derivatives.
The revisions are intended to unify the style and format of a multi-part standard; the change will partly nullify that objective.
It seems that this change is based on advice received from the Royal Society of Chemistry, though it has not been applied in the latest issue of Chemistry in Britain , neither can I recollect having seen it mention any possibility of change.
Standards in this field issues recently by the International Standards Organisation (ISO) appear to be using either spelling, depending upon the origin of the draft.
Sauce for the goose but not, apparently the gander!
There is very little likelihood of confusion arising whichever spelling is used in English documents, though there will be far-reaching consequences, for example in text-books, abstracts, indices, dictionaries, computer programs, and teaching, but it is difficult to see any compensating advantages in adopting the US version.
About 10 years ago the use of ml and l for millilitres and litres respectively was banished suddenly from British Standards in favour of mL and L, though both are permitted as alternatives by the ISO standard dealing with the layout of standards.
One wonders if we are also to have aluminum inflicted upon us surreptitiously.
How long before we are presented with a fait accompli for a fonetic fosforus and the continental decimal comma?
Dr Alan McNaught, secretary of the RSC's Nomenclature Committee replies :
The spelling of ‘sulphur’ was first discussed by the RSC's Nomenclature Committee in 1979, at the request of the BSI.
The committee recognised that both ‘f’ and ‘ph’spellings were widely used in English texts and made no specific recommendation.
The BSI decided to raise no objection to the use of the ‘f’ spelling in international standards.
This matter was raised again at the Nomenclature Committee's 1991 meeting, when it was noted that IUPAC recommended the ‘f’ spelling for sulphur in the 1990 edition of Nomenclature of inorganic chemistry while retaining the common UK spellings for caesium and aluminium.
The committee recognised that there was increasing use of the ‘f’ spelling in English publications and that there was no good etymological basis for preferring the ‘ph’spelling.
In view of these considerations, the Nomenclature Committee, which includes representation from BSI, industry, and secondary and tertiary education, gave a clear recommendation that RSC publications should use the ‘f’ spelling from the beginning of 1992.
BSI is to follow suit.
Dr Hobson may rest assured that there is no intention to modify spellings of any other elements.
Ed: Chemistry in Britain , being aimed at a wider audience than the RSC's primary and secondary publications, will continue to use the familiar ‘sulphur’ for the present, at least until general usage begins to reflect the change.
Charcoal and sodium borohydride
From D. T. Collin and C. Sidgwick
Our investigations indicate that charcoal promotes the oxidation of solid sodium borohydride in air and that the consequent self-heating may result in the ignition of charcoal and hydrogen — hydrogen being produced by thermal decomposition of sodium borohydride.
Ignition typically required about 1 g of a mixture of sodium borohydride and charcoal, when equal portions of each were mixed together and formed into a pile.
However, in the presence of water,eg after exposure to the laboratory atmosphere, inflammation took place more readily, with as little as 50 mg of mixture being required.
Mixtures aged in a test tube under nitrogen evolved little heat; however, when air was admitted heat was evolved and when the resultant hot (90–100°C) mixture was poured from the tube it ignited immediately.
The manufacturer's safety data sheet warns of a potentially hazardous reaction between sodium borohydride and fine dispersed heavy metals but this reaction with charcoal and solid sodium borohydride are stored and handled in such a way that the risk of contact between them is avoided.
Alumni search
From Lorna Baird, alumni relations officer
Calling all graduates of the Royal Technical College (1912–56), the West of Scotland Commercial College (1915–55), the Scottish College of Commerce (1955–64) and the Royal College of Science and Technology (1956–64).
The University of Strathclyde has launched a search to find alumni who took the Diploma of the Royal Technical College, the Associateship of the Royal College of Science and Technology, or attended any of the wide range of evening and day release courses at the Commercial College.
If you are an alumnus or alumna of the above institutions, or know anyone who is, please contact the Alumni Relations Office.
Funding buckminsterfullerene research
From Dr R Taylor
Prof C. J. M. Stirling (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 1114) should not be unduly concerned by the prospect that chemists may abandon their traditional research in order to work on buckminsterfullerene.
My impression is that the great majority of those who have entered the field have merely applied their particular area of expertise to this fascinating molecule.
To suggest that what they were doing before was of low priority is a misleading simplification — could one for example conclude that if a professor moves from one department to another he does so because the former is of low quality?
Prof Stirling need have no fears that buckminsterfullerene chemistry will get over-funded.
SERC, for example, has been following his advice assiduously — the Sussex fullerene chemistry group has received just £24045 from that source.
Requests for a postdoctoral fellow and for a technician have been refused two, and three times, respectively.
US competition, watch out!
Trivial pursuit
From Dr Alan E Comyns
Students who are not taught the ‘trivial’ names of chemicals (R. D. Bagnall,What's in a name, Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 46) will have a hard time in industry.
In the real chemical world,ie where chemicals are made, traded, used and disposed of, trivial names are still universal.
Just look at the catalogues, encyclopedias and journals of industrial chemistry.
Try buying a tonne of ethanoic acid.
The only major reference work using systematic names i Chemical Abstracts and that does at least cross-reference the common trivial names.
I do not decry systematic nomenclature, it has an important place in chemical literature; but this is a specialist niche, devised for the convenience of indexers and users of indices, not a part of the lingua franca of chemistry.
From G. Spencer
I enjoyed Bagnall's article in the January issue and agree with this feeling that the familiarity, the friendliness of science, is fast disappearing.
So may I enter a plea for simplicity, homeliness and humour, in the teaching of chemistry?
It is getting toward 70 years since I attended the lectures of that egregious humbug ‘Tubby’ Radcliffe at the Tech (now UMIST).
A born raconteur, the racy style of his lectures, with his well known yarns — the most famous being that of the ‘Woman who did’— I suspect got more chemistry into our thick heads than did the much admired cool, classic perfection of the lectures of Prof F. L. Pyman.
Still, even there lightness would occasionally break through.
On the evening that his election to the Royal Society was announced, he entered the theatre to give his lecture to be greeted by a standing ovation.
He smiled his rather pale, somewhat  wintry smile and said ‘Thank you gentlemen, and now it is my painful duty to set you your homework’.
With teaching, surely there is no substitute for personality.
Protection against poison gas
From D J. D. Lambert, emeritus fellow of Trinity College, Oxford
In G. B. Carter's history of Porton Down (Chem.
Br. 191,27 , 1095) the only mention of protection against poison gas — which played a vital role in World War I — is a photograph of troops wearing a primitive cloth helmet which rapidly became redundant.
There is no reference to the Lambert box respirator, which was devised by my father, Dr Bertram Lambert, OBE, in June 1915 and used throughout the war.
May I fill the gap by quoting from an obituary (Nature , 1963,199 , 1137):
‘Dr Lambert is perhaps best known for his initiative in the First World War towards the production of respirators.
Immediately after the first attack, the army set up a defence organisation…and early trials were made of respirators of impregnated cloth of Balaclava helmet shape.
As early as June 1915 Lambert, while on leave from the Royal Engineers, himself constructed a box-type respirator with soda-lime-permanganate granules as absorbing agent.
He took this to the War Office, and his principle was quickly recognised as superior to all other proposals.
In the following year box respirators with Lambert's granules, together with charcoal, were issued to the troops, and continued in use throughout the war.
The contribution was recognised later by a substantial monetary award from a War Inventions Board of scientists and by an OBE from the Government’.
Ed:In the space available, G. B. Carter was only able to touch on some aspects of CBDE's work.
Prior to the establishment of Porton Down in 1916, chemical defence had been coordinated at the Royal Army Medical College under Col E. B. Harrison (commemorated by the Harrison memorial prize administered by the RSC, royal Pharmaceutical Society and Society of Chemical Industry) while Lambert and others worked at Oxford.
Lambert's ‘Small Box Respirator’ developed in 1915 was adopted as the British Army's standard design in 1916.
Lost comrades
From Dr A. T. Howarth and Dr M. B. Ormerod
We are planning to have a reunion next summer of members who attended the Manchester University honours school of chemistry from 1939 to 1942.
So far we have been unable to contact: Lawrence Hugh Cecil Hawkins, Walter Howard Husband, Everard Arthur Swinton and John Chipchase Walker.
We would be very grateful for any news (tel: 0254 822241) of the whereabouts or fate of the above.
GLP and TQM
From Dr R. C. Price, quality manager
I read the letter from Graham Moss (Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 28) and his comments on the relationship between Total Quality Management (TQM) and Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) with interest.
We had, in fact, already made contacts between the Quality Assurance Group (UK) and the TQM in R & D Network — now part of the UK Quality Methods Association — to identify areas of common interest.
However, the TQM in R & D Network is not jut concerned with laboratory work, since it embraces R&D organisations from the electronic, computing, engineering as well as chemical and food industries.
We are concerned, therefore, to apply TQM to the broad range of activities that are involved in R&D operating in the different industries, including how best to manage the total R & D operating in the different industries, including how best to management the total R & D process, from an original concept, through to product or service marketing, manufacture and end-use.
GLP is clearly a good approach for some R & D laboratory functions; however, I believe that it is not the same as TQM.
GLP emphasises assurance of the laboratory data, whereas TQM is a broader subject and encompasses continuous improvement in customer satisfaction by everyone in the organisation.
TQM, I have found, is a fascinating subject that encompasses subjects as diverse as statistical process control and human behaviours such as leadership and motivation.
Applying it to R & D organisations is a challenge, and learning and sharing with each other through a network, such as the Quality Methods Association R & D group can be useful.
Calling female scientists
From Susan J. Dudley, head of science
I am looking for short biographies of female scientists — of any discipline — for use in school.
The scientists may be historical or present day.
If you have any details of, are related to, employ or indeed work as a scientist, in whatever capacity, please let know.
Quantum chemistry truth
From E. Scerri
Dermot Martin gave me an excellent account of contemporary quantum chemistry.
However, I would like to raise some points.
Martin's title contains the phrase ‘the search for chemical truth’.
As the philosopher van Fraassen asks, what has explanatory power got to do with truth?
Van Fraassen offers a challenge in saying: show exactly what about the explanatory relationships tends to guarantee that if x explains y and y is true, then x should be true as well.
Explanations after the facts are of course very useful but the hallmark of a successful research programme is predictions .
Does quantum chemistry offer genuine predictions in the sense of facts yet to be discovered?
Martin mentions the hydroxycarbene molecule, he might have added the prediction of a novel class of molecular complexes including .
Nevertheless, it seems remarkable that the number of molecules predicted, in over 60 years since the creation of quantum mechanics, should be confined to one or two highly exotic cases.
Goddard and others have proclaimed that quantum chemistry came of age in 1970 on the basis of predictions on the geometry of the methylene molecule.
However, a close examination of this work shows that it is not strictly ab initio , in that extrapolations are made from calculations performed on other molecules.
Turning to another point, whereas experimentalists are required to quote errors as a matter of course, theoretical chemists are not yet able to provide both upper and lower bounds in calculations of energies.
Whilst variational methods at least provide us with upper bounds, many modern approaches such as the use of many-body perturbation theory are non-variational.
Quantum chemistry may well yield progressively better approximations to ‘the truth’, but we would also like to know the range of errors in the claimed predictions.
From D. D. Eley, emeritus professor of physical chemistry 
I had always understood that quantum chemical ab initio calculations for molecules using gaussian orbitals were pioneered by S. F. Boys at Cambridge, but there is no reference to his work in Martin's article.
Boys waited long enough for recognition of his work in his life-time.
Perhaps now that he is dead we should try to make amends.
Azide hazard
From R. D. Peacock
I wish to report a serious explosion that occurred when attempting the literature synthesis of bis(2-aminoethyl)ether (Acta Chem.
Scand .,
1979,33B , 469).
The diamine is prepared from the corresponding dichloro compound via the bis(azide).
The bis(azide) was isolated and then reduced by passage of  through a boiling ethanol solution.
After Acidification and rebasification the amine was extracted into chloroform solution.
The chloroform was distilled off and, as the last of the chloroform was removed, a violent explosion took place that blew out the front of a reinforced glass fume-cupboard.
Fortunately, no-one was injured.
It seems most likely that an appreciable quantity of unreduced bis(2-azidoethyl)ether was still present in the ‘diamine’.
The student followed the literature preparation to the letter and worked to half scale.
There is no indication that the Acta Chem.
Scand. paper that azides are an explosion hazard, the  reduction step is not detailed quantitatively — passed for 18 hours, no flow rate suggested — and no suggestion made that the reaction should be checked for remaining azide before isolation of the amine.
The final stage in the experimental procedure would have been vacuum distillation of the amine, at which point having bis(azide) present would have certainly led to an explosion, even if it had not occurred earlier.
We strongly suggest that if this preparation is to be attempted it be done on a small scale and the reaction mixture be checked for unreduced bis(2-azidoethyl)ether before removal of chloroform and distillation of the diamine.
Banking on memories
From Dr R. D. Blenkinsop
Chemistry and comics (Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 30) brought back pleasant reading memories.
A leaning toward chemistry and chemical engineering was no doubt kindled in some way by a Mickey Mouse comic strip.
Mickey had a ramp with pea sized objects rolling down to be dealt a mighty blow from a spring loaded mallet.
Goofy appeared and enquired about the device.
‘It's an atom smasher’ replied Mickey.
Consequently F. Sherwood-Taylor's book The young chemist was soon located on the public library shelves.
All caution (H & S) was thrown to the wind as a few sample experiments will show: how to make coal gas; a safe gas explosion; how to make a banger; how to explode a little picric acid.
Coal gas production became involved with safe gas explosions.
A lever lid tin was used to heat coal dust, using a spirit burner.
Coal to heat coal dust, using a spirit burner.
Coal tar condensate must have closed the small hole in the lid, and the resulting explosion put a nasty black ring on the dining room ceiling.
A splendid science weekly called Modern Wonder was published at the time.
One cartoon-like strip showed a baker making bread using radio waves.
A June 1940 issue informed the world that U 235 would yield plenty of energy, yet there was no fear of whole nations being blotted out in one night.
The names of two exiled Jewish physicists doing the work were not revealed!
Part of the text stated ‘…one atom of it weight 235 times as much as an atom of hydrogen,[U 235]releases energy automatically directly it is touched by cold water’.
One author was designated PhD — a deep rooted ambition to get one was generated; only to be thwarted in several ways till the age of 55.
Two questions come to mind.
Do parents and teachers fully appreciate that material learnt in the early years remains n the memory bank for easy access and recall?
Do they inform young people that the only thing you cannot lose in life are your paper qualifications — if you think about it?
LAB — INFO
An up-to-date guide to suppliers of laboratory equipment.
For further information on a particular company's products, please circle the appropriate enquiry number on the reader service card.
Ken Kimble
Laboratory Reactors
Reactors of all designs with the same characteristics as large vessels.
We offer standard catalogue reactors or specials with triple wall (outer jacket evacuated), pneumatic B.O. valves, constant closing pressure on B.O. valve, solids charging ports.
Please ask for further details and price lists.
Enquiry No. 089
Labsystems
Non Vortexing 10 ml Pipette
The new 2–10 ml Finnpipette has been designed to be as simple to use as any standard volume instrument.
Even at 10 mls the anti-surge plunger ensures that the liquid is drawn smoothly into the tip without vortexing.
Instruments are available for trial on request.
Enquiry No. 091
Spectra-Physics
New micro-robotic sample processor, the AS3000 — optimised for microlitre sample preparation procedures and injection onto a HPLC.
This new autosampler product line provides automated microvolume sample preparation which significantly reduces solvent wastes and eliminates handling of toxic solvents.
The complete automation of sample preparation also increases sample throughput and improves accuracy and precision, especially when working with microlitre volumes.
Enquiry No. 094
Whatman LabSales
The LabSales Catalogue 1992
The 1992 full colour edition of the Whatman LabSales mail order catalogue feature 272 pages and contains over 2,000 items including products for pH, conductivity, safety, liquid handling, weighing and filtration.
Enquiry No 095
APD Cryogenics
The Displex closed-cycle refrigeration system has earned a reputation for reliability in the demanding field of low-temperature research.
The system's 10K–450K temperature range attests to its flexibility for cooling samples in a wide range of applications.
Now the Displex system is offered with a three-year warranty, the longest in the industry, reflecting the durability of this proven product.
Enquiry No 082
Jenway
The 3045 Ion Analyser has been designed to meet the requirements of both novice and experienced users.
This competitively priced model offers three electrode input, step by step instructions on LCD graphics display with the option of five languages and incremental analysis capability.
Enquiry No 096 
Negretti Automation
Negretti Automation's corporate identity brochure highlights its process control and weighing capabilities.
It incorporates a short history of the company with a few important milestones in its development and explains the company's current service to the processing industries.
A companion brochure summaries Negretti Automation's full process control & weighing range.
Free copies of both are available on request.
Enquiry No 093
Dionex
Supercritical Fluid Extractor
The Lee Scientific SFE-703 is a new extractor based on the solvating power of supercritical fluids.
The extractor has multi-cell capability with a small footprint.
The SE-703 has been designed to replace traditional liquid solvent extraction usually used for sample preparation prior to chromatographic analysis.
For a copy of our new brochure contact Dionex (UK) Ltd.
Enquiry No 084
Lab Safety Supply
Lab Safety Supply's 750 page catalogue contains over 13,000 personal and environmental safety products.
The catalogue features products for industrial and environmental safety, chemical storage and handling, protective clothing, safety eyewear, respirators, spill control, and much more.
MBH Analytical
Reference Materials
More than 2000 Reference Materials for Analytical Chemists covering Metals (Discs and Chippings), Minerals, Oils and Aqueous Solutions are listed in the MBH Catalogues.
Part I — Metal Discs for OES, XRF Part II — Metal Chippings, Powders, Oils, Aqueous Solutions
Contact us for a copy of the appropriate catalogue.
Enquiry No 092
HNU Systems
Send for your free information pack today.
Enquiry No 087
Ken Kimble
Chemical Reactors
All types of reactors supplied form small laboratory rigs through scale-up units to process plant.
We specialise in glass or glass lined steel but also offer reactors in all weldable metals.
A large range of standard units but custom build reactors are also handled.
Enquiry No 088 
Carri-Med
The Carri-Med CSL Rheometer
Pumping Why your product won't.
Extruding Does it fill the mould?
Mixing Why your components won't.
Coating Will your product sag?
Curing Will it ever set
Settling Are your phases stable?
Viscosity is no longer enough in today's manufacturing environment, where most processes are stress driven.
the Carri-Med CSL Rheometer can measure and quantify rheological properties for a whole range of materials.
Contact Carri-Med to find out more.
Enquiry No. 083
CHEMetrics
Simplified Water Analysis
CHEMetrics' Water Test Kits employ patented sampling and reagent dosing systems featuring vacuum-sealed glass ampoules.
These ampoules contain unit doses of preformulated reagents and are used to perform colorimetric and titrimetric tests, as well as sample dilutions.
Over 170 kits are available, with detection limits ranging from parts-per-billion to percent.
Enquiry No 086
Rhône-Poulenc
Products for Chromatography
The new Chromatography catalogue from Rhô-Poulenc contains a unique combination of products never before offered to U.K. Chromatographers in a single brochure.
Extensive experience in HPLC solvents and Chromatography Silica enables us to bring together this range which includes both Polymeric and Silica based columns and cartridges, high purity solvents for HPLC Sorbsil™ silicas for preparative chromatography and Flash chromatography columns.
Enquiry No 098
Distillers MG
This catalogue contains a summary of the special and high purity gases available from Distillers MG.
There is a comprehensive range of pure gases, gas mixtures, laboratory gases in pressure cans, purification systems and accessories.
Enquiry No 097
VG Laboratory Systems
VG LIMS now available on IBM computers
VG LIMS is the first Laboratory Information Management Systems to be available on the RS60000 series of IMB computers and represents a major breakthrough in this field.
VG LIMS can no provide efficient management of laboratory information for IBM users.
It also means that the laboratory can now by linked by the same AIX operating systems as the rest of the company.
For further information please contact:
Enquiry No 085
TECH-INFO
NEW in June ‘92, a cost effective way to promote your application notes or technical information.
If you would like to advertise in this new format please contact the Advertising Team directly, or circle the enquiry number below.
Enquiry No 099 
controversies
A scientist's taboo
Young children are taught chemistry with no introduction to atoms and molecules.
Is the time now right to teach these concepts in primary school science?
John Leisten
Imagine introducing young people to molecules by giving them wooden cubes as atoms and dowel rods as bonds.
It would note be surprising if they were enjoying themselves because everyone likes puzzles that are pitched at the right level; but could they also be soaking in such GCSE-endangered basics as valency, formula, and molecular weight?
I have made 200 of these bricks, written eight 30 min lessons for nine year olds, and had them tested in two county primary schools.
Set backs to chemistry in schools and in the public's esteem have become regular news — so at least reward my carpentry by reading on!
Molecules in primary schools
We worried at first that the children might be sceptical and uninterested; but we soon found that nine year olds have already heard of atoms in garbled ways from comics and really want to know about them.
Nothing difficult is attempted —eg only five different atoms are used — but banish any thought of triviality, because with the cubes shown in Fig. 1 we introduce children to five themes that they may study all their lives.
The first theme, and mainstay, is molecules from atoms.
As the atoms are introduced lesson by lesson, pupils use the cubes and dowel rods to predict about a dozen molecules.
They are told enough to identify each substance as its molecular model is made (eg H 2 toy balloons; HF, etching glass; CH 4 explosions in mines) and are soon writing molecular formulae.
(No black marks for H2 or H 4 C.)
A second important theme is numerical.
Which is heavier, a fluorine atom or five helium atoms?
A helium atom or a hydrogen molecule?
Is there a molecule that weighs the same as an oxygen atom?
It was a surprise in both the trial schools that molecules could make mental arithmetic so popular.
One teacher even had the pupils quizzing each other to satisfy their surplus enthusiasm.
In a states of matter theme, the children can mimic a gas by using plastic packing nodules (the molecules) suspended on nearly invisible cotton.
Pouring loose nodules from a jug into a tray and sticking others into a cubic array with dabs of silicone rubber illustrates that molecules are free to slide in liquids but not in solids, and are about equally close in both.
Babyish even for nine year olds perhaps, but better than waiting until they are teenagers.
Fig. 1.
Atomic/molecular models for nine year olds.
Reservations about this course will already be taking shape, so instead of describing it further I will guess at the two most likely criticisms.
The first is the lack of experiments — some might call it a betrayal of science teaching.
My answer is that these children already have a backlog of uninterpreted experiments.
They have been living since the nursery with different materials around them and objects having different weights, and they have a concealed knowledge of ice-water-steam which is more helpful to a teacher at this stage than any class experiments.
Their greater need is for explanations — or so their interest in these lessons suggests.
They should not be denied atoms and molecules because of a lack of primary school laboratories.
What about the psychologists’ criticism that atoms and molecules are conceptually unsuitable for nine year olds?
My answer again is practical and comes from a further eight 30 min lessons given to the same children a year later.
They had not forgotten or become confused but seemed to have jumped ahead, as adults often find when resuming studies after a break.
With two new atoms added to the previous five, the children tackled harder problems (‘How many different CFC molecules can you invent with these model atoms’?), and towards the end of the two year trial they had become familiar enough with valencies and weights to take to the Periodic Table idea enthusiastically.
Already they are prepared for an electron and nucleus model which would offer the same purposeful interest in salts that they clearly enjoyed in studying molecules.
It may well strain belief that eight hours of enjoyment can make primary school children comfortable with chemical ideas that are being chopped out of GCSE syllabuses, yet this much and more can be achieved by challenging a teaching tradition that is almost as unhelpful to chemistry as phlogiston was.
Chemistry without atoms is like geography without maps — atoms and molecules should be introduced in those school years when children grow crystals, turn litmus and make ring stains.
A woeful history
Cannizzaro anticipated this article by over 100 years.
He saw that just as a knowledge of atoms and molecules is essential for the progress of chemistry, it is also essential for chemistry student.
He advised teachers ‘to get to it (the atomic theory) as quickly as possible’, describing it as ‘one of those short cuts with the human mind often takes to raise itself quickly to a height from which the relations between phenomena can be discerned at a glance’.
How can such eloquence have been disregarded?
It happened insidiously.
There were still physicists at the turn of the century who scoffed at ‘the chemists’ atoms’and because physics was then the senior partner in school science it is not surprising that chemistry teaching began without atoms: but as school chemistry matured the pattern was allowed to set, and teaching atoms early and in a straightforward factual way became taboo.
Even by World War II most of us at school were learning about atoms inductively, and only in the higher classes.
Today's children have been IBM written in xenon atoms; they learn (without comment from anyone) the shape of India, the Earth's distance from the moon, dinosaurs and many other things they will never verify themselves; yet the first reaction of many adults to our lessons is ‘How do you get them to believe’?
The taboo lingers!
‘It is helpful to imagine that everything is made up of very small particles called atoms’ comes, not from some yellowing dog-eared textbook but from the new National Curriculum.
The muted wording may not matter but the timing does, because this item from Science for ages 5 to 16 is intended for average 13 year olds.
The report could guide UK chemistry teaching into the 21st century, yet it allows children to be taught without atoms or molecules for eight of the 11 years that it covers.
Can chemists afford to let that stand, and leave chemical education entirely to others?
Two birds with one stone
Chemistry is a winning subject that suffers through compression.
One typical example of this is a chemistry video that starts with Dalton, continues with chirality, and ends with conformational analysis.
Would an English lecture start with the alphabet, continue with parts of speech, and end with Jane Austen?
Readers who sympathise will know that when (too late) the teaching of recognisable chemistry is started the courses are indigestible, driving many students to less worthwhile subjects.
Changing the syllabus and the methodology is treating the wrong disease.
Teaching atoms and molecules to nine year olds would add spice and purpose to junior science (and do better for chemistry's image than advertising aimed at their parents.
But it would also help secondary teachers to space out chemistry's sequential steps, giving their pupils more time to absorb principles before they build on them.
Their reward could be to find (as I found in another country) that chemistry is the most popular subject in the curriculum.
Surely an early start on atoms and molecules must somehow be brought about.
Just one secondary school and its primary feeders need to take this path and others would soon follow.
It is a limited objective, but structured teaching for younger pupils has never been less fashionable, and educational bodies will ignore or even oppose it.
The active and sustained interest of chemists and teachers, many of whom read Chemistry in Britain , may be the only hope of preventing Cannizzaro's advice from gathering dust into its second century.
John Leisten can be contacted at 45, Ashleigh Drive, Loughborough LE11 3HN.
References
Not all star wars
W. A Gillespie
Rapidly advancing laser technology may now reveal some of the secrets hidden in the far infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Free-electron lasers on the whole have had a rather bad press.
Their name often conjures up visions of ‘star wars’, with ground-based free-electron lasers destroying incoming ballistic missiles as part of the US Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI).
In reality, these devices are a form of laser whose development can be traced back to the post-war years and which have a wide range of applications beyond generating very high powers.
Indeed, free-electron laster (FEL) is a generic name for a family of devices ranging from millimetre-wave generators to potential X-ray lasers, whose only common feature is their apparent lack of a conventional laser gain medium.
The output from a conventional laser is generated by stimulated emission, whereby the optical wave within the laser cavity is amplified by traversing the gain medium —eg the gas mixture in a CO 2 laser.
This amplification is produced at the expense of energy pumped into the medium via the population inversion of its atoms or molecules.
In contrast, the gain medium in an FEL is a focused beam of high energy electrons moving at very high speed within a vacuum chamber, and these electrons are stimulated to emit photons (electro-magnetic) waves by causing the beam to interact with a static magnetic field produced by a special magnetic system (Fig. 1 ).
An array of permanent magnets of alternating polarity makes the electron beam wiggle in the plane perpendicular to the magnetic field (ie horizontal in Fig. 1 ).
The magnet array is thus called a wiggler or an undulator.
The alternating transverse force makes the free electrons move sinusoidally, radiating photons in the forward direction.
In Fig. 1 the wiggler is planar, but a helical wiggler has also been used successfully.
The electrons in a free-electron laser are not free, but are coupled to the magnetic field.
(Completely free electrons cannot radiate, because this would violate the simultaneous conservation of energy and momentum.)
Nonetheless, the name adequately describes this unusual laser principle, and goes some way towards explaining the fundamental advantage of FELs.
Because a conventional laser relies on transitions between quantum states of an atom or molecule, the wavelength emitted is determined by the energy difference between these states.
For lasers based on atomic transitions, this limits the available wavelengths to a few discrete lines, and even for molecular liquid dye lasers the practical tuning range for a given dye is limited to about 50 nm.
Despite the great advances in laser technology in recent years — including titanium-sapphire lasers and optical parametric oscillators — the continuous wavelength tuning range of most high power lasers is still restricted, especially in the far infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum (10–1000 ).
In FELs, the wavelength of the radiation emitted depends only on the electron energy and the magnetic field.
Because either or both of these can be varied over wide limits, FELs are broadband tunable lasers.
Operating principles
Figure 1 shows a schematic layout of an FEL.
Mirrors are placed around the wiggler to reflect the emitted light back and forth, causing amplification on each pass by stimulated emission.
How can a beam of electrons that is made to wiggle in a plane with a spatial period of a few centimetres possible produce electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of a few microns?
A reduction factor of 10000 (see Box 1).
The exact mechanism of gain in the FEL&sup1,2,3; is complicated, and it depends critically on maintaining a precise phase relationship between the electron beam and the photons circulating in the optical cavity.
In most FELs the electron beam consists of short bunches of electrons of a few picoseconds duration owing to bunching in the radiofrequency fields of the accelerator.
The laser output therefore shows the same picosecond time structure.
Because pulsed electron beams can attain peak powers of tens of megawatts — equivalent to average powers of several kilowatts — even modest electron-to-photon conversion efficiencies produce enormous photon fluxes.
In principle FELs can have calculated efficiencies as high as 30–50 per cent when the dimensions of the wiggler are tapered to match the decreasing energy of the electrons traversing it.
The highest recorded efficiency is 35 per cent.
FELs can generate such high powers because the powers-dissipating mechanisms of the conventional laser medium are absent, and the electron beam removes the ‘waste’ energy from the laser cavity instantaneously.
For the same reasons, FELs can generate high quality, nearly diffraction limited, optical beams.
The FEL is also capable of lasing at harmonics.
Wigglers with a high K value can produce a spontaneous spectrum rich in harmonics, and stimulated emission can be induced —eg at the third or fifth harmonic.
These applications have become more important in recent years owing to the push towards shorter wavelengths form FELs — culminating perhaps in a genuine X-ray FEL.
A brief history
The development of the FEL can be traced back to 1950, when Hans Motz injected 3 MeV electrons from the Stanford linear accelerator (linac) into a magnetic undulator, producing millimetre and submillimetre radiation.
In 1953, with the same type of undulator and 100 MeV electrons, he produced spontaneous visible radiation, and later showed analytically that radiation could be amplified by using this technique.
Many microwave amplifiers and oscillators also rely on the interaction between free electrons and electromagnetic radiation, by using slow-wave structures and orbit modulation to match the velocity of the wave to that of the electron beam, thereby allowing energy transfer between them.
Devices such as ubitrons and gyrotrons (high frequency power generators for microwave heating), rather than conventional lasers, are therefore the forerunners of FELs.
The ubitron, an acronym for undulating beam interaction, was developed by Robert Phillips at General Electric during the late 1950s, and ultimately generated 150 kW peak power at 54 GHz (V-band), which is still a record.
The current interest in FELs originates from the work of John Madey at Stanford University.
In 1975, Madey and his coworkers amplified the output of a 10.6  CO 2 laser by using a helical wiggler injected by the electron beam of the Stanford superconducting linear accelerator.
This experiment was quickly followed by an FEL (a name chosen by Madey) operating at a wavelength of 3.4 , corresponding to an electron energy of 43 MeV.
These results confirmed the theoretical predictions and aroused great interest in FELs.
Significant progress has been made over the years, including the development of microwave FELs in the US at the Naval Research Laboratory, Columbia University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the Lawrence Livermore laboratory, the infrared-visible FELs built at Los Alamos, Stanford and Santa Barbara and the storage ring at Orsay, Paris.
FEL technology
FELs divide naturally into two distinct categories:
Raman FELs that utilise collective electron-radiation interactions and dense electron beams to generate very high powers in the microwave region; and
Compton FELs that use high energy electron beams and single particle interactions to generate visible or infrared radiation.
Most Compton FELs operate in the infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum (0.7–250 ), which is generally the most interesting region of the spectrum both in chemistry and in medicine.
The first generation of Compton FELs (1975–85) was built around available electron accelerators, most of which had been designed for nuclear physics and were therefore not optimised as FEL injectors.
Recently, however, electron accelerators have been built specifically to inject FELs, and these are now becoming operational.
The quality of the accelerator is crucial to the efficiency of a modern FEL.
The usual choice is an electron linac, because this can deliver the peak beam currents required to generate high gain.
However, linacs can suffer from mediocre beam quality unless they are specifically designed for FEL injection.
Electrostatic van de Graaff accelerators have excellent beam quality and stability but cannot sustain high currents without energy recovery schemes, and cannot produce beam energies much above 10 MeV, limiting them to operation in the far infrared (250–1000 ).
An interesting alternative is a superconducting electron accelerator, which can often compensate for its limited peak current by combination of exceptional beam quality, high stability and very long duty cycle.
The very low emittance of these accelerators (a measure of the size and angular spread of the beam) also permits lasing on harmonics — pushing the laser output into the visible or ultraviolet.
Electron storage rings can easily produce visible outputs because of their high energies (typically several hundred MeV), but they are weakened by the very low peak current that can be achieved, which significantly lowers their gain.
A survey of FEL activity around the world shows that about 50 projects are under-way and several others are seeking funding.
Most are in the US, but Europe has at least 10 facilities.
One of the most successful visible FELs uses the 800 MeV Super-ACO storage ring at Orsay, Paris, and is now being supplemented by the separate linac-injected FEL operating at a wavelength of 2–20 .
Figure 2 shows the undulator for this new facility, which lasted for the first time in January 1992.
A similar infrared FEL facility (Felix) is under construction at Rijnhuizen (Utrecht) in The Netherlands, ultimately spanning the range 3–300  with 8–80  available during the first stage.
This will be a very  flexible facility, with several undulators injected from a linac, with energy varying from 15–45 MeV.
The first stage of Felix lased for the first time in August 1991, and the second stage will be operational this summer.
The nearest equivalent to the original Stanford FEL is the near infrared laser under construction in Germany at the Darmstadt 130 MeV superconducting electron accelerator.
Using a hybrid undulator and energies between 35 MeV and 50 MeV it will be possible to cover wavelengths from 2.5–5.3 , generating 1.9ps laser pulses at a repetition rate of 10MHz.
Other projects in Europe include the development of several FELs at the Italian national laboratories in Frascati, and one is planned at the University of Twente, The Netherlands, based on a racetrack microtron accelerator equipped with a photocathode electron gun.
An FEL which uses a low energy (6 MeV) van de Graaff electrostatic accelerator has operated successfully at the University of California, Santa Barbara, since 1984.
A proposal to construct a similar facility in the UK, using the 10 MeV tandem accelerator at Oxford University, was submitted to the SERC in September 1989 but failed to gain support.
Applications
Many of the applications of FELs are logical extrapolations from existing lower power sources, but some of the most exciting future developments cannot yet be predicted.
Table 1 shows the wide range of FEL applications.
FELs offer new opportunities for investigating a very wide range of phenomena, especially in the far infrared where the coverage by others lasers is limited.
The broad wavelength tuning is accompanied by the high peak photon fluxes needed for investigating nonlinear processes, and by the time resolution needed to study the dynamics of reactions.
A good example of infrared FEL applications is the chemical dynamics research laboratory currently under construction at the Lawrence Berkeley laboratory in the US.
This is part of the so-called combustion dynamics facility and its main aim is to enhance the efficiency of combustion processes, coupled with the reduction of undesirable effects like pollution.
This research will be used to clarify the production, structure and reactivity of critical reaction intermediates and transient species, and will focus on the dynamics of elementary chemical reactions.
A variety of light sources is required to fulfil this programme, including a new infrared free-electron laser (IRFEL), dedicated synchrotron radiation beam lines at the advanced light source (ALS), an intense synchrotron radiation source, and conventional femtosecond lasers.
The IRFEL in particular will make it possible to study molecular excitation and dissociation by using infrared multiphoton excitation under collision free conditions.
This powerful technique has been limited so far to molecules that can be excited by CO 2 lasers, which have limited tunability.
However, the broad tunability of the IRFEL provides access, for the first time, to practically all elements and molecules.
By using the IRFEL, chemists will be able to probe basic molecular dissociation processes and produce unusual transient species such as organic free radical sand reaction intermediates.
A unique feature of these studies will be the integrated and simultaneous use of the IRFEL and ALS beamlines for pump-probe experiments and for experiments with crossed molecular beams.
By using the ALS as the pump and the IRFEL as    the probe, it will be possible to study the vibronic structure of highly excited molecules.
Reversing these rules will provide information on infrared spectra of transient species for combustion diagnostics, data on the energetics and reactivity of free radicals, and may also give an insight into ways of achieving regioselective photochemistry.
Other important areas include the direct detection of transient free radicals relevant to combustion, high technology manufacturing, hydrocarbon processing and the environment.
Reactive free radicals are often the active species controlling complex chemical reactions, yet they are difficult to understand because of the problems in studying them.
Another area that researchers can study is the chemistry and spectroscopy of surfaces and very thin layers, providing a tool for the non-destructive analysis of layers and adsorbed molecules.
The infrared region of the spectrum is used to determine molecular structures via their vibrational modes, and this is one of the few surface-sensitive techniques that does not need an ultra-high vacuum.
The very short pulse length of FELs is also useful in studying time-dependent behaviour, such as the dynamics of adsorption and desorption processes, or of catalysed reactions.
In laser surgery, CO 2 lasers (wavelength 10.6 ) are widely used because of the high absorption in water, and therefore in any soft tissue.
Unfortunately, transmission down fibres at this wavelength is also poor.
The current trend towards more refined microsurgery, involving the removal of very small pieces of tissue, requires pulsed lasers with very shallow tissue penetration, otherwise deeper tissue damage is caused by thermal conduction.
An example is corneal shaping using 193 nm excimer lasers.
In the infrared there are two wavelengths, at 3  and 6 , with extremely high water absorption, coupled with good transmission through fibre optics, and FELs open up the possibility of using a tunable laser operating in a pulsed mode in these regions, thus minimising tissue damage.
Conclusions
FELs are now a mature technology, and are competing with conventional lasers as tunable light sources.
They cannot compete within the visible spectrum, but they will be highly competitive throughout the infrared and perhaps also in the ultraviolet and soft X-ray regions, where there have been several significant developments recently.
These fascinating devices, halfway between lasers and particle accelerators, continue to develop, at least at the pace of the past decade, and will be very much in demand in applications requiring a combination of high peak power, broad tunability and short pulse length, along with excellent beam quality.
Dr Allan Gillespie is a senior lecturer in the department of electronic and electrical engineering, Dundee Institute of Technology, Bell Street, Dundee DD1 1HG.
References
Fig. 1.
The main elements of a free-electron laser.
Because the high power electron beam would damage the magnets, a magnetic transport system (not shown) injects the beam into the wiggler and removes it at the exit.
(is the precise wavelength emitted by the FEL, and  is the period of the wiggler.)
Box 1.
Radiation emission in an FEL
Electrons traversing the wiggler in the laboratory frame (a ) oscillate with a wavelength () of a few centimetres.
In the electron rest frame —ie the view seem from the electron (b )— relativity () shortens the wiggler period by a factor γ.
Radiation emitted by the electron is transformed back to the laboratory frame, and is concentrated in to a narrow cone around the forward direction (c ), generating a (Doppler) frequency upshift (γ).
For example, 50 MeV electrons have a , and thus a wiggler period () of 5 cm will generate a laser output at 4 .
The precise wavelength (formula;) emitted by the FEL is given by equation (i ): where  is the period of the wiggler, γ is the electron energy in units of the rest energy (),e is the electron charge, B o is the peak magnetic induction at the electron path,m is the electron rest mass and c is the velocity of light.
K is determined by the amplitude of the wiggle in the magnetic field (equation ii ).
(Between 1 and 2 for optimised systems.)
Fig. 2.
The undulator for the new free-electron laser at Orsay, France.
The two permanent magnet arrays are well separated in this photograph, to allow unrestricted access to the vacuum chamber containing the electron beam.
Box 2.
Some examples of FEL applications
Chemistry and materials science
Combustion chemistry
High resolution fluorescence spectroscopy
Catalysts, semiconductors
Reflection/absorption spectroscopy
Crystal growth, optical damage in materials
Photochemistry
Biomedicine
Laser surgery
Microsurgery
Phototherapy and photodynamic tumour destruction
Membrane dynamics (drugs)
Tissue irradiation and damage
Condensed matter physics
Linear and nonlinear spectroscopy
Superconductors
Optical reflection from surfaces
Communications and electronics
Lidar (optical radar)
Optical modulation
Photolithography
Chemical enterprise from ‘The Elephant’
David H. Leaback
As one of the pioneers of dyestuff manufacturing, Edward Chambers Nicholson established some chemical techniques that are still useful today.
October 1990 marked the centenary of the death of Edward Chambers Nicholson at his home in Carlton House, Herne Hill, SE London.
Only passing accounts of his life and work have appeared in the literature, and while brief references have been made to Nicholson's excellence as a chemist, these have not done justice to his achievements, or set them against the London localities where they occurred.
Nicholson's commemoration also rests with the intriguing interactions he had with other chemists, and raises questions on the objectives of chemical research which are still relevant today.
Nicholson was born in January 1827 — one of several sons of a successful grocer of Lincoln and Maidenhead.
When he was barely one year old, Nicholson's mother died and he was put in the care of his aunt Mary, on her farm at South Carlton, near Lincoln.
At the age of 10, he was removed to Dr Beasley's school at Uxbridge, Middlesex.
He later worked in a pharmacy in Andover, before entering the pharmaceutical laboratory of J. Lloyd Bullock in Conduit Street, London.
Lloyd Bullock was once a student in Liebig's Geissen laboratory and was at that time involved in establishing a similar laboratory in London.
Indeed, while the new college was being build in Oxford Street, the students worked in a makeshift laboratory in apartments rented in nearby Hanover Street.
Nicholson was one of the first students at the college to which A. W. Hofmann was appointed professor.
Here Nicholson came to know such students as Frederick Abel, Fred Field, Charles Mansfield, George Maule, George Merck, Henry Noad and George Simpson.
Nicholson's outstanding practical skills were soon evident, and in demand.
He assisted Abel with alkaloid preparations and analyses; he helped Mansfield to separate and characterise fractions from coal tar naphtha; and also find time to prepare and analyse aniline and related compounds.
By 1850, Abel was still assisting at the college, whereas Mansfield was preparing his naphtha fractions elsewhere and was eagerly looking for socially useful outlets for his products.
Field was doing metallurgical chemistry in South America, and Maule had joined Simpson to start a chemical apparatus business near the Elephant & Castle.
Nicholson himself was now working at Richard Fothergill's Aberdare Ironworks with another of Hofmann's associates — David Price — on aspects of the chemistry of iron.
Three years later, Nicholson suffered an attack of typhoid which prompted his return to London.
After recovering, he joined Simpson and Maule in their business at 1 Kennington Road, Newington (Fig. 1 ).
Here, Nicholson extended the range of pharmaceuticals and added fine chemicals for use in the burgeoning dyeing and photographic industries.
As the business grew, they acquired the adjacent premises at 2 Kennington Road.
Interests in aniline
Nicholson became a member of an elite group of chemists — the B-Club — in whose company he was able to keep up with the activities of Hofmann and his associates.
Here, he would have heard of poor Mansfield's terrible death following a naphtha fire in a derelict building in St Pancras, as well as of G. F. Wilson's new processes for producing cheap glycerin soaps and (Price's patents) candles from low-grade fats, and of Abel and Spiller's progress at Woolwich Arsenal on organo-nitrate explosives.
However, the development that particularly interested Nicholson was Perkin's  discovery of the first aniline dyestuff in his home laboratory in the East End.
The success of the factory that Perkin had set up near Harrow encouraged thoughts of a similar enterprise near the Elephant & Castle.
Nicholson approached the Perkins for a licence to manufacture the new mauve dyestuff at Newington.
This they refused, but the demand for the mauve dye was so great that the Perkins allowed Nicholson to provide supplementary supplies of the dye intermediates.
While Nicholson's experience made it easy for him to contemplate such preparations, the work of the Perkins at King David For indicated that it was unlikely that more than quart quantities of aniline could be prepared safely on the Kennington Road premises.
A more suitable site was found at Victory Place, Locksfields — half a mile to the east of the Elephant & Castle (Fig 2.).
The site was secured towards the end of 1858, and work began immediately to adapt the existing buildings to accommodate the rows of big glass bolthead flasks that Nicholson favoured for the preparations.
The Perkins had discovered, however, that such preparations could be done more safely and conveniently in iron vessels, and probably visited the Locksfields factory to advise on such improvements.
The extraordinary commercial success of the Perkins prompted chemists everywhere to treat aniline preparations with many oxidising agents, in the hope of discovering a new aniline dyestuff.
However, although Nicholson had the production facilities and large quantities of aniline, he was prevented from using his talents to make the mauve dye.
At about that time, a meeting allegedly took place between Nicholson, Hofmann and another of Hofmann's associates, Henry Medlock, at which it was suggested that arsenic acid should be tried as an oxidising agent.
Whatever the truth of this, Medlock lodged a patent in January 1860, very similar to one produced by Nicholson just eight days later, for the production of magenta, using the arsenic acid reagent.
Undaunted by this set-back, Nicholson successfully negotiated the rights to the Medlock patent for the considerable sum of £2000.
Outclassing the competition
Nicholson's former colleague, David Price, joined him at the new Locksfields factory, where they began a detailed study of the conditions for making magenta dye.
They found that no dye was formed from pure aniline; that magenta was usually a mixture of two dyestuffs (1 and 2 ); and that the products formed could be controlled by the proportions of the component amines.
Nicholson, who was renowned for his ability to crystallise ‘anything’, not only crystallised the rosaniline free base but also went on to prepare and crystallise a range of rosaniline salts.
By the time of the International Exhibition in May 1862, the production and presentation of magenta had been perfected.
The report on the exhibition was very complimentary to Nicholson:
…it is in England that the most beautiful products have been obtained; in proof of which assertion the Reporter confidently points to the splendid exhibition of Messrs. SIMPSON, MAULE, and NICHOLSON (United Kingdom , 600), which has attracted such general attention.
It is only justice to state that, while France has had the merit of inaugurating the industrial production of aniline red, England may, thanks to the activity, science, and untiring efforts of Mr. Nicholson, claim the honour of having brought this manufacture to its present high degree of perfection.
Nothing, in fact, could surpass the splendour those magnificent crowns of green, metal-sparkling crystals, which Mr Nicholson has contributed to the Exhibition; they certainly represent the finest products of this new industry which have as yet been seen, and are at the same time significant symbols of the success which has rewarded the exertions of this distinguished manufacturer.
From this it seems that Nicholson's dazzling display outclassed all others in the Chemical Section — including the rather pedestrian exhibit of Perkin & Sons.
but the tone of the report might be attributable to the attitude of the reporter (Hofmann) to the parties involved.
Initially, Hofmann was very hostile to Perkin's intention to leave academic research to exploit his discovery commercially.
Hofmann believed that the proper objectives of such research should not be for personal gain, but for the pursuit of fundamental knowledge and the fulfilment of social needs.
However, with time, Hofmann came to recognise the advantages of what Nicholson and Perkin were doing, and suggested that he undertook the analysis of their dye products.
Whereas Nicholson accepted wholeheartedly, Perkin characteristically turned down the offer, indicating that he intended to do the analyses himself.
The Perkins may have come to regret this decision because, after being eclipsed at the exhibition, the demand for their mauve dye decreased rapidly, and they found that the commercial potential for magenta dye had been grossly underestimated.
Proposals for a merger of interests in the Medlock patent with the French company Reynard Frères — in an attempt to satisfy demand for the magenta dye — were unsuccessful.
In contrast, two experienced chemists — Fred Field and William Spiller — were taken on at Locksfields, and had set about extending the firm's list of dye products.
French dye firms had shown that heating magenta dyestuffs under various conditions could give new dyes — such as the phenylated rosanilines, Regina purple (3 ) and Bleu de Lyons (4 ).
Nicholson and his colleagues improved and refined the    preparation of such dyes and, with the assistance of Hofmann, established their chemical constitution.
They found that the triphenylated rosaniline (4 ) was difficult to handle owing to its poor solubility.
Nicholson then observed that introducing one or more sulphonic acid residues (Nicholson's blue,5 ) greatly improved the handling properties of these colouring agents.
All this work was done in close cooperation with Hofmann, and there can be little doubt that this was beneficial to both parties.
Hofmann could offer advice, analytical expertise and academic contact and, in return, had access to large scale facilities, materials and dye products.
Undoubtedly, the alkylated rosanilines (eg Hofmann violent,6 ) came out of this cooperation, and were duly added to the firm's product list.
Yellow phosphine (7 ) was not only the first acridinium compound to be discovered, but was also the first basic orange dyestuff.
However, the Locksfields firm was not without serious difficulties.
At about the time of the exhibition, it emerged that the firm was infringing the Medlock patent.
In June 1862, legal proceedings were started, first against an East End pigment maker, and later against the Huddersfield dyemaker, Read Holliday.
These cases became a cause célèbre , involving many distinguished witnesses and many resources.
It transpired that Medlock's patent was badly drafted and the case hinged on the degree of hydration of the arsenic acid reagent used.
In the three or so years before matters were finally settled, a lot happened; George Simpson gave up his interest in the partnership to retire to his leafy mansion near Reigate; Hofmann had left England to take up a prestigious academic post in Berlin; and the new Nicholson, Maule & Nicholson partnership had begun to transfer its production to a site at Hackney Wick.
This move was probably motivated by the same considerations that led to the Perkins' choice of a site near Harrow, and to its eventual abandonment.
Despite the immense amount of effort and money that went into this new Atlas aniline dye factory, the business was sold barely three years later, to a partnership between the wealthy drysalter, Edward Brooke; a former employee, William Spiller; and the brother of a former partner, Richard Simpson.
Nicholson himself retired to his grand Carlton House, with its beautiful gardens and magnificent views of the Kent and surrey hills.
A lasting legacy
Over a century after his death, what endures of Nicholson's achievements?
First, there is the widely used practice of introducing sulphonic acid residues into dyestuffs to improve their solubility.
Secondly, a few of the aniline dyes developed by Nicholson are still used today.
But perhaps Nicholson's most spectacular achievement was the important part he played in surpassing the performance of the rival Perkin & Sons — a feat that would have been impossible without the cooperation of his friend, and mentor, Hofmann.
Together, Nicholson and Hofmann developed an impressive family of aromatic dyestuffs, and — even though the structure of benzene was still uncertain — began to understand how chemical constitution can influence the colour of compounds.
In view of their close relationship, it is fitting that Hofmann should have the last words on Edward Chambers Nicholson.
‘…In him was united the genius of the manufacturer and the habits of a scientific investigator’.
Acknowledgements:I am indebted to the librarians of the Royal Society of Chemistry and the London Boroughs of Hackney, Southwark and Tower Hamlets.
Dr David H. Leaback is managing director of Biolink Technology, Radlett, Hertfordshire WD7 8ND.
© D. H. Leaback
References
Fig. 1.
A view worth looking north along Kennington Road towards Newington Butts and the Elephant & Castle (1911).
On the right is the entrance to Newington Crescent where Nicholson and Maule lived during the 1850s.
On the near corner is the shop where Simpson set up his business in the 1840s — which later became the firm of Simpson, Maule & Nicholson.
Edwards Chambers Nicholson.
Fig. 2.
A reconstruction (looking NW) of the area of the Atlas works of Simpson, Maule & Nicholson, as it would have been in the 1860s.
The menace under the floorboards?
A. F. Gardner, R. S. Gillett and P. S. Phillips
We all take comfort and safety in our own homes for granted.
However, evidence has shown that there may be a silent long-term killer lurking in almost every room.
In recent years, radon has been recognised as the main source of human exposure to ionising radiation.
Uranium mines are know to have an increased incidence of lung cancer owing to exposure to radon, but only recently has the importance of radon in the home been acknowledged.
While research was indicating the potential of this problem, a remarkable event in the US seemed to highlight its seriousness.
An engineer at a nuclear power station in Pennsylvania set off radiation alarms as he ‘walked into work’.
The reason for this was that he was contaminated with radon decay products from his house.
The concentration of radon in his house was measures at ca 100000 B qm&sup-3;, a staggering figure when it is placed in context because the action level in the UK, above which urgent remedial action should be taken, is 200 B qm&sup-3;, and in the US it is only 150 B qm&sup-3;.
Until recently, the issue of high radon concentrations in homes remained in the backgrounds in terms of broad public concern.
But now the subject has appeared, with increasing concern, in the general press.
Some interesting reasons for this were suggested in The Observer in 1986.
Radon exposure is the hottest issue among radiation scientists today — but it remains almost entirely unknown to the public.
Neither environmentalists nor the nuclear industry seem to like talking about it.
Environmentalists keep quiet because concern over radon in houses would divert attention from the campaign against nuclear power.
The nuclear industry, for its part, does not seem to enjoy publicising the ill effects of radiation in any form.
These reasons may not be entirely true, but since formal advice on radon exposure was first issued in 1987 by the National Radiological Protection Board (NRPB) great concern has arisen in the few areas of the country that have high radon levels.
The noble gas!
Radon is a colourless, odourless and tasteless gas found in group O of the Periodic Table.
It has a density of 9.25 g dm&sup-3;, a boiling point of -62°C and a melting point of -71°C.
Its average composition in the Earth's crust ix 4x10&sup-13; mg kg&sup-1;.
The only isotope of radon abundant enough to cause a health problem is & sup222 ; Rn.
The other isotopes, & sup219 ; Rn and & sup220 ; Rn, are formed by the actinium and thorium decay series respectively.
The & sup222 ; Rn isotope is formed by the decay of & sup238 ; U (Fig. 1 ).
This isotope decays with a half-life of 3.82 days into & sup218 ; Po, which in turn decays into & sup214 ; Pb, & sup214 ; Bi and & sup214 ; Po.
These four radionuclides are called radon daughters, and these radon daughters become attached to dust particles and are breathed into the lungs.
The isotopes & sup222 ; Rn, & sup218 ; Po and & sup214 ; Po are all α-emitters; these particles result in very localised energy deposition in living tissue.
The & sup222 ; Rn isotope provides the largest contribution to the total radiation dose received by the population (Fig. 2 ).
Effects on the body
What effect does the radiation from the radon daughters have upon the human body?
The activity of a radioactive substance is the number of nuclei decaying per second.
The unit of activity is the becquerel (Bq).
One becquerel is equal to  one radioactive decay per second.
However, knowing the activity tells us very little about the possible biological damage caused.
The biological effects of α-particles (high linear energy transfer, LET) are in general much greater than the effects of β-particles and γ-rays (low LET).
Radiation of high LET can deposit most of its energy within a cell and this results in greater biological damage.
Damage to living tissue can be quantified by using the dose equivalent.
The unit of dose equivalent is the sievert (Sv)(a radon concentration of 20 Bq m&sup-3; gives an effective dose of 1 mSv per year).
Radiation can cause the ionisation of biological molecules when electrons are removed from atoms, bonds are broken,etc .
One important type of damage is a change in the DNA of chromosomes.
The more radiation, the higher the chance of damage.
Some types of DNA damage can be repaired on the cell, others cannot and these can have long-term effects.
Radiation damage owing to random effects are called stochastic and are not normally predictable.
The effects from radon daughters come from low-level radiation.
However, high doses of radiation that damage cells usually produce effects that can be related specifically to the radiation exposure.
Some of these effects occur very quickly —ie within days of exposure — and these are called non-stochastic effects and are reasonably predictable.
Some effects of radiation on the human body are given in Fig. 3 .
Stochastic effects are of course long-term and would probably not appear for decades.
Cancer, genetic defects and accelerated ageing can be caused by exposure to low level radiation.
The daughter nuclei are solids and form cationic clusters with water in the atmosphere.
When inhaled, these very small clusters are deposited in the respiratory tract.
The epithelial cells are exposed to α-particles and this can cause lung cancer.
Recent research seems to indicate a positive correlation between the incidence of acute myeloid leukaemia and indoor radon concentrations.
How is it possible to quantify stochastic effects?
It is possible to estimate risk factors for low doses by extrapolating data produced by exposing living systems to high doses.
However, the choice of statistical model used is still a problem.
However, there is data available for the effects of high dose radiation on the human body, and data on radiation hazards is regularly reviewed by the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of the Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR).
The data comes from three major sources.
Survivors of  Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
the radiation dose here goes up to 5 Sv and was mostly due to γ-rays.
Patients treated with radiotherapy.
The average radiation dose is 3.8 Sv.
People exposed to radiation at work.
Uranium miners in the US fall into this category.
These miners provide most of the information for high LET radiation effects in humans.
But what if we want to obtain data about the increased risk of cancer from exposure to doses of less than 50 mSv?
In some parts of the world background radiation is very high compared with the UK and quite substantial research has been carried out.
For example, on the SW coast of India there are deposits of monazite (CePO 4 ) with high concentrations of & sup238 ; U. The population is exposed to radiation doses of around 5 mSv per year.
This is around three times the average dose in the UK, and there is some evidence of an increase in cancer incidence.
However, because the scenario is totally different from the radon problem in the UK, great care must be taken in interpreting these results from other countries.
Risks in the home
There are five sources of radon in houses:
natural gas;
tap water;
surrounding air;
building materials; and
subjacent ground.
Uranium, the ultimate source of radon, tends to concentrate in acidic magmas, which form granite, or in shales which form from marine muds.
If the soil is permeable enough radon can diffuse out before it decays.
Granites in SW England are extensively faulted and fissured thus  allowing radon to escape, whereas Scottish granite is much less faulted, preventing radon from escaping.
Surveys of radon in UK homes have been done since 1976 about 24000 homes will have been tested.
The first survey found a mean of 20 Bq m&sup-3; in living rooms in daytime.
This figure is generally accepted as the UK average.
A house with a radon level of 20 Bq m&sup-3; will give an annual effective dose equivalent of 1 mSv and a lifetime risk of 0.25 per cent of contracting lung cancer.
However some homes have very high radon concentrations —eg in regions of the country that have high & sup222 ; Rn concentrations and ground conditions that allow rapid gas flow, producing large quantities of radon at the surface.
At the end of 1989 results became available for 10000 homes throughout the UK, and these are shown in Table 1.
The regions in the UK that have high radon levels in homes are Cornwall, Devon, Derbyshire, Northamptonshire and Scotland.
Some houses in these areas have radon concentrations of more than 1000 Bq m&sup-3;.
The NRPB originally advised the government that an action level was required, above which householders should reduce the radon levels.
This action level was set at 400 Bq m&sup-3, and was calculated to correspond to a lifetime risk of 2 per cent from dying of lung cancer.
Rounded values for lifetime risk from prolonged exposure to radon, and its daughters, in the home are given in Table 2.
The exposure to 400 Bq m&sup-3; suggests an approximate risk of dying of lung cancer of 6 per cent.
Taking the figures for smokers and non-smokers and allowing for all competing causes of death, the conclusion is that around one in 20 of the lung cancers in the UK may be due to radon exposure at home.
This corresponds to around 2000 deaths per year in the UK.
Because of this the NRPB has decided to reduce the action level to 200 Bq M&sup-3;, consequently Cornwall and Devon will have (an estimated) 60000 homes above the limit.
Somerset, Northamptonshire and Derbyshire will have some 10000 homes about the limit.
Again, this is an estimate, and extensive testing is required to give the true picture.
In some regions of Northamptonshire recent tests have revealed a higher proportion of homes about the limit than was predicted.
Why is radon in homes the problem?
The air in most buildings is at a lower pressure than the surrounding air.
This small pressure difference (only a few pascals) is enough to draw radon from subjacent soil into buildings via cracks in floors and walls (Fig. 4 ).
As a result, radon concentrations inside buildings are much higher than outside.
However, indoor radon levels also vary because there are so many factors involved —eg the geology of the ground on which the house is built, and also the style in which it is built.
Modern buildings that minimise draughts are prone to high concentrations.
Because of the quality and style of house construction and the various life-styles of the occupants —eg how long windows are left open — concentrations between neighbouring houses can vary tremendously.
The proportion of time people spend indoors can dramatically affect calculations.
A person who spends most of his or her time in the home will receive a higher dose.
The problems result from long-term exposure, so families who change homes every few years may not suffer because they are exposed to levels above the action level for only a short time.
Concentrations also differ between lower and upper storeys of a house.
Because radon is denser than air the lower     floor is likely to have a higher concentration of radon; on average bedrooms have 65 per cent of the concentration of living rooms.
In bungalows, bedrooms have 90 per cent of the concentration of living rooms.
Therefore, someone who lives in a bungalow and has lived in a high radon area since birth is the most likely person to suffer.
The amount of radon present also alters with the seasons.
In winter winds are stronger, causing greater pressure differences between inside and outside.
Occupiers also raise the internal temperature, thereby increasing the stack effect.
Once it has been established that radon concentrations are above the action level, remedial action must be taken (Table 3).
The building regulations of the Department of the Environment suggest a number of ways of doing this.
The primary objective is to prevent radon entering the house.
A considerable reduction can be achieved by sealing cracks etc .
If the house has a suspended floor there will be radon-rich air underneath, so an intact flexible membrane of 1000 gauge building polythene could be laid under carpets to exclude air.
It is very difficult to seal all the cracks in a building so a more effective method is to create an underpressure beneath the floor to counter that in the building.
This is done by creating a radon sump; a small hole filled with porous material.
This is connected by a pipe to a fan that sucks radon from the house.
The cost to radon-proof a house could exceed £1000.
Conclusion
It must be stressed that there is no direct evidence linking radon and lung cancer.
Yet the overwhelming opinion is that a significant proportion of lung cancer deaths in the UK are caused by radon, and that people who are likely to have long exposure to high radon levels are at extreme risk.
Although it is relatively simple and inexpensive to radon-proof a house, the social and political problems raised are enormous.
If the problem was widely publicised, certain regions of the country with high radon levels could find the value of their housing stock drastically reduced.
Would firms move into areas with high radon concentrations?
The problem seems to be that this colourless, odourless gas is a quiet, silent long-term killer and the cause of death (lung cancer) is prevalent amongst the population anyway.
It seems that public concern is mostly raised when the pollutant is easily observed and can be shown to be due to some organisation flouting the law.
But who do we blame for radon?
Scandinavia and North America
The UK is not the only country to experience problems with radon.
Sweden recognised the problem well over a decade ago and began legislation to limit the allowed dose; it has the most advanced testing programme in Europe with well over 70000 homes measured and over 2000 remedied.
In the US, certain states have problems including a ‘hot belt’ which incorporates much of the city of Syracuse.
In the mid-1980s the US Environmental Protection Agency tested 11600 homes, over 10 states — 21 per cent exceeded the action level.
As well as national recommendations for radon limitation, various supranational values vary just as widely.
The World Health Organisation (WHO) suggests taking action at 200 Bq m&sup-3;; other countries have different values (see Table).
Dr Paul S. Phillips is a senior lecturer in organic chemistry and Adele F. Gardner and Rachel S. Gillett are undergraduate students studying chemistry and the environment in the school of sciences, Avenue Campus, Nene College, Northampton NN2 6JD.
References
Fig. 1.
Radioactive decay sequence for the production and decay of & sup222 ; Rn.
Fig. 2 Percentage of radiation from various sources.
The effects of radiation on the human body
Above a dose of 20 Sv death occurs in hours.
The central nervous system is damaged.
After doses of between 5–10 Sv death occurs within days.
The main cause of death is the destruction of the gut lining, which results in severe infection.
After doses of between 2–5 Sv death occurs within weeks.
The main cause of death is the destruction of the bone marrow.
(The dose of radiation that would kill half of a human population within 60 days is the LD 50/60 .
Damage to the eyes at around 1 Sv.
Fertility of males impaired at around O.1 Sv.
Mental and growth retardation in children.
Table 1.
Radon measurements in UK homes.
Table 2.
Risk of lung cancer from lifelong exposure to radon at home.
Table 3.
Remedial action timescale at various radon levels.
Fig. 4.
How radon gets into a house
Picking the right person
John A. Muir
Most of us are nervous and apprehensive about job interviews.
But there is also pressure on an employer to adopt the correct recruitment policy.
Assume a staff vacancy has arisen.
In recent years people have been asking: does the post need to be filled or can reorganisation be used to distribute the work among existing staff?
If there is to be a straight replacement, is there a policy procedure for completing the exercise?
A number of factors need to be examined.
There may be a policy to appoint an internal candidate for the post so that the residual vacancy is filled at the lowest level by direct outside entry.
the question arises whether, in relation to any particular post, there is adequate potential to meet the needs of the firm, so notwithstanding what might otherwise be a desirable policy of providing career opportunities, this issue needs to be looked at closely.
If proper attention is paid to ensure that the entry grades are filled by staff who have good qualifications and potential, then internal promotees will be found more easily.
However, in practice insufficient weight is often given to this aspect of a recruitment policy, so that a firm committed to an internal promotion policy will have to make do with available talent for future promotions.
The recruitment process
Whatever the source of recruitment, it is going to be expensive.
The main costs are likely to be advertising space; agency fees (if an outside bureau is used); candidates' travelling and subsistence expenses; and perhaps relocation expenses for the successful candidate.
Internally, further costs will be incurred in relation to wage bills of existing staff involved in recruitment.
For example, the time spent on processing the applications and on selection itself.
It is also important to drawn up a job description, and that will take up senior management resources, to consider the job requirements and the profile of the ideal candidate.
Time spent on this may be looked up as an investment in that if essential job elements are identified, then the people involved in the recruitment process will be less inclined to develop the criteria as they go along.
Furthermore, the job description is also vitally important so that candidates then know what is required.
They can then match their experience against the description and come to the interview prepared to make a positive contribution to the business.
Standard application forms are used by many companies.
Using these forms has the advantage of enabling the selection personnel to compare the applicants' responses and qualifications quickly and easily.
However, this is often sunk from the start by using a poor form.
Perhaps not enough information is sought, the headings are too vague and there is a shortage of space.
The type of question asked needs to be considered very carefully.
what is the point of asking a middle ranking executive about his greatest achievement at work in the past 10 years when he has probably been locked into office procedures laid down by senior management and where his scope for initiative has been restricted.
Obviously the candidate will complete this section, but if he were to reflect honestly on his work and what he was allowed to do then his response would not advance his cause.
Candidates often dramatise their role.
If the employer is looking to make a judgement on a candidate's power of invention and imagination then such a question may be relevant but this is open to question if he is seeking to appoint a solid contracts officer.
A good application form can be helpful but what has to be considered is whether it stops the candidate from expressing him/herself.
Much can be gained by assessing the way a candidate puts him/herself.
Much can be gained by assessing the way a candidate puts him/herself forward in his or her own paper —ie good presentation.
This normally needs to be fairly short, but contain enough basic information, power of description, use of words, style of text and so on.
A candidate who is too brief perhaps has little to offer; another who spreads him/herself over four sides of A4 may be revealing basic traits of long windedness and, more seriously, an inability to decide what is important and what is not.
Thus the applicant's own application is a revealing guide to the applicant him/herself.
Some jobs attract a huge response.
The applications sometimes know this because the employer says so in acknowledging the first approach.
What has to be considered is whether this is really in everyone's interest.
It is certainly no encouragement to the applicants.
The first sift has to be based on the written application, hence the need for a good form and experienced people who are able to make suitable assessments of candidates' experience, and strengths and weaknesses against the requirements of the job.
For a senior job it should not be regarded as a burden to see 12 people and then draw up a short list of three or four.
Much of the final selection is done by just one person.
Frequently that person says he/she knows who is suitable the moment that person walks through the door.
Maybe he/she is right; often he/she is not and may recruit someone who becomes a liability.
Extensive experience at interviewing can help the manager develop a sense for the good candidate but the danger is that the interviewer finds people whom he/she regards as sympathetic and compatible.
This point is very important if the manager is left to select a supervisor who will be reporting directly to him/her.
He/she may well select someone whom they feel they can get on with.
This is all very well while it lasts but what  happens when the manager disappears?
In any event, selection based on personal considerations can turn sour and then there is no professional element to sustain the relationship.
The question is whether the supervisor in these circumstances is the person the company would have wanted.
What use is this to the organisation as a whole?
The interview
In large organisations, interviewing is normally done by a panel.
A typical arrangement would be: chairman, from the personnel department; line manager, the employing officer; and an independent person from another activity in the company.
The advantages of a panel are:
there is more than one experience against which to test the candidate.
Care is needed here to ensure that the interviewers' questions do not get crossed.
This can be avoided if the panel decides which areas are to be covered, before the interview:
personal bias is likely to figure less;
the successful candidate is likely to be more acceptable and therefore more useful to the company as a whole; and
the successful candidate will feel a greater sense of confidence about his/her future in the company if the person for whom he/she works (who would otherwise have made the selection) leaves or retires.
Interviewing candidates means assessing a number of factors.
Some interviewers have the ability to carry impressions and those assessments in their head; most do not.
The memory begins to dim a bit after one concentrated day's interviewing and after 48 h it is often a question of ‘what candidate was that’?
However, decisions should be made on the basis of a structured analysis of candidates' qualities.
The answer is to make notes either during the interview or immediately after it; perhaps the latter is a better curse.
Headings will include:
experience;
professional qualifications;
personality;
dress;
speech, power of expression;
potential for the job;
confidence; and
the ability to use the written word.
Some interviewers make a grid and award marks against each heading.
The items noted are in no special order and are certainly not comprehensive.
Interviewers will make up their own list depending on the job and will not doubt give more weight to some items.
One item which is becoming more significant is powers of communication — both spoken and written word.
The former is capable of being reasonably assessed over the course of the interview(s); the latter is more difficult to deal with.
Yet it is vital to recruit someone who can put an argument across in simple, straightforward text.
Why not ask the candidate to submit a report of the interview within a couple of days?
It is better to learn that the candidate cannot put a few words together before he/she joins the company rather than after he/she is employed.
Recruitment and selection are usually thought of as the company picking the person.
Despite the fact that most applicants are anxious to secure a job or move up the career ladder, the process is really two-way.
The scarcer the commodity —eg accountancy — the more the applicant will exercise his power of selection.
Thus there is a requirement on the part of the company representatives — the panel or interviewer — to sell the company.
This is often badly handled.
Far too much is said; all the intricacies of the company are explained, all the reporting lines, all the activities are spelled out.
All that is required is a brief, coherent description — what the group does, an outline of the local organisation and where the post in question fits in.
Details relating to the job and employment are important but the first interview is not the place to cover them in detail.
This means that a good proportion of the interview is taken up by passing information to the candidate.
Furthermore, an oversell leaves the candidate wondering what kind of people they are going to work for.
If a glowing prospect is held out then a successful candidate will expect it.
If this does not happen the person will quickly become disgruntled and disillusioned; worse, they may feel that they have been recruited on a totally false basis.
The purpose of the interview is not gladiatorial.
On the contrary, its objective is to quickly establish a relationship between the applicant and the interviewer(s).
Initially, the responsibility falls on the company to get things going.
Some exchange about holidays, even the weather, sets the scene; then the interview can begin.
The candidate's history, including health, must be explored to establish that there are no gaps and that the candidate's experience is relevant to the job being offered.
Questions should be open ended so as to get the candidate talking.
Questions which ask for a ‘yes’ or ‘no’answer are badly devised and do not carry the interview forward in a constructive way.
‘Can you handle a team of eight people’?
It is hardly likely that the candidate is going to say no; and yes does not reveal anything.
Far better to ask ‘what problems do you see, in supervising a team of eight’?
That, at least gives the candidate a chance to put forward some views.
Some time must be reserved for the applicant to ask questions.
Producing three pages of detailed questions relating to last year's accounts may entitle an interviewer to draw an adverse conclusion.
On the other hand, a few perceptive questions can be a plus mark which the interviewer would do well to recognise.
Policy considerations
When working out a recruitment policy there are a number of wider issues that need to be considered.
There may be a serious age gap in the company so that the senior staff are moving towards retirement while supporting staff are very much younger.
Is there potential to meet future challengers?
If such staff are promoted does it block off future promotion prospects for recruits?
If outside recruitment is a company feature then the age structure issue can be considered to achieve a better balance.
Recruitment and internal promotions can assist in the company's manpower plans.
Getting people into appropriate slots — with the right experience behind them — mans that succession routes can be mapped out.
Recruiting a specialist can mean starting a training programme so that the newcomer passes on his/her knowledge.
With recruitment, too, comes the opportunity for redeploying existing staff so as to widen experience.
Instead of filling the directly vacant post, staff can be moved round, and the resulting vacancy filled.
Many employers follow traditional lines by filling posts with staff who have experience of the particular work.
This is fine — it means that the newcomers can act from day one.
The question is, whether it is in the longer term interests of the firm.
People have a range of abilities, and higher management posts call for an all round capability, not least of which is the ability to draw resources together, and to lead.
Recruitment can allow the real needs of the organisation to be examined.
Is a specialist required or should general potential be given more weight?
Some companies assume that their staff accept that colleagues X and Y will move up and over their heads, and are content to see it happen.
This assumption should now be examined.
A company that consistently recruits from outside induces its staff to move elsewhere — this is expensive in terms of lost experience.
A company that picks out staff for promotion in the absence of objective criteria may be creating an atmosphere of bitterness and frustration among those who are left behind.
The cost in terms of efficiency and motivation is significant.
A sensible recruitment and selection policy that is familiar to the staff and adhered to be the company —ie the authors of the policy — will do much to keep staff morale high.
Final thoughts
Recruitment and selection are heavyweight matters in terms of company business.
The costs involved are direct and substantial.
The indirect costs of making a poor choice are hidden but heavy — perhaps not all that hidden if someone loses an order or makes an avoidable error in design.
Recruitment and selection are concerned with the very core of the company —ie using the company's personnel.
Good quality, well integrated staff will carry the company forward.
The observers of that coin is stagnation at best, but usually decline.
The importance of sound recruitment and selection cannot therefore be overstressed.
John Muir is managing director of Corporate Employee Relations, High View Lodge, Woodstock Road, Charlbury, Oxon, OX7 3ET.
BOOKS
Non-chromatographic continuous separation techniques
This book will benefit anyone involved in analytical chemistry.
Indeed, the two diagrams illustrating the role of analytical chemistry in society deserve wide exposure and could be useful compulsory reading the bureaucracies where there is a danger of passing legislation that runs ahead of analytical competence.
I believe that this volume will succeed in its aim of increasing awareness of non-chromatographic continuous separation techniques in the analytical community, thereby generating sufficient demand for instrument manufacturers to ‘bet firmly on these techniques’.
In many respects it is an excellent sequel to Flow injection analysis by the same authors and, like its forerunner, it covers an impressive range of applications supported by a generous number of drawings and diagrams.
Each chapter is unstintingly referenced; citing literature up to 1990.
Though packed with information, the facts are presented critically such that I found some sections fascinating —eg the section on factors influencing the performance of liquid-liquid extraction coils.
Because of its scope, readers must not be surprised when a description of an industrial application switches, say, to a research application in fundamental physiology or pharmacology.
Similarly, it may be intriguing to learn that on-line columns of silica-immobilised algal cells can eliminate problems such as overlapping peaks in anodic stripping voltammetry of trace metals.
Generally, this book reads very well with rare and minor typographical errors such as a ‘ultracentrifugation’ instead of ultrafiltration, and only occasionally does the syntax betray the presence of a translator.
At today's prices for hardbacks this volume represents very good value for money.
 A. D. NICOL 
Separation science series: The analysis of drugs of abuse
This book not only gives a detailed description of a modern analytical methods used in the detection of drugs of abuse but also includes information on the type of forensic support required by the police and customs in this area.
A brief descriptions of health and safety precautions required to protect staff handling the various drugs is included, as is information on the security of samples, results and staff.
These chapters will be particularly interesting to the  practising as well as to the trainee forensic scientist.
The chapters on the various analytical techniques used in the detection and study of drugs of abuse are of more general interest.
Obviously written by experts these chapters make interesting and informative reading.
I have no hesitation in recommending this book as essential reading for all who are legitimately involved in this field.
 C. TAYLOR 
Chromatography today
This comprehensive review of modern chromatographic techniques is divided into nine chapters, each dealing with specific areas of chromatography.
The modular approach adopted by the author has achieved his aim of avoiding any loss of continuity.
Each chapter begins with a brief introduction, and ends with a comprehensive list of references — typically in the hundreds.
Chapter 1 outlines the fundamental concepts of chromatography, leading into more detailed coverage of band broadening mechanisms and peak-shape models — important areas which are often overlooked in the current literature.
This is followed by an extensive section on the optimisation of column variables, although it does lack details of the increasingly useful column temperature control technique.
The chapter concludes with a treatment of quantitative principles, including the use (and abuse) of standards.
The book continues with two chapters devoted to the most widely used chromatographic techniques: GC and HPLC.
Chapters 2 and 4 cover column considerations, while chapters 3 and 5 cover instrumentation.
Curiously, there is little mention of either chiral stationary phases or chiral chromatography, which are discussed later in the less relevant chapter on sample preparations.
Instrumentation, and particularly the sections on detectors, is well reported.
Supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC) is well covered, and the short historical introduction is a timely reminder of the applications and limitations of the techniques.
The sections on column and mobile phase selection, and on instrumental parameters, make interesting reading.
Thin layer chromatography (TLC) is considered in some detail; although paper chromatography and electrophoresis would have been useful additions.
A complete and comprehensive chapter is set aside on sample preparations.
The book concludes with a review of hyphenated methods of identifying the compounds after separation, and includes extensive treatments of interface requirements.
It is virtually impossible to do justice to a book of this size in such a short review.
I only have one general complaint about the justification of both margins with disproportionately spaced fonts; it does make for difficult reading.
However, I found this book immensely valuable, and it will certainly take price of place in my collection of chromatography reference books.
 M. R. CRANMER 
Studies in inorganic chemistry, vol 11: Chemistry of the platinum group metals: recent developments
This book contains 17 chapters by 23 authors, covering a wide range of topics in the chemistry of PT, Pd, Rh, Os, Ir and Ru.
Although together these elements comprise only about 22 ppm of the Earth's crust they have many industrial uses, particularly as homogenous catalysts, as well as in less obvious areas such as cancer chemotherapy and in car exhaust systems.
The book falls into three main sections: the occurrence, extraction and uses of the elements particularly in catalysis, electro-chemistry, and electronics; organometallic chemistry and homogeneous catalysis in solution and in melts; and coordination chemistry, including biochemistry, cancer therapy, and high oxidation states.
Much of the work described is applied, with detailed descriptions of metal coated anodes for electrochemistry, catalysts in the petrochemical industry, and the formation of useful compounds by metal catalysed reactions of synthesis gas (CO + H 2 ).
Organometallic and inorganic chemists will find the chapters on C-H bond activation by metals and on metals i high oxidation states particularly interesting.
Although this is an edited multi-author volume, the text has been typeset and is of high quality.
The structural formulae and figures are, however, of variable quality.
Both the expense and the wide-ranging subject matter in this book mean that few people will buy it, but it should be in the library of any organisation working on the platinum group metals.
 P. D. LICKISS 
From caveman to chemist: circumstances and achievements
This history of chemistry is aimed at undergraduates and the ‘interested bystander’.
As the title suggests, the scope of the book is very ambitious.
The narrative begins with ancient technology and continues through Greek science, Islamic and medieval alchemy, Lavoisier and the development of atomic weighs and formulae.
Having come such a long way it is a pity that the story ends in 1900, without discussing the alleged takeover of chemistry by modern physics.
In a two page epilogue the author merely states that nowadays students begin not with a description of chemicals and reactions but by learning Schrödinger's equation and the shapes of orbitals.
The beginning of the book deals more with social history than science.
One slightly irritating stylistic point is the frequent wavering by the author as to the possible origins of various historical developments.
While discussing the Chinese search for the elixir of life, for example, we are taken in detail through the notion that the Chinese may have obtained the ideas from the Vedic culture.
The Mesopotamian influence is then considered, and the author concludes: ‘Probably, however, the Chinese developed the concept of the elixir of life from their own traditions and viewpoints’.
The account of chemistry since Lavoisier is far better and the main ideas are simple expressed.
This book is reasonably priced and may appeal to some undergraduates.
 E. R. SCERRI 
Carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur pollutants and their determination in air and water
This book is about carbon, nitrogen and sulphur pollutants and their determination in air and water.
The author's aim is to provide an account of the chemistry and analytical techniques associated with compounds of these three elements which would be suitable for non-analytical chemists and engineers.
The first two chapters discuss a number of pollution incidents and the biological cycles of carbon nitrogen and sulphur.
The next chapter on chemical bonding is rather spoilt by too many diagrams of ‘boxes’ including ‘tadpole’structures which represent covalent bonding.
However, there is good coverage of the bio-chemistry of the three elements including a description of their roles in the Krebs Cycle.
The next two chapters describe certain aspects of pollution chemistry including nitrification, denitrification, acid mind drainage, biochemical smog, and depletion of the ozone layer.
The next six chapters are on the use of analytical methods, including spectroscopy, electrochemistry and chromatography, as well as chemical and bioanalytical methods.
The theoretical aspects of these techniques are well covered but the environmental applications are rather sparse.
There are no complete instructions for any procedure and the reader would have to refer to the appropriate ASM method.
The volumetric analysis covered in the  chemical methods section is unnecessarily long because it mainly consists of acid-base and indicator theory that can be found in standard A-level textbooks.
Despite some reservations I recommend this book for college and industrial libraries as a reference book for environmental scientists.
 J. C. H. JONES 
International series of monographs on chemistry, vol 23: The chemical synthesis of peptides
This is a good, plain, traditional book on the chemistry of peptide synthesis.
It is written in classical textbook style and is full of formulae, equations and flow sheets.
The author firmly denies, at the outset, any pretension to exhaustive coverage in favour of‘ruthless selectivity’.
Reaction conditions are outlined at the foot of each flow scheme, but technology receives only a passing mention, with little discussion of modern peptide synthesisers on which so much of contemporary synthesis relies.
The use of enzymes in synthesis is discussed but biotechnology is not covered.
All this is perhaps inevitable in a subject which is expanding at the rate of around 1000 research publications a year.
The author has presented a most readable account which is both educational and entertaining, and in places exciting.
There is frequent and interesting use of metaphor which some occasionally may find puzzling.
Not every reader will understand the significance of ‘a (London) taxi driver who has done the knowledge…’ but peptide chemistry comes through clearly.
This book will be especially valuable for new researchers who are contemplating or starting peptide synthesis, but advanced undergraduates and those already experienced in the field will also find it interesting while newcomers will find a very valuable guide to the extensive bibliography of the subject.
This is a good book and I strongly recommend it.
 R. C. SHEPPARD 
Chemical evolution: origins of the elements, molecules and living systems
This book is a delight for the practising chemist.
It presents a state-of-the-art survey of the major fields that have developed out of 19th century chemistry: cosmochemistry; geochemistry; biochemistry; and molecular biology.
It is difficult to survey so many diverse fields; Professor Mason has succeeded brilliantly.
In a dozen distinct, but related chapters, the author covers (inter alia ) the formation of the elements in stellar nucleosynthesis, chemistry in the interstellar medium and the Solar System, the energetics of living systems, prebiotic chemistry, and organic replication.
The author's historical approach works well; we see not only how evolutionary concepts have developed, but also how the current theories of the chemical history of the natural world are interrelated.
This approach also gives us fascinating glimpses of the fallibility of great scientists.
We are reminded of the controversy caused by Lord Kelvin's incorrect estimate of Earth's age based on models of cooling without radioactive heating.
We learn, too, that the great geophysicist, Sir Harold Jeffreys, refused to accept the evidence for continental drift.
There are also some splendid quotes; Planck's gloomy view of the advance of science led him to believe that scientific truth triumphs not by convincing its opponents, but rather because they eventually die.
Planck is reported to have counselled the young Einstein in 1913: ‘As an older friend I must advise you against it (the pursuit of the general theory of relativity), for in the first place you will not succeed; and even if you do succeed no one will believe you.’
The amusements are, however, bonuses.
The great strengths of this book is that in less than 300 pages, in an economical and restrained style, the author delivers a state-of-the-art report.
Many of the likely readers will have expertise in one or more of the areas described here, and it may appear that a few interesting stories have been excluded.
For example, as an astrochemist I might regret the absence of a discussion of chemistry in the early universe which — it appears — may determine whether collapsing masses form protogalaxies, protoclusters, or protostars.
But this is a quibble.
The story is enthralling.
I have learnt much that I should, perhaps, have known already.
For example, as the author laconically notes: ‘It is fortunate for aerobic organisms that some expectations of equilibrium thermodynamics remain kinetically unfulfilled’,ie an atmosphere of dilute nitric acid would hardly be congenial for us.
There is much in the book that will be as new an exciting for most readers, as it was for me.
I found the authors' expert discussion of the role of the electroweak force in promoting optical activity in biopolymers quite fascinating.
This book will stand repeated and careful reading.
It includes, for those who wish to dig deeper, over 400 references, many to current literature.
It has comprehensive author and subject indexes.
It also has a large number of careful and useful line drawings.
I recommend this book enthusiastically to anyone with a professional interest in chemistry.
Buy it and read it.
 D. A. WILLIAMS 
Handbook of surfactants
An enormous range of surfactants is currently available to the formulation chemist.
Considering the additional confusion caused by much industrial nomenclature, with many trivial and trade names, it is not surprising that many formulators prefer to stick with what they know and trust.
A guide through this forest is badly needed.
This book provides just such a guide.
It is not a comprehensive encyclopaedia of surfactant properties, but is rather an easily read and well set out account of what is commercially available.
Each of the four main types of surfactant (anionic, cationic, non-ionic, and amphoteric) is dealt with in a separate chapter, and there are additional short chapters on speciality and polymeric surfactants.
Within each chapter the chemical and physical properties and applications of a wide range of surfactants are succinctly and lucidly described (toxicological and environmental data is left to an appendix).
The book does have weaknesses.
Surely polymeric surfactants, which are becoming increasingly important as dispersing agents, are worth more than the three pages devoted to them here.
More serious is the inadequacy of the theoretical chapter, the diagrams in particular being misleadingly simple; fortunately the bibliography provides sources where surfactant physical chemistry is better dealt with.
Furthermore, SI units should have been used rather than cgs.
This book should be useful to chemists formulating products, which include surfactants, throughout the chemical industry.
It is not a student text, but would certainly be a useful browse for a new worker in the field.
 B. A. COSTELLO 
The lottery of life: the new genetics and the future of mankind
It was the American biologist Garrett Hardin who first coined the highly apposite phrase ‘fate's lottery’ for those capricious processes of gene shuffling that determine which of us shall inherit stretches of DNA coding for serious debility, which of us are bequeathed the determinants of mental disease, which of us will die young, and which of us will be able to avoid lung cancer despite a lifetime of heavy smoking.
But Hardin was writing long before the avalanche of discoveries that have revealed the fine structure of the human genetic material, spawned sensitive techniques of screening and most recently pre-implantation diagnosis, and led to the first attempts at gene therapy.
These developments and their practical repercussions from the basis of Philippe Frossard's brisk, well-informed survey.
Although the dust jacket tell us virtually nothing about his career and qualifications, Frossard clearly has close knowledge of the contemporary literature of pure and applied human genetics, and he writes with felicitous clarity.
Where he comes seriously adrift, however, is in tackling the practical and ethical issues that arise from this uniquely far-reaching area of research.
On the prospect of engineering ‘babies à la carte’, for example , he says little more than ‘the temptation will remain’.
Even when he does spell out practical implications, such as genetic discrimination by insurance companies, he seems reluctant to say clearly what he believes should be the response of society to those prospects.
The lottery of life is an enticing work — not least in showing how one of the most exciting sectors of applied biomedical science in the 1990s rests on the curiosity-oriented work (much of it conducted in Cambridge, England) of the 1950s and 1960s.
With the extra dimension of greater personal commitment by the author, it could have been a very good book indeed.
 B. DIXON 
Nutrient content of food portions
The useful book presents nutritional data on some of our common foods and drinks in a different way from the standard McCance & Widdowson tables.
Instead of nutrient content per 100 g, the authorities have related their figures to average portion sizes, which should be of practical value to dietitians, health care workers and the food industry.
The system seems to work well with staple foods and major components of meals, but problems could arise with some of the portion sizes — for example, calculations for cheese are mostly expressed by single 40 g slice and for nuts anything from 9 halves to 32 kernels.
Figures for energy, protein, fat, carbohydrate, two minerals and five vitamins are given, but no moisture contents are quoted.
Some ethnic foods have been included but the book is week on snack foods which now form a common part of our diet.
Amongst the vast range of savoury snacks there is just one entry for crisps, and I felt that the huge variety of chocolate biscuits or wavers, toffee, caramel, nuts and muesli etc that are so widely eaten as snacks are under-represented.
Groups of foods that are good sources of certain nutrients are collected together in six appendices.
One idea for future editions might be to expand this section, for example, to identify foods high in fat or energy, or those with a good amino acid profile for vegans.
The tables dare clearly set out and the book should provide a valuable and compact alternative to the bulkier McCance & Widdowson with its various supplements.
 T. H. GRENBY 
Electron deficient boron and carbon clusters
By any standard this book is a first rate book.
This book is essentially the proceedings of a conference held at Loker Hydrocarbon Research Institute, in California, in 1989.
It is to the great credit of the    editors that I would not have known if they had not stated this in the preface.
Unlike many conference proceedings, which present a mere snapshot of the contributions made, this material has been selected, expanded and rounded to form a whole, and then presented in a uniform format.
It was a pleasure to read.
Not that it could be described as light reading; there is a lot of heavily theoretical material within its pages.
However, the effort is certainly worthwhile.
The book opens with a dedication by F. A. Cotton to ‘The Colonel’, Nobel prizewinner Bill Lipscomb, ‘on (or about) the occasion of his seventieth university’.
This is a real delight and conjures up a wonderful portrait.
I cannot resist retelling one of the anecdotes: in 1963, at a party to congratulate Cotton on an award he had just received, Lipscomb told Cotton that while he was delighted by the choice, it should not be supposed that he was on the ‘cottonpickin'’ committee.
Such is the personality of this giant in the field of borane cluster chemistry.
The substance of this book begins with some general concepts and definitions by the editors, leading into a chapter on geometrical systematics of nido-carboranes, boranes and carbocations by R. E. Williams.
Wade's chapter on electron distribution in boranes and carboranes follows naturally and is followed by chapters on ab initio calculations of boranes (Buchl and Schleyer), skeletal rearrangements in clusters (Mingos and Wales), recently determined borane structures (Greenwood), and electron deficiency aspects of small carboranes (Onak and Fuller).
A few chapters on more specific aspects, culminating with one by Olah on hypercarbon cluster chemistry of hydrocarbons, complete the book.
The detail of this book requires more explanation than is possible here, but this is a rewarding book to read.
Practitioners of the art will certainly want their own copies; but it would be a great pity of its readership were thus restricted.
It should be available in libraries and as widely as possible, because the principles expressed are significant well beyond the field of boron chemistry.
 K. SMITH 
The chemistry of polymers
This packed little book covers a wide range of aspects of polymers, not just their chemistry.
The book is aimed at new graduates who are unfamiliar with polymers, but it is also suitable for undergraduates.
With such diversity, each subject can only be treated briefly, and the book effectively gives thumbnail sketches of a list of topics that can be followed up elsewhere in depth.
Thus Ziegler-Natta catalysts take up only two pages and block and graft copolymers half a page.
However, the list of topics is extensive, including major polymer classes, polymerisation reactions and significant parameters (RMM,etc ).
Emphasis is also given to applied aspects of technological importance.
Mechanical properties, cross-linking plasticisers, polymer solutions and melts, additives, degradation, recycling and pollution are covered, and modern speciality topics such as biocompatibility, interpenetrating networks, ionomers and conducting polymers are briefly mentioned.
The index is insufficient, but this is a fault of many textbooks.
Thus antioxidant is not indexed, although a table of these is included in the text.
Adhesives are likewise mentioned but not indexed; while paints do not seem to be included anywhere.
This book is a primer, and I recommend it to any newcomer to the field, because of its overview of concepts and applied practical aspects.
However, it may be too expensive for undergraduates.
D. J. WALTON
Publications received
Recent IUPAC recommendations
Double-strand polymers
IUPAC has made available for public review draft recommendations for nomenclature of regular double-strand (ladder and spiro) organic polymers.
This document extends previously published structure-based and source-based nomenclature rules for naming regular single-stand polymers.
A double-strand polymer is defined as a polymer whose molecules are formed by an uninterrupted sequence of rings with adjacent rings having one atom on common (spiro polymers) or two or more atoms in common(ladder polymers).
The structure-based nomenclature depends upon the selection of a preferred constitutional repeating unit (CRU) of which the polymer is a multiple.
Factors taken into consideration are, in decreasing order of priority: minimisation of the number of free valences of the CRU; maximisation of the number of most preferred heteroatoms in the ring system; retaining the most preferred ring system; and choosing the longest chain for an acyclic CRU.
Prior to naming the polymer, the CRU is oriented and named according to the established principles or organic nomenclature for naming bivalent and multivalent groups.
Rules are provided for denoting substituents and end groups.
The source-based nomenclature identifies the starting monomer(s) from which the double-strand polymer is prepared with addition of an appropriate prefix ‘ladder ’— or ‘spiro ’—.
IUPAC welcomes comments on these recommendations, prior to the production of a definitive version for publication in Pure Appl.
Chem. copies of the text may be obtained on request from Dr A. D. McNaught, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4 4WF.
Comments should be received by August 1992 .
CONSULTANTS
The Principals of the following Consulting Practices are Professional Members of the Royal Society of Chemistry.
Readers seeking further information on services offered are invited to contact a Principal of the Practice concerned.
The latest edition of the Directory of Consulting Practices is available price £15.
Further details may be obtained from the Professional Affairs Department, Royal Society of Chemistry, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
Telephone 071 437 8656, Fax 071 734 1227            
radicals
ELEMENTARY BLUNDERS
David Jones
‘There's antimony, arsenic, aluminium, selenium…
’ Tom Lehrer's catalogue-aria of the chemical elements is a musical tour de force .
Sadly but excusably, it misses perfection: the elements do not appear in proper periodic order.
There is also an error.
The song ends ‘These are the only ones of which the news has come to Harvard.
And there may be many others but they haven't been discarvard’.
As we now know, there can't be many more undiscarvard elements.
The Periodic Table has no room for them.
Even the island of nuclear stability, that metallic gleam in the physicists' eye which promises stable or reasonably long-lived elements around atomic number 114, can only add a few more to the current tally.
It was not always so.
In the 19th century, the heyday of element hunting, enterprising geologists and chemists culled a rich harvest of new elements from minerals and industrial residues of all sorts.
As the century went on, the swelling ranks of new elements began to exceed the bounds of chemical decorum.
By 1879, one exasperated commentator remarked: ‘M A. Guyard claims to have discovered a new metal of the platinum group which he names uralium, from the Ural mountains, whence the ore is procured.
There have been quite a flood of similar announcements recently.
We now have gallium, davyum, mosandrum, neptunium, decipium, phillipium, norvegium, scandium, ytterbium, holmium, ‘X’, thulium, and uralium.
Chemists will have to keep as narrow a watch on these minor elements as our astronomers do on the minor planets, or we shall not know where we are’.
All of these elements had to compete for a limited number of unfilled vacancies in Mendeleev's Periodic Table, like contestants in a game of cosmic musical chairs.
Many of them didn't make it.
Others were exposed as impersonators — neptunium turned out to be niobium, for example, while davyum was probably rhenium.
Yet even in a position in the Periodic Table could be deceptive.
Mendeleev himself felt that its first row should have eight elements in it, as the second did, and advertised for vacancies between hydrogen and lithium.
Candidates for these positions began to appear in the heavens.
Norman Lockyer, in 1868, had announced the existence of helium, on the basis of a spectral line in sunlight which corresponded to no known terrestrial element.
An astrochemical bandwagon was soon rolling.
Lockyer and others rapidly identified other celestial novelties, like coronium, nebulium, and asterium, purely on the basis of spectral lines in heavenly bodies.
Mendeleev placed some of these elements below even hydrogen in his table.
Coronium, for example, received an atomic weight of 0.4.
Those who live by the spectrometer shall perish by the spectrometer.
By 1912, Moseley's X-ray fluorescence spectrometry had established the sequence of atomic numbers, which limited the available musical chairs more tightly than Mendeleev's rather permissive Periodic Table.
By the late 1920s Bowen and Fowler had shown that the spectral lines of coronium, nebulium, and so on, came from excited or ionised states of ordinary elements like oxygen and nitrogen.
Of all those postulated astrochemical elements, only the first, helium, survived: a wonderful example of beginner's luck.
Crossword no 86
Across
4.
Potty little Canadian holds liquor, up to 40 pints (5,3).
8.
Neat clothing for young limits a fifth of 10 across (6).
9.
Direction more frequently employed in water treatment (8).
10.
Atmosphere created by affected manners with due deference (8).
11.
Buy back from me with a note at the continental retreat (6).
12.
Investigate ring not involved in horse race fiddle (8).
13.
Looks smaller without parallel (8).
16.
Treasuries are in a 17 down mess (8).
19.
Bewitch wicket (8).
21.
Trial by fire or wood (6).
23.
Interfered with member in  attenuated environment (8).
24.
Charlies girl badly shut in a symbol of brevity (8).
25.
Magnifies heart-cut soxhlet extract (6).
26.
Mercy is trained within Provençal summer resting place (8).
Down
1.
Removes taxes (7).
2.
Send initially to China for white and yellow containers (9).
3.
Amusement park doesn't begin to be unethical (6).
4.
J.B. follows owner of coat and discoverer of 8 across (6,9).
5.
Engineers of an earlier period employed in gasoline production (8).
6.
To surrender produce (5).
7.
Durable sea legs wobble (7).
14.
Connections, so be it, replacing hydrogen in lungs (9).
15.
Speculators look for centre (8).
17.
Well-covered one abandons suit hire for Assembly (7).
18.
Leeches treatment for discoverer of 8 across (7).
20.
Moderate tantrum (20).
22.
Directions for girl to follow (5).
The solution to this month's crossword will be published in next month's issue
Solution to crossword no 85
RSC new
Women chemists
Any member not in receipt of a ballot paper for the election to the vacancy on the Women Chemists Committee, and who wishes to place a vote, can obtain one from M. Mackenzie, RSC, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 4WF; tel: 223 420066.
The closing date for receipt of ballot papers is 13 May 1992.
Process technology AGM
Would all members of the Process Technology Group of the Industrial Division please note that its AGM will be held in Burlington House, London, on Thursday 14 May 1992 at 16.00 and not as stated in the Process Technology Group Bulletin.
Divisional diary
Details of future conferences and symposia in the divisional and interdivisional diaries can be found on p371.
Food medallists
The RSC Food Chemistry Group has awarded its 1991 senior medal to Dr P. J. Lillford and its 1991 junior medal to Dr S. Harding.
Further details of the medallists and their work can be found on p370.
London GRSC ceremony
The first graduates of the new Faculty of Technology at the recently designated Polytechnic of West London, Slough, were admitted to the RSC in November.
The Society's immediate past president, Prof John Ward, presented the certificates to the 19 graduates.
Five had achieved class 1 awards, three class II(i) and eleven class II(ii).
Nilmini Wijayawickrame was awarded the Marriott Prize for outstanding results in the GRSC Part II examinations.
A number of individual prizes were donated by local companies including ICI Paints, Amersham International, Wyeth Research (UK), Celltech, Lilly Research Centre and Mars Confectionery.
These prizes were awarded to students for commendable achievements and demonstrate the close partnership that has been built up between the polytechnic's Department of Science and local industry.
Following the presentations Prof Ward spoke about chemistry and the environment.
He praised the effort and resolve shown by part-time students in completing professional courses in addition to the daily challenges of full-time employment.
He said that they were making a positive contribution, not only to the quality of life, but also to the prosperity of the nation, because without chemistry life on earth would be more miserable, more painful and certainly shorter.
He presented a strong message to the newly-qualified chemists encouraging them to try to win the confidence of the lay public by admitting to things that go wrong and telling them what was being done about it.
‘Most of the problems’, he concluded, ‘are going to be cured, not by less chemistry, but by more’.
D. A. Sawyer
Water quality regulations
An historic meeting of the Water Chemistry Forum was held on 3 December 1991 on the subject of Water quality regulations — the analytical challenge .
The meeting was the last scientific gathering to be held in Thames Water's New River Head building from which the laboratories have now moved to the new Docklands site.
It was fitting that the meeting was chaired by Sir Hugh Fish, the WCF's first chairman in 1984.
He outlined the long connections of the New River Head site back to early in the 17th century when what was probably the first privatised water company was established by James I (VI of Scotland).
Sir Hugh then entertained the water chemists with his personal recollections of more recent events during his ‘reign’ in the building during the 1970s and 1980s.
The meeting then proceeded to the more serious business of the UK Drinking Water Regulations under the expert guidance of Owen Hydes, the deputy chief inspector of the Drinking Water Inspectorate.
Ian Adams (Thames Region, NRA) then widened the regulatory theme beyond drinking waters to the UK and EC legislation on the ground, river, coastal and sea waters and the input of effluents and sludges etc .
The NRA Laboratory Services' response to these challenges of increasing amounts of high accuracy data with improved cost effectiveness was then summarised by Ian Fox (also of Thames Region, NRA).
The challenges faced by a large water company laboratory service were then outlined by Richard Vincent (Thames Water Utilities).
In the final paper, Hugh James (WRc, Medmenham) reviewed the background to the need for improved analytical methods for blue-green algal toxins.
He described the work done at WRc to develop a reliable method for analysis of microcystin-R, the most toxic of the hepatotoxins.
B. Basketter 
Molecular beams
A half-day Faraday Division symposium on Molecular beams in the chemical era will be held at the Scientific Societies' Lecture Theatre commencing at 14.00 on Thursday 14 May 1992.
The meeting will include the Faraday lecture by Prof Y. T. Lee (Berkeley, US) entitled Molecular beam reaction dynamics .
Supporting lectures will be given by Dr M. N. R. Ashfold (Bristol), Dr P. Felder (Zurich, Switzerland), Dr J. M. Mestdagh (Saclay, France) and Dr J. C. Whitehead (Manchester).
Further information from S. S. Langer, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
Automated analysis
The fifth in the series of Automatic Methods Group residential conferences, held on the general theme of the managerial aspects of automated analysis, will take place at the Viking Hotel, York, on 2–4 June 1992.
Environmental protection-pollution control — is automation the cost effective answer ? will cover the problems raised by the Environmental Protection Act, which introduces two new systems of pollution control.
Legislation requires the authorities to ensure that industry uses the best available techniques not entailing excessive cost (BATNEEC) to abate pollution.
The act also introduces the idea of integrated pollution control.
The conference is arranged in four sessions: legislation; monitoring emissions; controlling emissions; and cleaning up the environment — all of them subjects of considerable interest to senior management in industry.
Details from R. Lidgett, AMG conference secretary, Fron Cottage, Llandynan, Llangollen, Clwyd LL20 8UB; tel: 0978 861868.
Education research
Research in assessment IX has just been published by the Assessment Group of the Education Division.
It contains articles on a range of topics that were originally presented at the Research in chemical education in the tertiary sector symposium held in Nottingham in September 1990.
Contributions range from Standards in chemistry at GCE advanced level , through Entropy and the second law — fourth year undergraduate's ideas , to Looking at lectures through the eyes of students .
All (1991) Group members should have received a free copy.
Anyone who would like to receive a copy (price £3 plus 55p p&p, but free to members of the Assessment Group and the Chemical Education Research Group) should write to J. Brockington, Department of Science, Matthew Boulton College, Sherlock Street, Birmingham B5 7DB.
Food chemistry medals
The RSC Food Chemistry Group 1991 medals have been awarded to Dr P. J. Lillford (Unilever) and Dr S. Harding (Nottingham).
Dr Lillford,(right) who received the senior medal, is principal chemist at Unilever where he has led background research groups in the investigation and development of several product ranges.
He now leads a group carrying out fundamental research in the physical chemistry of biological materials, supporting all of Unilever's businesses.
He holds a visiting professorship at Nottingham University and an honorary chair in the School of Molecular and Biological Sciences, University of Stirling.
Dr Harding (left), the junior medallist, is reader in physical biochemistry at the University of Nottingham.
He is mainly known for his work on the analytical centrifuge and related hydrodynamic techniques, both in terms of developing the methodology and applying this methodology to the study of macromolecular solutions.
His group is also known for the application of light scattering procedures to viral and bacterial systems.
Pigments
Tracking nature's pathways to the pigments of life was the title of a stimulating lecture by Prof A. R. Battersby (Cambridge) at Minnesota 3M Research, Harlow, on 11 December 1991.
The lecture was sponsored by 3M as part of the Essex Section programme.
This lecture provided a fascinating insight into the elucidation of biosynthetic pathways using techniques such as NMR, stable isotope labelling, independent synthesis and enzymology.
To illustrate the use of these techniques Prof Battersby described the clarification of the biosynthesis of Uro'gen III, the parent ring system of pigments such as chlorophyll and haemoglobin.
Some recent work on haem d 1 , the prosthetic group of nitrite reductase, was also described.
Here synthesis has been used to clarify the structure of this material and thence show the biosynthetic relationship of haem d 1 to other families of the ‘pigments of life’.
D. E. Stevenson
Quality assurance
Quality assurance in Chemistry was the subject of the Radio-chemical Method's Group's AGM meeting, which was held recently at the National Physical Laboratory in Teddington.
Contributions were given by Dr J. Beaumont (NPL) on the historical background to NAMAS and the international accreditation situation; Dr S. Jerome (NPL) spoke on radionuclide standards and nuclide standardisation methods; and Dr J. Fleming (LGC) discussed the Valid Analytical Measurement programme and its future.
The meeting then turned its attention to the experience gained by several laboratories in implementing such schemes.
Dr J. Winter (AEA Technology, Harwell Laboratory) described some of the problems that may be encountered when implementing a formal QA scheme in a multi-disciplinary organisation and Dr S. Parry (Imperial College) illustrated many of the problems faced in an academic environment.
NAMAS is not always the accreditation system of choice and Dr R. Patel (MAFF, CVL, Weybridge) discussed the alternative of using GLP in toxicology laboratories.
Returning to NAMAS, A. Lally (MAFF, CVL, Weybridge) illustrated how accreditation had been obtained for an environmental radiochemical analysis laboratory.
All of the speakers emphasised the importance of involving staff at all levels in the development of an effective QA system.
Copies of an information leaflet about the group are available from Dr P. Warwick, Chemistry Department, University of Technology, Loughborough, Leics LE11 3TQ
P. Robb
Fire chemistry
The next meeting of the Fire Chemistry Discussion Group will take place at the University of Leeds on Wednesday 29 April 1992.
The main emphasis of the meeting will be the utilisation of thermal analysis techniques to study flame retardant phenomena.
Further details from Dr J Ellwood, hon sec FCDG, Fire Research Station, Borehamwood, Herts WD6 2BL; tel: 081 953 6177.
Chemical education
The Education Division is making funds available to assist members of the Society who teach in schools, sixth form colleges or non-advanced education to attend the 12th international conference on Chemical education in Thailand on 17–21 December 1992.
This conference follows a similar meeting held in York last year.
Further details of the conference and application forms for an RSC bursary can be obtained from Dr A. D. Ashmore, secretary (education), Royal Society of Chemistry, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
The closing date for application for a bursary is 30 June 1992 .
Divisional and interdivisional diary
Investigating paint
As part of the 150th Anniversary celebrations the East Anglia Section decided to target an age group that rarely features in RSC activities — primary school children.
About 60 children aged 10–12 from 16 schools were invited to the University of East Anglia for a Paint investigation day , organised by Dr J. Nicholson of the School of chemical Sciences, UEA, and supported by ICI Paints Division with a donation of paint materials.
The children themselves brought berries, charcoal etc and found out how pigments work, how paint is made and how its properties can be changed, before putting their knowledge to artistic use.
The opportunity for cave painting, in an artificial cave, demonstrated man's earliest use of pigments as paints.
Judging by the enthusiasm of pupils and teachers alike this was a very successful event; it was well covered in the local press as well as by BBC and ITV news.
Harry Willis prize
The molecular Spectroscopy Group is inviting applications for the 1992 Harry Willis prize for analytical spectroscopy.
Competition for this prize is based on submission of an essay, paper or review on some aspect of analytical spectroscopy suitable for publication in the RSC's Analytical Proceedings .
The prize is a bursary towards the cost of attending the Spectroscopy across the spectrum (SAS) conference at the University of Reading on 20–23 September 1992.
Entrants must be registered students of a course in chemistry of spectroscopy who are proposing to attend the SAS conference if they win the prize, and who will be willing in this event to transfer the copyright of their article to the RSC.
Applications should be made using forms available from the honorary secretary of the MSG and returned by 20 May 1992 to Dr D. L. Andrews, honorary secretary, MSG, School of Chemical Sciences University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ.
Polymer modelling
An international conference on Polymer modelling , sponsored by the Polymer Physics Group, will take place at the Polymer Science Centre, University of Reading, on 2–4 September 1992.
The meeting will be divided into a series of sessions: atomistic modelling; course-grain modelling; liquid crystalline polymers; polymer structures from scattering experiments and modelling; quantitative structure property relationships; polymer at interfaces; and free energy calculations of chain molecules.
Details from Dr M. R. Stapleton, Polygen/Molecular Simulations, Abbots House, Abbey street, Reading, Berks RG1 3BD.
Mad food
The lecture,Mad food , with which Prof R. W. Lacey (Leeds) regaled the Central Yorkshire section in January after the AGM, is not for the faint of heart or the weak of stomach.
No government warning on food issued over the past few years has been rescinded, but most people prefer to forget them, whilst sources of food poisoning remain unstopped.
Most breeding flocks of poultry still come from the continent, where UK controls do not apply.
Even free-range eggs should be well-cooked.
Prof Lacey's main concern, BSE, however is not destroyed by cooking and present lack of knowledge about Creutzfeld-Jakob disease is not reassuring.
It is fairly safe to eat game and animals which cannot be intensively reared.
Freezing and canning can be reliable methods of preserving foods but the cook-chill method is inadequately regulated.
Irradiation would make things worse by destroying the warning spoilage bacteria and leaving pathogens untouched.
as if lax regulations are not enough consumers put themselves at risk by careless use of refrigerators and microwaves.
E. W. Sharratt
UK Macro-cycles Group
The RSC UK Macrocyles Group (formed from the original UK Macrocycles Group) held its first meeting under its new title in York on 17–18 December 1991.
Prof T. Kaden (Basel) gave the first plenary lecture, which dwelt on the synthesis of homotopic and heterotopic bis(macrocycles) and their capacity for formation of homo-capacity for formation of homo- and hetero-binuclear complexes of transition metal ions.
This was followed by a poster session.
Other plenary lectures were given by Drs M. Grossel (Southampton), P. Comba (Basel) and V. Vohmer (Mainz).
In accordance with the group's aim to provide a platform for its younger scientists, short supporting talks were given by postgraduates and postdoctoral research associates.
J. C. Lockhart
Agricultural chemistry
Chemistry, agriculture and the environment will take place at the University of Surrey on 16–18 July 1992.
Management and the use of agrochemicals and related materials is a matter of growing concern throughout the world.
The aim of this conference is to provide a forum for agrochemical producers, risk assessment professionals, regulators, academics and all those with an interest in the safe and effective use of agrochemicals.
The conference will bring together a number of authorities in various aspects of chemistry, agriculture and the environment.
Details from Dr D. Stevenson, Robens Institute of Health and Safety, University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 5XH; tel: 0483 509220.
Solid state chemistry
A conference focusing on the role of Solid state chemistry in superconductivity will take place at the University of Aberdeen on 15–17 July 1992.
This conference is sponsored by the Polar Solids Group.
Materials to be covered are cuprate and non-cuprate oxides, organic metals and superconductors, fullerenes and other new materials.
Topics include synthesis and fabrication of single crystals, ceramics and thin films; mechanisms and theories of super conductivity; structural chemistry including non-stoichiometry and defects; transport and magnetic properties; microstructural effects; and phase equilibria.
Details from Dr J. T. S. Irvine, Chemistry Department, Meston Building, Meston Walk, Aberdeen AB9 2UE; tel: 0224 272894.
HK Olympiad
Hong Kong's third chemistry Olympiad, organised by the Hong Kong Chemical Society and the RSC, was held in February.
As in previous years this was a competition between teams of three chemistry students representing Hong Kong's five tertiary institutions.
Each team was given a topic of chemical interest on the previous evening and allowed to use their own facilities to research it and prepare a presentation.
The presentations were made before an audience and a panel of judges.
Prof S. W. Tam, Chinese University of Hong Kong, presented the awards.
The University of Kong Hong won a cup and gold medals with a discussion a disposing of the industrial chemical wastes.
The City of Hong Kong Polytechnic was awarded the silver medals for a presentation on the structure of plastics.
The bronze medallists from the Chinese University of Hong Kong described advances in dyeing.
This year's Olympiad was held in Hong Kong's new science museum and each team was asked to suggest a permanent public exhibit for the museum connected with their topic.
D. L. Crone 
Education
The RSC Education department is organising the following residential courses and one-day symposia in 1992:Improve your analytical techniques: open learning and workshops , courses begin 6 April 1992 and 5 October 1992 with corresponding workshops at Thames Polytechnic and Hull University.
Biotransformations for organic chemists will take place on 7–9 July 1992 at University of Exeter;Polymorphs and solvates for drugs will take place at the University of Bradford on 27–29 July 1992;Reaction calorimetry and laboratory automation — principles and applications will be held on 27 November 1992 in Borehamwood, Herts; and Organic synthesis will take place on 14–16 December 1992 at Churchill College, Cambridge.
Details from L. Hart, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
J. W. T. Jones Fellowship
The J. W. T. Jones Fellowship is designed to promote international cooperation in chemistry.
Specifically, it will allow chemists, particularly those from developing countries, to carry out short term studies in well-established scientific centres abroad and to learn and use techniques not accessible to them in their own country.
Fellowships will not be awarded to attend scientific meetings.
Candidates must be members of the RSC, hold at least a masters or PhD degree in chemistry or a related subject and already be actively engaged in research.
They must produce evidence that the theoretical and practical knowledge or training to be acquired in the foreign laboratory will be beneficial to their scientific development and must also return to their country of origin upon termination of the fellowship.
The award will consist of a lump sum to a maximum value of £5000, designed to cover part or all of an economy class air or rail ticket and a subsistence allowance.
It is expected that the institute of origin or the host institution will contribute to defray any remaining expenses incurred by the fellowship holder.
Applications will be considered by a fellowship committee and the holder will be required to submit a formal report on the work accomplished.
Application forms and further details are available from the international affairs officer, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
The closing date for applications is 30 June 1992 .
Inorganic biochemistry prize
Prof P. J. Sadler and research student Orla M. Ni Dhubhghaill (Birkbeck College, London) with the 1991 Inorganic Biochemistry Discussion Group prize awarded for their poster entitled Platinum group metal phosphines — the role of thiols in cytoxicity and lipophilicity .
The presentation was made at the Group's Christmas meeting by Dr H. A. O. Hill, FRS,(Oxford), one of the founders of the IBDG.
The meeting, organised by Dr Roberta J. Ward at the King's College, London, Chelsea campus, brought together clinicians, biochemists and chemists to discuss Inorganic and physical techniques in clinical diagnosis and biochemical research .
Prof Sadler, whose interdisciplinary research group is supported by the Cancer Research Campaign, MRC and SERC, has pioneered the use of NMR to monitor transition metal ion-based pharmaceuticals in biological environments.
Alkali exhibition
As part of the RSC sesquicentenary celebration, the Newcastle and North East Coast Section set up an exhibition at the Museum of Science and Technology, Newcastle upon Tyne, to commemorate the history of the chemical industry on Tyneside and Wearside.
Chemists from Sunderland Polytechnic, Newcastle Polytechnic and Newcastle University were also involved.
The north-east was the cradle of the UK chemical industry because it was the source of the alkali industry, which then developed and spread throughout the UK.
The exhibition comprised posters tracing the development of the alkali industry and the companies Corning Glass, Courtaulds Coatings, Rohm and Haas and Sterling Winthrop, together with memorabilia from the companies, which all had their origins in the north-east.
Research fund 1993
The RSC Research Fund exists to assist members in their research by the provision of grants of up to £1000 towards, for example, the purchase of chemicals or equipment or for running expenses of chemical education research.
If you work in a university, polytechnic, college or school anywhere in the world and your work is held up for lack of funding, the Research Fund may be able to help you.
A limited number of grants will be awarded for 1993.
Applications from members of the RSC will be considered on merit, but account will be taken of any other source of financial aid available to applicants.
Funds are limited, so preference will be given to those working in less well-endowed institutions; applications form those in UK universities will receive particular scrutiny.
Council is especially anxious to see inventive applications of a ‘pump priming’ nature and is prepared to consider applications from those working in chemical education as well as chemical research.
Members in developing countries should note that additional funds have been made available for 1993 by the Society's International Committee, to provide grants for successful applicants from such countries.
Preference will be given to those being able to cite collaborative projects with UK institutions.
Applications are limited to one per department and must be submitted through the head of that department.
Application forms, together with the regulations governing the fund, may be obtained from D. Howes, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
The closing date for applications is 1 November 1992 , but submissions sent well in advance of this date would be appreciated.
A question of food
This public symposium will take place at UMIST, Manchester, on 13 April 1992 at 18.00, during the RSC annual congress.
Details from I. Topping, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN; tel: 071 437 8656.
Personal news
S. M. Qaim , CChem, FRSC, has been elected a foreign member of the Pakistan Academy of Sciences.
The American Pharmaceutical Association as awarded Dr M. H. Abraham , CChem, FRSC, of University College, London, the 1992 Ebert Prize.
Industry
R. Knowland
R. Knowland , CChem, FRSC, is to retire as managing director of British Petroleum.
Shipley Europe has appointed Dr M. Goosey , CChem, MRSC, as technical director at its headquarters in Coventry.
B. Rochford , GRSC, has been appointed as Kontron Instruments' technical sales specialists.
Dr M. Goosey
Consultancy
S. Summerland , CChem, MRSC, has joined the consultancy firm Executive Scientist Appointments which specialises in the recruitment of executive and management scientists.
Dr R. G. Chitre
Education
The Indian Education Society has designated Dr R. G. Chitre , CChem, FRSC, executive director of the Centre for Nutrition and Health Education, Bombay, India.
Dr J. Nicholson , CChem, FRSC, has been appointed part-time head of the dental biomaterials unit at King's College Hospital School of Medicine and Dentistry.
Prof J. Bremner , CChem, FRSC, has taken up his appointment as professor or organic chemistry at the University of Wollongong, Australia.
Prof I. R. Falconer , CChem, FRSC, has been appointed deputy vice chancellor of the University of Adelaide, Australia.
Dr C. A. Ramsden , CChem, FRSC, has been appointed to the chair of organic chemistry at the University of Keele.
Dr B. M. Grieveson , CChem, FRSC, principal of Grieveson Associates, has been appointed as visiting professor to the department of civil engineering at the University of Surrey.
Prof W. R. Jackson has been appointed chairman of the chemistry department at Monash University, Australia.
Dr J. Nicholson
Deaths
RSC diary