

OUTREACH AND SPECIALIST ADVICE WORKER
Is the Door Open?
The CAB is justly proud of its open-door policy.
It aims to provide an impartial service of information, guidance and support free to all individuals and to make responsible use of the experience so gained.
Indeed if a BBC nationwide survey in 1987 is to be heeded, the CAB can be confident that the public is aware of the service it provides and makes good use of it.
Of 2,000 people interviewed by the BBC, over 90 per cent had heard of the CAB, and of these, a quarter had contacted one.
Perhaps, however, among the 10 per cent who do not know of the CAB, there are many people in difficulty who might be helped if only they were aware of the service it provides.
Perhaps, among the 75 per cent who may have heard of the CAB but have never sought assistance, there are many who would come to a bureau if they could.
There has been some focusing on why people may not be able to come to a CAB and which groups may be affected.
The CAB is asking if the door is as wide open as it could be.
It would be easy for the CAB to assume that people in need of advice and information who do not approach the CAB are served by other agencies.
Indeed in some cases they are.
But it is well known that the provision of advice services nationally is uneven and as the best.known generalist advice agency, the CAB feels that it would be failing the wider community if it did not consider what barriers may be preventing people from approaching a CAB for advice.
There are two main types of reason why people may not come to the CAB: physical ones and psychological ones.
The psychological barrier, whereby potential clients feel that the CAB worker may not empathise with their predicament, was discussed in the previous chapter.
But there has been an additional image barrier: the CAB as a generalist advice agency was often labelled a ‘signposting’ service whereby clients will simply be referred on to other organisations.
In some cases referral is essential, but this chapter will show that for many the CAB is developing specialist  in-depth expertise that has turned the tables  such that the CAB is now becoming the agency to whom clients are referred.
In comparison to the image barriers, the physical barriers are perhaps the more obvious.
People may not be able to reach a bureau because they are housebound.
They may be disabled, elderly or have children.
They may live far from their nearest bureau and the expense or lack of public transport may prevent them from coming.
It is estimated that in rural areas four million people live more than five miles from a CAB.
They may be unaware that some bureaux can arrange home visits.
Even where the bureau is nearby, the generally short daytime opening hours may be difficult for people who are working or are at school or college.
Evening and weekend CAB advice sessions are not widespread.
There are groups in hospitals and prisons for whom the regular CAB is inaccessible at any time.
The physical barriers that prevent some members of the public reaching a CAB are perhaps easier to tackle than the image barriers.
The following sections look at the outreach work that is taking place around the country to make the CAB more accessible to groups who could not otherwise easily reach a bureau.
Rural Advice Services
In the previous chapter, CAB enquiry statistics were presented.
But, as usual, statistics must be interpreted with care.
This is particularly so when considering rural advice services.
The number of enquiries which a bureau receives cannot be a measure of the value of or need for the service.
Rural services would always fail on that count.
However, if the number of enquiries per head of population is used as a measure of the penetration level, then rural services will be found to compare favourably with other areas.
Myths abound about the life-style and problems in rural areas.
Although the total number of people unemployed in rural areas may not be high, the percentage of the population unemployed can be considerable.
In mid-Cornwall, for example, over a third of the male population has been out of work in recent years.
For the employed, rural wages can be 10 per cent lower and the cost of living 10 per cent higher than in city areas.
The employment that does exist may be only seasonal in tourist areas.
Problems of unfair dismissal are common.
Young people move to the cities to seek work so the remaining population is increasingly elderly with family networks weakened.
Local council branch offices and government offices such as the DHSS and Job Centres have retreated to the towns.
Some 40 per cent of the rural population  have no access to a car so that the problem of claiming a benefit that may have been straightforward in town, is very pressing in the country.
Homelessness is often not thought to be a rural problem but there are some unemployed whose job searches in the city have failed and who would rather be unemployed in the countryside.
There is no council housing waiting for them, and the homelessness, debt and marital problems that accompany unemployment have become rural as well as city problems.
Rural clients' problems can therefore be seen to be similar to their city counterparts, but the rural advisers' problems are different.
They may not face the dreaded inner-city bureau queue but the less frequent presentation of serious enquiries makes training slower.
It is difficult to accrue the experience that is so essential to cope with the variety of problems presented to the rural adviser.
In addition there is less local support available: local 'Housing Aid centres, Consumer Advice Centres, marriage counsellors, women's refuges and the host of referral or consultancy agencies that city bureaux take for granted, are too far away.
Telephone advice work, often regarded as difficult, has to be tackled and the possible need for follow up with a home visit puts additional strain on rural bureaux.
In answer to these special rural problems, many areas are developing and testing solutions.
One of the earliest plans which has been tested and rejected was the village contact scheme whereby carefully selected volunteers gave advice from their homes, liaising with the nearest bureau.
It proved unworkable because the smaller number of enquiries in rural districts meant that experience was never gained and the lack of anonymity within small communities meant that the enquiry rate was unlikely to increase.
The development of telephone advice for rural areas has been successful both in East Anglia and in Northumberland.
Travelling time is obviously saved and anonymity is protected.
The East Anglian telephone service is located in Cambridge and anyone living within a 30-mile radius of Cambridge may use the ‘Freefone CAB’ without charge.
The Northumberland rural CAB experiment has concentrated its efforts on telephone advice skills.
They have discovered that problems that they thought had to be brought in person to a bureau, can in fact be carried out successfully over the telephone.
These include benefit and tax calculations and personal problems.
Follow-up action can even be taken on a client's behalf after a telephone consultation.
In fact rural telephone experience could have a beneficial effect, if carefully applied, in a busy city bureau.
Instead, at present, as soon as queues develop, the  telephone service is the first to be suspended and callers are required to speak to an answering machine, as will be seen in Chapter 4.
Initially, city advisers would need to rethink their attitudes towards a telephone service where sometimes the client who phones in is considered to be jumping the queue.
The Microfilm project was developed in direct response to the need for improved rural advice services in Hertfordshire.
Village contact schemes were not working there, mobile services were too expensive and the abridged information system — the basic pack — was too superficial.
In response to these problems, a portable system was designed which contained all the information that a regular bureau would have.
It consists of a viewer and screen in a briefcase together with the entire NACAB information system reduced to 300 postcard-size sheets of film in a plastic binder.
It can easily be taken to places such as hospitals, prisons and community centres.
The microfilm used in conjunction with a mobile radio telephone would go some way towards easing outreach work but such a combination is probably beyond the resources of most bureaux.
Furthermore it might have been thought that the compact microfilm system would have found its way from outreach extensions into busy bureaux to replace the cumbersome paper files but, as will be seen in Chapter 5, it is in fact likely to remain purely a portable tool.
A rural experiment in Suffolk has proved successful in two market towns.
Lowestoft CAB cooperated with the libraries in Bungay and Leiston where two rooms in each library were converted into community information points with noticeboards and leaflet racks.
A public telephone was then installed providing a Freephone link to Lowestoft CAB.
All the information is updated by the library and the CAB together, and the libraries have the NACAB Basic Information pack.
Users are therefore encouraged to use the information available and if they need more help to use the Freephone facility.
It will be seen in Chapter 5 that city bureaux also make links with local libraries, but in the main they are arranging to share local information rather than develop the self-service information service as in the rural communities.
However, some city bureaux would like to see similar developments.
It is clear, then, that ideas developed while broadening the CAB service to rural areas may benefit not only those areas but busier bureaux too.
The key to the success of any rural experiment, however, is publicity — something which will always be that much more difficult in rural areas than in more heavily populated parts of the country.
Advice in Prisons
Many problems experienced by prisoners are the same as those of other CAB clients: housing, social security, administration of justice, children and marital difficulties are the most common.
Prisoners' confinement and lack of contact with the outside world compound their problems.
For example, a male prisoner may receive a letter from his wife saying that she won't bring their children to see him anymore.
Or she will write to say that she is giving up the family house and moving away.
Alternatively the council may write to the prisoner to say that his/her tenancy cannot be held any longer with the result that the prisoner may have no home to go to when released.
The prison population is about 50,000 — the equivalent of a medium-sized town, where generalist advice and other specialist advice would normally be available.
However, for the prisoner, the CAB adviser is often the only non-establishment source of support and contact that he or she may have with the outside world.
The CAB adviser is supported by the vast information system which will often be brought into the prison using the portable microfilm system.
By early 1988, 22 bureaux were involved with projects in local prisons and many other projects were under discussion.
Some bureaux have been invited in by the probation or education departments or by the prison governor.
Other bureaux have approached the prison on their own initiative.
After contact has been made, a meeting is generally held with probation and prison staff to clarify the role, aims and objectives of the CAB service within the prison.
The needs of each prison are different and hence the types of CAB sessions vary.
Clearly, at the outset agreement must be reached between the prison authorities and the CAB to ensure that the bureau's code of confidentiality is not broken.
This means, for example, that a confidential interview room and direct telephone lines must be provided and any CAB mail addressed to prisoners should not be opened by prison staff.
On the other hand CAB advisers are given an initial induction period in order to have aspects of prison security explained to them.
In many of the prisons, CAB sessions are geared to deal with prisoners' pre-release anxieties and to explain how the CAB on the outside will be able to help them when they are released.
Prisoners are brought up to date with new legislation that may affect them, such as housing and social security.
At Styal prison in Cheshire, for example, the Wilmslow CAB runs resettlement courses for youth custody prisoners in association with the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders (NACRO) and the prison's education department.
Many of these pre-release courses lead to one-to-one advice sessions with the CAB worker.
At Lindholme prison in Doncaster, once-weekly two-hour sessions take place in a room that has been made available within the library and comfortably furnished with easy chairs and a coffee table.
Appointments are made through the library officer but the prisoner is not expected to state the nature of the problem in advance.
The library at Lindholme also serves as the legal aid and appeals office for the prison and the close proximity to the CAB allows the legal aid officer to refer the prisoner to the CAB session for any ‘civil’ enquiries that emerge from the legal discussions and vice versa.
In early 1987 Richmond CAB, with the help of the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants (JCWI) applied to the Commission for Racial Equality (CRE) for funding for a new project based at Latchmere House Remand Centre.
The project required one full-time worker and administrative assistance and aimed to provide a welfare, advice and referral service for the 98 people detained there under Immigration Act powers.
The Immigration Act gives authority to detain indefinitely and without trial those refused entry to the UK and those alleged to be here in breach of immigration law.
The Immigration Detainees Welfare Worker, as the CAB post has been named, may have about 30 ongoing cases at any one time covering one third of the detainees at Latchmere.
When enquiries were monitored in detail between September and November 1987, one third of the cases brought to the welfare worker were of the kind that the CAB regularly deals with and the other two thirds were immigration enquiries.
Of these the two largest groups were those who had overstayed their visas and those who entered the country illegally.
About half of the people detained under Immigration Act powers in general do not wish to challenge the decision that they should leave but they need help winding up their affairs here, contacting their friends and families and pressing the Home Office to process their cases quickly so that they do not have to spend unnecessarily long periods in prison.
The other half want help in challenging their deportation orders.
The power granted by the Immigration Act to detain people for an indefinite period gives rise to a high level of anxiety and stress among detainees.
Prison officers will not necessarily know how long any person will be detained and  immigration officers do not seem willing to say.
The CAB welfare worker cannot predict exact dates but by looking at a client's circumstances he or she can give some indication.
The clients appreciate being kept in the picture, even if their stay cannot be made shorter.
The relationship, however, between the staff and the CAB welfare worker at Latchmere is very good.
The prison officers enable the CAB worker to contact a client outside visiting hours by telephone, and the prison staff will contact the CAB if they are particularly concerned about a client currently being seen by the CAB.
There is considerable local liaison and there is a support group that meets regularly with the welfare worker, consisting of representatives of JCWI, the United Kingdom Immigrants Advisory Service (UKIAS), NACRO, Hounslow Law Centre, GLCABS and the probation Service.
Since the casework load at Latchmere is constantly rising and there is a two-week wait for an appointment with the welfare worker, the load can be contained only if common elements of the detainees' problems can be drawn together.
Then an attempt can be made to examine possible changes to the system and so influence social policy as a result of the first-hand experience of the clients.
For example, the time spent in detention for all detainees interviewed has been monitored.
It was seen that the length of stay for those who wish to leave the country quickly is not that much shorter than for those who challenge their deportation.
It is hoped that this information can be used to help shorten the average length of detention for those who want to go home quickly.
The welfare worker would also like to ensure that clients have adequate legal representation and would like to set up a system whereby property that belongs to a detainee is returned by the police.
The need for the translation of forms is pressing, as is the need for voluntary interpreters.
Advice in Hospitals
There are now over 20 CABx working in hospitals, providing independent confidential support and advice for patients, staff and relatives.
At any one time several hundred thousand people are in hospital.
Some are rushed in as emergency cases leaving bills unpaid, rent in arrears and families in financial hardship.
Others, particularly in psychiatric hospitals, may have been ‘inside ‘all their lives and may now be facing a daunting entry into the community.
The extent of CAB work in hospitals tends to reflect resources available.
It may range from one afternoon a week to full extension  services opening daily, staffed by a paid worker and volunteers.
In some cases there may even be regular ward visits, hospital staff training in basic benefits work and the CAB information system on microfilm.
Before a bureau can establish an extension in a hospital there is a lot of groundwork to be done, just as there is in prison work.
All those involved in patient care must fully understand the role of the CAB in the hospital.
This includes nurses and medical staff as well as social workers.
The CAB workers must similarly understand the boundaries of their responsibilities.
In many cases this is made clear through a written code of practice.
The following two clauses come from Lincoln CAB's code of practice and it illustrates one approach to the demarcation of responsibilities within a psychiatric hospital:
It is anticipated that there may be a number of enquiries about patients’ status and responsibilities within the hospital, and the bureau will advise on the implications of these.
In such cases the bureau workers will explain to the patients the nature of their detention, and advise them as to what rights they have to appeal, if any, and where requested, arrange for representation at Mental Health Review Tribunals.
With the agreement of patients, the CAB workers will be allowed access to basic information, such as patients' legal status, doctor, ward and welfare benefits.
The bureau will not have access to clinical, medical or nursing notes about the patient.
In addition, the CAB within a hospital will need its own office, separate from the social work department, and a direct telephone line free from the hospital switchboard.
In early 1987 those CAB staff who conduct sessions in hospitals came together to exchange experiences.
Below are some of the hospital schemes that they described.
The Hope Hospital in Salford is a huge hospital with 20,000 in-patients a year, 40,000 out-patients and 2,500 staff.
The CAB is open there for four days a week, six hours a day and is run by a paid manager and seven volunteers.
Enquiries centre on benefits and on debts caused by ill health and reduced income.
The hospital staff are beginning to grasp the difference between CAB and social work and are now involving the CAB with more in-patient cases.
Advice sessions in Stoke-Mandeville Hospital are run by Aylesbury CAB.
It is situated in the main hospital corridor one full day a week.
It took considerable time here for the work of the CAB to be understood but its place is now firmly established.
Because of the specialist nature of the hospital, patients come from all over the country and the CAB spends much of its time chasing up patients' benefits, contacting DHSS offices all over the country.
The need for advice services at Tooting Bec psychiatric hospital was recognised in the early 1980s by a CAB community advice team.
It achieved funding for a full-time advice worker in 1983, although funding has been precarious since the abolition of the GLC.
A major worry for patients in psychiatric hospitals has always been money and access to it.
Hospital administration can refuse patients access to their own money and this can cause immense damage to the patients' dignity and self esteem.
Although social workers may supply patients with a claim form for state benefits, they rarely assist or follow through the claims.
The CAB in the hospital, as well as advising the patients, has allocated time each week to train nursing staff, hospital social workers and occupational therapists in basic money advice.
The community advice team in Tooting Bec hospital has seen the need to use their experience in a psychiatric hospital to help others in such hospitals, in particular ones facing closure where the patients have very clear anxieties.
They have therefore been active in trying to use their experience to influence social policy, and in 1986 they made recommendations to the Health Advisory Service on administering patients' money (the hospital bank system) and on the hospital complaints procedure.
As with all CAB advice work, the public must be aware of the service available, but in particular in hospital and prison work the clients must be constantly reminded that confidentiality is paramount.
Publicity is therefore essential and apart from the regular posters and leaflets, hospital radios and newsletters are also being exploited to get the service across.
Helping the Disabled
Siting a new bureau involves a complex combination of local objectives, suitability, costing and availability.
A community bureau on a council estate will be favoured by some but rejected by others on the grounds of lack of anonymity.
High Street siting is often sought after.
Essex saw the positive effects of such siting when, in 1987, they were forced to leave local college premises and move to a shop in Harwich.
Following the move, enquiries rose substantially.
They realised that the college site, inaccessible at the top of a hill and situated half way between two communities, was in fact serving neither.
When a bureau is about to be sited, a great deal of consideration is given to the needs of the disabled, although  statistics for the West Midlands showed that full access is still not always easy to achieve.
Although some bureaux can make access for disabled clients feasible, there are still many disabled clients for whom coming to a bureau may not be worthwhile even if their problem is pressing.
One such group is the deaf.
NACAB has recently established links with the British Deaf Association.
Together they would like to investigate how the CAB service can be made more accessible to deaf people.
An article was published in the spring 1987 edition of CAB News , the magazine of the CAB service, explaining to bureau workers how they might be more sensitive to the hearing impaired.
It drew their attention to the fact that some of their clients may have a hearing problem without expressly saying so.
In Great Britain 50,000 people use sign language as their main language, but as many as half a million people may be hearing impaired.
One third of those over 65 and one half of those over 80 are hard of hearing.
In the first instance certain basic guidelines that make communication easier for the hard of hearing were suggested.
These included speaking more slowly, facing the client, and checking that the advice is being understood.
In addition it has been suggested that bureaux make contact with the social worker for the deaf at the local Social Services Department to ensure that the bureau has all the up-to-date information relevant to the deaf.
Advice workers are encouraged to learn sign language.
Since the 1987 article, some bureaux have taken action to ease the difficulties of the hearing impaired.
Woolwich CAB in South East London is providing a regular signing interpreter for deaf people using the bureau.
The service is available one morning a week and the interpreter sits alongside a trained CAB adviser.
Clients are also referred from surrounding areas.
On a wider scale, the CAB has worked with the British Deaf Association to influence social policy and legislation for the benefit of the deaf.
Stockport District CAB has been awarded a 20-hour-a-week home visitor post as part of a Department of Social Security-funded pilot scheme to help carers of the sick or disabled.
The post holder has the task of recruiting volunteers, making tribunal representation, publicising the scheme and liaising with other groups.
Many carers provide 24 hour nursing care and are thus rendered housebound themselves.
They are often in urgent need of advice and information about the financial, practical and emotional support available.
In Pendle, Lancashire, the CAB disablement project is well established.
Weekly advice sessions are provided for the disabled and their carers.
Some 90 per cent of the adviser's time is spent on  medical appeal tribunals and reviews of Department of Social Security benefits for disabled people.
Success is increasing the caseload, fuelled by referrals from the local MP, social services and neighbouring CABx.
Mentally handicapped people and their carers are one of the most isolated groups in today's society.
And if they are black their disadvantage is multiplied.
Bradford CAB has focused on the advice needs of mentally handicapped people through a unique project now funded by Bradford Metropolitan Council.
There are 25 families, 19 of them from ethnic minorities, which form the core of the project, and for these families alone £46,400 of unclaimed benefits has been recovered.
Making contact with the families in the first instance was the most difficult problem.
Many families keep their mentally handicapped children and adults at home.
Contact with ‘Humnawa’, an Asian parents' support group, produced a mailing list of 65 families.
Of the 34 who replied, almost all requested a home visit and almost all were missing out on benefits.
The 1988 social security changes have always been on the agenda of the project and with the abolition of additional requirements and single payments, new sources of support must be found for the core families.
For example, the Rowntree Trust Family Fund has been helpful to families with severely handicapped children.
Helping Ethnic Minorities
In the 1980s, issues of race have never left the agenda for the CAB.
The CAB's 1984 Kirklees Report put the spotlight on recruitment of black workers as vital to attracting ethnic minority clients to the bureaux.
In 1985 there was a demand through area committees for the public adoption by the CAB of an anti-racist policy.
In 1986 Council voted on three policy statements (see Appendix C).
In brief, the first covers equal opportunities in matters of recruitment to CAB staff which has been discussed in Chapter 2; the second covers racism awareness training, which will be discussed in Chapter 6; and the third is a call to bureaux to reflect ethnic minority community needs.
Some of the ways in which bureaux have carried out this policy objective are described here.
In 1986 the Management Committee of Brent CAB decided that action should be taken to advance the advice needs of the large ethnic minority community in Brent.
The first step was to research the needs and attitudes of the black community by contacting community groups that represent them.
Links were made and any experiences that black groups have had with the CAB were identified; the work of the CAB was described and help was  enlisted from the black community in order to improve the services that the CAB could offer them.
Following these contacts, recommendations were drawn up, some of which have already been implemented.
Advice sessions, taking place on the black groups' own premises, have begun.
A telephone consultancy now operates and CAB training has been offered to community group advisers.
The CAB responded to a special need that resulted from the British Nationality Act in 1981.
The Act removed the right of people who had settled in the UK before 1973 to register as British citizens, and replaced this with the opportunity to naturalise as British at the discretion of the Secretary of State at the Home Office.
This change was of considerable importance in Brent where many residents arrived between the 1950s and early 1970s.
Publicity was limited and, as the deadline approached at the end of 1987, inaccurate rumours were rife about the exact meaning of the regulations.
To clarify the confusion, Brent CAB set up temporary special sessions to advise people about their status in the UK, their rights to British citizenship and the associated costs.
Sessions took place either on bureaux premises or in the offices of black community groups.
As a result of this experience, the CAB together with other interested organisations lobbied the Home Office to try to persuade them to waive or reduce the £60 fee for those on supplementary benefit.
Unfortunately this did not succeed.
Nevertheless, Brent CABx now have nine representatives of black groups and organisations on their management committee whose aim is to pass on to the bureaux their knowledge of the needs of the communities that they represent.
Brent's success in informing and advising the immigrant community about changing legislation that directly affects them was repeated around the country, and is reflected in the immigration enquiry statistics which rose by 180 per cent in 1987/8 compared with the previous year.
 Middlesbrough has a large Asian community which traditionally has not used the CAB.
The bureau is seen by many Asian people as a government agency for white people only, and as their English is poor and they have a different cultural background, special efforts need to be made to attract these potential clients, who often have complex problems.
In 1986  Middlesbrough CAB set up a specialist advice service to the local Asian community funded by the MSC Community programme.
Two part-time project workers were employed who speak six Asian languages between them.
They run external advice sessions using the microfilm information system and have opened an Asian advice telephone line.
The service has been publicised through a public service announcement in Urdu on local  television and has been swamped with requests for interpreter help from social services, solicitors and other agencies.
Two workers have been unable to meet the demand.
The project's battle to break down barriers between communities has finally been won in spite of an atmosphere of very insecure funding.
Six years after the project was first suggested, the Department of the Environment is funding two full-time workers through the Inner Urban programme.
Another project has been hit by insecure MSC Community programme funding.
In 1985 Gateshead CAB set up the Refugee Specialist Advice Project which helps refugees, asylum-seekers, and those with exceptional circumstances, to remain in the UK.
Recently they have also assisted other ethnic minority groups with problems of legal status, welfare benefits, housing, training and educational prospects, as well as helping those who were simply finding it hard to settle in.
The project has dealt with 340 clients from 45 different countries, but the project coordinator is now only working voluntarily, and the staff are heavily overloaded with casework.
Yet More Project Work
Most CABx can identify local groups which appear to have a particular need for assistance, and NACAB policy is to encourage bureaux to cater for such special groups.
None of the activities described here exists or is encouraged in any extensive way nationally in the way that hospital or prison work is, but they are nevertheless of interest.
The need for specialised local services is very dependent upon provision by other groups in the area.
Carrying out a local community profile should ensure that there is no wasteful duplication and it will often uncover gaps or a place for cooperation.
The following projects are a few examples of those that exist around the country.
The first two special projects cater for women's needs.
Halifax CAB has begun advice sessions for current and former occupants of a local women's refuge.
A bureau worker makes weekly visits, alternating between the refuge and a church hall where there is a follow-up ‘drop-in centre ‘for women who have left the refuge.
The majority of women are single parents and about half have needed assistance with social security benefits.
Successes have included gaining removal expenses for a woman who had been refused them, and furniture from Calderdale Voluntary Services for another woman who was not entitled to a Single Payment from the DHSS.
Pitsmoor CAB in Sheffield has begun an experimental women-only advice session at the bureau.
The emphasis is on informality and a  crèche is provided.
The presence of Asian women advice workers has attracted a good response from the Asian community and the informality is attracting more family and personal enquiries of the sort that people may have felt uncomfortable about bringing previously.
Sittingbourne and Faversham CABx in Kent have provided advice sessions at the Sittingbourne Travellers' Education project for gypsies.
This has involved cooperation between the CAB, health visitors, the Department of Social Security and the local authority Education Department.
The travellers' enquiries concentrate on Child Benefit, Attendance Allowance and eviction problems.
Experience quickly showed that advice had to be given with care, as the travellers' way of life is unique.
Trust had to be built up slowly.
Bromley and Chislehurst bureaux handled so many disputes between neighbours that they felt there was a clear need for a specialist Neighbour Dispute Centre.
Now such a centre has been established and is staffed by specially trained CAB workers.
In its first year, the centre was asked to mediate in over 60 disputes.
It has attracted media interest and has been visited by researchers from the US and Scandinavia.
Many referrals come from the community — councillors, local solicitors, Age Concern — but a referral does not automatically mean a solution.
One third of the disputes brought to the centre in the first year of operation could not be resolved because the ‘other side ‘would not agree to meet, although home visits have proved to be a way of overcoming this hurdle.
Many neighbour disputes simply need an impartial independent mediator — a role which is played by the CAB.
East Anglia area have likewise recognised the distress caused by neighbour disputes.
They have produced a self-help readable leaflet called ‘What to do if…you have neighbour problems’ as part of a series covering a variety of common issues.
Young people do not come readily with their enquiries to the CAB, as has been seen in the previous chapter.
Studies have shown that the middle-class image of the CAB volunteer, for example, has kept young people away.
In 1984 a survey of schools and youth training schemes was carried out in Pembroke by a CAB worker.
All the groups in the survey had a fixed idea about the sort of worker they would meet at the CAB: female, over 50, middle or upper class and authoritarian.
They expected workers to have little or no idea of their needs and to be out of sympathy with their interests or attitudes.
Moreover they could not see how a bureau could be of use to them.
The respondents subsequently expressed considerable surprise at the sort of problem with which the bureau can assist.
CAB's confidentiality had not been fully appreciated nor was it realised that the worker was there to supply information required, not to pass judgement on the client or to offer gratuitous advice based on their personal experiences or prejudices.
Nevertheless they still wanted a worker who could communicate with the young and relate to them.
They would prefer someone in the age range 25 — 45.
Such indications that young people may not view the CAB as being in touch with their attitudes and problems has prompted many bureaux to devise special outreach projects.
Some of these are described below.
School-based projects are well tried.
The Stockton District CAB project in a local comprehensive school is one such experiment.
In cooperation with the headmaster and the Youth and Community Tutor, the CAB began by holding a two-hour-a-week advice and information session in a private room in the school's community and coffee bar facility.
After three months, however, the response did not justify the effort from the bureau and the initiators had to rethink their approach to young people.
It is conceivable that an advice session on site is too public, so Stockton have developed an educational role in the school instead.
A 12-week course on social security, employment and money advice has been given to 15- and 16-year-old pupils.
South Tyneside CAB has been involved in another educational project.
It has participated in the making of a video by the Banking Information Service on wise ways to use credit.
A family of four (played by actors) is shown, where each one has fallen into money problems through unwise use of credit.
The first part of the video shows each family member approaching various advice services, including the CAB, to help them sort out their money problems.
The second part of the video shows a class role-playing various situations involving credit.
Yet another youth project of a rather specialist nature is being carried out in the north east area.
In 1987, Killingworth bureau was actively involved in promoting among young people an awareness of their rights and responsibilities concerning contacts with the police, especially since the police and Criminal Evidence Act came into force.
A special training day was held for workers in the bureau, with a play illustrating the workings of the act, followed by workshops.
The play was subsequently put on again for the public.
It is hoped that a mobile advice centre will tour the area with the aim of making young people more aware of their rights and responsibilities in such areas as work, YTS and welfare benefits.
Many projects for young people: are still in the planning or experimental stage and they do not always succeed immediately, as  can be seen.
But the overwhelming size of the response to an initiative like ‘Childline’ indicates that it would be dangerous to conclude that young people do not have problems even if first attempts to tap them fail.
Until a successful formula can be devised, local initiatives for youth are likely to continue with as much publicity as possible.
The Boundaries between Outreach and Specialist Work
Much outreach and project work is extremely complex and demands specialist knowledge in many areas.
Furthermore, the boundaries between the skills needed in outreach work and main bureau work are not always clear.
Much of the outreach work done by CABx demonstrates very clearly that the CAB no longer matches its one-time image as a referral agency.
Helping the unemployed is one of the clearest examples of a combination of outreach work (on temporary factory sites) and specialist work, such as money advice, welfare rights and employment law.
For it is not uncommon for each individual client to have a number of complex interrelated problems which may necessitate several bureau visits, thus adding to the ever-expanding workload of the CABx.
Unemployment Related Problems
The CAB has become quite used to responding to emergencies, so when a bureau is alerted to an impending crisis and the clients are unlikely to be able to visit the bureau, the workers go out to the clients.
The CABx of Camborne in Cornwall and Bridgewater in Somerset did just that in 1986.
The tin-mining towns of Camborne and Redruth on the north coast of Cornwall had been facing major redundancies since the 1985 plunge in tin prices.
In order to be able to cope with the increasing enquiry rate at the bureau, an emergency appeal to NACAB for special funding led to the appointment of a fixed-term welfare rights officer.
The task of the bureau was to prepare for the impact on the community of potentially large-scale long-term unemployment.
This started with the Compair-Holman factory announcing a cut of 500 jobs in its workforce, together with a further 1,500 jobs at risk and 2,500 other jobs in dependent businesses left insecure.
Enquiries at Camborne rose from 750 a month to 1,100 a month after the new post was filled.
To cope with this, specialist training was needed in unemployment, debt counselling and some tribunal and county court casework for all bureaux workers.
Local employers and  employees, unions and other statutory bodies were involved in this work in an attempt to be better prepared for the crisis.
When Geevor mine announced 300 layoffs, the CAB was ready to move in, and it held four days of emergency advice sessions at the mine.
The arrival of 256 miners with problems concerning benefits, mortgage repayments and employment rights necessitated the calling of help from Exeter CAB which worked alongside representatives from building societies and Job Centres.
The majority of the miners had never claimed state benefits before and were intimidated by the whole process.
When 250 workers were made redundant by Quantock poultry Packers, the CAB moved into the remote Somerset factory.
Their bureau is normally 10 miles away in Bridgewater but, with the agreement of Quantock's management, two three-hour weekly sessions were established ten weeks before the closure of the plant.
Two rooms and a telephone were reserved for the CAB and, with a list of appointments prepared by the company, clients were called over the tannoy system to avoid queues.
The overriding anxiety for the employees was what benefits they could claim and how much they would receive.
As the CAB became accepted, clients often returned with more personal problems.
All this additional responsibility was taken on when Bridgewater CAB were themselves working under conditions of insecure funding.
The North East CABx have seen the effects of unemployment in their area on a large scale over the last few years.
So much so that they are convinced that very many of the problems that they deal with are unemployment related.
They feel strongly that in order to relieve these stresses more influence should be brought to bear on policy-makers to alleviate the plight of CAB clients.
They also want funding to be made available from new sources responsible for unemployment, to help the CAB cope with unemployment related stresses.
The north east area submitted a motion to the Annual General Meeting of the CAB in 1986 which after much discussion and some softening was passed as follows:
This association resolves to make unemployment a priority issue for its policy comment work.
The cumulative effect of unemployment should be demonstrated to this and successive governments by drawing on bureaux experience which highlights the correlation between unemployment and multiple debt, matrimonial problems and fuel debts, etc.
It was not considered an easy or even feasible task to prove this relationship, but the North East CAB area policy comment sub-committee nevertheless launched a pilot study.
Four bureaux  participated initially, to test definitions of unemployment and unemployment-related problems.
This proved to be less than straightforward as there were some differences of opinion as to whether part-time employees or the disabled should be included.
Nevertheless, the pilot study is to be expanded to areas outside the north east and it is hoped that it will eventually be used to help with funding applications, and provide statistical data for the press.
The North East area CAB was disappointed, however, that differences of opinion on definitions may mean that the full thrust of NACAB's social policy work may not be put behind this motion.
With conventional jobs in very short supply, Sunderland CAB is helping the unemployed set up their own small businesses.
On the initiative of a retired small businessman, the New Enterprise Advisory Service (NEAS) has helped 550 clients a year consider the potential of self-employment.
The coordinator assists with loan and grant applications and may see the client several times in order to develop a sound business plan in stages.
Clients are also visited at their place of business in order to offer emergency help with business crises.
Having seen the need for NEAS, the coordinator now sits on the steering committee for the development of the Sunderland Enterprise Centre where NEAS will be one of the business advice services.
This centre will provide 18 work units as well as help and counselling for the tenants and others with small business problems, and is the result of local cooperation between the CAB and other agencies, for the benefit of the community.
Tribunal work and Welfare Rights
The welfare rights unit based in Wolverhampton is one of several specialist CAB units.
Its funding originally came from the EEC and is now provided by NACAB.
Very few welfare rights units can boast such resources.
However, the expertise it has developed serves a much wider geographical area than the West Midlands, where it is based.
It is in effect a CAB national resource and an example to those interested in its work.
As such it is worth describing its activities in detail.
The unit provides an intensive casework and development service for the advisers in the 65 West Midlands bureaux to help them deal with particularly complex social security, employment and related enquiries from the public.
In addition, consultancy, training and information, including a new bi-monthly magazine Adviser and a specially developed electronic database —‘Lawtel’— are available to all UK CABx.
Although the range of work of the  tribunal unit has grown, the size of the original team of three full-time caseworkers and two administrative assistants has remained the same.
The unit also acts as host to a money advice worker.
Unfortunately the computer consultant who used to write software for CAB use, bowed to budgetary cuts.
A technician now services hardware problems.
A telephone hotline service provided advice and information in response to just over 2,000 enquiries from all over the UK in 1986/7.
Some 60 per cent of these enquiries came from the West Midlands.
The written consultancy service, to which CABx often send in case papers for detailed research, preparation and drafting, totalled 170 enquiries.
Fifty cases were adopted by the unit in 1986/7 from bureaux who needed additional assistance.
One example of a very successful case was the recouping of benefit arrears for a client.
The client eventually recovered £1,000 in supplementary benefit additional requirements, backdated to 1976.
The unit could take some credit then for the change in the supplementary benefit adjudication regulations that followed as a result.
The unit however, does not simply take over cases.
A full range of standard and tailor-made training courses are provided to help bureaux carry their own caseload.
Courses have covered social security, income maximisation, housing benefit, employment and advanced representation courses on social security and industrial tribunals.
The unit has also provided input into monthly caseworkers' meetings.
Training goes outside the immediate geographical area and one-off courses are designed for local authorities and voluntary organisations.
The unit has also published training packs for all of its courses and in 1986/7 3,400 packs were sold to CABx, other advice agencies and local authorities.
In addition, the unit participated in the preparation of new NACAB training material for the 1988 changes in social security regulations.
The Adviser magazine was launched by the unit in November 1986 as a joint venture between NACAB, Shelter and the Community Information project.
It covers social security, housing, money advice, employment and computer news.
Total distribution is almost 3,500 and the subscription and advertising income cover the marginal cost of the magazine.
The unit operates a postal library service where photocopies of cases are available to CABx on request or by subscription.
For several years the unit has been in partnership with Lawtel, the Prestel-based legal information service, to get social security decisions included on the database.
Approximately 400 cases have been added and the unit shares responsibility with the Department  of Social Security for updating these cases.
Twenty-seven CABx have been involved in piloting the Lawtel service.
Fifteen of the 27 CABx who were on-line, used Lawtel several times a week and seven used it daily in the period of piloting.
Debt Counselling
There is little doubt that debt counselling, or money advice as it is also called, is the major ‘growth’ area among all CABx enquiries.
However, it cannot be seen as a new problem area.
The following account of the 1950s from Margaret Brasnett's Story of the Citizens Advice Bureaux sounds all too familiar.
Hire purchase indeed soon began to figure in the minds of bureau workers as the Wicked Fairy, as well as the Fairy Godmother, in the house.
They saw — and no doubt often found in their own homes — that this method of buying, if properly used was a godsend to thousands of people, especially to young couples setting up their first home and families moved from old houses or furnished rooms to new estates and towns.
But in the hands of people who could not add two and two together, or calculate that the weekly instalments on the dining room suite, the washing machine, the television set, the refrigerator came to most of the whole weekly income, with little over for rent, food, clothes, and every other necessity, it was practically the root of all evil from which could grow debts, family quarrels, rent arrears, eviction and even worse disaster.
Not only was the wider effect of debt on family life recognised but also, as happens today, attempts were made to influence social policy through retrieving bureau experience and to build educational programmes to influence the public in their home-making.
As early as 1955 a CAB sub-committee was set up by the national committee to consider hire purchase problems as seen by bureaux all over the country and by other voluntary organisations with experience of families in difficulty; and in addition to recommendations about trade practices, about possible action by local authorities, and other things, which were sent to the appropriate associations or government departments, the deliberations of the committee produced results which were to have an influence on the trend and standing of much CAB work in the future.
First their report was published as a booklet, ‘Hire purchase and Credit Buying’, which gave factual information about the various methods and the legislation controlling them, their advantages and disadvantages and the dangers they hold for thoughtless or inexperienced people; and also a leaflet setting out some of the points to be taken into account when undertaking hire purchase.
These both had a large circulation far beyond CAB circles: 1,500 copies of the report, for example, went to the Army Education Department; 21,000 copies of the leaflet were bought by a Scottish county council; and many copies of both were taken by youth organisations and clubs and societies of many kinds as a basis for informal discussion.
This had a bearing on the second feature of the report: its strong recommendation about the need for more advice and education in home-making and home-budgeting.
Although the terminology may sound dated, little else in the extract does.
What then has made debt the single most pressing problem for CAB clients in the late 1980s?
It is unlikely that any one cause is going to be found but some statistics may shed light on the larger scale, spread and upward trends in debt.
A study by Tahira Hira carried out on 400 CAB debt cases in Scotland between 1984 and 1987 points to interesting trends.
Debt is common among the poor and unemployed but it is certainly not confined to them.
The Scottish study shows that two thirds of the male clients were employed and are increasingly in higher earning brackets but of the female clients an increasing number are in lower income groups.
The Scottish experience shows the enormous increase in the amounts owed by clients over the three years of the study.
The amount of debt of the 400 families increased from £295,113 in 1984 to £836,409 in 1987, an increase of 183 per cent.
In 1984 only 7 per cent of the clients owed money on credit cards but in 1987 this figure was 23 per cent.
The amount owed on credit cards was £12,407 in 1984 but £67,445 in 1987.
Media and social pressures must take some of the blame for the increase in debt.
As in the 1950s NACAB will attempt to use the experience of its clients to change policies which may encourage debt.
At the 1986 AGM the following resolution was passed:
This association calls upon Council to make strong representations, including the use of the normal information retrieval procedures, to both the Advertising Standards Authority  and the Office of Fair Trading to control more effectively the current advertising of and the availability of credit and to press for a tightening of existing guidelines and legislation covering advertising loans, credit cards and other financial services, in order to make the full implications clearer to the consumer (for example, the nature of a secured loan).
Although statistics do not explain why people are increasingly in debt they do explain why ‘negotiating debt’ enquiries have increased by 330 per cent over the last three years in Scottish CABx.
It is a little more difficult for central NACAB's information retrieval section to isolate debt enquiries accurately, as they form part of general consumer problems, but it is unlikely that their experience is different.
Although debt enquiries still only account for 6 — 7 per cent of total enquiries, the severity of the problems means that each case can take over 12 hours of interviewing and office work to handle.
Typically a client will seek the help of a bureau when debt problems have become unmanageable for them, and the stress of trying to cope with perhaps a dozen competing creditors plus court summonses is threatening home life, health, housing and possibly employment.
Out of this fraught legal and financial tangle the bureau worker must work with the client to create order and stability.
The worker will need to carry out the following:
deal with emergencies (e. g. disconnection of electricity, court orders or eviction)
maximise income/minimise expenditure (checking income tax, state benefits, maintenance payments etc.)
check liability for debts (is the client being overcharged?
Is somebody else liable?)
check for untapped resources (insurance, compensation for unfair dismissal)
prepare a statement of income and expenditure
assemble a complete list of creditors and outstanding balances
calculate a scheme of pro-rata payments to creditors from ‘available income ‘(if any)
write to creditors with debt adjustment proposals, negotiate and finally agree a scheme
In addition to the technical aspects of debt counselling, a competent advice worker will pay attention to the personal and emotional problems of clients with multiple debt problems.
Some will give the personal aspects the highest priority because of accumulated experience which shows that a client who is not emotionally ready for the severe belt-tightening and discipline involved in emerging from serious debt, will not stay the course.
for this reason it is important that training courses in debt counselling include giving emotional as well as financial support.
The hours needed to carry out all these tasks can come from two sources.
They can be gained at the expense of time spent on clients with other problems (as will be seen in Chapter 4) or they can be derived from additional funding earmarked for the purpose.
Both of these ‘solutions’ are used around the country.
The former is patently not in keeping with the CAB's open-door policy and results in unintended rationing of advice to other clients.
The latter solution involves the employment and training of specialist money advice workers and the development of money advice units, some of which can already be seen around the country.
All of these specialists, however, are first and foremost generalist advice workers, in keeping with the CAB ethos of considering the ‘whole ‘person and not just extracting their debt problems.
Needless to say, additional funding to set up these units is often slow to materialise.
An expensive fund-raising exercise in 1987 aimed at financial institutions raised only £55,000 which was one third of the initial target figure although some isolated local initiatives have brought much-appreciated donations from local businesses.
It is not only the client who benefits from the CAB expertise in money advice but also the government, local authorities, credit companies and stores.
It seems reasonable that they should share the cost of what is after all only a system of humane debt collection acting on their behalves.
The CAB must put this point across.
The Scottish CAB's annual report for 1986/7 pleaded convincingly:
Of all the problems dealt with, the solving of debt problems probably has the most dramatic effect for funders: for Government and local authorities the cost of personal insolvency can be immense if not properly handled; at the same time the work done by bureaux must be saving private companies considerable sums in legal and administrative costs and in reducing their proportion of ‘bad debts’.
That the government, local authorities and private companies are not queueing up to offer the resources to enable CABx to extend their work can only be due to the movement's failure to make its point effectively.
The reticence of the CAB to put its case more cogently to the private sector may be explained by their historic fear of losing their independence.
Equally, creditors have been suspicious of the CAB  who they consider may be too ‘soft’ on the client.
If the private sector is to contribute seriously to debt counselling then it is likely to want to know how many CAB clients adhere to their repayment schedules and how many emerge better able to cope and more confident after counselling.
At present this data is elusive.
However, as debt work grows trust may induce better communication and result in benefits to the debtor, creditor and the CAB alike.
The descriptive nature of what has been examined here has excluded the self-examination and debate that accompanies all CAB development.
The next chapter will examine recent issues that are engaging bureau workers in their search to meet their commitment to the community.
MEETING BUREAU CHALLENGES
What's in a Name?
‘Bureau manager’ is the title of the senior staff member in every Citizens Advice Bureau.
The title ‘manager ‘is relatively new.
In February 1987 NACAB Council voted to change the title of all CAB senior staff members from organiser to manager.
Merseyside Area Committee originally suggested that the job title of ‘organiser’ no longer fitted the task that the bureau senior staff member was expected to carry out.
They suggested that the title might be the cause of a lack of appreciation by the funders, the local authorities, of the complexity, responsibility and professionalism now required of the post holder.
The recommended salary scale for bureaux managers is pegged to local authority rates for professional staff.
Many local authorities, however, do not pay bureaux managers at this rate and although the shortfall will always be attributed to budgetary constraints, there may also be a lack of awareness of what the position entails.
The title ‘organiser’ was traditionally used in social work and voluntary service early in the century and had a particular connotation that is not helpful in today's environment.
Clearly the role has changed beyond all recognition.
Margaret Brasnett in her Story of the Citizens advice Bureaux in 1964 talks of the ‘need for people who are good at keeping papers in order and seeing that information material is filed and kept up-to-date’.
For such a task perhaps the term ‘organiser’ is sufficient.
For her the ‘core of the bureaux are the interviewers’.
Some 25 years later interviewers are still essential at bureau level but the complexity of the task that they carry out has shifted the core role on to a professional manager who is needed to galvanise the efforts of the team in order to meet growing demands.
A glance at the dictionary definition of the two verbs ‘to organise’ and ‘to manage’shows forcibly the inadequacy of the title ‘organiser’to describe the person in charge of a modern-day CAB.
The Oxford Dictionary indicates that an ‘organiser gives orderly structure or makes arrangements’.
The bureau managers today would be pleased if their task could be described only in these terms.
Unfortunately the definition of a ‘manager’ comes rather closer to their task.
The Oxford Dictionary says that the ‘manager regulates or is in charge; or succeeds with limited resources or means’.
A full job description of a bureau manager is reprinted in Appendix A. Extracting the essence, the manager is responsible for service delivery to the community by a team of workers.
In order to fulfil the aims of the CAB the manager will be responsible for training, support, supervision, advice work, following up casework, social policy work, publicity, bureau development, community contact, as well as budgeting, funding and liaising with the management committee, NACAB area and central offices, and of course general management.
The advice workers constitute the manager's main resource and the area officer and training officer form a basic support team at NACAB area office.
These job descriptions are also contained in Appendix A. Although a familiarity with these tasks on paper is important to achieve an understanding of bureau work, their expansiveness should not be allowed to deter the potential applicant.
Nor should the issues and problems examined here be allowed to overshadow the fact that 15,000 people in the UK are experiencing great satisfaction, involvement and a sense of achievement within their communities through their work in a Citizens Advice Bureau.
The purpose of highlighting bureau issues in this chapter is to show the vibrance of the debate within the service and the CAB's effort to cope with an ever-changing environment.
Balancing Staff Numbers
Despite the difference in the volume of enquiries between an urban bureau and a rural one, both urban and rural bureaux workers experience a high level of stress.
The West Midlands survey showed that staff shortages appear to be a common cause of that stress.
In response to such shortages bureaux may mount campaigns to recruit more volunteers.
Professional journals, local and national press, ethnic minority newsletters and libraries are all common vehicles for staff recruitment.
The success or failure of such a campaign follows a fairly predictable national pattern.
Suburban and rural areas will recruit well but inner cities and council estates are short of volunteers.
It is not unknown for a suburban bureau to have a waiting list of potential volunteers, but in the main staff shortages appear to be a problem equally in suburban and inner-city areas.
It would appear therefore that recruiting more volunteers is not always the answer to staff shortages.
Stress reflected in a staff  shortage may in fact be due to a shortage of space.
If a bureau has only two interview rooms then four volunteers are the most that can be accommodated in the advisory role: two interviewing, one taking telephone enquiries and the fourth following up cases in the general office between clients.
Managers with a full complement of volunteers and adequate space, however, fare no better.
They may have exchanged one stressful situation for another.
The managerial task involved in galvanising a team of perhaps 30 volunteers is considerable.
In such a large team it is inevitable that there will be frequent staff changes and several members of the team will be inexperienced at any one time.
Although all staff will have been through a thorough central basic training course (see Chapter 6) much additional training and supervision is still needed back in the bureau.
Each bureau is asked to appoint an in-bureau tutor for on-going training.
The manager may take on that role but the new volunteers may find that they lack support as the manager is likely to be too busy with other duties to carry out the in-bureau training task thoroughly.
Some managers may delegate the task of in-bureau tutor to an experienced advice worker, in which case they partially lose that person's services as an interviewer.
Apart from the frequent staff changes inherent in a large team, communication between staff, and between manager and staff will inevitably be very hard.
The manager may only see each volunteer once a week and should the manager be out of the bureau on that occasion, two weeks may pass.
Guaranteeing continuity in the casework of clients is a serious problem for a manager with a large team of volunteers.
Of course the importance of a high quality of case recording is clearly recognised but a rushed volunteer might leave gaps in case recording.
Managers therefore may find that the only solution to continuity is to be thoroughly familiar with all case records in order to be able to smooth the transition as one volunteer picks up a case started by another.
The manager may be the only member of the team who is present in the office full time to fill these gaps and the responsibility of ensuring continuity for clients may make a manager reluctant to take on a large team of very part-time volunteers.
Increasing the Demand on Volunteers
Until recently, volunteers in the CAB were required to commit themselves to four hours' voluntary service per week.
This was usually in the form of one day or two half-day sessions.
It will be mentioned in several contexts that the complexity of CAB advice  work over the last few years has increased considerably.
Statistically this is often expressed as an increase in casework or in the number of ‘repeat’ clients whose problem entails a second or third visit to the bureau to bring it to a satisfactory conclusion.
Casework usually involves added complexity and the opinion is gaining credence in some circles that it is almost impossible to gain sufficient experience to become proficient unless one spends two whole days a week in a bureau.
In fact GLCABS now require this level of commitment from their new recruits.
This demand is actually the cause of acrimonious debate in the London area.
Inner London bureaux are normally staffed by a small team of paid advice workers with perhaps one or two volunteers, opening for a limited number of hours to the public, whereas outer London bureaux are staffed largely by volunteers and are open for longer hours.
Inner London bureaux which began under the auspices of the Family Welfare Association were not accustomed to volunteers at all as they were staffed by paid workers and many even have a negative attitude towards them.
Although a lack of continuity of part-time workers and the difficulty of accruing experience may partially justify higher demands on volunteers, nevertheless the outer London suburbs suspect that the heavy demand of a 2-day-a-week commitment now placed on all new London volunteers stems not from these practical considerations but from a poor stereotypical image of the volunteer and from a negative attitude towards volunteering in general.
The view can be frequently heard from paid workers in the CAB that volunteers are a privileged class who cannot empathise with many of the clients who come to the CAB.
They consider that it may be demeaning for a client to be ‘helped’ by a volunteer; they consider that a person working for no pay is being exploited; and they feel that volunteering confirms a sexist role model because it is mainly women supported by wage-earning husbands who volunteer.
The view is also heard that the suburban bureau staffed by middle-class middle-aged women wearing twin-sets and pearls can provide no more than a signposting agency and cannot provide the in-depth advice, casework and tribunal representation that full-time paid staff can.
The staff profiles presented in Chapter 2 indeed confirmed that the average volunteer is a woman in her late forties, but studies have also highlighted a wide spread of ages, with paid staff not necessarily lowering the average age.
Whether the stereotype is true or false, such attitudes from paid CAB staff deny the basic volunteering ethos of the very organisation to which they are so committed.
The normally comfortable marriage outside London, between paid worker and volunteer, is evidently not so  comfortable within London.
The volunteers are not free from their own stereotypical view of the inner London paid worker and the NACAB and GLCABS staff worker.
They are seen as mainly young with insufficient life experience; they are considered intolerant and left wing.
In spite of this image, volunteers may even subconsciously adopt an inferior posture as they submit to their full-time colleagues, which does not help the full-time worker build a more positive view of the volunteers.
Even more seriously, many volunteers think that the decisions affecting their bureau are made by these full-time employees.
Although ideas may be mooted by paid staff, it is elected bureaux representatives who will vote them in or out (see Chapter 1).
But volunteers seem woefully ignorant of this democratic process.
Again one sees the enormous task of communication which bureaux managers have, to convey to their volunteer team how they can have a say in the running of their bureau.
A smaller team would be closer to the democratic decision-making process but then the doors of such a bureau would not be able to open to the public for so many hours.
Pressure from the public for longer opening hours and at more convenient times makes a comfortable balance between a small and large bureau team hard to achieve.
Needless to say there is a case to be made for both sides in the discussion of small team versus large, and paid versus voluntary.
Indeed, advice work is certainly more complex today than even a few years ago.
The pace of legislative change and the increase in the population dependent on benefits have contributed to this.
But many bureaux who are dependent on volunteers have nevertheless kept up with these increased demands and offer the same in-depth service that bureaux staffed with paid workers offer.
They succeed by a greater division of labour, with most volunteers carrying responsibility for generalist advice while referring complex work to a few specialists.
The presence of at least some specialist assistance has been shown to be essential for raising the standards of the whole team.
But the heavier load that the manager bears in these bureaux to maintain a larger team and to open longer hours to the public, as well as doing in-depth work, often goes unrecognised.
The seriousness with which volunteers are taken in the CAB is to a large extent up to them.
If their commitment and reliability are seen to be less than that of a paid worker then the stereotype will be reinforced and the many totally committed and reliable volunteers will be misjudged.
There is nothing within official NACAB policy that gives any support whatsoever to a distinction between paid and voluntary staff, but traditional British attitudes  may be responsible for differentiation.
The trend today is for more paid workers to be employed in the CAB alongside volunteers with the result that the need to inculcate professional attitudes among volunteers has become more apparent.
The shaping of a totally professional view is yet another task for managers which, unlike many others, they will be unable to delegate.
NACAB's expressed expectations may not be sufficient to change attitudes but some managers have found that tact, gentle persuasion and frank discussion can succeed.
The ‘Unemployed’ Advice Workers
Since the early 1980s when unemployment became a part of inner-city life, a new type of worker has appeared in many bureaux.
Volunteers are now engaged who may work full-time in the bureau in the hope that the experience, training and discipline will lead to a paid job in the future, either inside or outside the CAB.
They may be school leavers, graduates, people made redundant or returning to the job market after raising a family.
Such a new source of workers should be a godsend to the harassed manager who favours volunteers but finds the short hours of the traditional volunteer a nuisance.
Equally one might expect the full-time paid CAB worker, who normally eschews the middle-class volunteer, to cheer the broadening of the CAB volunteer base.
Although both of the above views are voiced, neither is universal, and the arrival of the ‘unemployed’ volunteer, together with a new breed of part-time Manpower Services Commission worker, has in fact caused some conflict.
Although the bureau manager who supports a large team of very part-time volunteers craves the injection of hours that the unemployed can offer, they equally crave stability and escape from the greater supervision needed by new staff.
Consequently many managers are unwilling to take on an ‘unemployed’ worker, however tempting their offer of several days' service per week, as they cannot cope with the high turnover of staff that ensues.
Some managers who carry a smaller team of paid workers with only few volunteers have indeed shown support for the new breed of ‘unemployed’ worker, in order to broaden the CAB volunteer base.
In addition they may be proud that their bureau should supply quality training and experience that enables the worker to enter mainstream employment.
It is also seen as a way in to paid CAB work for black workers who might not normally be economically able to volunteer but through circumstances beyond their control find that they have no choice.
As a by-product, with  the experience gained they are now in a strong position to enter paid advice work.
Such a route is encouraged by NACAB equal opportunities policy.
Meanwhile, managers who are angry that these ‘unemployed’ workers use up scarce training resources only to subsequently take them outside the CAB should be encouraged by the consultation that is taking place between the Manpower Services Commission (MSC) and NACAB central office staff.
They are discussing how CAB training might form a recognised part of the Education and Training Programme (ETP) and how it could be funded as such.
Recognition, however, has so far not proved easy.
NACAB feels strongly about the suitability of their own training and the right of the school leaver to choose voluntary work if they wish without jeopardising their benefits.
But the CAB is only one organisation within the whole voluntary sector.
It is an issue that the National Council for Voluntary Organisations is taking up on behalf of the whole voluntary sector after consultation with NACAB staff.
Meanwhile bureaux are advised to decide independently whether to cooperate with MSC schemes.
The Community Programme also met with some suspicion when it was first introduced by the MSC in the early 1980s but it proved to be a boon for many bureaux to expand their services and broaden their workforce.
Perhaps history will repeat itself with the successor to the Community Programme, if the difficulties can be ironed out.
The Pressures of Queues
Where staff is in short supply and space is insufficient, long waiting-room queues cause considerable stress to the advice worker (and the client too, of course).
The pressure of a long queue was the most frequent cause for stress mentioned in the West Midlands survey of volunteers.
So obvious is this problem that it did not really need a questionnaire to highlight it.
Pass by any inner-city CAB five minutes before opening time and there will be a sufficient crowd of people waiting to occupy the advice workers for a half-day session.
The public perusing opening hours of some bureaux may think it unreasonable for a bureau to close for lunch.
This is not how it appears in practice to the workers in the bureau.
The workers merely wish to clear a backlog of clients before the afternoon session begins.
Similarly many a bureau may have to close their doors an hour before their official closing time in order to be able to leave the bureau not too many hours after closing time.
Under pressure, an advice worker may be tempted to take short cuts.
But two short cuts are expressly discouraged in CAB training: the first is the adviser trusting to memory.
The adviser is trained always to check information in the files.
Secondly the adviser is discouraged from closing the interview too quickly after an initial problem has been presented by the client.
Experience shows that clients may not immediately express the real reason for their visit but need to be given a chance to raise further problems.
To meet these standards the worker needs total concentration and freedom from time pressure.
Awareness of a waiting-room queue makes this very difficult.
Because of the way most bureaux are structured, it is usually hard for the advice worker to remain blissfully unaware of the length of the queue.
Bureaux in the main are not purpose-built and even if they have been especially partitioned for the purpose-built and even if usually enough total space to consider the ergonomics of advice work.
The worker is likely to have to climb over knees and bags several times as the clients wait, in order to get client records from the general office or to refer to the information system.
Many bureaux make it policy to apologise to the waiting clients before they have a chance to complain.
But even that may not help as the worker may be waylaid by those who have ‘just come in for a form’ or an address or have to collect their children from school in five minutes.
Appointment Systems
Comparison with a doctor's surgery may bring out those aspects of CAB work that make CAB queues particularly difficult to deal with.
On a practical level a GP's surgery generally has a receptionist.
Even if there is no appointment system, the receptionist is there to smooth the process.
But more important is the expectation of the patient who comes to the surgery.
Rightly or wrongly the patient expects little more than perhaps ten minutes of the doctor's time.
The notion that a doctor is a very busy person who should not be detained, prevents most patients from overstaying their welcome.
On the part of the doctor, British medical training until recently has paid scant attention to the patient's need to be listened to and the doctor will therefore home in on physical symptoms only.
These expectations on both sides make the length of a doctor's appointment reasonably easy to predict.
This is not the case at the CAB.
The length of an interview is very hard to predict.
One client may quite sincerely come in just for a form but another client who comes in ‘just for a form’ may indicate that they really need help filling it in.
Experience shows that the longest interviews are with clients who need help to sort  out serious debt problems.
This could take an hour at the first interview and need several interviews after that.
Expectations are very important too.
The CAB is suffering as a result of its own success.
The client knows that the CAB is there for everyone and everyone will be seen if they are prepared to wait.
To be then told that time is short is contrary to the client's hopes and expectations.
It is hard to disappoint someone who may have come in as a last port of call when all other channels to sort out their problems seem closed.
By contrasting the doctor's concentration on physical ailments with the CAB worker's lengthy advice session, there may have been an unintentional implication that CAB workers see their major role as counsellor and that it is the counselling role that is time consuming.
It is in fact a minority of bureaux who consider counselling to be an integral part of advice work.
A CAB interview with scant attention to emotional problems is generally lengthy because forms are complex; because benefit calculations take a long time; because contacting the Department of Social Security on the telephone takes even longer and calculating an equitable distribution of debt repayments longer still.
Many pressured workers feel that to add counselling to already time-consuming tasks would compound the queues and others feel ill-equipped to cope with emotional issues.
It is in fact NACAB policy that advice workers should be able to carry out some limited counselling functions and they do run training to that end.
There are strong indications from those bureaux that see counselling as an integrated part of advice work that counselling does not extend interview times.
On the contrary, it is possible that greater training in counselling skills may lead to a more skilfully directed and efficient interview.
Because of the difficulty of predicting interview time, the idea of converting the ‘open door’ to a total appointment system, as some doctors do with success, is an anathema to many CAB workers.
It is even a condition of membership of NACAB that a bureau be open to the public without appointments for at least 12 hours per week.
Nevertheless, out of necessity, to help the adviser feel less pressured, some bureaux do run partial appointment systems.
In Sydenham, Kent, for example, the staff have decided to aim for a 20-minute initial interview.
Where a problem seems obviously more complex they suggest that the client makes an appointment with an adviser to come back at a time when the bureau is officially closed to the public.
West Hendon bureau in London has recently converted its Monday evening session to appointments only, to cope with overcrowding.
Meetings with voluntary professionals — lawyers, accountants and others — are often by appointment.
But even the bureau which decides to institute a limited appointment system needs some mechanism for making the appointments.
Although bureaux often dream of the luxury of a receptionist, few have them.
Even if they had the space, the concept is riddled with conflict.
Issues of confidentiality are often raised when receptionists are discussed, as clients may have to announce the purpose of their visit in public.
In addition, CAB advisers are proud to be a ‘one-stop’ service and there is a fear that a receptionist may make unnecessary referrals in order to relieve queues and so reduce bureaux to the signposting agencies they were once considered to be.
Nevertheless a carefully designed receptionist role that would take these misgivings into account, may be worth discussing.
The successful receptionist models could be used to devise special training to enable CAB receptionists to ascertain the depth of a problem; they could serve the dual function of assessing which clients have just come in for a form or a local address and they could make appointments for others in person or by telephone and smooth the queue.
Experience with rural advice in the north east area has shown that telephone advisers become skilled at solving basic problems over the phone and recognising those where the client needs to come in to a bureau for in-depth advice.
If their experience could be harnessed to define the receptionist's task, it may suit potential volunteers who cannot contribute two full days' work but who nevertheless are committed to the CAB.
The alternative of using a fully trained adviser as receptionist would probably not be considered an efficient use of staff.
But it is unfortunate that even if all those issues could be worked out, it is the rare bureau that has the space available in the waiting room for a receptionist anyway.
Telephone Enquiries
There are obviously many types of typical CAB problems for which the telephone is not useful but it is a fact that there is a heavy demand, particularly from women, for telephone contact with the CAB.
Some bureaux manage to staff a line while the bureau is open to the public, others can only offer telephone advice when the bureau is closed to the public.
Unfortunately many bureaux manage neither of these options.
It is common to turn the bureau telephone answering machine on with the recorded message that an adviser is not available to take the call and the potential client should call again later or come in person to the bureau.
Many regard a well-funded telephone service as a serious answer to queues.
Barnet and Westminster are discussing a service shared among several bureaux.
The idea of a pan-London telephone enquiry service is under discussion in GLCABS.
It might have at its disposal a computerised local information system for each area it serves in order to answer local queries as well as general ones.
Of course enquirers would be referred to their local CAB where needed.
Much of the information system would unfortunately be taken up with information about the assortment of opening hours of individual bureaux.
Much effort would be saved if these were more uniform or if, at least, there were core hours when all CABx were known to be open.
The situation where clients still need to telephone their local bureau just to make sure that it is actually open and not closed because of staff shortages, union meetings, staff training and the like could thus be avoided.
This concern has been debated in Barnet where they have voted to outlaw one-off closures without discussion with their management committee.
These problems aside, there would seem to be much support from CAB advisers for a well-publicised telephone system to relieve pressure and widen the availability of the CAB.
Local experiments with joint telephone services may shortly provide some indication as to the feasibility of a wider plan.
Alternative Relief Systems
Computers have already been mentioned for the holding of local information.
The place of computers in improving office efficiency varies widely from bureau to bureau.
Many bureaux are using word processors very efficiently, especially for debt counselling work.
Some use them to store management committee records, a few use them for bureau statistics but although their contribution is growing, it seems unlikely that they will have an immediate effect on client queues.
On the contrary, the learning process is very time consuming and most volunteers are unlikely to be able to concentrate on acquiring new computer skills which may be only peripheral to the immediate problem of interviewing clients.
Such pessimism should not, however, discourage the imaginative computer work that is developing in many bureaux or deny the role of computers in profiling and statistical work, such as that discussed in Chapter 2.
The numbered ticket system is some half-way solution between appointments and sitting out your turn.
At least it may allow the client to do some local shopping or allow a child more space outside.
But to most bureaux workers it is too reminiscent of the  DHSS ticket system.
Whether they themselves are therefore put off the idea or they think their clients will object, is hard to say, as very few bureaux seem to have given the system a try.
The Specialist versus Generalist Debate
The discussion so far has been oriented towards lessening the pressure caused by the build up of queues and ways of smoothing the flow of clients through a bureau.
Speculation as to the causes of queues has included a greater public awareness of the CAB, growing numbers in receipt of state benefits, unemployment and the availability of credit, the rising divorce rate, and a complex legislative programme that has affected clients detrimentally.
All of these developments play their part in growing pressure on the CAB.
But nevertheless there are many long-serving CAB advice workers who would deny that client problems today are so much more severe than in the past.
CAB treatment, however, of client problems has changed beyond recognition.
The client who presents a single problem will be allowed time to explore several; the client who appears with a threatened electricity disconnection will be given time to expose other debts; CAB workers are more aware of the place of industrial tribunals, of medical appeals and of welfare rights case law.
The previous chapter described the growth of these specialist services.
But there is also an awareness that the growth of in-depth work may be changing the nature of the CAB service and there is renewed debate on the desirability of this new image.
Early references to the place of specialist work appear in the findings of the government-commissioned Lovelock review of NACAB in 1983.
The review prevaricated on the issue of the CAB's obligation to provide specialist services to clients.
They could see that providing specialist support for bureaux was a sure way of improving standards of generalist advice work but did not think that NACAB should develop these services further.
Rather they should refer complex enquiries to government agencies.
NACAB disagreed with these suggestions and responded firmly.
They reasoned that clients in general are reluctant to be referred, if indeed there is an agency to refer them to, and in any event local authority government departments do not provide the independent advice services that the client is generally seeking.
The CAB has a long history of mobilising professionals such as lawyers, accountants and surveyors, to advise clients on a voluntary basis but there are very few lawyers who specialise in welfare benefits or money advice.
In addition, since the CAB did not succeed when they pressed for the  extension of legal aid to cover representation at industrial tribunals, there simply is no other organisation able to take on this work.
For these reasons, specialist services have developed at a fast pace within the CAD, as has been seen in the previous chapter.
It is hard to question the worth of these projects.
Nevertheless the specialist versus generalist debate is still on the agenda among advice workers in bureaux around the country.
Three arguments are often raised to counter the increasing tendency towards in-depth work.
The first suggests that by ‘helping’ clients the adviser may in fact be ‘disabling’them and encouraging dependency.
The second argues that by concentrating on specialist work the generalist nature of the CAB upon which it was founded is disappearing.
Only clients who have specialist problems will come to bureaux and all those with less than ‘two-hour’ problems will effectively be shut out.
Thirdly it is seen that a policy of specialism may demand either full-time paid advisers or volunteers with at least two days a week spare to allow for the level of training and continuity that specialist work demands.
All these opinions are recognised as having some value and cannot be ignored, even if specialism is to remain a permanent part of the CAB service.
To counter the first fear of specialisation, ‘disabling’ clients is certainly not the objective of casework, and advisers must resist the personal satisfaction that they may get from acting on behalf of a client when that client may well have been able to cope with assistance alone.
Training is directed towards encouraging advisers to recognise such clients and then help them to resolve their problems themselves with self-help material, which is produced in many areas.
Helping a client towards independence, however, is certainly not a short-term solution to shortening interviews.
On the contrary, such an educational approach is likely to lengthen interviews.
But there will always be clients whose English is poor, who are bewildered or have perhaps tried but failed, and who will still need specialist care.
It is clearly imperative that these clients and others with lesser problems can feel comfortable in a bureau.
Hence the need to explore any avenue that will provide a variety of services in order to allay the second fear about specialism — that the service will become labelled as one for the poor only.
The third fear about specialism — that it requires an almost full-time commitment — may be justified.
But the effect of engaging specialists reaches beyond their own caseloads.
The possibility that the generalist advice worker would become less valued through an increase in specialists has not been borne out in practice.
On the contrary, it can be seen that the standard of generalist work is  raised through the training, enthusiasm and knowledge of the specialists and so is a cost-effective method of raising standards within the CAB.
Paradoxically the paid specialist therefore adds support to the voluntary ethos of the CAB by enabling the volunteer to meet better the demands of advice work.
It remains to convince funders of this argument.
These points may be particularly relevant in any future plans to absorb parts of legal aid work into generalist advice centres, as was suggested in the Legal Aid Scrutiny Report by the Lord Chancellor's department in 1986.
Bureaux showed themselves to be particularly concerned that the CAB would be overwhelmed and lose its identity and NACAB produced a detailed response addressing these fears.
In balance NACAB concluded that if the Green Form proposals were to be implemented it would be the single biggest input of resources into the advice sector ever.
These proposals suggested that the change should be gradual, starting with welfare rights work, in which bureaux anyway have greater expertise than lawyers, then gradually proceeding to housing work and followed later by matrimonial work.
Concern was expressed at what the effect would be when attaching a means-tested service to a free one.
Any change, therefore, would have to be approached with caution and constant monitoring.
But overall, NACAB did not believe that the initial resources proposed for the task were sufficient and considerable negotiations would be necessary before the CAB would accept the task.
When the Problem Has No Solution
As was seen in Chapter 2, CAB volunteers expressly state that helping other people is an important part of the job satisfaction of an advice worker.
It is not surprising, therefore, that it is very stressful for CAB advice workers when they find that there are times when they are unable to help certain clients.
There are many reasons why this may be so, some of which are clearly beyond the adviser's immediate control.
In welfare benefit cases, the client simply may not qualify, even though the need is apparent.
The adviser's stress may be further compounded by the feeling that the regulations are unfair.
Ever-changing regulations cause stress both because of the need to become familiar with new rules and because of the sensitivity needed to cope with clients who may be worse off after the changes.
The major changes in the social security regulations in April 1988 were one major example of an unrelenting stream of legislative change, much of which affects  CAB clients detrimentally.
Legislative changes in benefit regulations of course cause difficulties at the Department of Social Security which is already unable to cope.
This has an immediate effect on the workload at the CAB where claimants often go when they cannot get satisfaction at the Department of Social Security.
Advisers constantly complain of lost files at the Department of Social Security, staff indifference and the difficulty of getting through on the telephone.
And so more than ever the ‘voluntary’ CAB finds itself carrying out what should be in effect a statutory task.
CAB advisers are accustomed to finding themselves in the position of mediators, and although they usually sit comfortably in this role, many dislike the role of mediator between client, Department of Social Security and charity foundations that has been thrust upon them.
This can occur in cases of severe poverty, where there is inadequate allocation for the statutory social fund after the abolition of special payments.
It would appear to be a relatively recent phenomenon in the CAB that so many client problems seem insoluble.
It must always have been the case that some problems are inherently insoluble, but perhaps it is the stress on all social services that turns the CAB into the last port of call when all others have failed.
Waiting lists for marriage guidance can be many months long so the client comes to the CAB instead; independent debt counsellors are rare outside the CAB; unemployment causes stress that is not within the remit of the Job Centre, so the client comes to the CAB; few of these problems have easy or immediate solutions.
CAB advice workers, used to seeking a practical solution to clients' problems, now find that they have a new role.
If they cannot help the client materially once they have checked the benefit entitlement, they must help the client come to terms with their situation.
This new task is recognised by special training courses on problem management — a carefully chosen course title that distinguishes it from ‘problem solving’.
Chapter 6 describes these courses in greater detail.
Advisers are therefore more often finding themselves in the position of having to tell the client that they cannot help in any material way.
This causes further tension if disgruntled clients vent their anger on the advice worker.
Bureau safety procedures, in the event of a violent client, cannot be neglected.
Many workers who desperately want to help find this situation hard to cope with.
The genuine desire to help those with real needs can make the advice worker angry if a client appears to wish to take advantage of the system or only to insist on their rights and not to face their  responsibilities.
Confidentiality for the client has always been of paramount importance within the CAB and is accepted by all workers as an essential part of their work.
In the main it causes few problems, but in recent years there has been a rise in cases that cause conflict for the advice worker.
A typical case will amply illustrate the tension aroused in the advice worker in such a situation.
A mother, for example, comes into the bureau to talk about her marital problems.
In passing she mentions that she has sometimes in despair hit her children.
The worker, at the time, is not able to interrupt the woman to help her with that problem but after she leaves the bureau the adviser feels extremely worried about it.
He knows that ringing the social worker or the NSPCC would be a breach of confidentiality.
Writing to the client would be out of the question too, because of her marital problems, even if her address were available.
The adviser can only hope that if the client was put at her ease while at the bureau then she may come back for further help when that issue could be picked up for suitable referral.
Advisers, who after consultation with colleagues still find themselves troubled, are able to consult with NACAB area or central office.
There has been a recent increase in requests for such support with cases where the need for confidentiality may conflict with legal responsibilities or with the adviser's desire to protect a weaker third party.
Organising Support
The list of pressures experienced by the adviser grows.
The responsibility involved in giving the correct advice and information is taken very seriously.
The CAB worker is expected by the service and by the client to be an expert in many many areas: in benefits and in housing with minimal specialist training; in recognising a legal problem without legal training; in consumer rights, employment rights, children's rights and much more.
In theory this sounds quite unrealistic but the worker is reassured that none of these topics need be committed to memory.
On the contrary, standards require that the information system is consulted at all times, not only because it is impossible to memorise everything but also because it is likely that facts have changed since they were last consulted.
Recent trainees in particular will need considerable help in locating and interpreting information for clients and advisers will feel uncomfortable if they constantly need to consult with colleagues.
Requests for assistance or consultation lead to a fairly  high level of interruption and noise in the office, which may slow down other work and even make holding a telephone conversation difficult.
Separate offices for quiet work are a rare commodity.
Richmond bureau has overcome the conflict between the need for support and the interruptions that this entails by formally assigning an experienced advice worker the task of support during the hours that the bureau is open to the public.
The inexperienced advice worker thus need no longer feel a burden on colleagues, as the need for support has formally been recognised.
Richmond bureau was prompted into this action when it felt that it was losing advice workers because of the tensions involved in the work and because insufficient support was given to alleviate it.
The support worker has to create a delicate balance between giving advisers the ‘answer’ for a client and directing them to the relevant part of the information system.
In this way the support worker has a role in training as well as practical help.
Although the support worker may be able to engage in other office-based tasks at the same time, this method of support is clearly available only in those bureaux where there is a worker available to fill it.
So far it has been seen that a manager may help the advisers cope with pressure by encouraging social policy work in order to remove persistent client problems; by training directed at problem management or interview management or by assigning a support role to a member of the team.
Another way of easing tension is the Joint Progress Review (JPR).
This is the process by which the manager sets aside perhaps an hour per year to talk privately to each adviser, to look back over the year and forward to the next and discuss any concerns that the manager and adviser may have.
This may be known to some as ‘appraisal’ or ‘evaluation’but such titles are inappropriate if the process is meant to enable advisers to express freely whatever is on their mind, as the idea that advisers are in some way being assessed during the meeting could inhibit them from airing problems.
In order to enable the JPR to result in action and development, and for it to be used as a basis for discussion the following year, the interview is often summarised and stored in the worker's personal records.
In some bureaux, the workers themselves have the task of writing up the JPR which must be signed as accurate by the worker and the bureau manager.
An honest ‘airing’ may entail managers putting themselves on the line for criticism as it is clear that the inefficiency of a manager can in itself be a cause for tension in a bureau.
A growing number of bureaux have started to carry out JPRs and are very pleased with the results and the JPR will shortly become a compulsory membership requirement.
If it can be shown to be successful at  bureau level then there are certainly grounds for extending it throughout the democratic structure of the CAB.
‘If I were manager I would…’
Sixty West Midlands workers were asked in what way they found their managers lacking, and to make any suggestions for improvements.
West Midlands bureaux managers may feel proud at the number of workers who reported that they were very satisfied and could think of no way in which they would do things better.
But for those managers who are reluctant to ask for opinions, and for advice workers who are reluctant to criticise openly, the results are summarised here.
Quite predictably many of the respondents' suggestions — even very basic ones — would require considerable funds to implement.
Many advisers were desperate for more space: the bureau general office being too crowded with administrative workers who should have their own area; they wanted easy access to the information system without too much clutter; some suggested that the telephone adviser should be in a separate area and a separate receptionist area be allocated, and a coffee machine be available for clients.
Respondents wanted the office to be kept tidy and records well organised, and no-smoking areas allocated.
More funds were required generally for longer opening hours; more paid staff was wanted as was more training.
In general the West Midlands advisers who responded to the survey did not blame managers for the lack of funds, but nor did they appear optimistic that more money would materialise.
The next group of suggestions was less dependent on extra funds.
Some felt that a recruitment campaign for volunteers was overdue.
Many workers were concerned that those recruited should be representative of the community and include more men and people from ethnic minorities, particularly those with language skills.
But the feeling was expressed that recruits who prove unsuitable should not be retained.
An influx of volunteers, it was felt, may give managers an opportunity to take advantage of workers' particular skills and interests.
More volunteers would also allow the workers simple pleasures like a lunch break without feeling guilty.
Workers indicated that they would like to be able to take their holidays without being obliged to find a replacement and so have to do double duty before or after their holiday.
More volunteers might make way for evening opening, Saturday morning opening, outreach work or specialist work, but some of the West Midlands workers expressed a fear of working unsupervised.
Outreach work was described as particularly lonely.
Some of the advice workers surveyed were concerned that they should work as a team.
They craved support from the manager and encouragement for new workers in particular.
They liked praise and appreciation.
But more specifically the suggestion was made by one respondent that ten minutes in the day be set aside when the bureau is closed, to discuss problems and tie up ends.
During this time the manager could also keep the day's team informed of bureau, area and central NACAB matters.
So essential did this communication seem to the West Midlands survey respondents, that the repetition that it would inevitably entail for the manager, as different volunteers come in each day, still seemed worth the effort.
This scheduled time could also be used by the manager to listen to the team's feedback.
The question of work discipline was often raised by the respondents but they supplied no easy answers.
Workers wanted managers to be strict, but fair and helpful.
Written guidelines were wanted for all tasks so that there are no recriminations when things go wrong.
Some respondents felt that it was important that the manager had high expectations for punctuality and discipline so that resentment does not build up within the team.
On the other hand, some expressed the very destructive attitude (discussed earlier in the chapter) that expectations should not be too great, as they were after all ‘only volunteers’.
Respondents understood very clearly the difficult role of the manager, and some workers openly confessed that nothing would induce them to take on the manager's job!
With the following description of the demands of the job, supplied by one of the respondents, that is no surprise:
Running an organisation that depends so much on voluntary workers to keep going requires extra skills to those of a manager in a commercial organisation.
She has to make workers feel welcome and valued — but mustn't tolerate carelessness or inefficiency.
She has to train and instruct people of varied ability without making anyone feel stupid or incapable.
She has to get through a lot of work but always accept interruptions.
Further suggestions by some of the respondents related to the division of tasks.
The traditional division, whereby the advice worker advises clients and the manager does everything else, was not always thought to be efficient or fair.
Experienced volunteers thought that they should help with in-bureau tutoring; among the few who knew what social policy work was, there were some who wanted to take more part in it and others who wanted more time to  read in order to keep up to date.
This last group of suggestions is timely, and prompts an examination of trends towards a wider interpretation of the role of the advice worker within the bureau structure.
Redistributing Tasks
It is clear from previous discussion that voluntary CAB workers in particular come into the organisation with the preconceived idea that interviewing clients will be their task.
In fact it is likely that they have chosen to work in the CAB because this is what they want to do.
Nevertheless there are signs of some rethinking of alternative job descriptions for the volunteer.
There are several reasons for rethinking task definitions.
In many bureaux where the advice workers carry out client interviewing only, the manager is left with direct responsibility for all other bureau tasks.
The list merits repeating to emphasise the number of non-interviewing tasks involved in managing a CAB.
These include training, support, supervision, following up casework, social policy work, publicity, bureau development and community contact as well as budgeting, funding and liaising with the management committee, NACAB area and central office, and of course general management.
The manager may be unable to carry out all these other bureau tasks alone.
Communication may break down because the task of the manager and the volunteer is diverging, so that the manager's activities seem distant to the volunteer.
Volunteers can help clients more effectively if they are allocated time for tasks other than direct interviewing.
A considerable public relations exercise, both inside and outside the CAB, may be necessary to achieve any change from the traditional interviewing role to a broader concept of voluntary work in the CAB.
The idea of a collective bureau, where the manager's tasks and responsibility are shared among all the workers, was tested out, mainly in London, but is now a rare phenomenon.
Problems of collective management are such that there are now only four such CABx remaining, all in the London area.
It is a style that is unlikely to appeal to many people, and is not even encouraged by NACAB or GLCABS.
Nevertheless, there are aspects of the running of collective bureaux that are very relevant to those bureaux who wish to make some alterations to the strict division of tasks.
A description of Charing Cross bureau will clarify these.
The bureau runs on a small staff of two full-time workers, four part-time advice workers, one part-time administrative worker and four part-time volunteers.
The result of such a small staff is that the  bureau is open to the public for only 16 hours a week.
There could be no better way of demonstrating the variety of tasks that normally falls on the shoulders of a manager than to reproduce in full in Figure 4.1 the ‘Allocation of Jobs’ list that the collective bureau at Charing Cross uses.
These are mainly administrative tasks, but their rotation will insure that every worker becomes familiar with every aspect of bureau, are a and central NACAB activity.
A deputy is allocated to about half of these tasks and after six months a reallocation of tasks may be requested in accordance with skills, interests and time available.
In addition, tasks are prioritised so that a worker can know how to cope with competing demands, Interviewing still tops the list, but other activities that are high on the list may surprise more traditional bureaux.
The half day per month allocated to every worker for reading is second only to interviewing.
This is followed by telephone advice work, and attending management committee meetings and management working groups.
Each adviser's job description includes interviewing and social policy.
The Charing Cross bureau records its enquiry statistics on computer so that information on recurring problems can be extracted without difficulty.
Staff meetings take place once a week for one to two hours and rotate between Tuesdays and Thursdays to ensure maximum attendance by part-time staff.
Staff must attend one in every three meetings and they are asked to acquaint themselves with what took place if they were absent.
The job of chairing the meeting rotates, but the agenda includes a fixed list of topics.
‘Action’ is high on the agenda as a mechanism for ensuring that tasks do not fall between members of the collective.
Special tasks allocated at the previous meeting are read out to check that they have been completed.
Problems arising from interviews are discussed and the task of case checking allocated for the following week.
Social policy has a regular spot on the agenda.
Current broader issues are examined and it is decided whether any action or research needs to be carried out.
Such a detailed description of the Charing Cross collective bureau is not intended to imply recommendation of a collective structure or that it is without problems.
In particular, it would be difficult for the structure to function with a large staff.
Nevertheless there are aspects of the collective structure that other bureaux are experimenting with.
Bow bureau, for example, was without a manager for some time and the staff temporarily took collective responsibility for all tasks.
Now they say that even when they get a new manager, they could not return to the traditional pattern of advice workers advising and the manager doing the rest.
In 1986 Camden bureau restructured its job definitions.
It concluded that staff time should be occupied as follows:
Advisers:
70 per cent work with individual clients
12 per cent social policy work
18 per cent educative work, liaison with other agencies, bureau tasks
Managers:
25 per cent work with individual clients
25 per cent social policy
50 per cent management
The transition had to be accompanied by a reduction in public opening hours to allow workers time for the additional tasks.
The CAB at North Shields must have a unique structure.
There are four paid staff and no volunteers.
Although they are committed to individual advice work, they consider such work to be limited in its effectiveness.
Even more pointedly, they argue that dealing with one client may increase the burden on others in equal need.
For example, helping one client obtain a council tenancy may be achieved at the expense of others on the list.
The staff feel that, as specialists, the information to which they have access should be shared for the collective good of the community.
Consequently the bureau is open for half the working week for individual problems and the other half is spent on a combination of community and social policy work.
In addition the premises and equipment are available for use by local community groups.
The bureau has been involved in several local residents' campaigns for improved amenities and has also produced a report on racism in North Tyneside, aimed at persuading the local authority to look at its range of services within the borough.
As a result of workshops at a Westminster conference (described in Chapter 2), wide-ranging recommendations for bureau development were put together for further assessment and implementation.
They covered six areas: advice giving, social policy, management committees, volunteers, fundraising and new technology.
Some of the proposals in each of these areas are outlined here.
In the area of advice giving, bureaux might be encouraged to move towards three-day opening to the public.
A fourth day would be used for outreach work, to include training other organisations, home visits and issue-based talks to other groups; and a fifth day would concentrate on pro-active rather than reactive social policy work (see Chapter 8 for an expansion of these concepts).
Proposals for social policy work included better in-bureau training  for this work, recognition that social policy is sufficiently important to warrant reducing opening hours and the recruitment of volunteers to work specifically and exclusively on social policy work.
The conference wished to clarify the role of management committees and review the suitability of the name of the committee.
They wanted induction and training for all management committee members and for the management committee to take a lead in fund raising.
Recommendations concerning volunteers included formal support by named staff and the targeting of recruitment to ensure that volunteers represent the whole community.
They recommended that volunteers receive subsistence payments for child minding and other special needs.
They wanted volunteers to have placements in other bureaux.
The conference recommended the setting up of a fundraising committee.
It was also recommended that computers infiltrate bureau work more extensively, with a computer officer appointed in each bureau and the sharing of experience and initiatives.
Computers were wanted in social policy work, for client profiles and to make the local information system borough-wide.
The implementation and monitoring of these recommendations will no doubt be watched with interest by other NACAB areas.
Highlighting these few bureaux may give the misleading impression that they are out of line with the mainstream.
Clearly they all function with the agreement of their management committees and funders, and within NACAB membership conditions, In fact NACAB has democratically voted its support for a broadening of roles, by reiterating in the new membership regulations the responsibility of the management committee for ensuring that bureau workers are trained in social policy work, and that they see it as a natural complement to bureau work when dealing with individual clients.
This chapter has concentrated on the challenges of bureau work.
An orientation towards the pressures in the CAB today makes the reiteration of the opening words important: that problems must not be allowed to overshadow the fact that 15,000 people in the UK are experiencing satisfaction, involvement and a sense of achievement within their communities through their work in a Citizens Advice Bureau.
And the vitality of the debate and the search for solutions are a healthy reflection of the social awareness that CAB work instils.
The Information System
The information system is the major link between adviser and client, without which a bureau could not and would not be allowed to continue to serve the public.
Certainly, few would deny Lovelock's accolade that the information service is the ‘lifeblood of the CAB service’.
In his Review of the National association of the Citizens advice Bureaux in 1984 it was noted that ‘for the most part we heard nothing but praise for the comprehensiveness, accuracy and clarity of exposition of the monthly update’ of the information system.
The Information Production Group (IPG) in the central NACAB offices in London is responsible for supplying and updating the complex information that advice workers in the 1,000 bureaux need to advise and inform bureaux clients.
The IPG constantly strives to improve the information service that it offers to bureaux, and bureaux silence on issues surrounding information would seem to indicate satisfaction.
It could equally indicate, however, that the system is taken for granted, as a right of membership of the CAB.
Unlike training, which has a NACAB staff presence in all area offices, the IPG serves from a distance and so its internal processes are not so widely known.
This chapter details these processes as well as the IPG's objectives, decisions and constraints and shows that although the activity takes place in London, bureaux needs are at the forefront of decision-making for the information system.
The IPG's task of informing every bureau of the social security changes in 1988 demonstrated many of its key issues and is therefore used here as a case study.
An Overview of the Information System
The Information Production Group forms part of the bureaux services division at the central NACAB office, together with information despatch and training.
Its primary objective is to ensure that bureaux and other independent advice agencies are able to give effective and easily accessible advice to their clients by providing a background of up-to-date, accurate and easily accessible information on all matters relating to rights, responsibilities, benefits and services.
The information system comprises nearly 1,000 items on approximately 20,000 pages.
This includes information items written by the information group which occupy some 60 A4 ring binders (see Figure 5.1 for a sample page), leaflets from government departments and other organisations, and reference books from agencies such as the Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG).
The information system is classified according to 14 problem categories (Figure 5.2, excluding categories 7.4 and 15) and these correspond directly to the enquiry statistics described in Chapter 2 (Figure 2.1).
It has a comprehensive index (Figure 5.3) which is reissued four times a year and in the intervening months index supplements are issued.
Also, supplied with the information system are guides to collating local information and to reordering waiting-room leaflets.
The information system is updated by a monthly pack which is sent to all bureaux.
The pack includes the ‘Action List’, a set of detailed instructions on how to update bureaux information files (Figure 5.4), new and reissued information items and leaflets, and a booklist reviewing publications of interest to advice workers.
It also includes the ‘Noticeboard’ sheets (Figure 5.5) which are intended to be pinned to bureaux noticeboards in order to alert workers to items of topical interest and impending changes.
The process of producing information for the bureaux involves the monitoring of legislative and other changes through newspapers, journals, Hansard, HMSO daily lists and other sources.
The IPG has its own very much more extensive information system and library in order to organise this material.
The IPG currently consists of two part-time and eleven full-time information officers, two administrative assistants, and one part-time and three full-time clerical officers.
The planning of information production takes place at monthly meetings where priorities are determined according to the extent and nature of the impending changes and the date they will take place.
Bureaux are polled annually for suggestions for rewriting parts of the system and the IPG weights these and builds them into the plans.
Each information officer will have a mix of new writing and rewriting, both short items and long items, as well as special research projects to look at how the information system is used in bureaux.
Deadlines are precise and are largely met.
The information officers work in small teams, drafting and editing specific items, and items are then checked and tested for accuracy and accessibility by bureaux, government departments, specialists and outside agencies.
The IPG does not produce conventional reference material.
The   raw reference material is reorganised so that it is geared to the needs of advice workers and oriented to the problems that clients bring to advice agencies.
In addition to law, it includes current practice and tactical information in a problem-solving format using the clearest structure for the purpose, such as checklists and flowcharts (Figures 5.6 and 5,7).
Gobbledegook has no place in the CAB information system, as can be vividly seen by comparing Department of Social Security regulations with their equivalent in the NACAB information system in Figure 5.8.
The IPG staff is also responsible, on a rota basis, for running an information consultancy service for advice workers, through a freephone telephone line or by letter.
The service may be asked, for example, to provide the exact wording of a piece of legislation to support a tribunal hearing, to clarify confusing items or to point to where in the information system an item may be found.
1988 Social Security Changes — the Information Task
The 1988 changes to social security regulations have been considered by some to constitute the biggest overhaul in welfare benefits since their introduction by Beveridge in 1948.
Three benefits have been replaced by an entirely new set of conditions and considerations: supplementary benefit has been replaced by income support; family income supplement by family credit; and single payment by the social fund.
Three benefits have been substantially changed — housing benefit, pensions and widows' benefits.
All these sections required rewriting, reclassifying and indexing as well as updating any cross-references to the old benefits throughout the information system.
Some attempt had to be made to build new links with the existing problem-based material even before the full implications for clients were known.
The IPG also had to provide information to help bureaux cope with the transitional payments periods and appeals already in progress based on the previous regulations.
Coordination with the information sections in Scotland and Northern Ireland was also necessary.
New calculation sheets for each benefit (and two for housing benefit) had to be devised, tested and coordinated with the training section.
Leaflets and reference books from HMSO and other organisations had to be assessed.
Cooperation with other sections within NACAB offices was an essential part of the task.
The training section has already been mentioned.
The information retrieval section needed to check facts with the IPG about the position of claimants so that it could    feed into the debates about take-up campaigns and potential losers.
It also needed to collect the cases which had been referred to the consultancy service.
The IPG identified additional work to be done before the changeover: claimants may still have been entitled to special payments before they were abolished or entitled to benefits that they were not claiming that would affect the amount of transitional payments they would receive on transfer to the new system.
The IPG assisted the press and publicity group in preparing material to encourage these take-up campaigns.
These essential contacts with other departments meant insufficient time for equally important but less clearly defined contacts with the research and development group.
Since the IPG approaches its information items in the widest possible context, liaison with researchers helps its writers pick up the concerns of other agencies and enables them to   include other sources of information and views.
Nevertheless liaison did take place with CAB specialist welfare rights units.
All through this period the parliamentary liaison officer supplied papers and amendments from the committee stages of the Social Security Bill and took back to parliament from the IPG problem areas suitable for Parliamentary questions and issues for MPs to follow up in other ways.
1988 Social Security Changes — Information Decisions
Planning within the IPG for the social security changes started in autumn 1986 but normal procedures operated until March 1987.
Usually only two or three information officers are involved in development work but because of the enormity of this task, different groupings had to be considered.
As the IPG has a commitment to maintain a comprehensive information system at all times for bureaux, it was decided that work on other sections of the files should continue alongside the social security work so as not to  let the changes dominate the work of the group.
Therefore two approaches were proposed: either a few information officers could be involved in this new work, with the others continuing with previously planned work, or all information officers could be involved in both types of work.
The first option was rejected, as in the past it has isolated the small group from the department.
In the event, the task was so large that a small group would not have been able to cope with it alone.
There were, however, problems in coordinating the work of a large group and certain administrative and communication tasks became very difficult.
In line with their decision not to neglect the information system as a whole, between May 1987 and March 1988, about 80 new information items were written, among which were items on self-employment, unemployment benefit, package holidays and shoplifting.
The 1988 budget occurred during that period and proposed legislation such as the Housing Bill, poll tax, Education Bill, Consumer Protection Act, Financial Services Act, Legal Aid Bill, Immigration Bill and Criminal Justice Bill had to be monitored.
Reference books form an important part of every bureau's information system, and in preparation for the social security changes these had to be reassessed.
Requests by bureaux for the supply of CPAG's Supplementary Benefit and Family Income Supplement by John Mesher had been increasing and so the IPG decided to use this opportunity to survey which reference books the bureaux used in practice as social security reference books.
The survey was carried out in summer 1987.
On the basis of a large response the Bureaux Services Committee decided to substitute Mesher for the ‘Yellow Book’ which had previously been supplied on supplementary benefit and family income supplement.
Normally, after due consultation, the IPG decides which reference books should form part of the information system in bureaux.
The social security project was further complicated because of negotiations with the DHSS about which books they were going to provide.
In addition to the £50,000 that the DHSS contributed towards training and information for the changes, it also agreed to supply a copy of relevant HMSO publications to every bureaux.
Frustratingly, however, the IPG was unable to view these publications in advance and so it had little idea as to how useful they would be.
In addition the DHSS would not agree to supply updates free of charge, so after much discussion three DHSS manuals were chosen but none of them was to be updated.
The risk that bureaux may therefore, in due course, be in possession of out-of-date manuals was hard for the IPG to accept.
Nevertheless, receiving these manuals would give bureaux a chance to assess  outside publications, to evaluate their use and to decide whether to subscribe to the updates independently.
Deciding which manuals to supply was just the first of a chain or decisions.
Storage space had to be found for this unusually large collection of books which arrived in batches over a period of weeks.
The bureaux were impatient to receive them but the administrative task of splitting the despatch into several stages would have been enormous and costly.
The despatch was already complicated enough: some bureaux hold more than one information system so they are entitled to extra copies of certain reference books.
However, the three DHSS manuals were not to be a permanent part of the system so only one copy of each was to be supplied per bureau.
Considerable cross referencing is normally done between the information written in-house, DHSS leaflets and CPAG handbooks.
But none of this was ready by the time the information system had to be despatched, so leaving a considerable residual task for further updating and despatch.
Clearly the classification of the social security section (known internally as the ‘9's’ section as in (Figure 5.2) would need considerable rethinking.
In the summer of 1987 two options were considered.
One was to add a new social fund sequence at the end of the existing structure and to slot housing benefit, income support, supplementary benefit and family credit into the positions of the existing housing benefit, supplementary benefit and family income supplement respectively.
The other option was to restructure the whole of the ‘9's’ section to fit in the new benefits.
The IPG decided to reclassify the whole section as It was felt that the existing structure would no longer be helpful.
As so much change was, in any event, necessary this would be an ideal opportunity to reclassify, while involving the minimum of additional work for the bureaux.
The normal close communication between those in the IPG involved in writing, classification and indexing, was difficult to maintain whilst carrying out this task, which had much larger dimensions than usual.
Indexing of the whole package was carried out as usual, with the classification group meeting the writers to discuss each item in turn to ensure consistency of language, and to locate mistakes and contradictions.
In all 1,995 index changes could be counted when these were transmitted by computer to Scotland.
The average number of index changes for any one month was previously 210.
Fortunately the computerisation of the index, which took place in 1985, considerably simplified the reindexing process.
The importance of a complete index was demonstrated to be so important to bureaux workers that plans to cut the reissue of the index from four times a  year to three were shortlived.
1988 Social Security Changes — Obstacles for the IPG
One of the most difficult aspects of producing material to deal with the Social Security Act was the timing of its production and despatch in advance of the Act coming into force in April 1988, and the constraints which made purposeful timing difficult.
To begin with, the first draft regulations were not received until July 1987 instead of March 1987 as had been first intimated by the DHSS.
Final regulations were only received in early December, and regulations for calculating transitional support were not received until mid-December.
Meanwhile, the DHSS started sending clients notices of assessment for income support in November.
These notices brought clients into local CABx while advisers found themselves unprepared for their enquiries.
In addition, publicity was making benefit claimants aware of the impending changes and advising them to go to their CAB.
In order to equip advisers for this stage, short-term items on ‘Advising clients now’ and ‘Pension choice’were produced.
Nevertheless, there was considerable anxiety among advisers that they would not be adequately prepared for the changeover.
Budgetary constraints were ever present for the IPG group.
Typing and printing were most affected.
Approximately 1,250 pages of new information were produced by 3.5 typists, and this involved a lot of unpaid overtime as it was supported with a mere extra £1,000 for limited additional typing help.
Three million pages of information were printed and there was no budget allocation for using outside printers.
Negotiations about time allocations and printing materials therefore started with the central NACAB print room in November 1987.
Writers had to forecast the number of pages for printing before they were written, and sometimes before the legislation had been finalised.
In a normal month the print room at central NACAB offices deals with only one monthly update but in order to spread the printing load, several months' updates were in progress and each had to be isolated and stored.
New administrative systems were needed to avoid confusion.
The need for coordination with the training section at NACAB central and area offices put additional time constraints on the production of material.
The draft information items were planned for September 1987 to enable training packs to be despatched to training officers in January.
These three months were needed to draft the training pack so that it coordinated with the structure of the information drafts.
It then had to be tested by training officers  and checked by the IPG.
The training packs were finally despatched in December and because they were based on information that had not yet been circulated, they served an information as well as training need.
The need for speed meant that the training packs were based on information drafts that had not yet been passed by Parliament, let alone checked, so inevitably errors crept in.
Checking the factual accuracy of the new social security information items proved to be a greater obstacle than usual.
The DHSS which normally checks IPG items, as well as items from other agencies, chose this period to change its own practices.
Previously the IPG could approach any civil servant with relevant experience to check a draft item and have direct contact with that person to clarify additional comments.
In spring 1987 the information division of the DHSS decided to make checking procedures more systematic, which meant that the checker was not selected by the IPG at NACAB central office and was not directly accessible to it.
This was particularly frustrating in view of time constraints, and the appearance of late regulation amendments which the IPG wanted to incorporate quickly and accurately.
1988 social Security Changes — Issues for Bureaux
It has already been stressed that the NACAB information system is very much more than a reference work.
It tries to include guidelines for good practice between adviser and client as well as accurate information.
The introduction of the social fund raised issues for bureaux that the IPG was asked to clarify in the information items, thus demonstrating the breadth of understanding that the information writers are expected to have of problems in the field.
The new social fund was introduced to replace single payments.
The social fund was significant for three main reasons: it replaced individual rights based on regulations with discretion which was to be applied by social fund officers; the budget for social fund payments was to be cash-limited; and most payments would be in the form of loans rather than grants.
Some managers began to express concern at the difficult position advisers would be in when working with the new social fund.
They therefore wanted information items to spell out for the workers what would and would not be appropriate action to take.
Issues of concern were: how far should workers get involved in discussions with social fund officers about individual cases; how actively should workers support individual applications in view of the fact that there is a limited budget and therefore a limit to the number of people who could be  helped; and should bureaux help social fund officers to set priorities between groups of claimants?
In short, information items needed to set out what the relationship between bureaux and social fund officers should be with regard to giving money advice to clients.
The IPG was concerned to receive an early policy decision.
Waiting to see how the social fund would be administered in practice would leave advisers unsure and the issue should ideally have been included in any training on the new social security regulations.
Eventually, alternative ways of relating to the social fund were put forward and Council agreed on a policy of ‘impartial advocacy’.
This approach would reserve judgement on the rights and wrongs of the social fund but would, as far as possible, adopt a positive approach to what is essentially a discretionary fund, by advocating the payment of grants wherever they were not specifically excluded by the guidelines.
This policy was included in the mid-March information pack.
The Information System in the Bureaux
The NACAB information system is the ‘lifeblood of the CAB Service’ because it is so essential to every individual bureau.
A visitor observing the activity inside a Citizens Advice Bureau may well be surprised at the amount of physical movement within the office when advice giving would normally be considered a sedentary job.
The focal point of this activity is the information system.
Advisers interview clients in interviewing rooms but must leave the client in order to check information in the files.
They are trained always to check the information files and not to trust to memory.
The initial reaction of an efficiency expert may be to suggest that each adviser has the information system in their interviewing room in order to save time and energy.
However, in most cases this would be neither practical, economical nor psychologically sound.
It would not be practical because the paper information system takes up a vast amount of space, something which is sorely at a premium in many bureaux premises.
It is in three parts and the main physical bulk takes up at least three metres of shelf space, in addition to which there may be one metre of reference books and some local information on file or cards.
Duplication would therefore be physically impractical.
Neither would duplication be economical.
Even assuming that the bureau could bear the additional nominal £150 that NACAB charges each year for keeping the system up to date, the heaviest cost would be the time of the person who must insert the monthly updates.
An average of 90 items need updating each month.
Occasionally this means swapping a new page for an old one, but more often the task entails cutting and pasting, and replacing new figures for old, updating the index and marking the reference books.
This takes between six and eight hours per month in each bureau.
Each additional copy would therefore be a heavy burden.
Paradoxically, although the task of updating the information system each month may be considered a chore, many managers insist on doing this task themselves.
They regard it as an ideal way to familiarise themselves with the latest legislative and other changes and are sometimes reluctant to delegate the task or to see it rendered unnecessary, as is the case with the microfilm system described below.
Of course they could read the monthly pack anyway but they do not see this as the same as actually having to insert each change in its correct place.
Until recently, it was regarded as vitally important that every worker should read the monthly updates and a spare copy was sent to each bureau.
This spare copy has now been stopped following recent budgetary cuts at NACAB central and area offices, but its importance has been reaffirmed by advice workers themselves in that the vast majority of bureaux choose to buy a spare copy from NACAB using bureaux budgets.
It is common practice for workers to take the spare pack home to peruse — the bureau that assigns time to a worker specifically for reading is rare (see Chapter 4).
The most important reason, however, for not placing the information system in each interviewing room concerns support for the adviser.
Advice workers need the chance to consult with colleagues at the same time as they consult the information files.
This can be done quite casually if the information system is in the general office where the manager, deputy or other workers may also be consulting the system, writing case reports or telephoning.
This is especially important for inexperienced workers and is an important aspect of informal supervision and team support.
In Chapter 4 more formal arrangements for support were described, but in most bureaux the natural discussion that takes place as advisers focus on the information system serves as the only team support.
This mechanism serves equally as an informal check on the interpretation and use of the information system to ensure accurate advice giving.
All advice workers have their own personal style.
The same is true of their attitude towards the information system and its availability to the client.
Some advice workers will carry the relevant volume back to the interview room to read with the client, as they are encouraged to do.
Others will keep it out of sight.
Training stresses that the advice process should be open; all  telephone calls should be made in front of the client and letters shown to them.
Clearly, however, there is some ambivalence within the service over the availability of the information system to outsiders.
For example, training emphasises that it is essential to ‘help the clients help themselves’.
The ultimate self-help information service, whereby the information system is available in the waiting room, is regarded by some as unworkable and by others as a highly desirable step forward.
It is certainly true that many CAB clients would be unable to cope with it but many others, currently excluded from the bureau by long queues, would welcome it.
Allowing direct access for clients to the information system, without the support of an adviser, arouses in some advice workers the fear that the CAB could become an impersonal information centre, when the importance of providing a personal, listening service as well as information, has been so clearly recognised.
A further point is whether the information system in its current style is suited to client use.
The IPG states clearly that it is designed for advice workers, but many instances have proved that clients have used it successfully when left to browse by hard-pressed advisers — an indication of its clarity of exposition and potential as a tool for those members of the public who feel they can cope without personal assistance and someone to listen.
The Microfilm Information System
Royston CAB has come some way towards solving the shelf space problem and the updating costs of holding more than one information system in a bureau.
In 1984 development started in Royston on a replication of the complete NACAB information system onto microfilm.
This consists of a compact portable reader, a wallet of microfiches and the paper version of the index.
There are about 300 fiches which include the NACAB information system as well as six of the 15 reference books that are normally part of the bureau system.
Such a system can sit comfortably on the table in an interview room.
In addition, the monthly updates to the microfilm system need no scissors and paste.
The new fiches simply replace the old ones.
The updating task can be completed in about 15 minutes.
The microfilm system was conceived by Royston as a tool for improving rural information services.
Space in rural bureaux is often short, hours are often limited and the portability of the microfilm system has many advantages when the information system cannot be permanently stored.
In January 1988 about 100 CAB users of the microfilm system  were surveyed.
Three quarters of the respondents were using their system up to twice a week.
Any one system may be used for several different purposes but the most common use was for outreach work.
The system is being used in community centres, libraries, prisons, hospitals, home visits, mobile advice units and even on radio phone-ins.
From the survey, it would seem that many bureaux which own the microfilm system find many uses for it within the bureau when it has not been taken out for an outreach advice session; it is used for training purposes in order to demonstrate access to and use of information in CAB advice work and it is also used for giving talks to outside groups.
It is used in bureaux for reference purposes and for checking case records and may be positioned by the telephone and used for telephone advice, because some consider it inappropriate to leave a caller while the adviser looks further afield for information.
The microfilm is also an invaluable tool for disabled workers who are unable to get to the central paper system or for an interview room that is situated far from the general bureau office.
The piloting of the microfilm project within the CAB, in 1986, was so successful that it was decided to market the product outside the CAB.
Publicity efforts increased in 1987 and about 30 systems were sold outside the CAB.
Each outside sale must have the agreement of the local NACAB area office to ensure that the purchaser will not harm any local CAB or bring the service into disrepute by poor use of the information.
BBC's ‘That's Life’ consumer television programme was the first outside customer, followed by Barclaycard mainly for consumer issues and Newcastle College of Arts and Technology for employment and benefit issues.
Although many potential customers may only require parts of the information system, a decision was made that only complete systems could be sold.
It is planned to target sales at other advice agencies, public libraries, personnel departments of large companies and publishers of newspapers and periodicals.
The success of the microfilm information system is self-evident from the order books.
By March 1988 there were about 160 subscribers in total and 1988/9 should show a self-supporting enterprise making a considerable contribution to CAB resources through its profits.
There is little doubt that the system is reaching a wider market than the originally intended rural one.
Yet despite the success, the microfilm system is far from replacing the traditional paper system.
There are 300 outside subscribers to the complete paper information system compared to 30 outside subscribers to microfilm systems.
A member bureau must have at least one paper version of NACAB's information system, with a  microfilm system only as an optional extra.
It would seem that compactness and design cannot prevail over human factors, so that the need for a visible, multi-access central system that also facilitates mutual support takes precedence.
In addition, the inability to have more than one ‘page’ open at the same time for cross-referencing is a definite limitation of the microfilm system for advice work.
Indeed, the centralised updating of the microfilm system is considered a mixed blessing by those who like to use the updating process to familiarise themselves with the monthly information changes.
The very portability and compactness of the microfilm system could offer new opportunities for the spread of the NACAB information system.
But there is clear ambivalence over its wider dissemination.
Even while discussing the sale of the cumbersome paper system outside the CAB the issue has always been disputed.
Now that the portability of the microfilm system makes it an attractive product, the unresolved controversy may resurface.
In today's economic climate it may not be feasible for bureaux to purchase extra experimental microfilm information systems but the ambivalence over the wider spread of the NACAB system is most evident in sales of the system to outside agencies.
Each outside order is considered by the local NACAB area and permission for the sale to proceed is not always given.
Some bureaux cooperate with their local libraries, encouraging the use of the information system and the joint collection and dissemination of local information, but others have been known to begrudge its use and to try to prevent sales, for example, to Community Programme advice centres in nearby locations.
The NACAB information system, whether paper or microfilm, can justly be considered the showpiece of the service and many wish to protect it.
The basic pack, however, which is a two-volume much-abridged version, is widely sold outside the CAB.
It is kept up to date in the same way as the full system and is held by many libraries and other advice agencies.
It was the forerunner of the microfilm information system, as it was also conceived for rural services, but its use is now far wider.
There are over 2,000 subscribers.
It is interesting to speculate whether the microfilm information system will come to replace it in the future.
Problem Classification
The CAB dealt with seven million enquiries in 1987.
In Chapter 2 the method of recording enquiries was discussed, as well as some of the guidelines for classifying them.
To recap: any aspect of a client's  problem that requires access to the information system is reported and included in the enquiry statistics.
The category numbers (see Figure 5.2) from those sections of the information system that are accessed to deal with the problem are then recorded in the case records.
All these references are collated each month and sent to NACAB central office via the area offices.
This system is popular, straightforward and is reasonably consistent over the country.
However, it does have disadvantages.
As has been mentioned, the dual aims of the CAB are, in short, to advise clients and to exercise a responsible influence on the development of social policy.
In monitoring the fulfilment of the first aim, the direction of social policy influence should become evident.
This will be facilitated if the method of reporting clients' needs in the bureaux corresponds with current social policy issues but the classification of the information system has not always enabled that natural transfer of information.
For example, a client may come to a bureau because he is concerned that the housing benefit to which he is entitled is taking a long time to materialise.
Another client may have a similar query concerning delay in receiving family credit.
The former query, until recently, would have been classified in the ‘Housing, property and land’ section while the latter would have been classified as a ‘Social security’enquiry.
This method is adequate as a system of nationally consistent statistical recording but as a feeder to influence social policy legislation from the experience of clients, the recording system has sometimes been inadequate.
The two enquiries above clearly have a common source — delays at the DHSS — but the bureaux recording system would not have highlighted that difficulty.
In an attempt to move to a slightly more problem-based system of enquiry recording the Scottish Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux (SACAB) developed the categorisation shown in Figure 5.9.
The indexing for their information system, however, remains largely the same as NACAB's, with the result that the use of the two systems in parallel, one for enquiry classification and the other for information access, may have solved one shortcoming and raised another.
There are also individual bureaux which develop extensions to the minimum national demands of enquiry classification.
It is often (but not exclusively) those bureaux who have well-developed computer expertise.
In the West Midlands there has been some attempt to classify the type of assistance given to each client into advice or support where support means that some action was taken by the advice worker.
This may range from telephoning, letter writing or tribunal representation on the client's behalf.
Tunbridge   Wells, without a computer as yet, records some estimate of the amount of time spent on each client problem, including interviewing and follow-up work.
They also record the area that the client comes from for the benefit of their funders.
The depth to which an enquiry is classified can also affect a bureau's ability to respond to local problems.
Several clients may come into a bureau complaining of damp council property.
Each client will be advised individually and each will be recorded as an enquiry concerning ‘problems during occupancy’ of a home.
It is quite conceivable, however, that if more specific recording took place, a picture might emerge that a particular housing estate is suffering from damp.
Rather than waiting for more individual tenants to bring the same problem, it would be more efficient for the bureau to alert the local authority concerned and to explore with interested clients the possibility of a tenants' association.
This way they can attempt to address the problems of the estate on a community basis rather than individually.
Discussion among advisers in a bureau might highlight community issues, but, as was shown in Chapter 4, there can be a lack of continuity among staff due to the part-time nature of voluntary work, so that clear local patterns may not emerge in that informal way.
A more formal comprehensive method of recording enquiries could enable local and country-wide issues to emerge accurately.
In the early 1980s NACAB set out to address this issue through a major Classification Research Project, first in collaboration with the British Library, and then with the Department of Trade and Industry.
It was intended that the research team would produce a new, easily expandable classification system for use by all community information and advice agencies.
The new classification was to focus on drawing together items in the CAB information system by client-situation, so that seemingly disparate things, such as holiday insurance and local animal-care centres, would be brought together as part of the information a client may need when going on holiday.
The earlier example of delays at the DHSS would have emerged under one classification too.
It was intended to provide a large number of alternative words and expressions for subjects, so that advice workers could look for information under terms which were familiar to them and still find the right information.
Access overall was meant to improve.
Unfortunately, in spite of an investment of time, effort and money, the final product did not reach the bureaux.
From the pilot testing, the new system performed well for statistical recording, but the retrieval of information was not considered an improvement on the previous system.
The new system would still have needed considerable  further development and it was felt necessary to terminate the project.
The two main reasons given for this were that it was too ambitious and it was too far removed from bureaux experience until too late in its development.
There is, needless to say, some bitterness and disappointment that no system emerged after considerable expenditure.
However the IPG did succeed in developing the information system along problem-based lines in the normal course of their development work.
This had in fact been an important focus since the early 1980s, even before the start of the classification research project, and the IPG's approach has been adopted for all new and rewritten items.
One example of many was the rewriting in 1986 of the ‘family and marriage’ section.
The new items adopt a structured problem-based approach to the many different marital difficulties that people face, and information on the cultural and religious framework, which may affect options open to ethnic minority clients, has been included for the first time.
Furthermore, the new consumer package offers a more ‘step-by-step’ style, to enable CAB workers who are not specialists, to handle a much larger range of consumer cases.
Information on housing benefit has now been removed to the social security files, as had been suggested, in accordance with frequent requests from bureaux.
A quieter but potentially important project is currently underway by Sir John Boreham who has been seconded from the government statistical office.
In spite of the fact that enquiry statistics appear consistent over time and in different areas, he has been unable to find consistency in definition and recording of enquiries when he visited bureaux.
He is looking, instead, for a classification system that will above all be simple and that will attempt to include the number of interviews that take place in a bureau, together with some classification of the clients' main and subsidiary problems as well as the type of advice or information given.
In addition he suggests a random sampling of enquiries for further in-depth analysis.
Information and Computerisation
Interestingly, the Classification Research Project did not specify the computerisation of the information system as one of its objectives.
The idea of a computerised, centrally based and centrally updated information system sent via telecommunications to all bureaux is only part of a golden jubilee wish-list.
With the rejection of a national jubilee fundraising appeal that project is no longer on the agenda, but computers are, nevertheless, used to  improve aspects of the information service.
For example, the index of the information system was computerised in 1986 and at the same time was expanded, and made to encompass extensive cross-referencing (see Figure 5.3).
This computerised index replaced a card index system that used to have to be updated by hand by bureaux staff.
In addition the IPG has recently assessed the benefits of desk-top publishing within the information system and as a result has purchased such a system.
Many bureaux are using software packages directly in some aspects of advice work, in place of the conventional information system.
Benefits calculation packages are especially popular with inexperienced advice workers to ensure that they have followed every avenue of enquiry.
But more experienced workers have found the use of packages slow, as the conventional system allows them to skip irrelevant parts more easily.
None the less, development of these systems is likely to continue.
Computers are also used in bureaux to collect and analyse enquiry statistics.
The bureaux can register enquiries in considerable detail in the knowledge that the computer will enable them to extract information under many headings.
The system is based on keeping detailed records of clients and their enquiries so that cumulative analysis can take place.
This might be according to whether the client is new to the bureau or not, whether the enquiry is new or a continuing problem, or according to a client's age, sex, origin, economic activity or area of residence.
Such data can be of positive use in detecting local trends and issues, as was seen in Chapter 2.
The success of the system is of course dependent on the commitment of the advice workers and clients.
Not all advisers feel comfortable asking clients for these personal details nor do they necessarily have the time to do it.
In addition, some clients feel threatened when approached for personal information.
Although still controversial, the collection of this information is in fact recommended practice, as it is essential to the complaints procedure to note a client's name and address, even when it is clear that the enquiry will not necessitate a return visit.
Clients will of course be assured that all details are given in confidence.
Perhaps as this becomes more accepted practice, and the benefits of computerised client data are demonstrated, more bureaux will be encouraged to use a computer to record client data for social policy work.
Figure 5.10 is an extraction from Richmond CAB's computerised enquiry system and it shows the potential power of such a client profile software package.
However, closer examination shows that the large number of clients classified as having ‘unknown, economic   activity lessens the impact of the information and emphasises the difficulty of extracting the relevant data from them.
If Richmond bureau, which is seriously committed to the use of computers for the purpose, can extract only partial data from clients, bureaux that are less convinced of its value are likely to obtain a very sparse picture of their clients using this method.
Whether it is clients or advice workers who are resistant, the stumbling block will need to be explored in order to further convincing social policy work.
The Future of the Information Service
Clearly it is not every year that the government introduces massive changes to social security legislation and the IPG would not expect an exercise of this size again for many years.
However, the normal work of the IPG does involve most of the procedures and considerations described above.
The decision-making, the deadlines, the intra-departmental and inter-departmental coordination, testing and checking, and constant contact with bureaux who are using the information system, are all necessary in their regular work.
Further impending changes in government legislation may make the pressure experienced during the social security changes seem almost normal.
For this reason there is a degree of worry about  recent budget cuts that have been imposed on the information section at NACAB central office.
Some fear that the information system is regarded as an easy target for cuts.
Yet, while such cuts are seen as preferable to the personal hardships of redundancy, less obvious cuts in the information system would also have personal repercussions — advice workers are entirely dependent on it for serving clients and would be unable to function as efficiently without it.
However, the decision by Council to make cuts in the information budget is not intended in any way to deny the importance of the information system to advice workers in the bureaux, Council sees that the system has reached a very high standard and that this is recognised throughout the entire advice sector.
In 1986 the National Consumer Council produced a discussion paper entitled ‘Good Advice for All’.
It was an attempt to set basic standards for advice services.
Many aspects of current advice and information provision nationally fall far short of the recommended standards.
However, the NACAB information system was singled out as a basic bench-mark for what should constitute an adequate information resource in a generalist advice agency.
What Council was trying to recognise in shifting resources from information to training was that, having achieved a good product, additional fine tuning of the information system no longer need be a priority.
Ensuring that advice workers know how to use this high quality tool became of primary importance.
The next chapter examines how training is expected to achieve this end.
Training
The Scope of CAB Training
There are 15,000 advice workers in the Citizens Advice Bureaux throughout England, Wales and Northern Ireland.
Of these, almost one quarter were new recruits in 1987.
In addition, there are 10,000 members of management committees.
The most easily recognisable training need is that of the new recruits.
In 1987 there were 3,500 new recruits, each of whom passed through a formal selection process.
These trainee advice workers must then attend a basic training course of approximately twelve full days.
In addition to this, trainees participate in many hours of training in the bureau, both supervised and via self-instruction packs.
Less obviously recognisable, but equally necessary, is the on-going training and retraining of serving advice workers.
All CAB advice workers must be kept up to date in information and skills.
Information changes in the wake of new legislation — for example, the major  overhaul of benefits in April 1988 necessitated a nationwide retraining campaign for all CAB workers.
The pace of legislative change in recent years has been relentless and advice workers need to be prepared for it in advance.
Skills must also be updated.
Interviewing as a technique has been studied and analysed and research suggests that technique can, in fact, be improved with training.
New social consciousness dictates a need among advice workers for self-awareness in their attitudes to clients, in particular towards black and ethnic minority clients, and how personal attitudes can and do affect the direction and achievements of advice giving.
Again, this means that 15,000 advice workers, both experienced and inexperienced, must undergo more training.
The managerial role of senior bureau workers is increasingly recognised.
Managers and deputy managers can now receive training in staff management, time management, planning and budgeting, in addition to the familiarisation training that they have always received.
Management committees are being asked to take more responsibility for the shaping of their bureaux by participating in  the planning and assessment processes.
This brings a further 10,000 people into the CAB training network.
Because training in the CAB must be ongoing and the ‘student body’ is scattered nationwide, a central training location would be impractical.
A two-tier system operates instead.
The 22 areas each employ at least one training officer who is mainly responsible for planning a training programme for the bureaux in the area and for training further trainers who will collaborate more closely with workers in their bureaux and help implement the plan.
Central NACAB office and the 22 area offices are responsible for this mammoth task, which until recently has accounted for one fifth of the NACAB budget.
In 1987 an even bigger slice of the budget was apportioned to training, in recognition of its importance.
Recruitment and Selection for Voluntary CAB Advice Work
Overcoming the negative stereotype of the CAB volunteer is considered by NACAB to be important.
Chapter 2 showed how harmful this image can be in unwittingly discouraging many people in distress from bringing their problems to the CAB.
It is the processes of recruitment and selection that have the potential to make the volunteer body more representative of the community it serves.
There is, of course, no harm in a volunteer approaching a friend to join the CAB.
But when this is the only method of recruitment used, or if the ‘friend’ is waved through without a formal impartial interview, then the standard of recruits cannot rise and the social catchment area of the volunteer base will not be broadened.
With the development of the NACAB policy of equal opportunities in recruitment there has been more awareness of this issue and considerable developments in recruitment practices have resulted.
While in the past recruitment may have been conducted almost exclusively through church newsletters, today the management committee may place a notice on the noticeboard of an ethnic minority community centre, in a Job Centre or in the public library.
Some bureaux have successfully recruited in large companies, attracting those who may be retiring early and who are looking to develop new stimulating interests.
Recruitment is now therefore a step removed from the ‘old boy/girl’ network and encompasses a potentially wider section of the community.
Even the upper age limit for recruitment and retirement has been made more flexible.
Although many areas still recommend that 65 is the upper age limit for basic training for advice work, and 70 is the recommended  retirement age, new NACAB membership requirements now allow bureaux the freedom to take a more personal approach to advice workers nearing retirement, allowing them to continue beyond 70 if the management committee and bureau manager agree.
There seems little doubt that recruitment is now more imaginative, and the data in Chapter 2 showed that there is indeed some change in the volunteer body, yet there are still clear patterns that appear difficult to shift.
For example, bureaux in the Home Counties will often boast of a waiting list of volunteers such that , in fact, they rarely need to mount recruitment campaigns.
On the next level, there are bureaux who include recruitment campaigns as part of their forward plan, knowing confidently that the response to each campaign will attract considerably more people than they need.
But at the other extreme there are inner-city bureaux with a considerable need for a large staff, who struggle to recruit volunteers from a very small pool indeed.
As will be seen throughout this chapter, there are wide local variations in selection procedures and in training.
However, there is a uniform national application form (Appendix B) for all potential CAB workers.
The questions on it are open-ended and allow space for recruits from all backgrounds to express their interest in and suitability for CAB advice work.
At this point area practice diverges.
Recruits will normally have an informal interview with the manager and perhaps a senior worker in the bureau to which they have applied.
Over the course of a few weeks they will probably spend several hours in the bureau familiarising themselves with bureau practice before their formal selection interview.
The tasks that they carry out during this period vary, as will be seen later.
There is a degree of self-selection in this process when some recruits choose not to proceed as they become more familiar with what will be expected of them.
They will have had an opportunity to become familiar with NACAB's anti-racist and equal opportunities policies, as well as expectations in terms of time commitment, standards expected and training requirements.
In a few cases, the manager may decide that the recruit is unsuitable but more normally they will be given a chance at a formal interview where the manager's opinion will be taken into consideration.
The composition of the interview panel varies from area to area.
Since staff recruitment is perhaps the key task of a bureau's management committee, it is normal for the chairman and perhaps one other member of the committee to participate in the interviewing process.
GLCABS, however, which has several staff  formally trained in recruitment, does not always include a member of the management committee.
In addition, a representative of the area office will participate.
In some areas this may be the area officer.
In GLCABS two senior advice workers, specially trained in selection processes, will interview the candidate, one representing an outer-London bureau and one an inner-London bureau.
Surrey and West Sussex area is piloting a recruitment sub-committee that can relieve the area officer of the interviewing task.
The sub-committee comprises about six experienced bureaux managers from the area, who are each responsible for representing their area on about five bureaux interviewing panels.
All members of this sub-committee have undergone training in selection and interviewing skills.
They come together regularly to discuss standards of recruitment and recruits in the area, as well as the standards of the management committee members who are involved with them in the interviewing process.
Aside from relieving the area officer of a very large task, members of the sub-committee piloting the system in Surrey and West Sussex are benefiting from the hitherto rare opportunity of coming together with other managers in their area.
These managers involved in recruitment have also found a new sphere of satisfaction as they observe the progress of the trainee volunteers whom they were involved in interviewing.
The manager of the recruiting bureau may or may not be present at the interview, but may be present when discussion takes place afterwards, or may have submitted a written report on the recruit's attitudes and progress so far in the bureau.
The structure of the interview will vary from place to place.
An interview length of between 30 and 45 minutes seems the norm.
GLCABS have a written list of questions that each recruit will be asked.
They have a formal code of recruitment and selection and a personnel specification for the task of advice worker.
The recruit will be evaluated against this specification when making the final decision, so as to come as close as possible to an objective evaluation of the candidate.
The interview panel will be interested in exploring the recruit's capabilities in several relevant areas, while always remaining mindful that formal qualifications are not necessary for advice work.
Communication skills will be assessed, in particular the recruit's ability to express complex information; the panel will attempt to assess the recruit's numerical ability, whether in previous work experience, paper qualifications or in home budgeting.
The panel will explore the recruit's experience with reference books of any sort.
A key part of the interview will centre on assessing the interviewee's attitudes towards the variety of  people who approach the CAB with problems.
The panel will try to assess the recruit's ability to remain impartial and courteous even under pressure and their ability to keep any strong opinions they may have from influencing the advice process.
In addition the panel will take the opportunity to reinforce the aims of the CAB and its policies.
The candidates should be familiar with these policies and the panel will want to satisfy itself that the candidate appreciates the importance of NACAB policies, standards and training.
It is interesting to note that GLCABS have recently made their interviewing procedure more personal and informal.
In the past they have brought many candidates together for an entire day of selection activities, which included written tests of their numerical and communication skills.
This tough process, it was realised, did not accord with their own equal-opportunities policy, in that candidates for paid advice workers' posts were given only an oral interview, even though their job description may have been identical to that of a voluntary advice worker.
The acceptance rate among potential volunteers would appear to vary around the country.
GLCABS reject approximately one out of every six candidates who reach the formal interview, whereas the figure for Surrey and West Sussex is closer to three out of six.
In both areas, a candidate may be accepted but their bureau manager may be asked to pay particular attention to some area of weakness that became apparent in the interview.
All candidates accepted for training are on probation for at least six months and are made aware of this.
In the main, candidates rejected by GLCABS have shown a lack of understanding of the ethos of the CAB or negative attitudes, which they appear unwilling to change, towards certain client groups.
Basic Training — a Sample Structure
Prospective advice workers are first allocated to a bureau, as described above.
Even after formal acceptance as a trainee CAB advice worker, they may not go to a training centre for some time.
Instead their basic training starts with supervised self-study at their bureau and only then will they attend an area-based course, together with other new entrants in their area.
In addition, they will be expected to go on visits to their local Department of Social Security office, courts, industrial tribunal and other institutions that are relevant locally to the CAB clients.
Trainees may spend several hours each week, for three to four weeks, at their bureau, working through a package of case-study exercises, such as the following  typical examples:
Peter is 17.
Three months ago he left school and started a job in a local factory.
He had an accident at work and has been off work for two weeks.
He comes into the bureau to ask what income he is entitled to.
He lives with his parents.
He comes back two weeks later saying that he has been given the sack.
His employer paid him up to that point.
What should he do now?
Ahmed is a single parent with two children under five.
He has been ill recently and has found it very hard to cope with his children.
A friend has told him that the council might be prepared to take the children into voluntary care for a while so that Ahmed can convalesce properly.
Another friend has said that if he agrees to that he might never see them again.
What information can you offer Ahmed?
Trainees will be expected to use the CAB information system in order to try to resolve the problems.
The solutions should then be discussed with the in-bureau tutor who is assigned to each trainee.
During this same period, the trainee may also be asked to sit in on interviews in their bureau.
They will be asked to consider specific aspects of the interviewing process as they observe the interview.
They will observe the process of making clients welcome; the process of listening to clients; of summarising their problems and the type of questions asked by advisers to help clients explain their problems.
The trainee, sitting in, should consider the emotions evident in these interviews and the ways in which possibilities for action were explored and information given.
After observing several interviews, these aspects should be discussed with the in-bureau tutor.
By the time the area basic training course starts, trainees should have a good feel for the work of their bureau, and CAB policy and practice.
At the area course the trainee will have a chance to meet trainees from other local bureaux.
About 20 trainees may be brought together for about ten days spread over a few months, interspersed with more in-bureau case study exercises and observation.
The continuing theme during basic training will be interviewing skills, without which the advisory process may not get underway.
Much effort has been invested in searching for the most suitable counselling model.
Although the CAB interview must be exploratory, as in other counselling situations, it is thought that it  should be strongly directed towards examining options and decision making.
Gerald Egan's model of ‘The Skilled Helper’ has been widely adopted as most suitable for this type of advice work.
He has developed a framework which is based on the idea that the aim of the interview should be to help people with the management of their problems.
Although in many cases this will mean that a solution to a problem is found, it also takes account of the fact that some problems are insoluble.
In these cases, if the aim of the interviewer is to ‘solve people's problems’ they are destined to failure and the stress that goes with it.
That is why Egan puts the emphasis on problem management — there will always be some way in which a client can be helped to manage a little— or very much — better.
Egan recommends that an interview should follow a logical course, the process of which should be controlled by the interviewer.
Within this framework, the clients are regarded as responsible for themselves.
The interviewer is concerned not with taking over and controlling the clients' lives, but with helping them handle problems in order that they may fashion their own lives according to their own values.
Knowledge and skills are the tools that enable clients to become more able to do this — and the interviewer's task is to use and share their own knowledge and skill with the clients.
Figure 6.1 shows, diagrammatically, Egan's process of repeatedly opening and temporarily concluding the discussion through each of the four stages.
The exploration stage helps the client to open up the problem for review and then narrow down by focusing on issues that need immediate attention.
The goal-setting stage explores any possible new frames of reference with a view to setting, and then choosing, problem-related goals.
The action-development stage will allow the client to explore available options for each goal and will help the client choose the most desirable ones for them.
Finally, programme implementation and evaluation helps the client carry out the programme chosen.
Then, either alone or with the client, the interviewer must evaluate the achievements, or otherwise, and any further steps that need to be taken.
Training in the Egan interviewing method can cleverly integrate the two other important elements of basic training: concepts within the welfare state and use of the NACAB information system.
With a combination of realistic case studies, role playing and group discussion, the bureau environment can safely be simulated to include the interviewing process and a search for information.
Prepared videos of realistic interviews are used as a basis for   discussion too.
With all these teaching techniques, attitudes can be explored and brought to the surface, as will be seen in the case studies described in the next section.
In some interview-skills courses, videos may be taken of the trainees themselves as they roleplay, and then these are discussed.
It will be just as important for the trainees to roleplay the part of the client in order to allow them to empathise with the client's situation.
Case Studies in Interview Skills Training
The CAB invests considerable time and energy in improving the standards of advice-giving for the seven million enquiries each year.
The information system is constantly refined and updated; training is never static; specialists are on hand and there is constant striving to serve clients more effectively.
The one issue that eludes control, is knowing exactly what takes place behind the interviewing door.
It was mentioned earlier that trainee advice workers do sometimes observe interviews carried out by experienced advisers.
Similarly there are bureaux where inexperienced advisers are observed by the manager or in-bureau tutor early in their interviewing career.
But the effectiveness of such supervision is questioned and it is not universal practice.
Case recording is one method of keeping in touch with the interview room, but case records are factual reports of problems and action taken, and cannot and should not serve to describe attitudes and the atmosphere in the interview room.
On a global level, client  satisfaction is clear as client numbers are increasing, but still the CAB cannot be sure that its own aims of offering accurate and impartial advice and information are fulfilled.
Training in interview skills takes a preventative approach to poor standards of interviewing.
The interview is made up of the two sets of interrelated emotions — those of the adviser and those of the client.
Either of these can hinder an interview in a way which may be difficult to define after the event.
When the interview is simulated in the classroom using pre-prepared videos, cassette recordings or role playing, an exchange of trainees' reactions, fears and responses to the situation presented can improve an adviser's ability to cope with real interviewing.
Most trainees will be emphatic about their ability to be impartial, unprejudiced, empathetic and to keep confidentiality, but a few hard-hitting video scenes can catch even the most ‘broadminded’ trainee off guard.
The following cases will demonstrate how a trainer may use some theoretical situations to open discussion of diverse topics of importance in the CAB.
The situations have been adapted from the NACAB training videos ‘Face to Face’ and ‘Perceptions’.
Client 1:Sally with final demand for electricity payment in hand 
‘I just can't cope with it any more.
There's just no way I can pay such a big bill, and I need the heating on to keep the baby warm.
They won't really cut me off, will they?’
Client 2:John holding charge papers 
‘I need a solicitor — well Legal Aid — I mean I'm being done for — you know — interfering with my daughter — incest they call it don't they?’
These two cases look very different but they have many aspects in common.
Both interviews could be concluded reasonably quickly with practical action.
The adviser might contact the electricity board for Sally to prevent her supply being cut off, and John could be furnished with a list of local solicitors who do legal-aid work.
The trainer's task is to explore more deeply, by facilitating an exchange of views over what else might happen and what passes through the minds of the adviser and client as a result of particular approaches.
In discussing John, advisers may acknowledge that they would feel uncomfortable with the client, probably feeling censure.
Instinctively they may opt to carry out the minimum of conversation and close the interview as soon as they have supplied  the list of solicitors.
The trainer will ask the trainee advisers to think about any unintentional assumptions implied by this brief exchange.
Trainees will come to realise that their action, by its abruptness, has carried with it the judgement that the client is guilty of incest.
An examination of the client's hesitance, however, indicates that he is not at all sure about the terminology and that he may simply be echoing the wording of the charge.
The trainer might prompt the trainees for alternative approaches.
It may be suggested that John could be asked what he means by ‘interfering’.
This will allow John to expand and will give him the feeling that someone will listen to him.
It is likely that he will still need the list of solicitors but, by not immediately closing the interview, the adviser may have explored issues which are important, which John may not have thought worth telling the solicitor.
John's feeling of self-worth will equip him better to cope with the trauma that he is about to face.
Now for Sally the adviser has prevented her electricity from being cut off.
Of course she might be pleased with that outcome, but she may also have a new feeling of helplessness, in that she has failed to manage her own problems.
In fact, financial problems may not be uppermost in her mind.
Depression at her isolation with her baby may be bothering her much more.
She may find it difficult to raise this personally more pressing problem, but until the adviser acknowledges her priorities, Sally may not absorb what is said to her.
Trainees will see that by tackling the practical presenting problem with too much alacrity they may superimpose their interpretation of Sally's problems before confirming them with Sally.
Using Egan's approach to problem management described above, Sally's case may be used to demonstrate that she will benefit more if she can be helped to focus on what are, in her opinion, the most pressing problems.
She may feel far better leaving the bureau with details of a local self-help group for single parents and information about local child-care facilities.
She may feel more in control if she takes her bill herself to the Department of Social Security, having been guided by the adviser that she should ask them about the ‘fuel direct’ scheme that will debit her benefits automatically and prevent disconnection.
The time that would have been spent waiting for the Department of Social Security to answer the telephone might instead have been used to uncover what Sally's own priorities are.
The discussion with trainees may reveal that they fear that they will open emotional floodgates for Sally since so many of her problems may not have immediate solutions.
As the waiting room is full, they may suggest that the practical step of dealing with the  electricity bill is an obvious option.
This raises essential issues about the nature, direction and image of the CAB which are important for trainees on basic or intermediate training to think through.
Such a discussion may include the place of casework in the bureaux, the debate about quality of service versus quantity, generalist versus specialist services, the place of counselling and the place of social policy work.
Sally's case can be explored further.
Frank discussion of the sort suggested above may throw out underlying attitudes that need to be faced and worked at.
For example, disapproval of debt by some advisers may emerge.
Trainees may find it a humbling exercise to draw up their own household budget using current benefit rates as their sole income.
Attitudes to seeking help in general may emerge.
Trainees may discuss in groups how they felt when each one last sought help.
The doctor's surgery may be the nearest that they may have come.
Although not the same, a discussion, perhaps of the feelings of helplessness in the hands of the professional, can be useful to enable the trainee adviser to empathise with clients.
Client 3:Sheila talking about her son who is gay :
‘I don't feel any different towards him; he's still my son.
It would be nice to see him married like the others, but it's just something that I've got to accept.
It's his father I'm worried about.
He'll kill him when he finds out.’
Sheila's problem looks very different to John's and Sally's.
It does not immediately lend itself to action on the part of the adviser.
The conflicts that face the CAB adviser are unusual among the caring professionals.
The image of the CAB is one of action and advocacy — the adviser will ‘do’ something for the client or at least tell the client what to do.
But Sheila's situation does not lend itself to action.
Professional counsellors faced with the same client would be clear that it is their task to explore emotions and they allocate the time to do it; social workers have the mixed task of practical and emotional support but they have a restricted caseload and the time to build up a relationship.
However, because the CAB door is always open, the CAB adviser is expected to cope, at least initially, with clients who might more suitably be supported by a counsellor or social worker.
Sheila's case may prompt a discussion of the referral of clients to other agencies, and trainees may be encouraged to find out what the policy is in their own bureau towards referrals and what agencies have been successfully recommended.
Trainees may discover that there is no service locally that could help Sheila.
And  even if there is a family counselling service or marriage guidance counselling there may be a waiting list.
It may be suggested that there is an element of rejection in being referred.
It was probably difficult for Sheila to take the step of coming into the CAB with the very sensitive subject of homosexuality that for all she knows may be taboo at the bureaux.
She may be encouraged if she sees a poster on the wall about Aids.
So she sits out her turn.
With very good will the adviser writes down the address of the local family counselling services.
The adviser may feel inadequate to discuss the problem or may justify a referral using the many benefits cases waiting in the waiting room as an excuse.
But provoking discussion among the trainees of some straightforward opening questions may reassure them that they could cope themselves, at least initially, with Sheila.
They may suggest asking Sheila what her worst fears are — for herself, her son or her husband?
She may fear Aids for her son; she may fear violence from her husband; she may fear that her son will have to move out of the family home and fear her own loneliness.
Whichever appears the most serious to her can be explored further.
The relief of being able to talk about the problem at all will probably be of some comfort.
The interview need not be long but Sheila will have discovered that there are people who will listen and she is now more likely to take up any referral she is given for more long term counselling.
Client 4:Joseph describing racial harassment in his neighbourhood :
‘I can't take much more of it — life's becoming unbearable for us.
We try to get on with people, to be friendly with them and all we get is trouble.
Why are they doing this to us?’
If any issue is likely to arouse feelings of helplessness in the advice worker it is this one.
If only the adviser knew the answer.
Joseph is seeking practical and emotional support.
Unfortunately the most obvious solution is unlikely to be feasible — councils do not move tenants that easily.
For want of any better solution trainees will suggest that the adviser contact the local authorities to ask them about their policy on moving tenants suffering from racial harassment.
Avenues may emerge from that enquiry.
The local authority may be aware of the problem on that estate and be able to report a dozen other families who are suffering similarly.
Predictably they will tell the adviser that they cannot rehouse all those families and perhaps the tenant can contact the police.
But trainee advisers who are socially aware can still use that information  for Joseph's benefit.
They may explore with Joseph whether he can get in touch with the other black families.
Advisers are here exposed to an example of social policy work where several potential clients may be assisted at the same time to help themselves.
They may see that it does not have to be time consuming and it doesn't always involve filling in forms.
It may be sufficient to listen to Joseph and allow him to give vent to his anger.
After that he may feel more ready, together with other residents, to get in touch with suitable ethnic minority organisations in the area or with the Community Relations Council.
The above four cases only scratch the surface.
The trainer has a responsible task to help trainees through many other issues that are totally new to them and that every CAB worker will need to confront.
The trainer also has the responsibility to convey to the trainees that they must not think of themselves as problem solvers, but only as facilitators.
As has been seen, in the process of training many CAB policy issues emerge.
Trainers sometimes find themselves being held responsible for these policies.
The trainees have to remember that the trainers are not responsible for these policies but only facilitate them.
If aspects of CAB policy that the adviser questions arise during training, then it must also be part of training to show how advisers might try to influence CAB policy.
Chapter 7 is devoted to this discussion.
Basic Training — the Issues
The basic training structure that was described earlier is used by GLCABS.
It has several distinguishing features.
It is skills oriented rather than information oriented; it is group based; trainees are encouraged to observe interviewing sessions as part of the process of training before actively conducting an interview themselves; the pre-basic training can be of several weeks or even months duration; the basic training course itself is not assessed formally; and the overall time taken to become a useful member of a CAB team may be as long as a year.
There is much debate within the CAB on these training issues and some of the reasoning and alternative suggestions are worth examining.
The major area of debate concerns the balance between the time spent on learning information skills versus the time spent on learning interviewing skills.
Debate is heated, as opinion is probably equally divided.
A basic training working party was set up in 1986 with the task of designing a national basic training common core.
This is now in the piloting stages.
The object of designing a national common core was in part to raise overall standards and  in part to prevent the wastage of resources involved in each of the 22 NACAB areas designing its own basic training course.
The resultant design has leaned towards a course more heavily weighted towards interviewing skills.
Superficially, CAB workers have a twofold task: they interview clients and they supply them with information and advice.
These two tasks are inextricably interwoven: if advisers fail to establish what it is that a client wants to know because of poor interviewing, then they will not be able to supply the correct information even if it is available.
Experience shows that many clients have difficulties in expressing their problems and may be anxious.
Unless interviewers can be accepting and supportive and skilled at helping clients explore their difficulties, little progress will be made.
Information, on the other hand, is constantly changing.
Frequent legislative changes make it dangerous for advice workers to assume that any facts are unaltered and they must therefore always be encouraged to look things up afresh.
Familiarity with the scope and organisation of NACAB's information system as well as knowing how to access the relevant information are the necessary information skills, rather than a knowledge of specific legislation.
It can be seen, therefore, that interviewing skills, together with a knowledge of where to find information, are considered the backbone of basic training.
Area basic training courses have varied quite considerably with regard to the time allocated to interviewing skills and solid information.
The Wessex area in the south west, for example, has leaned towards a lecture-based structure in order to convey information.
The West Midlands, on the other hand, concentrates heavily on the interviewing model.
The new basic training common core pays more attention to the interviewing model.
It has discarded lectures, but accepts that familiarity with concepts of the Welfare State is important so that the trainee is not fearful of the information expectations.
Well-chosen case studies are a successful method for exploring interviewing skills simultaneously with information skills.
But even if basic training can be divided into interviewing skills, information searching and welfare concepts, personal differences still make group training difficult.
A law student who is a CAB trainee volunteer may not fear legislative tomes but may want considerably more training to cope with an emotional client and feel the need for deeper counselling skills than basic training allows time for.
Conversely an experienced marriage guidance counsellor who transfers to the CAB may be overwhelmed by the immense range of problems that the CAB deals with and find the information system threatening.
In addition a basic training group  may include those preparing for a full-time career in advice work together with part-time volunteers.
It has been shown in Chapter 4 that this relationship is not always a comfortable one.
Tensions emerge, particularly when the two groups attend courses together.
The onus falls on the skill of the trainer who must take advantage of the experience of all those within the group, as well as working to improve areas of trainees’ personal weaknesses.
For this reason, the thorough training of trainers is regarded as very important.
Trainers' courses are described in a later section.
Personal and local differences are important to the working party designing the basic training common core.
Without taking the history of area training independence into account, a national common core for basic training would have greater difficulty gaining acceptance.
In addition personal differences among trainee advice workers must be accommodated.
Group-based training need form only a small part of the complete basic training course.
A much broader common core has been designed than just that experienced in a formal group setting.
Training is redefined as learning, and learning can take place with or without a tutor, in training rooms, in a bureau or at home, formally or informally.
The group course is still necessary for interpersonal skills but much further relevant learning tailored to the individual's needs can take place outside a group structure.
This philosophy is built into the common core by assigning a key task to the in-bureau tutor that each bureau is obliged to appoint either from among its paid or voluntary staff.
The trainee, together with the in-bureau tutor, should work out and carry through a tailor-made course of study.
This must include the core modules in the correct order, but the mode of study for some of the modules is very flexible.
Personalised design for parts of the core training programme overcomes the two problems of differing regional resources and the variety of entrants' experiences.
It does, however, pose the problem of a national standard of supervision.
Where a course is centralised, validation is straightforward.
Where responsibility has been spread to more than 1,000 in-bureau tutors, the supervisory task of one solitary area training officer becomes very hard.
The in-bureau tutors will rarely have training as their sole task.
They may also be the bureau manager or they may be a voluntary advice worker with the same caseload as any other member of the team.
Training may sometimes unintentionally be squeezed out as being superficially less urgent than the many emergency day-to-day situations that arise in a bureau.
Self-assessment using a Personal Learning Journal is an integral part of the basic training programme, but where a trainee is new and vulnerable it may be hard to  distinguish a slow learner from a hard-pressed tutor.
It is the complexity of these issues and the necessity for the widest consultation which makes the Common Core design task such a lengthy one.
A further area of debate in the design of the basic training Common Core concerns the method by which a trainee advice worker gains experience of interviewing.
The GLCABS basic training structure described in detail earlier, allows the trainee to sit in with experienced advice workers to observe their techniques.
But in some areas a minority hold the view that the confidentiality of the client is thus breached and the nature of the interview may be altered by the presence of an observer.
Although the client's permission will always be sought before a trainee sits in, many clients may feel unable to refuse, even though they are certain that they will be uncomfortable with a third party present.
Instead, these bureaux use a method that involves close supervision of the trainee.
After superficial induction to bureau life, through discussion and self-study over a period of approximately four weeks, trainees will take a two-day course in basic interviewing skills.
They then return to their bureau to start interviewing for four weeks.
A ‘minder’ is allocated, who is freed for that time to assist the trainee.
Trainees go alone to the interviewing room with the client to establish the client's problem.
They then return to the general office where their ‘minder’ is waiting to help them find any necessary information and work out some options for the client.
The trainee then returns to the client.
There may be client cases where new recruits feel out of their depth in which case they can invite the minder into the interview room, with the permission of the client, but still continue to deal with the client's enquiry.
The minder may interject at times, but will allow a relationship to build up between the client and the trainee.
In extreme cases, trainees can hand over to the minder where they feel unable to cope.
In all cases in those early days, considerable time will be spent by the trainee and minder discussing each interview.
After four weeks the trainee returns for formal basic training of a further eight days.
This training structure is in place in the Surrey and West Sussex area where there is a strong orientation towards counselling skills.
Consistent with that policy they have adopted a supervisory structure that is common in professional counselling training.
When trainees are allowed to begin interviewing on their own under supervision they have already been accepted as CAB trainee advice workers, but in the GLCABS structure where candidates begin by observing the interviewing process they may not yet have  formally passed the selection procedure.
Meanwhile they have become involved in the bureau and staff have invested time introducing them to procedures.
Rejection at selection time after this may be both a personal disappointment to them and frustrating for bureau staff who have spent time to no end.
Some areas therefore prefer to shorten the pre-training stage.
This is the case in Surrey and West Sussex.
Needless to say, using both structures, there will still be many trainees who drop out or are deemed unsuited as advice workers.
In the main, however, the selection procedure is rigorous enough so that basic training does not have to be used for assessment purposes.
It is assumed that all trainees will return to their bureaux and where necessary areas of weakness that emerged during training will be worked at with their in-bureau tutor.
The possibility that the CAB basic training course should become a recognised certificated qualification has been on the agenda.
Should this be realised, then assessment on the course may have to be more rigorous.
The total length of the basic training process is often debated.
Some area officers are concerned that the new common core would appear to be lengthening the total training period during which a trainee will need to be under close supervision.
At a time when the rate of turnover of advice workers in the CAB is increasing, the lengthening of the training process is not attractive.
A higher proportion of staff will have trainee status at any one time and extra staff will be needed for the supervisory role.
The North East area have engineered a local solution in the form of an ‘accelerated basic training course’.
This is a full-time four-week course with three full days each week in the classroom and the other two days at the bureau.
It is designed for those who are intending to work several days per week in a bureau, but whose expected term as workers in the CAB might be short.
Other areas will probably watch the outcome of this experiment with interest.
In Chapter 4 the high turnover of trained CAB staff was discussed.
The unemployed and many returning to the job market benefit from CAB basic training and with their new skills find paid employment elsewhere.
This is a fitting tribute to the standards of basic training around the country.
In addition, the ethos of the CAB is being spread by all those who receive CAB training and then act as ambassadors for the CAB in other roles.
It might be considered an expensive reward for achieving a high standard and a costly method of public relations.
Anti-racist Training
Giving impartial advice untainted by personal prejudices has always been the aim of the Citizens Advice Bureaux.
In addition, the service has always been free and open to all individuals.
Many CAB workers feel that these objectives amply cover all clients including ethnic minorities and lesbians and gays.
But from the early 1980s there has been a growing feeling that policy and practice were beginning to diverge.
The 1984 Kirklees Report showed that ethnic minority clients were not well represented among CAB clients at the time.
The-CAB door may have been officially ‘open’ but minorities were not accepting the invitation, It was felt that the way to remedy the situation was by recruiting more black advice workers so that black clients would feel more comfortable and so that black workers could help white workers to better understand black clients.
While responses to the Kirklees Report were being discussed, a further incident gave impetus to more precise anti-racist policies.
Circumstances arose in South London whereby, paradoxically, a certain virulently racist agitator was not felt to be acceptable as a CAB.
Suddenly the open-door policy was in question and was in need of modification.
In 1985 a working party was set up to formulate the CAB's anti-racist policy, briefed by NACAB central office's ethnic minorities specialist services officer and the growing Black Workers Group.
A clear NACAB anti-racism statement was formulated together with several guidance papers for advice workers on the issue.
Appendix C shows the anti-racism statement together with an extract from one such guidance paper on dealing with racist clients.
In 1986 a two-year development plan was launched to cover recruitment, training and the monitoring of the take-up of the service among ethnic minority groups.
The first training courses to be put together borrowed concepts from other anti-racist groups.
Race awareness training had a mixed reception from CAB workers.
Some achieved increased personal awareness through self-examination; others felt their values to be under attack.
Where such culturally based courses have provoked resistance, race awareness training has given way to courses that are less inward looking but which are designed to promote specific practical anti-racist goals.
For example training in recruitment under the equal opportunity policy has often proved to be more acceptable.
This training can extend beyond the recruitment of ethnic minorities to opportunities for women, the disabled and lesbians and gays.
Training in inter-cultural understanding is well received too although inter-class understanding has not yet made  its way into training plans.
Specific minority issues, such as racial harassment or the relationship between the blacks and the police, can be usefully singled out for successful in-bureau training.
The anti-racist training programme is now an integral part of CAB policy.
It is accepted that antagonism must not jeopardise training efforts and every opportunity is used within the service to communicate the need for the policy.
Experience has shown that surer progress can be made towards introducing the policy throughout the CAB by carefully tailoring courses to local readiness, and allowing workers to grow towards a greater social awareness at their own pace.
In-service Training
Basic training and anti-racist training are two areas about which there has been debate in order to reach a national consensus for good practice.
Locally, in-service training covering many topics is of more immediate day-to-day concern to advice workers.
All prospective CAB voluntary advice workers will be told that they may be required to make a commitment of one to two days a week to a bureau as well as six sessions a year of in-service training after their basic training.
The very nature of the service dictates that every advice worker must be kept up to date both with changing legislation and with skills.
It would be hard to find a consensus definition of ‘six sessions’ but nevertheless the principle of in-service training is paramount throughout the service.
A ‘session’ may be a half a day or a whole day.
Alternatively it may be an area based course involving advice workers from several bureaux or it could be a private study session with an open learning package.
It might be a private session with the in-bureau tutor, a visiting lecturer, or a staff meeting set aside to discuss a particular topic.
Group courses arranged at an area office are more common in city centres where bureaux are more concentrated geographically and less travelling is involved for participants.
Because of the great variety of in-service training modes needed to take account of the different conditions in the areas, training material is often produced in several formats.
Material for a group course may also appear in self-study form or in video form.
A sample of in-service units has been extracted from GLCABS training calendar for 1988 and is shown in Figure 6.2, while actual attendance at in-service courses in the West Midlands in 1986/7 is shown in Figure 6.3.
Debates in In-service Training
The accolade of membership of NACAB carries with it the advantages of status and support for a bureau.
At the same time it confers obligations.
It obliges the bureau to conform to the policy aims and objectives of the CAB and reach a standard of advice work that fulfils these aims to NACAB's satisfaction.
However the immediate task of most advice workers is to help the clients in the interview room cope with day-to-day pressing problems.
In theory there should be no conflict.
The democratic process described in Chapter 7 shows how each worker has the opportunity to elect representatives who will formulate the policy of the association on their behalf.
In the interview room this is sometimes forgotten; global NACAB policy is not often on the day-to-day agenda of advice workers.
However, training is the tool that may enable greater awareness of NACAB policies and their relevance; through training both the long-term aims of the association and the immediate aims of the adviser might be achieved, but conflict arises when there is insufficient time for both.
Advice workers unfortunately may see two strands to their training: that which they are required to undergo, contrasted with that which they want in order to overcome their personal shortcomings in the interview room.
When 60 random advice workers from the West Midlands were polled about their most recent training experiences and their personal training needs, the conflict was apparent.
None of the respondents requested training that would fulfil recent CAB policy issues; there were no requests, for example, for training in equal opportunity recruitment or race awareness.
Most commonly they requested more help with social security benefits.
The next most common request was for training in County Court preparation, tribunals and employment issues.
Courses on debt counselling followed together with requests for counselling courses to include bereavement and marriage guidance skills.
A few individuals requested courses on income tax, landlord and tenant, and consumer issues.
With such a healthy list of urgent needs, advice workers might be excused if they become impatient when training for which they cannot see an immediate need is imposed upon them.
Such has been the reaction of some advice workers to race awareness training and anti-racist training.
Many advice workers are unaware that they have had a democratic part in the policy decisions that have adopted these training requirements and some even see these demands on them as a personal affront.
Any requirement that may be construed as ‘compulsory’ is bound  to evoke some rebelliousness.
If the immediate benefits are unclear then any time spent will be resented.
The more that is done, therefore, to ensure that anti-racist training is task-related rather than theoretical, the more workers may opt for these courses ‘voluntarily’.
Looking to the future, this conflict should cease to arise; race-awareness training is now integrated into basic training, where it sits as a natural part of discussions on impartiality and prejudice during the interviewing process and should have the benefits that CAB anti-racist policy intends.
Some of the case studies earlier showed how this is carried out in practice.
The integration into mainstream training, of topics that are no immediately recognised by bureaux workers as important, can often be an answer to fulfilling policy requirements.
Anti-racist training is one such area and training for social policy work is another.
The CAB's aims state that advice work and exercising a responsible influence on social policy are equal in importance, but it has been hard to persuade some advice workers that social policy work is an important part of their task as advisers.
Clearly it is not an area in which workers are going to request training when they see so many more pressing needs.
Special training in social policy work has been given by NACAB's Information Retrieval Group in several areas, and it was seen there that advice workers could be convinced of the benefit of social policy work but their budget did not allow further development of this programme.
Therefore integration of the concept of social policy work into every course is considered to be the most effective way forward.
Earlier case studies demonstrated how this may be done.
Bureau Managers' Training
Although it is possible to produce a job description for a bureau manager (see Appendix A), each bureau has very individual characteristics and consequently managers see their tasks differently.
Nevertheless, there is certainly a common core of skills and knowledge that managers are expected to master and these are built into the managers' induction and training programme.
Managers of bureaux must have a wide view of how the CAB functions both locally and nationally.
It is recommended that their training stretches over a period of about 15 months from the time that they take up their post.
It may consist of NACAB area and central office induction when the new manager will meet the local and central staff and hear about the work that they do and the  resources available to support the manager.
Area training will then involve the manager in learning about managing a local bureau.
Managers need to know about the annual financial cycle, the bureau budget and its management and local authority finance.
They will also need to know about lobbying and negotiating and how to work effectively with the bureau management committee as well as how to manage staff meetings.
A manager can also take the initial foundation course which tackles those issues that may be relevant to any manager, whether inside or outside the CAB.
These include planning, staff support, team work, recruitment and personal development.
Alongside the factual overview for managers, trainers are concerned to sharpen the managers' interpersonal skills.
Egan's four-stage problem management model, so essential in basic training, is also regarded as applicable to management problems.
The technique is applied in the following way.
First the managers will be encouraged to tackle an issue that has become problematical in a bureau by asking open questions of themselves and the bureau staff.
Such issues may include some of those discussed in Chapter 4, such as waiting-room queues, staff shortages, poor facilities or personality clashes.
Facts should be separated from fantasy and feelings explored.
The second stage may attempt to look afresh at the situation and to create new perspectives using lateral thinking and brain-storming.
Even seemingly wild ideas may be aired at this point to break away from stale thinking.
Around the new ideas, goals can be set.
Next, specific action may be agreed upon that is realistic and measurable with perhaps a contingency plan lined up too.
The final stage in solving a management problem would be evaluation just as it is with an interviewing problem in Egan's model.
It sounds very much easier in theory than in practice.
Nowhere in the above description of manager training did it explain how best to carry the role of mediator.
The task will fall to the manager to persuade advice workers to attend race-awareness training in addition to popular updating in welfare benefits; managers may have the task of explaining to management committee members why they now need training after so many years without it; it will be the manager's job to be attuned to advice workers' weaknesses and tactfully point them to the relevant additional training; the manager must find a balance in workers' meetings between training, casework and group support.
As well as reporting policy requirements to advice workers, the manager must pass back to the area office any new training needs that have emerged from basic advice work.
With all those roles it is hardly surprising that one of  the most popular training requests among managers is assertiveness training.
Management Committee Training
It was noted earlier that training can arouse resistance if it is perceived to have been imposed by policy decisions.
The new membership scheme for bureau membership of NACAB, described more fully in Chapter 7, recommends among its clauses that management committee members undergo training.
This scheme evokes strong doubts from some area officers and bureaux managers who may not have been among those who carried the vote to accept the plans.
They do not question the need for such training but only the practicality of it.
The dissenters hold that management committee members usually earn the position in recognition of their involvement in other community matters.
Almost by definition they are very busy people.
However desirable it is that they receive training, many do not see it as a practical proposition.
Some members of management committees none the less throw themselves into their new role with enthusiasm.
The case study devised by East Anglia area in Figure 6.4 shows how imaginative such training can be, although the area has now had to cease management committee training through lack of funds.
An understanding of the complexities raised in such a case study may become essential in order to cope with the new responsibilities of management committees under the new membership scheme.
It may also have the effect of precluding those members who cannot find the time to attend a few workshops and may therefore strengthen management committees and their bureaux in the long run.
Training the Trainers
The system of personalised in-bureau training that has been described above could not be sustained and developed without the two-tier system of area training officers supported by area tutors and many in-bureau tutors.
These tutors are to be empowered with greater responsibility than previously when new membership standards are instituted.
Although they have always had responsibility for trainees, this is to be made more formal within the framework of the basic training common core.
Courses for trainers and tutors are therefore an essential part of the training cycle.
And cycle it certainly is: area tutors and in-bureau tutors come from the ranks of the advice workers.
Indeed many are still   advice workers and are thus constantly furnished with very real on-going practical experience to support their tutoring role.
Interpersonal skills form the nub of the trainers' course.
The need for trainers to be able to bring out skills in others is paramount.
In GLCABS, trainee trainers have a centrally based group course for a full week.
Activities include group exercises, role playing and much feedback and discussion.
There may then be a break of a few days while participants work to devise a training session.
For example they may be asked to prepare a training session on how to deal with difficult clients or one on housing benefits.
Pre-prepared training packs or videos are put at their disposal.
The group then reassembles for a few days to allow everyone to present their trial training session.
This may be videoed and the video will then be analysed both with the group and privately with the trainer.
Trainee trainers will then return to their bureaux as in-bureau tutors to assist with the induction of new volunteers or assist with training at an area office.
Selling Training
Few would disagree that the CAB has raised its profile in the public eye over the last few years.
Outsiders may offer reasons such as increased public need or increased publicity.
But those within the service point to the investment in training as a major contributory factor to an increasingly professional service.
At the same time, funding has been insecure so that voluntary organisations are being encouraged to sell their expertise in order to fund their activities.
The CAB has developed considerable skill in training, as this chapter has demonstrated, and much of it has relevance outside the CAB as well as inside.
Traditionally the NACAB information systems and basic pack have been marketed but the sale of training material is now also significant in its own right.
Self-study packs and training videos of the type that are listed in the GLCABS training calendar in Figure 6.2 are popular.
The early case-study section demonstrated how they are used in a training environment.
So successful have these videos been that a partially self-supporting unit, NACAB Vision, has been formed which produces further training videos on a wider range of topics.
Recently they produced a highly acclaimed 90-minute video called ‘A Positive Approach’ for counsellors working with Aids sufferers and their families.
This was made in cooperation with the Terrence Higgins Trust, the British Association of Counsellors and the Centre for Aids Counselling.
The Wolverhampton tribunal unit that was described in Chapter 3 has several successful sales ventures: it contributes social security legal precedents to Lawtel (Prestel's legal database) and its Adviser magazine enjoys wide circulation.
The more manpower-intensive training is also marketed.
East Anglia produces a glossy brochure in order to help sell its training courses to local businesses, retraining groups, voluntary groups, social workers and advisers.
Any spare spaces available on courses for its own advice workers are filled by people from outside and this helps provide additional professional stimulation for its trainers.
Some training is carried out as a goodwill gesture.
A local bureau may be approached to talk to a group of probation officers.
The bureau is hard pressed for staff but may nevertheless decide that such work has wider positive influence.
A talk to probation officers will indirectly reach a section of the community — prisoners — who are not able to come to a bureau and may be seriously in need of a bureau's services, as was seen in Chapter 3.
Similarly it can be argued that if home helps or social workers request training from the CAB in aspects of new legislation, this can cement a positive  relationship between the CAB and the local authority who will then see a service in action that is worth funding.
It is not only financial considerations, therefore, that guide the decisions for allocating limited training resources.
The next chapter will view the wider decision-making process within the CAB.