

‘VISIONS OF CHILDHOOD’
The market town of Ottery St Mary lies in a broad Devon valley eleven miles from the city of Exeter.
The River Otter, Coleridge's ‘dear native brook’, borders the town to the west, and makes its leisurely way through a landscape which to eighteenth-century inhabitants seemed ‘the richest finest Country in the world’, and which even now preserves the striking beauty which so impressed itself on Coleridge's young mind.
The little manor-house at Cadhay stands near at hand in the Ottery meadows, and more distant views reach as far as the great hill-fort at Hembury, built on a commanding spur of land in the late Iron Age.
The town itself is in most respects unremarkable by comparison with its Devon neighbours, and like many of them flourished especially in the seventeenth century, heyday of the West Country cloth trade: when Celia Fiennes passed close by in 1698, she found all Exeter and the country around making ‘an incredible quantity of serges’ which were sent from the port of Topsham to be sold in Europe.
Only at the top of Silver Street, beyond an area in which Ottery's weekly market was anciently held, does the town reveal its more distinctive self.
There on a ridge of high ground overlooking Ottery's narrow streets rises the great collegiate church of St Mary, a version, on a smaller scale, of the cathedral church in Exeter.
The history of St Mary's and that of the town over which it presides have been bound together since the Middle Ages, and the church's sober, dignified presence was to form part of Coleridge's earliest recollections of childhood.
Long and low, with transept towers and a vaulted nave, the building as it stands today was largely the work of Bishop Grandison of Exeter, a ‘magnificent and diligent prelate’ who ruled over the diocese in the fourteenth century.
He chose Ottery as the place in which to found a religious community, and in 1337 obtained the king's licence to make the church a collegiate foundation, whose members were to include a warden, a minister, a chanter, and eight choral vicars.
Houses to accommodate them rose as a compact group south of the churchyard, and the church itself was soon ambitiously transformed to provide the setting for an elaborate cycle of daily worship.
Though the Reformation brought an end to Grandison's college, the medieval college houses were allowed to remain, and the collegiate church, to which a magnificent parish aisle had recently been added, was given over completely to  the people of the town.
The medieval choir school also survived — though renamed by Henry VIII ‘the Kynges Newe Grammer Scole of Seynt Marie Oterey’— and like many provincial grammar schools throughout the land it continued to provide a modest education of the kind which gave to the youthful Shakespeare his ‘small Latin, and less Greek’.
The collegiate church of St Mary, Ottery St Mary, in the late nineteenth century
It was of this school, the King's School, that the Revd John Coleridge became master on 20 August 1760, four months before also being appointed vicar of the parish church.
He settled with his growing family in the schoolmaster's house, close to the sixteenth-century schoolroom, and there, on an October morning in 1772, his second wife, Ann Coleridge, gave birth to their tenth and final child.
As with so many details in the life of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, the exact date of his birth has not gone undisputed.
Coleridge himself long believed that he was born on 20 October, but his father, with a clergyman's attention to such matters, recorded in the parish register that the true date was 21 October ‘about eleven o'clock in the forenoon’.
John Coleridge was then fifty-three years old, his wife forty-five.
Their son was brought for baptism in the parish church on 30 December, his godfather, a local man called Samuel Taylor, providing the child with two distinctive names.
Thus was young Sam (as his family, to his later great distaste, was apt to call him) or STC (as he preferred to call himself) given his earliest identity in the eyes of the world.
The schoolmaster's house, Ottery St Mary, shortly before its demolition in 1884.
Coleridge was born in the house on 21 October 1772
The family of which Coleridge became a member would have seemed exceptional even had he never been born.
His father had risen to a leading position in the town of Ottery from a background of extreme poverty, and Coleridge's surviving brothers were all gifted men whose descendants were to include not only scholars and bishops, but the Lord Chief Justice of England.
Social status, so quickly achieved, made the family unwilling in later years to acknowledge their very humble origins.
Only Coleridge could see no reason to obscure the truth and would quote Macbeth to the effect that their grandfather, another John, had been ‘ditch-delivered by a drab’.
Carrying through life a heavy sense that early separation from Ottery had left him no better than an orphan, Coleridge took comfort in believing that his own grandfather had been an orphan before him, a nameless, parentless child, discovered beneath a Devon sky.
The truth itself was only slightly more prosaic.
View from the churchyard at Throwleigh, Devon, the parish in which Coleridge's grandfather was born
John Coleridge was probably the bastard child of that name baptised on 18 April 1686 at Throwleigh, a remote and beautiful parish on the eastern edge of Dartmoor.
His mother was Jane Coleridge, a native of the neighbouring parish of Drewsteignton, and his father, as Coleridge later claimed, was probably William Northmore (1640–1716), member of a substantial Devon family and owner of Wonson Manor in Throwleigh.
Northmore's bastard son was destined to gain nothing from his relationship to a wealthy family.
‘Christened, educated, & apprenticed by the parish’, he married at Drewsteignton in 1715, then migrated to Crediton, where he ultimately became a ‘respectable Woolen-draper’.
His eldest surviving son, Coleridge's father, was born in 1719 and attended the Grammar School at Crediton; but when bankruptcy brought the family low, the younger John, not quite sixteen years of age, ‘walked off to seek his fortune’, taking with him no more than his father's blessing and half a crown.
He became a successful schoolmaster, through the kindly help of a family friend, and was a married man with three daughters by the time he walked to Cambridge in 1748 to become an undergraduate at Sidney Sussex College.
There he ‘distinguished himself for Hebrew & Mathematics’, and might eventually have obtained a fellowship had he still been single.
Instead, in 1749, he came home to Devon to take charge of Squire's Endowed Latin School in South Molton, and at the end of the year was ordained by the Bishop of Exeter.
When his first wife died in 1751, he went so far as to obtain a licence to marry a certain Hannah Laskey.
But that wedding evidently did not take place, and in December 1753 it was Ann Bowden whom he rushed to the altar in Exeter, his bride being already heavily pregnant with the first of their many offspring.
The new Mrs Coleridge was born in Bishop's Nympton in 1727 and came from a family whose origins were in the Exmoor borderlands of Devon and Somerset.
Strong-willed and ambitious for her children, she did not retain the affection of her youngest child, Samuel, despite her early devotion to him, and left him in adult life with an obscure and painful sense that she had treated him cruelly.
Coleridge associated far happier memories with his father, a learned, generous, and notoriously absent-minded man who ‘in…excessive ignorance of the world’ reminded his devoted son of Fielding's Parson Adams.
John Coleridge would startle his Sunday congregations by quoting Hebrew to them in his sermons — Hebrew being, as he explained, the ‘immediate language of the Holy Ghost’— and published a Latin grammar in which he proposed the ‘bold Innovation’ of renaming the ablative case the quippe-quare-quale-quia-quidditive case.
‘My Father made the world his confidant with respect to his Learning & ingenuity,’ Coleridge wrote, ‘& the world seems to have kept the secret very faithfully.’
Of the nine sons and one daughter born to this remarkable and ill-assorted  couple, only the second son failed to survive childhood.
Of the rest, some were already leaving Ottery to begin their careers by the time Coleridge's own memories began, and he grew up in the schoolmaster's house chiefly among the younger family members who remained.
Next in age to him was his brother Frank, born in 1770; then followed his sister Ann (or Nancy), dearly loved and lost early, then his brothers Luke and George.
George, who was eight years old  when Coleridge was born, became almost a second father to him in the difficult years ahead, and was, Coleridge wrote, ‘every way nearer to Perfection than any man I ever yet knew — indeed, he is worth the whole family in a Lump.’
The Revd John Coleridge (1719–81) with his horse outside one of the former collegiate buildings at Ottery St Mary.
After a watercolour of c. 1775
Pixies' Parlour, a sandstone cavern one mile south of Ottery St Mary.
In the summer of 1793 Coleridge visited the cavern with a party of young ladies, ‘one of whom, of stature elegantly small, and of complexion colourless yet clear, was proclaimed the Faery Queen’
Coleridge's recollections of his Ottery childhood survive chiefly in the resonant and deeply-felt autobiographical letters which he wrote at Tom Poole's request during 1797–8.
As he recorded in the letters, he carried from his earliest years one overriding impression, which was quickly summarized: ‘My Father was very fond of me, and I was my mother's darling — in consequence, I was very miserable.’
His brother Frank hated him because of their mother's devotion to the new favourite, and Frank's ‘immoderately fond’ nurse was equally resentful, giving Coleridge ‘only thumps & ill names’.
So powerful a mixture of love and rejection was both perplexing and formative, leaving the child uncertain where to attach his affections, and desperate in his search for acceptance and approval.
‘…I became fretful, & timorous, & a tell-tale — & the School-boys drove me from play, & were always tormenting me — & hence I took no pleasure in boyish sports.’
While Frank was ‘climbing, fighting, playing, & robbing orchards’, Coleridge was more likely to be found in the meadows by the River Otter — first of those rivers, brooks and springs that were to work so powerfully on his mind — or close by at the sandstone cavern known as Pixies' Parlour, where with the  ‘hand of…childhood’ he carved his initials in the rock.
As he later recorded in his ‘Lines on an Autumnal Evening’, these were the settings in which for the first time ‘young Poesy/Stared wildly-eager in her noontide dream’.
The King's Grammar School, Ottery St Mary, shortly before its demolition in 1884
He read voraciously, developing his early appetite for books on visits to the shop in Crediton kept by his Aunt Susannah.
There the young Coleridge would read anything he could find, and at the age of six had already progressed from the tales of Tom Hickathrift and Jack the Giant-Killer to Robinson Crusoe and The Arabian Nights .
The story of a man compelled to search for a pure virgin, read one evening while his mother was mending stockings, left him ‘haunted by spectres’ whenever he was in the dark; other stories drew him out to the churchyard, where, with his imagination overflowing, he would race up and down through the great avenue of elm trees, and act out among the docks, nettles and rank grass whatever he had been reading.
From his knowledge of ‘Romances, & Relations of Giants & Magicians, & Genii’, his mind was soon ‘habituated to the Vast ’, and when, walking home to Ottery one winter evening, his father told him the names of the stars ‘and how Jupiter was a thousand times larger than our world — and  that the other twinkling stars were Suns that had worlds rolling round them’, Coleridge listened with profound delight, ‘but without the least mixture of wonder or incredulity’.
Sir Stafford Northcote (1762–1851), 7th baronet.
He succeeded to the baronetcy in 1770, and was not yet twenty years old when he rescued Coleridge from probable death on the banks of the River Otter.
Portrait by James Northcote, RA
His first formal education was received in the reading school kept at Ottery by ‘Old Dame Key’, a relative of Sir Joshua Reynolds, and at six years old he progressed to his father's grammar school, where he quickly surpassed all his contemporaries.
The old women of the town marvelled at a child whose intellect had been ‘forced into almost an unnatural ripeness’, and their flattery made him vain:
I…despised most of the boys, that were at all near my own age — and before I was eight years old, I was a character — sensibility, imagination, vanity, sloth, & feelings of deep & bitter contempt for almost all who traversed the orbit of my understanding, were even then prominent & manifest.
His emotional vulnerability was no less manifest, and in early quarrels was easily exploited.
One argument with Frank, who soon grew ‘very fond’ of his unfathomable young brother, led to a childhood crisis whose significance Coleridge was still struggling to understand far into adult life.
‘I had asked my mother one evening to cut my cheese entire , so that I might toast it,’ he told Tom Poole:
This was no easy matter, it being a crumbly cheese — My mother however did it — I went into the garden for something or other, and in the mean time my Brother Frank minced my cheese, ‘to disappoint the favorite’.
In the violent argument which followed, Coleridge was prevented from running at his brother with a knife by the return of their mother, and then fled from the house, still in an ‘agony of passion’, stopping only when he reached a hill overlooking the River Otter a mile from the town.
He obstinately remained there even when his anger had subsided, and read morning and evening prayers from a little shilling book he had with him, thinking at the same time ‘with inward & gloomy satisfaction’ how miserable his mother must be.
He saw Mr Vaughan cross Cadhay Bridge a few hundred yards away, heard the calves in fields beyond the river calling to their mothers, and then, as the storms of an October night closed round, he closed his eyes and tried to sleep.
Mrs Coleridge was quite as distracted by her son's disappearance as he could have wished.
Men and boys were sent to look for him, the ponds and the river were dragged, and by morning hopes of finding him alive had almost been given up.
Coleridge had rolled in his sleep down the hill slope to within a few yards of the river, and when he woke up at dawn, he found he was unable to move or even to call out to the shepherds and workmen he could see near by.
Only the perseverance of Sir Stafford Northcote, who lived at the Warden's House, managed to save him.
Sir Stafford had been searching all night and finally came so close that he heard the child crying:
He carried me in his arms, for near a quarter of a mile; when we met my father & Sir Stafford's servants.
— I remember, & never shall forget, my father's face as he looked upon me while I lay in the servant's arms — so calm, and the tears stealing down his face: for I was the child of his old age.
His mother was ‘outrageous with joy’ at the return of her lost child, and put him to bed, where in a day or two he recovered.
But the after-effects of his experience remained with him far longer.
He was subject to attacks of ague for many years, and memories of that October night came to embody for him his sense of exile from his family, and his anger at his mother's demanding and erratic love.
Towards the end of September 1781, John Coleridge took his son Frank to Plymouth, where he was to begin service as a midshipman under Admiral Graves of Cadhay.
Returning to Ottery late on 4 October, Mr Coleridge gave a ‘long & particular account’ of his journey, before going to bed in high spirits.
Soon afterwards, his wife heard a noise in his throat, and when she spoke to him, he did not reply.
Her shriek awakened the house, and Coleridge, who had been asleep when his father returned, knew at once what it signified, saying to himself in the darkness, ‘Papa is dead.’
John Coleridge, ‘an Israelite without guile’, had probably died of a massive  stroke , and a few days later was buried on the north side of the altar in the church he had served for twenty-one years.
The practical effects of his death on a largely unprovided family were immediate, and soon after the funeral Mrs Coleridge and her children moved from the schoolhouse to make way for her husband's successor as schoolmaster.
A more dramatic change for the youngest family member came in the new year.
Though Coleridge continued at the King's School for several months, delighting his mother by pointing out the new master's faulty knowledge of grammar, in April 1782 Francis Buller, a family friend and later an eminent judge, obtained for him a presentation to Christ's Hospital in London (the Blue Coat School), ‘there to be educated, and brought up among other poor children’.
Mrs Coleridge may have felt that the Blue Coat School would best prepare her son for the clerical career John Coleridge had wished him to follow.
To Coleridge himself, however, his enforced departure from Ottery seemed like betrayal.
At the age of only nine, he set off on the London coach, and said a sudden and bewildered farewell both to his family and to his Devon childhood.
Cadhay Bridge and the River Otter
Exile from the West Country was to last far longer than Coleridge can have expected.
His first surviving letter, written to his mother in February 1785, seems to suggest that he had visited Ottery in the recent past; but better evidence that he returned there does not survive until 1789, seven years after his arrival in London.
By that time his feelings of resentment against his mother were fixed for life, and the imaginative intensity with which he called up the Devon landscape as a lost Eden of content had become a habit of mind.
Coleridge was to speak and write on many occasions of the ‘visions of childhood’ which so filled him during his London school-days.
He told Wordsworth how he would lie on the leads, or flat roof, of Christ's Hospital, and gaze into the sky because that was the only face of nature London could not obscure, or how he would close his eyes and ‘by internal light’ see before him the trees and meadows of Ottery and the river itself.
In important respects, however, his longing was a self-deception, a poetically fruitful means of expressing that sense of loneliness and isolation which had been as much a part of him in Ottery as in London.
Only when he settled as a newly-married man, first at Clevedon, and later at Nether Stowey, was he able to   test the healing powers of mere natural beauty, and to find that beauty was not enough.
Christ's Hospital had been founded in 1553 for the ‘orphaned, aged and sick poor’, but by the time of Coleridge's arrival it had long outgrown its origins to become the foremost of England's charity schools.
Seven hundred boys, almost a third of them sons of the clergy, lived their ‘ultra-Spartan’ lives in an institution which combined frequently brutal discipline with a consistently meagre diet.
‘Every morning a bit of dry bread & some bad small beer,’ Coleridge mournfully recalled, ‘every evening a larger piece of bread, & cheese or butter…’
Dinner was an unvarying weekly round in which boiled beef and mutton figured largely, and it was little compensation to several hundred hungry schoolboys that they took their meals in the school's magnificent hall, overlooked by the demure and decorative paintings of Antonio Verrio.
Left: The cloisters of Christ's Hospital, Newgate Street, London.
The school buildings were demolished in 1902.
Right: The Revd James Boyer (1736–1814), Upper Master of the Grammar School, Christ's Hospital
Coleridge, the ‘playless day-dreamer’, survived and made friends at Christ's Hospital in spite of every misery his school-days could heap on him.
His isolated Ottery childhood had provided few opportunities for exploring the possibilities of friendship.
Now, adrift from home and more vulnerable than ever, he discovered in himself a remarkable gift for inspiring friendship, a gift which never left him.
In the nine years he remained at school his closest companions were to include Bob Allen, Val le Grice, and Thomas Middleton; but no friend proved more lasting or dependable than the gifted, tongue-tied Charles Lamb, son of a minor official at the Inner Temple.
For Lamb, the desolation of the exiled Coleridge had a poignant force, which he famously recalled in his essay ‘Christ's Hospital Five and Thirty Years Ago’.
There, speaking in Coleridge's voice and tactfully substituting Calne for Ottery, he wrote:
O the cruelty of separating a poor lad from his early homestead!
The yearnings which I used to have towards it in those unfledged years!
How, in my dreams, would my native town (far in the west) come back, with its church, and trees, and faces!
How I would wake weeping, and in the anguish of my heart exclaim upon sweet Calne in Wiltshire!
The refuge of books, first discovered in his Aunt Susannah's shop, still remained available to him in London, and by a curious accident he gained access to as many books as even he could want.
Walking one day down a London street, arms outstretched as he day-dreamt that he was Leander swimming the Hellespont, he was accused by a man whose coat he touched of being a pick-pocket.
Coleridge's improbably romantic explanation and evident intelligence so impressed the man that he gave the remarkable child a subscription to the circulating library in Cheapside, where he began, according to his own not unlikely account, to read every book it contained.
‘Conceive what I must have been at fourteen,’ he reminisced to James Gillman, his first biographer.
‘…My whole being was, with eyes closed to every object of present sense, to crumple myself up in a sunny corner, and read, read, read.’
He was guilty of no more than his usual exaggeration when, at the age of twenty-four, he announced to a friend that he had read ‘almost every thing’.
Coleridge's outstanding abilities remained quite unsuspected at Christ's Hospital until they came to the attention of the Upper Grammar School master, the Revd James Boyer, a man whose great gifts as a teacher were only exceeded by his sadistically violent temper.
With the mellowing of harsh memories, Coleridge was able in middle age to speak of Boyer's teaching as an ‘inestimable advantage’, even while admitting that his old master's severity still haunted his dreams.
It was Boyer who helped Coleridge to understand the subtle logic and ‘fugitive causes’ which gave the greatest poetry its power, and who taught the lesson, not immediately applied in Coleridge's teenage work, that conventional metaphors and needless elaboration seldom made good verse:
In fancy I can almost hear him now, exclaiming ‘Harp?
Harp?
Lyre?
Pen and ink, boy, you mean!
Muse, boy, Muse? your Nurse's daughter, you mean!
Pierian spring?
Oh 'aye! the cloister-pump, I suppose!’
At the age of sixteen, Coleridge joined the select band of the ‘Grecians’, the school's most gifted pupils who studied for places at Oxford and Cambridge.
In the three years that followed, he at last found personal happiness and intellectual  fulfilment, and was swiftly transformed into the brilliantly eloquent young man the greater world was soon to know.
It was that young man, declaiming and arguing, whom Charles Lamb was famously to invoke: ‘Come back into memory, like as thou wert in the day-spring of thy fancies,’ he wrote in 1820, ‘with hope like a fiery column before thee — the dark pillar not yet turned — Samuel Taylor Coleridge — Logician, Metaphysician, Bard!’
How have I seen the casual passer through the Cloisters stand still, intranced with admiration (while he weighed the disproportion between the speech and the garb of the young Mirandula), to hear thee unfold, in thy deep and sweet intonations, the mysteries of Jamblichus, or Plotinus (for even in those years thou waxedst not pale at such philosophic draughts), or reciting Homer in his Greek, or Pindar — while the walls of the old Grey Friars re-echoed to the accents of the inspired charity-boy !
The destruction of the Bastille in July 1789 drew from Coleridge impassioned verse in praise of freedom and ‘glad Liberty’, and the fevered excitement inspired throughout Europe by the early days of the French Revolution provided the intellectual climate in which his radical conscience began to form.
His reading of Voltaire's Philosophical Dictionary made him briefly an atheist (Boyer beat religion back into him, to lifelong effect), but of more lasting consequence was his discovery of twenty-one sonnets by a Wiltshire clergyman called William Lisle Bowles (1762–1850).
The sonnets of Bowles struck Coleridge with the force of revelation, seeming to him, in their natural use of language and heartfelt expression of personal feeling, unlike anything he had ever read.
He made over forty transcriptions of the sonnets ‘as the best presents I could offer to those, who had in any way won my regard’, and in his own poetic experiments of the next few years found an important model in the work of the now-forgotten Wiltshire priest.
New friendships, as much as politics and poetry, transformed for him the final years of school.
He was introduced by Tom Evans, a younger school friend, to his widowed mother Mrs Evans, and was soon being welcomed with unaffected warmth into the family home near Christ's Hospital.
He came to love the generous and practical Mrs Evans like the mother he felt he had now entirely lost, and for her daughters developed feelings altogether more romantic.
He and Bob Allen enjoyed ‘hours of paradise’ escorting the Miss Evanses home on Saturdays, and would bring them ‘the pillage of the flower-gardens…with sonnet or love-rhyme wrapped round the nose-gay’.
He became devoted most of all to Mary Evans, the eldest daughter, and believed that he loved her.
But by the time he arrived at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1791, having left Christ's Hospital with academic honour and real regret, his love had not become a sufficiently urgent reality for him to declare it.
Instead, it remained a pleasing abstraction, like his fading memories of the Devon fields.
Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1841
Cambridge was empty when Coleridge reached it in October.
The fenland winds blew through a town ‘very fertile in alleys, and mud, and cats, and dogs…’ but almost devoid of the friends who had increasingly sustained him at Christ's Hospital.
His old friend and mentor, Thomas Middleton, now in his final year at Pembroke College, was the only person he knew, and it was Middleton who in the months ahead provided Coleridge with fatherly guidance and approval.
Though Coleridge was lonely, and made ill by the dampness of his rooms, he quickly became a regular attender at chapel, read mathematics for three hours a day, and in ‘Leisure hours’ was making translations of Anacreon.
Coleridge was the first to recognize that ‘Freshmen always begin very furiously ’; but so long as Middleton was at hand to guide and encourage, he overcame the weakness of will and habit of procrastination which were always ready to disable him.
By April 1792, he was ‘writing for all the prizes’, and later that year his ‘Ode on the Slave  Trade’, a poem ‘tinged with melancholy & moral pathos’, won the Browne Medal.
He spent his first summer from Cambridge in leisurely visits to his family, staying first with his brother Edward in Salisbury then travelling to Ottery for one of the few lengthy returns he had made since childhood.
The reality of the narrow market town belied his long-nurtured recollections of it, and some of those he had loved most were now gone.
His brother Luke, whom Coleridge had come to know and revere in London, had died in 1790 at the age of twenty-five; Nancy, loved ‘most tenderly’, had succumbed to tuberculosis the following year at only twenty-one.
He amused himself during his visit writing doggerel about the Revd Fullwood Smerdon, his father's successor, and returned to Cambridge reflecting with distaste on Devonshire people:
The manners of the Inhabitants annihilated whatever tender ideas of pleasure my Fancy rather than my Memory had pictured to my Expectation.
I found them (almost universally) to be gross without openness, and cunning without refinement.
This new assessment of his home marked an important casting off, a kind of liberation, and if in later years Ottery remained symbolically important to Coleridge, that was only because his recollections of the shaping years of childhood all seemed to gather at the town.
As a present reality, Ottery had ceased to compel him.
In Cambridge that autumn he found himself without the steadying influence of Thomas Middleton, and without money.
To his growing band of Cambridge friends he remained the brilliant talker and philosopher whose radical sympathies were ever more plain.
Privately, however, his mood was often near despair as he contemplated the financial and emotional chaos into which he was sinking.
‘I am so closely blocked up by an army of Misfortunes,’ he told Mary Evans in one of his increasingly fond letters, ‘that really there is no passage left open for Mirth or any thing else.’
When he visited Ottery in August 1793 his brothers reluctantly agreed to help him; but some of the money they supplied was frittered away on the journey back to Cambridge, and when he got there he discovered a host of forgotten debts.
‘My Agitations were delirium,’ he later told George:
I formed a Party, dashed to London at eleven o'clock at night, and for three days lived in all the tempest of Pleasure…
I again returned to Cambridge — staid a week — such a week!
Where Vice has not annihilated Sensibility, there is little need of a Hell!
By late November, in a mood not far from suicidal, he was in London once more, desperately hoping for a win in the Irish Lottery; but when that last hope failed, he used the only means he could find of acting decisively.
On 2 December  1793, having adopted the alias of Silas Tomkyn Comberbache, he secretly enlisted in the 15th Light Dragoons.
Sword used by Coleridge as a recruit in the 15th Light Dragoons.
It is now preserved at his cottage in Nether Stowey
Like the child who long before had fled from the schoolmaster's house at Ottery, Coleridge in his flight to the dragoons was escaping from intolerable external pressures, from the certain disapproval of his family, and from emotions within himself he seemed unable to control.
His descent into drunkenness and sexual dissipation filled him with self-disgust, and his still undeclared love for Mary Evans was gaining a disturbing power.
Now, dressed as a soldier, and further hidden behind his remarkable new name, he closed his eyes on his troubles and tried to forget.
He was posted first to Reading, and was soon proving himself a soldier and horseman of rare incompetence.
He gained the trust and friendship of his comrades by writing their love-letters, and for a month in the pest-house at Henley became the devotedly unselfish nurse of a soldier suffering from smallpox.
It was there that a letter from his brother George eventually reached him, forwarded by one of Coleridge's friends who had discovered the full story of his flight from Cambridge.
George was generous and conciliatory to an extent that Coleridge can hardly have expected.
But the joint efforts of George and James Coleridge to rescue their brother from his folly were to prove both complex and time-consuming.
At first the army would not consider a discharge before a substitute had been supplied.
Eventually, submitting to James Coleridge's persuasion and recognizing the peculiar circumstances, the authorities decided on another solution, though one of which the Coleridge family evidently remained unaware.
On 10 April 1794, Silas Tomkyn Comberbache was discharged from the dragoons, ‘being Insane’.
That was a judgement with which the remorseful S.T. Coleridge would, for the moment, hardly have disagreed.
‘I laugh almost like an insane person when I cast my eye backward on the prospect of my past two years,’ he had written to  George in February.
‘What a gloomy Huddle of eccentric Actions, and dim-discovered motives!’
When he returned to college immediately following his discharge, he was lucky to escape with relatively minor punishment — the Master ordered one month's gating and ninety pages of Greek translation — and was determined not only to drop his more unsuitable friends but, as in his first year at Cambridge, ‘to write for all the Prizes’.
Throughout his life Coleridge found such resolutions far easier to make than to abide by, and in reality his university career was almost at an end, as was any possibility of academic distinction.
Remorse, dissatisfaction and hope filled his mind as the heat of a glorious midsummer approached, and his yearning for a means to channel his abundant intellectual and emotional energy was greater now than it had ever been.
In early June, poised between elation and despair, he set out on a walking tour with an amiably dull university friend, Joseph Hucks.
By the time Coleridge returned to Jesus College three months later, having travelled to Oxford and Bristol, and tramped half over Wales and Somerset, the landscape of his life, and his hopes for the future, had been dramatically transformed.
Coleridge's brothers, James (1759–1836),left,and George (1764–1828),right.
Coleridge thought George ‘every way nearer to Perfection than any man I ever yet knew’
‘EPIDEMIC DELUSION’
Coleridge left Cambridge on his summer walking tour with simple intentions.
He and Joseph Hucks were to spend ‘three or four days’ in Oxford, and then to embark on a lengthy exploration of North Wales, the destination at that period of many travellers searching for the picturesque beauty praised by writers such as William Gilpin.
For some who made the journey into Wales, the experience was profound: on a warm summer night in 1791 William Wordsworth had climbed to the top of Snowdon to watch the sun rise, and had found there an intensity of natural beauty which he never forgot.
Coleridge's Welsh visit, by contrast, was perhaps the least significant part of his wanderings during the next few weeks, and almost from the moment he left Cambridge, his simple plans for what he called his ‘peregrination’ began to grow more complex.
He reached Oxford with Joseph Hucks about the middle of June 1794, and quickly renewed his friendship with Bob Allen, an undergraduate at University College since leaving Christ's Hospital two years earlier.
Allen, in turn, took Coleridge to Balliol to introduce him to a young radical and poet called Robert Southey, who was then almost twenty years old.
The two men were instantly captivated by one another, Coleridge overwhelming Southey with his extraordinary powers of eloquence and intellect, Southey immediately winning Coleridge's admiration by his decisiveness and strength of character.
The pattern of their relationship was to be repeated in many of the ‘chance-started friendships’ which Coleridge formed in later years.
Struggling throughout his life with his own infirmity of will, and with a haunting sense that he was like some great tree possessing ‘pith within the Trunk, not heart of Wood’, he was consistently drawn, for good and ill, to those possessing stronger personalities than his own.
Southey had been born in 1774 above the draper's shop in Wine Street, Bristol, belonging to his unsuccessful father.
His childhood had largely been spent, however, in the more socially elevated household of his snobbish and unloved aunt, Elizabeth Tyler, from whom he may have learnt the polished superficiality of manner which was one feature of his character.
When he arrived at Balliol College in 1792, he had recently been expelled from Westminster School for publishing an essay condemning flogging, and his radical temperament developed rapidly during his Oxford years.
He supported the French Revolution even more enthusiastically than Coleridge, and in 1793 bitterly opposed the  willingness of Pitt's government to go to war against the recently proclaimed French Republic.
He read Plato, and despairing of his own country, dreamt of an island ‘peopled by men who should be Christians and Philosophers and where Vice only should be contemptible’.
Oxford from the river,c .
1850
Coleridge was not only a willing listener to Southey's ideas, but was soon developing them into grand and Utopian principles during long hours spent in Oxford ‘disputing on metaphysical subjects’.
The philosophies of Rousseau and of David Hartley, whose work had become a powerful influence on Coleridge, convinced them both that ‘Vice is not natural to Man’, and that given strong reasons for being virtuous, ‘Man would approach very near perfection’.
Before  Coleridge's lengthening visit had come to an end, the two dissatisfied young men had pursued the logic of their arguments to a startling conclusion.
They decided, with a wild mixture of folly and idealism, that in the spring of 1795 they would set sail from England to establish an ideal community in America, and in the meantime would gather recruits for the scheme and earn money for it by writing.
The community was to be governed according to the principle of ‘Pantisocracy’— a word invented by Coleridge meaning ‘equal rule by all’— and in the course of the next few months Pantisocracy in its broad details was discussed and argued into existence.
The proposed community, to be established on the banks of the Susquehannah river in New England, would consist of twelve men and women, and would sustain itself by farming the land.
Coleridge and Southey optimistically calculated that two or three hours daily labour would be all that was required, and that the remaining time could be given up to‘study, liberal discussions, and the education of their children’.
Members of the community were to be permitted their own opinions in matters of politics and religion, but property would be held in common.
Left: Robert Southey (1774–1843).
After a portrait by John Opie, 1804.
Right: Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772–1834).
After a pencil and chalk drawing by Robert Hancock, 1796
The astonishing speed with which the two brother radicals developed their Pantisocratic scheme was testimony not only to the transforming effect they had on one another, but to the very weak foundations upon which the whole  enterprise rested.
Although other idealistic communities were already being established in America at that period, few who saw the Pantisocratic scheme in its early growth were ever convinced that it could succeed.
Coleridge and Southey themselves soon became impervious to all doubt.
With the certainty of the newly converted, they could see only that Pantisocracy offered an escape from their increasingly unsatisfactory and unhappy lives, and from a country whose politics they deplored.
It seemed to promise a new beginning, almost a new birth.
Gloucester seen from Robins Wood Hill, 1829
Coleridge had spent three weeks in Oxford before, on 5 July 1794, he finally set off on his Welsh expedition, promising Southey that he would rejoin him later to make further plans for settling in America.
Joseph Hucks now seemed a poor companion in comparison with Coleridge's new Oxford friend, and as the two men walked on under a blazing sun, first to Gloucester —‘a nothing-to-be-said about Town’— and then to Ross-on-Wye, Coleridge's thoughts returned constantly to the substance of his conversations with Southey.
‘I have positively done nothing but dream of the System of no Property every step of the Way since I left you,’ he wrote back to Oxford on 13 July.
He not only dreamed Pantisocracy, he preached it as well.
At Llanvillin his oratory caused two huge butcher-like men to dance about the room in excited admiration, and at Bala, he provoked a violent quarrel among the justice, the  doctor, and others of the parish who were gathered at the inn.
His invincible capacity for making friends soon prevailed, however, and, as he explained to Southey, ‘they all except the Parson shook me by the hand, and said I was an open hearted honest-speaking Fellow, tho' I was a bit of a Democrat’.
Only at Wrexham were painful thoughts quite unexpectedly revived: Coleridge caught sight of Mary Evans, and discovered that she was in the town visiting her grandmother.
But that sudden reminder of ‘thoughts full of bitterness’ and images too dearly loved’, as he expressed himself theatrically to Southey, subdued his high spirits only briefly.
‘Love is a local Anguish,’ he wrote after he and Hucks had travelled on from Wrexham.
‘I am 50 miles distant, and am not half so miserable.’
On about 5 August, after climbing Penmaenmawr and Snowdon, and experiencing sundry other adventures, Coleridge arrived at the Bush Inn, Bristol, and immediately sought out Robert Southey.
Southey had reached the city shortly before, having walked from Oxford with George Burnett, a Balliol friend who had been persuaded to join the Pantisocrats.
To his friends in his native city, Southey began with missionary enthusiasm to explain the principles of Pantisocracy and to praise the genius of the absent Coleridge.
Southey's seafaring brother, Tom, was an early recruit to the scheme, as was Southey's widowed mother in Bath (even though she told him she thought he was mad).
Robert Lovell, a recent Bristol friend of democratic principles, was not so easily persuaded, but before long ‘totally changed his opinion’ and became an important convert.
Lovell was a Bristol poet of minor talents whose rich Quaker family had disowned him for his marriage that year to a beautiful actress called Mary Fricker, one of five sisters already well known to Southey.
Indeed, the third sister, the ‘mild and affectionate’ Edith Fricker, was even now the object of his somewhat calculating attentions, and within a fortnight had accepted his proposal of marriage, together with its Pantisocratic consequences.
It was at Lovell's dinner-table that Coleridge eventually found Southey, and there for the first time that he met Lovell's wife Mary and her eldest sister Sarah Fricker.
The eldest Miss Fricker never forgot the arrival of the travel-weary student whose brilliant reputation had gone so powerfully before him.
‘Brown as a berry’, his clothes worn out, and his hair in need of cutting, he appeared before them as a ‘dreadful figure’, though one whose torrential eloquence was unabated.
Lovell gave Coleridge food that night, but not shelter, and in the days that followed was responsible with Southey for introducing him to a city strong in religious dissent and political radicalism.
One meeting of particular significance was with a young dissenting bookseller called Joseph Cottle, whose shop stood at the corner of Corn Street and High Street, a few yards from Southey's birthplace.
Cottle, who four years later was to publish the Lyrical Ballads and in old age produced his garrulous and unreliable Reminiscences , immediately saw in Coleridge the signs of ‘commanding genius’, but reserved for Southey's ‘great suavity of manners’ his more enthusiastic praise.
Pantisocracy, the everlasting theme, he   considered an ‘epidemic delusion’ of comic potential, a judgement not inappropriate to some of Southey's more absurd pronouncements on the subject that summer, but less than fair to the deep seriousness with which Coleridge had begun to form his Pantisocratic ideas of social relations and social justice.
At the heart of Bristol, looking from Wine Street into Corn Street 1829.
The building on the left with the curved façade had formerly been Joseph Cottle's bookshop
Joseph Cottle (1770 1853), friend and first publisher of Coleridge, Wordsworth and Southey
In the second week of August, filled by an idealistic vision of their future lives on the banks of the Susquehannah, Coleridge and Southey set out from Bristol on a walking tour into Somerset.
To Southey, the county was almost home territory.
Although he had been born in Wine Street, Bristol, his cloth-making ancestors had come from Wellington, and his grandfather had farmed in the remote Somerset hamlet of Rich's Holford below the southern slopes of the Quantock Hills; his eccentric uncle, John, was comfortably established in a ‘most delightful villa’ a mile from Taunton, and Bath had intermittently been Southey's own home since childhood.
It was to Bath that the two Pantisocrats walked first, staying the night at old Mrs Southey's house, 8 Westgate Buildings, where another visitor, Sarah Fricker, was already in residence.
Mrs Southey had asked Sarah to visit so they  could ‘talk over the American affair’, and it may by then have seemed inevitable to Sarah that she too would be carried on the Pantisocratic tide.
Coleridge himself cannot have failed to make the calculation that of four marriageable Fricker sisters, one was married to Robert Lovell, and another all but engaged to Southey.
The dangerous logic of events was leading to a predictable conclusion, though Sarah and Coleridge had met for the first time only nine days before and were of fundamentally different temperaments, she sharp-tongued, humorous and practical, he procrastinating and visionary.
High hopes and summer weather did nothing to encourage circumspection, and by the time Coleridge and Southey left Bath the next morning, with Southey's dog Rover in attendance, it is likely that some kind of relationship with Sarah was already understood.
Wells Cathedral from the north-east, 1830
Cheddar Gorge, looking south, 1830
The two friends set out on their meandering though scenic way through Somerset intending first to visit George Burnett at his family home in Huntspill.
They were ten miles from Bath when they reached the village of Chilcompton, remarkable for a beautiful stream which bordered the village street on one side and which abounded with trout and eels.
Coleridge addressed to the stream a delicate poem in the Bowles manner, describing the ‘scatter'd cots and peaceful hamlet’ he saw, as well as a band of schoolchildren launching their ‘paper navies’into the water.
It is a poem such as a man would write in contented mood, and   Southey for his part thought it ‘very beautiful’.
They dropped down into the city of Wells from the lower slopes of the Mendip Hills, and cannot have failed to pause for one of the finest views of the cathedral.
What else they saw in and near the city they did not record, but it evidently did not include on this occasion the famous caverns at Wookey Hole.
Cheddar Gorge, however, was considered indispensable, and towards evening they marched onward.
‘How far to  Chedder ?’, they asked everyone they met, receiving estimates which varied from two-and-a-half miles to seven.
Night fell, but in spite of that, as Southey wrote to a friend, ‘We talked philosophy like two poets and often paused one while to drink at a clear spring — another while to encourage poor Rover now quite lame — and sometimes to mark the glowworms paley ray.’
When Cheddar was finally reached at about ten o'clock, no one would take them in, until an innkeeper had pity on them and made up a bed in the garret.
Rover insisted on joining them there, the landlady taking care to bolt the door on the outside ‘for fear we should rob the house’.
Southey did not sleep well: Coleridge, evidently troubled by dreams even when his waking thoughts were optimistic, made a ‘vile bedfellow’.
nn
During his Welsh expedition, Coleridge had occasionally lapsed with self mocking enthusiasm into the prose style of the travel writers to express his feelings for mountains ‘sublimely terrible’ and other natural marvels.
When the sun rose on Cheddar Cliffs — as the gorge was invariably called — he found a scene which justified superlatives, and which travellers had long regarded as among the most remarkable natural sights in lowland Britain.
Only Southey's description survives to give some impression of the effect produced by the towering limestone gorge on two minds eager to be astonished:
Never did I see a grander scene — immense rocks rising perpendicularly from the glen to such a height as pained the neck of the spectator, and terminating in the most bold and fantastic manner.
Large trees grew from the interstices of the stone and sheep brouzed on the edge of every precipice.
There was another stream to drink from, perhaps an opportunity to visit some of the gorge's ‘five considerable caverns’, and in the scene as a whole, images enough for Coleridge to store up for the poetry of the future.
They probably reached George Burnett later that day at Huntspill, where his father's Georgian house stood at a respectable distance from the busy turnpike, with a large sundial presiding over the front door.
The elder Burnett can scarcely have been pleased to welcome the two wandering Pantisocrats.
He was a prosperous farmer who had sent his son to Balliol — a college which owned land in the parish — with the intention that he should eventually be ordained.
Now John Burnett found his good-natured and impressionable son falling under the spell of two far more intelligent men of dubious opinions, and caught up in a wild scheme for emigration to America.
Certainly, George Burnett, weak-willed and  indolent, was to suffer the most from the rash ideas and too easy friendships which that summer produced.
Before he died in 1811, an opium-addicted pauper in Marylebone Workhouse, he may have reflected that it would have been better had he never left the low-lying fields of Huntspill.
Burnett was not the only friend Southey and Coleridge hoped to visit in the course of the Somerset expedition.
A few miles from Huntspill, in the hamlet of Shurton, lived Henry Poole, a fellow student of Coleridge's at Jesus College, and one member of a large and talented family whose various branches were scattered through a number of local villages.
Coleridge and Southey may have crossed the River Parrett at Bridgwater in order to reach Shurton; more probably, like Thomas De Quincey thirteen years later, they decided to shorten the journey by using the river ferry at Combwich Reach.
If so, it was at Combwich (pronounced ‘Cummage’) that Coleridge first set foot within that secluded, forgotten territory, bounded by the Quantock Hills and a bleakly impressive coastline, which was to remain with him for the rest of his life.
Gravestones of the Burnett family in the churchyard at Huntspill
He and Southey found Henry Poole living at his father's house, Shurton Court, then recently transformed from a large farmhouse to a townish Georgian mansion.
Henry, who later became the amiable vicar of Cannington, was never a likely recruit to idealistic schemes for emigration.
Nor was his father, William Poole, a landowner and practical farmer renowned for his ‘astonishing sagacity in  predicting the course of the weather’.
But the family at Shurton evidently warmed to Coleridge in spite of his views, and it was to Henry's sister Lavinia that he would later address his affectionate short poem ‘To a Young Lady on her Recovery from a Fever’.
Though Shurton proved to be less than fertile ground for Pantisocracy, Henry Poole was quite happy to guide Coleridge and Southey to more promising territory near at hand.
On the morning of Monday 18 August 1794, he accordingly set off with them on the road to Nether Stowey, three miles distant.
Shurton Court, Stogursey, the home of Henry Poole
Nether Stowey — usually known in Coleridge's day, and since, simply as Stowey — had called itself a town for as long as anyone could remember, but by the late eighteenth century it was in reality no more than a large, straggling village whose inhabitants numbered fewer than six hundred.
It lay at the point where the fertile coastal plain to which Shurton belonged gave way to the austerely beautiful Quantock Hills, and in the meeting of those two quite different landscapes the village acquired something of its distinctive character: Stowey was a place always busy with the concerns of a lowland domestic world, but the gateway as well to a solitary hill country where man's dominance was suddenly challenged and nature prevailed.
Accidents of history, as much as of geography, had played their part in making the village.
The attentions of powerful lords in the Middle Ages brought  borough status, a castle, and the right to hold a market and a fair, and ensured that Stowey was quickly established as one of the most important places between Bridgwater and Williton.
Even the decline which came in later centuries was only relative.
When Coleridge first entered the village in August 1794, it remained the economic focus of a wide surrounding territory, and struggled, in the midst of endemic rural poverty and untamed nature, to sustain its modest version of prosperous, civilized society.
The market-house, Nether Stowey, from a watercolour by W.W. Wheatley, 1845.
The old woman on the right is walking down Lime Street.
On the left is the beginning of Castle Street
Approaching from Shurton and Stogursey, Henry Poole and his companions probably entered Stowey from the north.
The first they saw of the village may thus have been the dilapidated thatched cottage called Gilberts or Gilbards, which, improbable as it would have seemed to Coleridge in the fever of Pantisocracy, was to have so important a place in his later history.
The cottage, the last in the village, stood at the end of Lime Street, one of the three short streets which converged on the centre of the village and at whose junction stood Stowey's ramshackle market-house.
Narrow, busy, and densely built, Lime Street was the poorest of the village streets, and probably provided homes for the labourers and artisans — clothworkers, candlemakers, quarrymen and others who made up a large part of the Stowey community in the late eighteenth century.
St Mary's Street, containing three inns and a few grander houses, gave way to open country before reaching St Mary's Church and Stowey Court, the latter a mansion of the sixteenth century with formal gardens and a gazebo.
Castle Street, running west from the market-house, formed the broad heart of Stowey, and contained the majority of its more prosperous households.
Here lived wealthier tradesmen and professionals in houses of brick, stone and stucco, many built in the course of the eighteenth century.
The wide street rose gently westward towards the prominent hill on which Stowey's long-vanished castle had stood, and a Quantock stream, which drove the Stowey corn mill, flowed through a deep stone gutter on the street's southern side.
Architecturally, as in other ways, this pleasing street scene was dominated by an elegant seven-bay house in red Quantock sandstone.
It had been built earlier in the century, and by 1794 was the home of Henry Poole's uncle, Thomas Poole the elder, an ‘irritable, arbitrary old man’ whose bad temper owed only a little to his sufferings from the gout.
Though Mrs Poole, gentle-natured and tolerant, made up in part for her disagreeable husband, most who visited the Castle Street house were attracted there by neither of the elder Pooles, but by their son, another Thomas.
Such was certainly the case that summer day in 1794, when Henry Poole, with his two poetical companions.
at last arrived at his cousin's door.
Thomas Poole the younger had been born into comfortable West Somerset obscurity in 1765, and gave little sign to those who met him for the first time of the great gifts of character and intellect which he possessed.
When Thomas De Quincey visited Poole in 1807, he found a ‘stout plain-looking farmer’, and discovered only later that beyond the plain exterior, the proudly-maintained West Country accent, and the abrupt manner was a man of wide culture and fervently liberal viewpoint, and one who, like Coleridge himself, possessed a remarkable capacity for making friends.
Those qualities owed little to the opportunities provided by formal schooling or family background: the Pooles had been tanners in the Stowey area since at least the early eighteenth century, and Tom Poole's father, the eldest of four gifted brothers, ran a large and thriving tanning business from his Castle Street home.
He sneered at Tom's bookish   tastes, and denied him the education which would better have suited his intelligence and his inclinations.
Instead, the elder Poole apprenticed his son at an early age to the tanning trade, the younger showing his resentment by ‘ostentatious inattention’ to the work of the tanyard and a steady devotion to his books.
Tom Poole's house in Castle Street, Nether Stowey
Tom Poole (1765–1837) in middle age
If at first Tom Poole's knowledge as a practical tanner suffered in consequence, his commercial acumen and persuasive eloquence did not.
In 1790 a great meeting of tanners held in London elected him to speak for them to the prime minister, William Pitt, concerning the distressed state of the tanning trade; and in 1793 he wrote to parliament on behalf of Bristol tanners to suggest remedies for the scarcity of the oak bark used in tanning.
His introduction to the greater world during his London visit was important in shaping his liberal sympathies, and when he returned to Stowey in March 1791, his relatives were shocked to find him overflowing with French Revolutionary politics as well as other democratic heresies.
By 1794 his letters were being opened by the government, who were said to regard him as ‘the most dangerous person in the county of Somerset’.
Events would in due course moderate his view of the French experiment, but Poole, in spite of hostility, never abandoned his intelligent radicalism or his strong social conscience.
Remembered now for his friendships with Coleridge, Wordsworth, and Humphry Davy, as central to his biography was the fact  recorded by his Stowey epitaph, that he remained the ‘enlightened Friend of the Poor’.
Coleridge's first meeting with Tom Poole lasted less than a day, but in that short time Coleridge was expansive both on the subject of himself and his plans for the future.
He spoke with all his habitual power of his recent follies ‘abberations from prudence’ as he called them — and of his resolve now ‘to be as sober and rational as his most sober friends could wish’.
He discussed religion and politics, leaving no room for doubt that not only was he ‘a Unitarian, if not a Deist’, but also ‘a Democrat, to the utmost extent of the word’.
And he described in detail his hopes for Pantisocracy.
Poole, as one who had already thought of emigrating to America, listened sympathetically; but he saw at once that the scheme could never succeed, remarking to a friend that however perfectible human nature might be, it was ‘not yet perfect enough’ for Pantisocracy.
Poole was as quick to recognize, however, that Coleridge himself was someone of ‘splendid abilities’, and before the day was over, the two very different men had established a lasting friendship.
Coleridge — mercurial, brilliant, and prodigiously well read — opened to Poole the world of thought and learning he had longed to discover since boyhood.
Poole offered in return the benevolent strength and practicality which Coleridge was soon to value so greatly.
Marshmills in Over Stowey, the home of Tom Poole's cousins
The meeting at the Castle Street house was decisive in the lives of both Poole and Coleridge, and was also, though by accident, instantly notorious in the little  world of Stowey.
Soon after midday Tom Poole and his brother Richard decided to take their interesting visitors on a short walk to the farmhouse called Marshmills in Over Stowey, home of a large tribe of Poole cousins who were almost a second family to Tom and Richard: among them were Penelope Poole, ‘a beautiful, dark-eyed girl’ who would never return Tom Poole's love for her (he died unmarried), and John Poole, an Oxford fellow and later the rector of Enmore, who was Tom Poole's friend and companion from childhood.
John Poole was a man of high Tory opinions, and the motive for introducing him to Coleridge and Southey can only have been mischievous.
John Poole, as he recorded in his Latin journal, was predictably scandalized:
About one o'clock, Tom Poole and his brother Richard, Henry Poole and two young men, friends of his, come in.
These two strangers, I understand, had left Cambridge, and had walked nearly all through Wales.
One is an undergraduate of Oxford, the other of Cambridge.
Each of them was shamefully hot with Democratic rage as regards politics, and Infidel as to religion.
I was extremely indignant.
John Poole's temper cannot have been improved when he announced the news of Robespierre's execution, reported in that day's Western Flying Post , and prompted  from Southey the Histrionic cry, ‘I had rather have heard the death of my own father.’
In the evening John Reeks, the drunken rector of Aisholt, called at Marshmills to join the chorus of indignation, having met Tom Poole's visitors back at Stowey.
There, it seems, the talk had become surpassingly outrageous, and by the time the brief visit came to an end, it was assured of its place in the folklore of the Poole family: John Poole was still recalling it half a century later.
The inhabitants of Stowey for their part were already passing judgement as Coleridge, Southey and Henry Poole set off on the road back to Shurton.
The Revd John Poole (1771–1858), Tom Poole's cousin and boyhood friend
In a West Country summer whose consequences were to stay with Coleridge for the rest of his life the most significant event was yet to come.
Returning to Bristol from Shurton, he and Southey stopped again at Mrs Southey's house in Westgate Buildings, Bath, and as before found Sarah Fricker there to greet them.
The ‘epidemic delusion’ of Pantisocratic brotherhood had perhaps never been more powerful than at that moment, life on the banks of the Susquehannah never a more siren prospect, and a conversation which began by Coleridge asking Sarah if she would write to him when he returned to Cambridge led quickly to a proposal of marriage, which she accepted.
The date was probably 20 or 21 August 1794.
Southey wrote long afterwards that he was astonished at this turn of events, since Coleridge, such a short time before, had talked of being ‘deeply in love with a certain Mary Evans’; Coleridge, on the other hand, was later to blame Southey for having persuaded him into marriage against his will.
Both were probably guilty of rewriting the history of their true feelings, and it seems clear, at least, that Coleridge's proposal to Sarah Fricker was his own impulsive decision.
In the fever of Pantisocracy, he needed no persuasion.
On 2 September Coleridge parted from Southey in Bristol — Southey said it was ‘like the losing a limb’— and began a characteristically slow and interrupted progress back to Cambridge for what would prove to be his final term.
As Southey was writing next day of a future which opened to him ‘a smiling prospect’, and of his hopes for ‘the purest happiness Man can ever experience’, the summer was already at an end.
Somerset in winter: the beach at Kilve near Nether Stowey, later to become the ‘favorite seat’ of Coleridge and Wordsworth
BRISTOL AND CLEVEDON
On the morning after his return to Jesus College, Coleridge paused to look about the room from which he had been absent since June, and to record his state of mind in a letter to Southey:
My God! how tumultuous are the movements of my Heart — Since I quitted this room what and how important Events have been evolved!
America!
Southey!
Miss Fricker!— Yes — Southey — you are right — Even Love is the creature of strong Motive — I certainly love her.
It was an almost convincing affirmation of his feelings for Sara (as Coleridge would henceforward write her name) and his fervour for Pantisocracy certainly showed no decline in the coming weeks.
News of Pantisocracy had reached Cambridge before him, where at first it was the cause of disbelieving mirth.
By late October, however, it had become the ‘universal Topic’ in a more serious sense, and on one occasion was expounded by Coleridge in a conversation lasting six hours.
At the end of it, his system was declared ‘impregnable’.
Already the strains in his relationship with Southey were becoming evident.
Letters to Bath and Bristol arrived too seldom and erratically to satisfy the punctilious Southey, who deplored most of all the lack of communication with Sara.
To Southey this suggested a disturbing want of seriousness in an engaged man.
The doubts maturing in Coleridge's own mind concerning events that summer blossomed alarmingly at the end of September.
A letter from Mary Evans, possibly written at George Coleridge's suggestion, begged him to give up his plans for emigration, and addressed him with painful tenderness as ‘her best-beloved Brother’.
The unexpected shock of this letter produced in Coleridge a ‘waking Night-mair of Spirits’, and brought a sudden realization of the true state of his feelings for Sara: he felt nothing at all.
But, as he assured Southey on 21 October, he was resolved to be true to his word, even as he contemplated a future with ‘her, whom I do not love — but whom by every tie of Reason and Honor I ought to love’.
Southey himself had just suffered an unpleasant shock of a different kind.
On 17 October the formidable Miss Tyler turned Southey out of doors on College Green, Bristol, having learnt, rather late in the day, of his plans for emigration, and worse, of his intended marriage.
‘I attempted to reason, but in vain,’ he wrote soon after, having been forced to walk through a rainy night to his mother's house in Bath, his pockets empty.
but his ‘self approbation’ undiminished.
The letter from Mary Evans, and some stridently critical letters from his brothers, left Coleridge paralysed by indecision and self-accusation as the year drew to a close.
He wrote to Mary admitting the ‘ardent attachment’ he had so long felt for her, and asked her to confirm a rumour that she too was now engaged.
To be certain that his love was hopeless would, he thought, bring him new strength of purpose.
Mary's confirmation of her intended marriage reached Coleridge just before Christmas, and he replied at once in a letter which was his brave and gentle farewell.
Sara Coleridge (1770 1845), from a miniature by Matilda Betham, 1809
‘Mark you, Southey!—I will do my Duty ,’ he wrote from London five days later, as he steeled himself for his promised return to Bristol and the renewal of his relationship with Sara.
But Coleridge never arrived, and early in January the now beleaguered Southey decided that his endlessly procrastinating friend must be brought back from London.
Southey looked for him first at the Salutation and Cat in Newgate Street, where the landlord had given Coleridge free quarters because his conversation was so good for trade.
Eventually, however, he was  traced to new lodgings at the Angel Inn nearby, and shortly afterwards, in spite of protests, was safely on board the Bath coach, with Southey standing guard.
Pantisocracy had not emerged unharmed from the weeks of separation.
Despite intense poetical activity by both men, money to finance Pantisocracy had simply not been found, and almost Southey's first words on discovering Coleridge were to announce that he had abandoned immediate hopes of emigration in favour of a new scheme for setting up a trial community on a farm in Wales.
Coleridge was dismayed: ‘For God's sake — my dear Fellow — tell me what we are to gain by taking a Welch Farm?’
But he fell in with Southey's plans, none the less, and agreed that in the meantime they must live frugally in Bristol and earn money.
By February 1795 three Pantisocratic brothers — Coleridge, Southey, and George Burnett — were settled together in lodgings at 25 College Street, Bristol, very close to the cathedral, and to Southey's Aunt Tyler.
The Susquehannah could not have been farther off.
Lithograph of Bristol from Clifton Wood.
After a painting by W.J. Muller, 1835.
Brandon Hill and the cathedral appear left of centre; St Mary Redcliffe, with its truncated spire, is on the right
Coleridge became almost at once a leader of Bristol's vigorous and combative intellectual life, in which the radical sympathies of a prosperous nonconformist community confronted the conservatism of wealthy merchants and professional men.
By late February he had already ‘endeavored to disseminate Truth’ in the form of three political lectures, the first two delivered at the Corn Market in Wine Street, the third in a vacant house on Castle Green.
The fury aroused by his anti-Pitt eloquence was at once frightening and flattering to his vanity.
He found himself being harried by ‘Mobs and Mayors, Blockheads and Brickbats, Placards and Press gangs’, and more seriously threatened by ‘two or three uncouth and unbrained Automata’.
During his third lecture the crowd outside the house was scarcely prevented from attacking it to get at the ‘damn'd Jacobine’ inside.
Coleridge had worked intensely, under Southey's close scrutiny, to prepare the lectures, and had written the first at a single sitting between midnight and breakfast-time on the day it was delivered.
Further lectures by both Coleridge and Southey were to follow, those which Coleridge delivered including one attacking the slave trade and another concerning the Hair Powder Tax (later to become the improbable subject of his first sermon); and at the end of June he began a series at the Assembly Coffee House on the Quay comparing the English Civil War and the French Revolution.
If the radical tendency of his lectures brought him enemies, it was the new friends he was making who were to prove more important.
Among them were Josiah Wade, a radical Bristol tradesman, and John Prior Estlin, a Unitarian minister with whose religious opinions Coleridge's own were beginning increasingly to coincide.
At an uncertain date between late August and late September there was also a first meeting with a virtually unknown poet and radical called William Wordsworth, two years Coleridge's senior.
Wordsworth was the guest in Bristol of a wealthy sugar merchant, John Pretor Pinney, whose sons had recently befriended the poet, and it may have been at the Pinney town house in Great George Street that the meeting with Coleridge took place.
That, at least, is the unreliable tradition.
Wordsworth himself recalled in old age that he had first met Coleridge, together with Southey, and Edith and Sara Fricker, at ‘a lodging in Bristol’.
On that evidence, 25 College Street, or possibly the Fricker house on Redcliffe Hill, would seem the more likely setting, though wherever the meeting occurred, its consequences in the private and artistic lives of both men were greater than either could even dimly have foreseen.
Wordsworth was quick to take the measure of his new acquaintance.
‘Coleridge was at Bristol part of the time I was there,’ he wrote in October.
‘I saw but little of him.
I wished indeed to have seen more — his talent appears to me very great.’
Coleridge's relationship with Sara in these months was developing in unexpected ways.
He discovered soon after his return to the city that she had refused two   offers of marriage — one from a wealthy suitor — on the strength of the promise made to him at Bath, and that she continued to love him ‘with an affection to the ardor of which my Deserts bear no proportion’.
The deadening sense of obligation with which Coleridge had returned to Bristol was now swiftly transformed, until, as a ‘neutral spectator’(perhaps Cottle) told Thomas De Quincey, ‘if ever in his life he had seen a man under deep fascination, and what he would have called desperately in love, Coleridge, in relation to Miss F, was that man’.
Notice advertising Coleridge's lectures comparing the English Civil War and the French Revolution, 1795
The town house of the Pinney family in Great George Street, Bristol.
It was here that some of the early meetings of Coleridge and Wordsworth probably took place
William Wordsworth (1770–1851).
Pencil and chalk drawing by Robert Hancock, 1798
The bridge leading into Bristol High Street.
1829
At the same time, friendship with Robert Southey was in further steep decline.
Coleridge became aware soon after their lectures began that Southey's manner had grown ‘cold and gloomy’, and that he had started to back away from the principles of Pantisocracy.
In part, Southey's changed manner reflected his desperate irritation with someone whose procrastinating habits had become unignorable in the cramped spaces of 25 College Street (Coleridge admitted to Southey that ‘you sate down and wrote — I used to saunter about and think what I should write’).
But more important were Southey's fundamental doubts concerning  the likely success of Pantisocracy in any form.
Coleridge remembered with bewilderment the occasions of some more memorable disagreements on the subject: during a strawberry party at Long Ashton; crossing the bridge below Bristol High Street after visiting the Fricker family; on a two-day excursion to Chepstow and Tintern with Joseph Cottle, Edith and Sara, during which, with poetical appropriateness, they all got lost in pitch darkness above Tintern Abbey and Southey ‘marched on like a pillar of strength, with a lady pressing on each arm’.
The final breach grew from Southey's good fortune in being offered an annuity of £160 during the summer of 1795.
Thereupon Southey announced that, Pantisocrat or no, his private resources were his own, and that on the Welsh farm each person should manage his own affairs.
‘In short,’ Coleridge wrote bitterly near the end of the year, ‘we were to commence Partners in a petty Farming Trade.
This was the Mouse of which the Mountain Pantisocracy was at last safely delivered!’
The two men ceased for a time even to acknowledge one another in the street; and though they later resumed formal courtesies, close friendship was dead.
‘You have left a large void in my Heart,’ Coleridge wrote in November.
‘I know no man big enough to fill it.’
Marriage to Sara had become by late summer not only a longed-for end in the midst of disillusionment, but an increasingly urgent necessity.
The unchaperoned freedom with which she and her sister had gone about the city with their prospective husbands had given rise to the ‘hostile breath of rumour’, and had encouraged a general belief that ‘Pantisocracy meant a system of things which dispensed with the marriage-tie’.
Coleridge and Sara fixed their wedding for early October, and in the meantime began looking for a home.
The cottage which they eventually discovered at Clevedon, on the Somerset coast south of Bristol, was not quite the ‘honeymoon cottage’ it has often been called.
Coleridge viewed it rather as another home for Pantisocracy, even though his companions and fellow believers were reduced now to Sara herself and George Burnett.
(His concern for the floundering Burnett showed Coleridge at his best during these months: Southey abandoned Burnett; Coleridge stayed loyal to him, even though the two men were not special friends.)
The cottage — which was probably not the cottage now bearing a commemorative tablet — lay in a wooded ‘Valley of Seclusion’ at the west end of Clevedon, close to the parish church where Arthur Hallam is buried.
Coleridge and Sara, in further disregard of the proprieties, first stayed at the cottage on about 20 August 1795, over a month before their marriage.
They were deeply in love, and the strength of their feelings for one another, together with the great natural beauty of the ‘green and woody’ landscape which surrounded them, induced in Coleridge a depth of contentment he would rarely find again.
The immediate result was the short love poem which he later revised and expanded as ‘The  Eolian Harp’, but which even in its original form showed him speaking in a manner now distinctively his own.
With his ‘pensive Sara’ leaning on his arm, he writes with conversational ease and descriptive felicity of their cottage overgrown with jasmine and myrtle, of the scents drifting from a neighbouring bean-field, and the ‘stilly murmur’of the distant sea.
To a revision of the poem published in 1803 he added the lines, ‘Methinks, it should have been impossible/Not to love all things in a World like this’, his words seeming to carry the weight of his later regret that his unclouded times with Sara were so quickly over.
But for the moment, the prospect of marriage to a woman he loved, and of life together in a place of exquisite beauty, seemed to offer the stability and direction he never ceased to crave in his personal life.
‘Domestic Happiness is the greatest of things sublunary,’ he had written to Southey earlier in August, ‘and of things celestial it is perhaps impossible for unassisted Man to believe any thing greater.’
Now, for the first time, domestic happiness seemed within his own reach.
The cottage at Clevedon traditionally, and probably erroneously, associated with Coleridge,c. 1840)
In September he returned, after more than a year, to visit Henry Poole at Shurton Court, and to renew his friendship with Tom Poole, now master of the Castle Street house since the death of his father in July.
Tom Poole, who had nursed his father devotedly at the end, was in low spirits, but was as instantly captivated by his visitor as he had been at their first meeting.
He addressed Coleridge, with more enthusiasm than skill, in a poem which begins ‘Hail to thee Coleridge, youth of various powers!’, and which expresses in its stilted, conventional way, something of the electrifying effect produced by Coleridge's passionate eloquence on any sympathetic listener.
Coleridge's themes were the  predictable ones: the rift with Southey, the folly of the world, his love for Sara, and Pantisocracy.
Even the unsympathetic could not but be impressed, and when Charlotte Poole, Tom's cousin, met Coleridge at Marshmills that month, she mingled her disapproval with admiration, setting him down in her journal as ‘a young man of brilliant understanding, great eloquence, desperate fortune, democratick principles, and entirely led away by the feelings of the moment’.
The Somerset coast at Shurton Bars
Another and better poem, written by Coleridge himself, also resulted from his September journey.
At Shurton, a letter reached him in which Sara evidently wrote sadly of the growing coolness in her relations with Edith and Southey.
Imagining his Sara ‘all oppressed with gloom’, Coleridge's spontaneous reply was a poem set in the descriptive frame of an evening visit to Shurton Bars, the coastal area lying beyond a rich tract of open fields to the north of Shurton Court.
The coast at Shurton Bars shelves more gently to the sea than at many points farther west, and in the eighteenth century still provided a landing-place for infrequent trading vessels which brought coal from Wales for coastal lime-kilns and West Somerset hearths.
But in general, it was a place bereft of human   activity, where a grey sea rolled unattended on to sand and shingle, and the only house was an abandoned shell (whose ruins still survive).
Such a setting, as Coleridge acknowledges in the poem, he might once have sought out to echo the mood of a ‘sad gloom-pamper'd Man’; but now his descriptions of the sea breeze moaning through the house, the thunder of the ‘onward-surging tides’ and the watchfire shining out from Flat Holm in the Bristol Channel, are powerfully transformed by the central fact of his love for Sara, and become part of a vast natural counterpoint to intimate and far from gloomy thoughts.
‘Lines Written at Shurton Bars’ shows Coleridge progressing rapidly from the bland natural description contained in poems such as the one he had written in May ‘while climbing the left ascent of Brockley Coomb’, and opens the way to the ‘Conversation Poems’of the following three years, where feelings of friendship and love — for Charles Lamb, the Wordsworths, his infant son Hartley — stand in close and creative relationship with luminous descriptions of nature.
The Church of St Mary Redcliffe.
Bristol, 1829
On the morning of Sunday 4 October 1795 Samuel Taylor Coleridge and Sara Fricker were finally married in the vast cathedral-like spaces of St Mary Redcliffe Church in Bristol, close to the Fricker house on Redcliffe Hill.
Mrs Fricker, despite her family's opposition to the match, condescended to be a witness, as did Coleridge's new friend Josiah Wade, and the only ‘tinge of melancholy to the solemn Joy’ was provided by the thought that this was Chatterton's church, where, in a room above the north porch, the boy poet had supposedly found his poetic forgeries.
Five weeks later, on 13 November, Southey and Edith Fricker were secretly married in the same church, Southey setting off almost immediately afterwards to spend six months with his uncle in Portugal, leaving Edith behind.
Coleridge and Sara began their married life more conventionally, and within a few days he was writing in enraptured terms to Tom Poole from their ‘comfortable Cot’ in Clevedon: ‘the prospect around us is perhaps more various than any in the kingdom — Mine Eye gluttonizes. — The Sea — the distant Islands! the opposite Coasts!— I shall assuredly write Rhymes — let the nine Muses prevent it, if they can.’
For the moment, however, domestic considerations were more pressing.
The most notable household items they had thought to bring with them were evidently ‘some old Prints ’, and almost at once Joseph Cottle was called upon to supply further essentials, including a kettle, a pair of candlesticks, a tin dustpan, a cheese toaster, two large tin spoons, a keg of porter, and a Bible.
Cottle obliged his impractical friends with his habitual amused indulgence, and having sent Coleridge ‘all that he had required, and more’, rode down to Clevedon the following day to pay his respects in person.
He was happily surprised to find that the cottage did indeed live up to Coleridge's estimate of it, possessing ‘every thing that heart could desire’, including a small flower garden  and a climbing rose which Coleridge was soon to commemorate in verse.
Only wallpaper for the whitewashed parlour seemed, at least in Cottle's opinion, to be lacking, and he accordingly sent an upholsterer down to Clevedon a few days later to paste up some ‘sprightly paper’.
Sea-bathing, walks on the steep coastal hills above the cottage — where Coleridge could watch the sunbeams ‘dance, like diamonds, on the main’— and the continuing assurance of Sara's love, were enough to quell any restless dissatisfaction while the last of a mild autumn remained.
Coleridge even felt some confidence that his writing could sustain them both in their new life: Cottle, in a further act of generosity, had offered him a guinea and a half for every one hundred lines of poetry he produced, and faithfully honoured the bargain in April of the following year when he published Poems on Various Subjects , Coleridge's first major collection.
St Andrew's Church and the Bristol Channel at Clevedon,c .
1850
But Coleridge soon discovered the shortcomings of Clevedon, and especially the inconvenient distance separating it from his literary friends in Bristol, and from the indispensable Bristol City Library.
Having been reduced now to travelling on foot, he could not make the return journey to Bristol in a day, and Sara too often found herself left lonely and uneasy in a cottage whose attractions were not increased by the coming of winter, or by neighbours who were ‘a little too tattling and inquisitive’.
When, in November, Coleridge was persuaded by his Bristol friends that he should return permanently to the city, he expressed sadness at leaving Clevedon, but probably felt relatively little, even though the only home available to him and Sara was in cramped quarters in Mrs Fricker's house.
Coleridge rationalized the departure in his poem ‘Reflections on having left a Place of Retirement’, asking whether it was right that he should live in beauty and solitude while his ‘unnumber'd brethren toil'd and bled’ in the greater world.
The grandiose question hid Coleridge's simple discovery that neither natural beauty nor loving domesticity could replace his need for intellectual stimulation and a creed to hold to and to preach.
While he was casting a regretful backward glance to the ‘dear Cot’ at Clevedon, the familiar towers and spires of Bristol already loomed invitingly.
Bristol, like much of England, was in political turmoil when Coleridge reached it in November.
Crop failure in the previous year and the debilitating effects of war with France had brought national scarcity and popular protest by the end of 1795, and in London, King George had been lucky to escape when his coach was attacked by stone-throwing crowds crying ‘Bread!
Peace!
No Pitt!’
The government replied with the introduction of the ‘Two Bills’, against seditious meetings and treasonable practices, and successfully aroused the contending arguments of conservatives and radicals throughout the land.
A meeting at Bristol Guildhall on 17 November was called to congratulate the king on his escape, but attracted as well a large group who wished to implore him to end the war.
One voice in particular repeatedly called out ‘Mr Mayor!
Mr Mayor!’ in an attempt to be heard, and then embarked on ‘the most elegant, the most pathetic, and the most sublime Address that was ever heard, perhaps, within the walls of that building’.
The voice was Coleridge's, arguing that although the war had been costly to the rich, it had left them much; ‘but a PENNY taken from the pocket of a poor man might deprive him of a dinner’.
That month Coleridge kept up the radical cry by publishing some of his Bristol lectures from earlier in the year, under the title Conciones ad Populum , and in late December he embarked on an altogether bolder enterprise.
At a meeting in the Rummer Tavern (which still exists in rebuilt form a few doors from Cottle's former bookshop) he was persuaded by ‘sundry Philanthropists’ and opponents of the war to begin publication of a periodical to be called the Watchman .
Cottle   thought that Coleridge, of all men, was ‘least qualified to display periodical industry’, and many friends in the city were equally doubtful.
But they gave him their support, none the less, and the first issue, containing political reports, original essays, poetry, and reviews, was announced for the beginning of March, the aim of the publication being, as Coleridge modestly explained, ‘to proclaim the State of the Political Atmosphere, and preserve Freedom and her Friends from the attacks of Robbers and Assassins!!’
Notice advertising Coleridge's Conciones ad Populum and Southey's epic poem,Joan of Arc , 1796
Cottle and others succeeded in finding over three hundred subscribers for the Watchman in Bristol alone.
But many more were needed, and in early January Coleridge set off to publicize the new venture on a tour of the Midlands, recording an eventful journey with comic gusto both in his letters at the time and almost twenty years later in the Biographia Literaria .
He talked religion with the great Erasmus Darwin in Derby, preached to sometimes vast congregations from Unitarian pulpits —‘my Sermons spread a sort of sanctity over my Sedition ’— and returned in triumph to Bristol with the names of several hundred new subscribers.
His idealistic and high-spirited mood came back to him in memory when in 1815, almost his darkest time, the Biographia was written:
O! never can I remember those days with either shame or regret.
For I was most sincere, most disinterested!
My opinions were indeed in many and most important points erroneous; but my heart was single.
Wealth, rank, life itself then seemed cheap to me, compared with the interests of (what I believed to be) the truth, and the will of my maker.
The drudgery of compiling the Watchman to peremptory deadlines, and with little help, quickly evoked very different feelings in Coleridge.
The printer was careless, George Burnett a forgetful and utterly incompetent assistant, and all the time Sara's groans of pain were announcing the early stages of a difficult pregnancy.
Nor were readers much happier.
Cottle wrote that ‘a feeling of disappointment prevailed early and pretty generally, amongst the subscribers’, and when in the second issue Coleridge included a rather too satirical essay on fasting, he lost goodwill alarmingly.
The Watchman survived until 13 May 1796, when the tenth and final issue appeared, Coleridge leaving his readers with explanations, regrets, and the words of the prophet, ‘O Watchman! thou hast watched in vain!’
To the man on whose support he would now increasingly depend, he wrote a little before the end, ‘It is not pleasant, Thomas Poole! to have worked 14 weeks for nothing —for nothing — nay — to have given the Public in addition to that toil five & 40 pounds!’
Much of the substantial loss which Coleridge suffered was borne by the uncomplaining and insufficiently thanked Cottle, whose verdict on the Watchman was brief and to the point.
‘It was’, he said, ‘a losing concern, altogether.’
Coleridge found it difficult to accept failure quite so dispassionately.
The publication in April of Poems on Various Subjects , its preface written at the last moment in Cottle's bookshop, was a genuine cause for satisfaction and received enthusiastic reviews.
But Coleridge soon found himself adrift once more on a sea of self-doubt, without employment of any kind, and without money.
The troubles which surrounded him were not just his own.
On a stormy night at the beginning of May he watched by the bedside of his brother-in-law, Robert Lovell, as he lay dying from a putrid fever, and tried to comfort Lovell's young wife Mary, who was listening frantically to her husband's ‘loud, deep, unintermitted groans’ during his final hours.
At the same time, Coleridge's mother in-law, Mrs Fricker, also seemed on the point of death at the house in Oxford Street, Kingsdown, that he had just found for Sara and himself on the north side of the city.
(In the event Mrs Fricker survived until 1809, dying on the same November day as Coleridge's own mother.)
Weighed down by a burden of ‘domestic Sorrows & external disappointments’ that threatened to overwhelm him, he turned once again to Tom Poole —‘my dear, very dear Friend’— and on about 15 May set off in the carrier's van for Stowey.
He stayed a fortnight, and during that time dined memorably on honey pie, made an even more unfavourable impression at Marshmills, and no doubt spent long hours talking in Poole's garden arbour, ‘an Elysium’, as he called it, in which he had already recited many of his recent poems.
There was much to discuss, including Tom Poole's proposal, in the end gratefully accepted, that he and a few friends should supply Coleridge with an annuity of £35 or £40 as a ‘trifling mark of their esteem, gratitude and admiration’.
But neither £40 a year nor the financial kindnesses of other friends were enough to rescue Coleridge from the need for hard decisions.
While Poole was urging him to remain true above all to poetry, Coleridge still had no sense of a purely poetic, or even literary, vocation, and for the moment could offer only two vague plans for the future, ‘the first impracticable — the second not likely to succeed’: he could ‘make a portly Quarto’ by translating all the works of Schiller, then set up a school at 100 guineas a head, or he could ‘abjure Politics & carnal literature’altogether and become a dissenting parson.
He left Stowey with his thinking no farther advanced, but with an ever-growing admiration for Tom Poole and affection for his home.
‘Dear Gutter of Stowey!’ he wrote at Bridgwater while he waited distractedly for the carrier.
‘Were I transported to Italian Plains, and lay by the side of a streamlet that murmured thro' an Orange-Grove, I would think of thee…’
Other friends tried to help.
Dr Thomas Beddoes, a Bristol physician at Hotwells, told him of an opportunity to write for the Morning Chronicle in London, and Coleridge, with a heavy heart, almost accepted the editor's ‘very handsome offer’.
‘If I go,’ he wrote to Poole, ‘farewell Philosophy!
Farewell, the Muse!
Farewell, my literary Fame!’
Plans in August to become tutor to the children of a Derbyshire widow called Elizabeth Evans quickly foundered  (although Mrs Evans greatly admired Coleridge), and by the beginning of September he was speaking in decided terms of opening a day-school in Derby.
‘In all human probability,’ he wrote, ‘I shall settle at Derby in November.’
Such a note of finality was not, however, to be relied upon, and he was soon writing to Poole of racking doubts and of ‘dim & huddled’ feelings.
Terrible neuralgic pains which troubled him throughout this period were the mirror of his inward distress, and the large doses of laudanum he took to relieve his symptoms, a portent for the future.
By 15 October 1796, almost a month after the birth of his son David Hartley Coleridge, he had at last reached a decision.
But the course he now proposed to take amounted, in effect, to a failure to decide, a refusal to make any of the conventional choices available to him, a creative act of cowardice..
Castle Street, Nether Stowey,c. 1920.
The cars stand outside Tom Poole's house and the ‘dear gutter of Stowey’ is visible on the right-hand side of the road
He would go to live near Stowey, and Tom Poole.
‘A BEAUTIFUL COUNTRY’
Having reached an ebb of spirits comparable to that which, a year before, had followed his breach with Southey, Coleridge was suddenly filled again with hopes and plans, and at the beginning of November wrote to Tom Poole with a sense of joyful liberation:
To live in a beautiful country & to inure myself as much as possible to the labors of the field, have been for this year past my dream of the day, my Sigh at midnight — but to enjoy these blessings near you , to see you daily, to tell you all my thoughts in their first birth, and to hear your's, to be mingling identities with you, as it were;— the vision-weaving Fancy has indeed often pictured such things, but Hope never dared whisper a promise!’
His decision to reject a future of schoolmastering was evidently taken after a brief and desperate visit to Stowey at the end of September.
He dreaded most, he said, the physical and mental confinement which teaching seemed to threaten, but had also been greatly affected by the birth of his son.
When first he saw Hartley, as a sonnet written soon after memorably records, he felt only sadness, reminded unexpectedly of his own childhood self, and fearful what his son's future might be.
It was a momentary thought, quickly dispelled when Sara took Hartley in her arms; but from it crystallized the firm decision that both Hartley and any other children they might have should be spared a city childhood, and be ‘bred up from earliest infancy in the simplicity of peasants, their food, dress, and habits completely rustic’.
The banks of the Susquehannah lay out of reach as a setting in which to realize this vision; the streams which flowed from the Quantock Hills passed through a landscape which had already begun to seem hardly less desirable.
Coleridge's Somerset household was at first intended to have a touch of Pantisocratic inclusiveness.
He would be moving there not only with Sara and the baby, but with Sara's mother, their servant Nanny, and a young man called Charles Lloyd, who had fallen under Coleridge's spell after meeting him in Birmingham.
Lloyd had persuaded Coleridge to take him as a pupil at £80 a year; but when his wealthy father, a member of the banking family, insisted that the arrangement could last only for a year, Coleridge's expectation of a regular  income suddenly vanished, and Lloyd eventually settled with him as an occasional lodger, not a pupil.
Mrs Fricker, for her part, was soon wise enough to discover ‘a great aversion to leaving Bristol’.
Not only was the membership of Coleridge's proposed household in doubt for many weeks, but also its exact location.
During one of his Somerset visits he had already discovered Adscombe, a hamlet of Over Stowey parish not far from Tom Poole's cousins at Marshmills.
It was a place of great beauty and utter seclusion, lying in a sheltered combe on the eastern flanks of the Quantocks.
The hamlet consisted of little more than the substantially-built Adscombe Farm, three cottages, and a ruined medieval chapel, probably the original of the chapel in ‘The Foster-Mother's Tale’ whose leaning wall was propped by a ‘huge round beam’.
The Quantock Hills seen from West Quantoxhead, 1791
It was in this ‘enchanting Situation’ that Coleridge at first hoped to obtain a cottage with six acres, the property of Lord Egmont of Enmore Castle.
John Cruikshank, Tom Poole's friend and neighbour, promised to get the cottage; but Coleridge was left ‘full, yea, crammed with anxieties’ as negotiations ground on.
‘I am frightened at not hearing from Cruikshanks,’ he wrote to Poole at the beginning of November.
‘Has Lord Thing a my bob — I forget the animal's name — refused him —or has Cruickshanks forgotten me ?’
At first it seemed that the only delay was in making the cottage fit to occupy, and Coleridge wondered whether, until it was ready, there might not be some rooms to spare at Shurton Court.
Soon, however, it became clear that Cruikshank had promised more than he could deliver, and after two months of waiting, all hopes of Adscombe were given Up.
Adscombe Farm, Over Stowey
Desperate in his anxiety to leave Bristol, almost any available house now seemed acceptable to Coleridge so long as it was near Tom Poole.
There was only one.
It was the decaying thatched cottage known as Gilbard's which stood at the top of Lime Street in Stowey, and which had been occupied until then by a widow called Elizabeth Rendell.
Tom Poole suggested it as a last resort, and Coleridge, who remembered the cottage, immediately asked him to take it for a year.
(The landlord was Mr Blake, member of a prominent local family.
)‘It is not  a beauty, to be sure,’ Coleridge wrote to Poole on 28 November; ‘but it's vicinity to you shall overbalance it's Defects.’
Content that all was finally settled, Coleridge was unprepared when his West Country plans were threatened by one further difficulty, raised at the last moment by Tom Poole himself.
Poole's letter to Coleridge of about 10 December has not survived, but it was the cause of ‘unexpected and most acute pain’ and expressed Poole's doubts that the Lime Street cottage could ever be a suitable home.
He rashly suggested that, as an alternative to Stowey, Coleridge might like to consider Iron Acton near Bristol, where he could be closer to his city friends.
It is not clear whether Poole's motives were merely altruistic, or whether, as seems more likely, he had begun to question the wisdom of having an emotionally dependent and notoriously radical young poet as his neighbour.
Coleridge's own feelings, on the other hand, were beyond any doubt.
Opening Poole's letter on a visit to Bristol City Library, he began at once to write the first of two wildly intemperate replies: the country round Iron Acton was ‘intolerably flat’; Bristol contained no friends of his beyond Cottle and Estlin (Wade was going away); and as for the cottage, he would make it do.
He and Sara would not want much, and sixteen shillings a week would be enough to keep them, money which Coleridge intended to earn by reviewing.
‘Pardon me if I write vehemently,’ he apologized disingenuously to Poole in his second letter, adding with more than a hint of picturesque excess:
Mrs Coleridge has observed the workings of my face, while I have been writing; and is intreating to know what is the matter — I dread to shew her your Letter — I dread it.
My God! my God! what if she should dare to think, that my most beloved Friend is grown cold towards me!
Coleridge in such cajoling and overwrought spirits was not to be thwarted, and Poole sensibly gave up all further resistance.
The City Library, King Street, Bristol.
Watercolour by Edward Cashin, 1823
On the last day of 1796 Coleridge, Sara and the baby finally left Bristol on their journey west, a wagon following after them loaded high with ‘boxes of Books, and Chests of Drawers, & Kitchen-Furniture, & Chairs, and our Bed and Bed-Linen, & c & c ’.
They had chosen one of the coldest Decembers ever recorded in England to make their journey, and Coleridge, plagued once more with neuralgia and illness, was suffering at the time from a face ‘monstrously swoln’.
But his mood was calm.
He turned from Bristol without regret and entered again the West Somerset landscape of coast and hills over which, very soon, he would become a persistent and delighted explorer.
At the same time, he was entering with a new singleness of purpose the creative landscape of his own mind, and sensed already that what he might achieve in the months ahead would surpass anything which had resulted from two very public years in Bristol.
‘I am not.fit for public Life,’ he wrote from Bristol to his new friend John Thelwall, the radical lecturer; ‘yet the Light shall stream to a far distance from the taper in my cottage window’.
Church bells ringing out the old year from the tower at Over Stowey probably formed a distant accompaniment to Coleridge's first night in the Lime Street cottage.
His own farewell to 1796 was made in his ‘Ode to the Departing Year’, a bleak prophecy of war and ruin in which Coleridge renounces his role as public commentator, and dedicates himself to the ‘deep Sabbath of meek self-content’ he hoped that Stowey, the Quantocks, and Tom Poole would now make possible.
But as he and Sara looked about their new home in a winter twilight, they must soon have recognized that the Lime Street cottage would be one major obstacle in the path to contentment of any kind.
Though Gilbard's was not quite so irredeemable a hovel as some have claimed, its shortcomings were plentiful enough.
The cottage, which was regularly to shelter four or five inhabitants together with frequent guests, was a tiny building.
On the ground floor were two small parlours on either side of an entrance passage, and beyond them a rudimentary kitchen.
Above were three correspondingly small bedrooms, two of which looked out on the narrow and often gloomy street.
To the defects of a house with little space and less privacy were added general dilapidation, a plague of mice (which Coleridge was too good-natured to set traps for) and a daily flow of traffic past the door on a turnpike road  transformed in wet weather to ‘an impassable Hog-stye.
.. a Slough of Despond’.
But worst of all in those first winter days was the cold.
‘I can endure cold,’ Coleridge had written earlier in December, ‘but not a cold room!
If we can but contrive to make two rooms warm, & wholesome , we will laugh in the faces of Gloom & Ill-lookingness.’
A dozen yards of cheap green cloth for stopping draughts, and determined efforts to make the chimney draw, overcame the worst effects of the weather, and the generosity of Tom Poole did most of the rest.
Sara would always remember gratefully the help he gave at that time ‘to render a miserable cottage, an abode of comparative comfort’.
Within a few days they were ready to invite Poole to a dinner of roast pork and potatoes — cooked in the baker's oven because the cottage had none that could be used — and at the end of January a letter to John Prior Estlin described with quiet enthusiasm the clear brook which ran before the cottage door, a pretty garden —‘large enough to find us vegetables and employment’— and an orchard lying beyond which was about to become home for some ducks and geese, as well as two pigs.
By early February, Coleridge had achieved for the moment something like contented self-sufficiency in both his inward and outward life.
‘I never go to Bristol,’ he wrote to John Thelwall.
From seven to half past eight I work in my garden; from breakfast till 12 I read  & compose; then work again — feed the pigs, poultry & c , till two o'clock — after dinner work again till Tea-from Tea till supper review.
So jogs the day; & I am happy.
Coleridge's cottage as it may have appeared early in the nineteenth century.
The lattice windows which Hazlitt remembered were replaced by sashes when the Coleridges finally gave up the cottage at the end of 1799
Ground-floor plan of Coleridge's cottage as it probably appeared in 1797–8.
The surviving remnants of the eighteenth-century building are shown in solid black, the parts which have vanished as broken lines.
The cottage is essentially of the seventeenth century, but was restored in 1800 and greatly enlarged during the second half of the nineteenth century
That, needless to say, was at best half the story, since Tom Poole's house had immediately become for Coleridge a spacious and comfortable refuge whenever Lime Street grew oppressive.
A gate set up by Tom Poole at the bottom of the Lime Street orchard led directly into his own garden, a small secluded area which lay at some distance behind Poole's house in Castle Street and which –contained, beneath the shelter of a lime-tree, a jasmine-covered arbour.
(A modern bungalow now occupies the site.)
From this garden Coleridge could either walk on through Poole's orchard and a ‘fine meadow’ to the home of his new friends, John and Anna Cruikshank, or he could negotiate Poole's tanyard and its ‘Tartarean tan-pits’to reach the Castle Street house itself.
The ‘great windy  parlour’ at the front of the building was soon to become for Coleridge a place in which he felt more at home than in his own tiny cottage, and it was there that he and Poole were later to spend long sociable hours with the Wordsworths, Charles Lamb, Hazlitt and others.
A room which served Coleridge in a different way stood at the back of the house on the first floor: this was Tom Poole's vaulted bookroom, created by him early in 1795 and filled with a wide-ranging library which helped to reconcile Coleridge to the loss of his frequent visits to the City Library in Bristol.
A flight of external stairs allowed him easy access to the bookroom, and there he must often have been found when the ‘noise of Women & children’, which made study impossible, had driven him once again from Lime Street: it is probable that most of the poems associated with the cottage were at least partly written in the bookroom.
Detail from a late eighteenth-century map of Nether Stowey showing: 1.
Coleridge's cottage; 2.
Coleridge's orchard; 3.
Tom Poole's garden and the lime-tree bower; 4.
Tom Poole's house; 5.
Castle Hill House, the home of John Cruikshank
For both Coleridge and Sara there was the company not only of Tom Poole   and his much-loved mother, but of new friends as well.
John Cruikshank at Castle Hill House and his ‘very amiable’ wife, Anna, were chief among them, and for Coleridge, at least, there were also a number of admiring and musical young women with whom his puns, conundrums, and attempts at dancing made him ‘an immense favorite’.
Only in the months ahead did Coleridge and Sara begin to realize how much they had also aroused the hostility and suspicion of inward looking Stowey, and Coleridge's final verdict on his village neighbours would be a gloomy one.
Writing to Poole in April 1799, when the Cruikshanks had gone, he remarked that ‘excepting yourself & Mother there is no human being attached to us & few who do not dislike us’.
Tom Poole's bookroom
It was Sara who chiefly bore the social realities of Stowey, the inadequacies of the cottage, and the burdens of parenthood.
For Coleridge there was always the immediate possibility of escape, either to the bookroom near at hand, or to the more distant hills.
His exploration of the landscape began nearly at once.
‘My walks…were almost daily on the top of Quantock, and among its sloping coombs,’ he recalled in the Biographia.
‘With my pencil and memorandum book in my hand, I was making studies , as the artists call them, and often moulding my thoughts into verse, with the objects and imagery immediately before my senses.’
Bewildering doubts and dissatisfied creativity had led him to the hills in search of a poetic subject ‘that should give equal room and freedom for description, incident, and impassioned reflections on men, nature, and society’.
That capacious subject he considered himself to have found in the stream which rises at the spring called Lady's Fountain, and flows through Holford Combe and Holford Glen on its short journey to the sea at Kilve.
‘The Brook’, as the intended poem was to be called, would trace the fictionalized stream from its origins ‘among the yellow-red moss and conical glass-shaped tufts of bent’ to the first lonely cottage, and ultimately to ‘the market-town, the manufactories, and the seaport’.
He was to follow the course of the stream many times, latterly in the company of William and Dorothy Wordsworth.
But the poem progressed farther in the mind than on paper, and all that survives of it are some verse fragments describing the distant wail of swallows and seagulls, water dripping one Sunday from the miller's wheel (perhaps at Kilve), the snow blown curling from a wood ‘like pillars of cottage smoke’, and a wild Quantock pony racing in the wind.
Other projects made more rapid progress that new year.
At the end of January an invitation from Richard Brinsley Sheridan to write a tragedy for Drury Lane left Coleridge ‘gratified and somewhat elated’, and vowing that whatever time he could spare from reviewing he would now devote to play-writing.
He embarked soon after on his long verse-tragedy Osorio , a story ‘romantic & wild & somewhat terrible’, which he set in Spain at the time of the Inquisition, but which was to draw, at least to a small extent, on his Quantock and Exmoor wanderings   of the next few months.
A new edition of his poems was also in prospect from Joseph Cottle, augmented, when it appeared in October, by substantial contributions from Charles Lamb and Charles Lloyd, and by a generous poem of dedication addressed with a childlike longing for acceptance to Coleridge's brother George, his ‘earliest Friend’.
(George, sad to record, ‘was displeased and thought his character endangered by the Dedication’.)
The brook in Holford Combe
Only as the calls upon him grew more insistent did Coleridge's mood darken.
By mid-March he was far behind with the reviewing on which he now chiefly depended for a living, Cottle was becoming ‘clamorous’ about preparations for the new edition of poems, and Osorio was a commitment which seemed likely to reach for months into the future.
Circumstances at Lime Street did nothing to improve his state of mind.
Although there is no hint in his letters from the Stowey period of differences with Sara, it is likely that the subtle process of estrangement was already under way.
His twin devotions to Quantock solitude and the company of Tom Poole brought not only physical separation from the Lime Street cottage, but a widening emotional distance from his forthright, practical, and hard-pressed wife: it would not be long before the autumn happiness of their Clevedon days was a distant memory.
Difficulties of a more acute kind began with the arrival of Charles Lloyd on 22 February.
Coleridge had  discovered during the final weeks at Bristol that the devoted but unstable Lloyd was subject to attacks of mania and was a sufferer from epilepsy.
During March, established as a lodger in one of the upstairs bedrooms, his illness returned.
‘He has been seized with his fits three times in the space of seven days,’ Coleridge wrote to Joseph Cottle on 15 March; ‘and just as I was in bed, last night, I was called up again — and from 12 o clock at night to five this morning he remained in one continued state of agoniz'd Delirium .’
One of the bedrooms in the Lime Street cottage
By the end of the month Lloyd had retreated to Erasmus Darwin's sanatorium in Lichfield, and Coleridge to Bristol, on the first of two short visits.
During the first visit he was in such low spirits he could not bring himself to meet even the faithful Cottle; during the second, in early April, optimism and humour had sufficiently returned for him to relish a meeting with one especially talkative woman on his homeward walk.
She asked if he knew a ‘vile jacobin villain’ who had led astray a young man from her parish called Burnett.
The villain in question was a certain Coleridge, upon whom she proceeded to heap ‘every name of abuse that the parish of Billingsgate could supply’.
The man himself, walking mildly at her side, had by some inevitable process succeeded in charming his travelling companion, and ‘had not courage enough to undeceive her’.
April brought another and more significant meeting to raise Coleridge from ‘calm hopelessness’ and financial worry.
Early in the month William Wordsworth, returning from Bristol to the home he was sharing near Crewkerne with his sister Dorothy, made a detour into West Somerset to visit Coleridge.
At their first meetings in Bristol during the autumn of 1795 each had at once recognized in the other a man of extraordinary abilities.
It seems clear that they had corresponded during 1796, and by the time they met again at Stowey they were well acquainted with each other 's work.
Now came the opportunity for long discussions in Tom Poole's parlour, and no doubt for readings from Osorio and from The Borderers , Wordsworth's own, equally unsuccessful, verse tragedy.
Coleridge was overwhelmed, as he made plain in a letter to Joseph Cottle: ‘T. Poole's opinion of Wordsworth is — that he is the greatest Man, he ever knew — I coincide.’
His imaginative pulse quickened almost at once, and in the second week of May he was able to report.that no fewer than 1,500 lines of Osorio had been completed.
His mood also soared.
When the sub-librarian of the Bristol City Library wrote on the subject of overdue books, Coleridge managed a tour de force of consternation in reply (the recipient was not amused).
In these weeks he was also carrying his tireless eloquence to local Unitarian chapels.
Unitarianism, a tolerant and loosely-defined system of belief, had attracted Coleridge since his Cambridge years.
Of all varieties of the Christian faith, it seemed best able to accommodate his persistent search for a means to link the truths of philosophy   and religion, and his almost pantheistic sense of the ‘Absolute Unity’ shared by God and his creation.
He had asked John Prior Estlin for letters of introduction to the Unitarian ministers at Bridgwater and Taunton, and became a regular preacher in both towns for as long as he remained at Stowey.
On Sunday 4 June 1797 he preached for Mr Howel at the Dampiet Street Chapel in Bridgwater, taking as his Coleridgean theme ‘the contemptibleness & evil of lukewarmness’.
Immediately afterwards, he set off on a journey into Dorset, determined to repay Wordsworth's visit of two months earlier.
He breakfasted at Taunton with Joshua Toulmin, the town's kindly and distinguished Unitarian minister, then continued west through Neroche Forest towards Horton Cross and Chard.
Lukewarmness was far from his prevailing mood as he strode onwards.
Interior of Mary Street Unitarian Chapel, Taunton.
The Bible is the same that Coleridge used on his many preaching visits to the chapel
Lithograph of the Cistercian abbey at Forde, Dorset, 1875
The landscape south-east of Chard is remote and beautiful.
Broad, well-wooded valleys mark its character.
Streams flow abundantly into the little River Axe, and close to the meeting-point of three counties a secluded no man's land contains the  exquisite Forde Abbey, its Cistercian isolation still largely undisturbed.
Marshwood Vale lies farther south, expansive and lovely, and extends from Hardy's ‘little Pilsdon Crest’ to a horizon which is the sea.
It was in a fold of high ground on the northern borders of the vale that William Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy had recently taken up residence in a red-brick mansion called Racedown Lodge, a house combining Georgian elegance and merchant stolidity, and quite likely to be, as tradition asserts, the original of Sir Walter Elliot's Kellynch Hall in Jane Austen's Persuasion .
Despite the stateliness of their domestic setting, Wordsworth and his sister were hardly more financially secure at Racedown than the household at Lime Street, and owed the possibility of living there to the brothers John and Azariah Pinney.
The Pinneys had become devoted admirers of William Wordsworth after meeting him in London during 1795, and had soon persuaded their father, John Pretor Pinney, that the little-used family mansion in Dorset should become Wordsworth's temporary home.
The elder Pinney, owner of the largest sugar plantations in Nevis, would certainly have been less pliable had he realized that his sons were allowing the new tenants to have Racedown rent-free; but in the event he quickly warmed to the young poet, and welcomed him as a guest to the family's town house in Bristol during the autumn of 1795, the period which first brought Wordsworth into contact with both Coleridge and Southey.7sup18;
John Pretor Pinney (1740–1818), the owner of Racedown Lodge
William and Dorothy Wordsworth arrived at Racedown Lodge one midnight near the end of September 1795, and were to remain tenants there for almost two years.
For both of them a period of deep contentment had begun.
‘I think Racedown is the place dearest to my recollections upon the whole surface of the island,’ Dorothy later wrote.
‘It was the first home I had.’
The extent of their happiness as they read and wrote, and walked the Dorset lanes, was in proportion to the unsettled times they had often known until then.
The death of their mother, Ann Wordsworth, in 1778, when William was seven and Dorothy six had cast a long shadow over their early lives, and had left them and their three brothers effectively orphaned.
Their father, John Wordsworth, a law-agent in Cockermouth, sent Dorothy to be brought up in Halifax by a relative, and before long had enrolled William in a boarding-school at Hawkshead.
Dorothy did not see her brother again for nine years, and never once returned to the family home in Cockermouth before the death of her father in 1783.
She never ceased to regret that her own family had been scattered while she was still so young, and when, in 1787, the five Wordsworth children were briefly reunited, they returned constantly to a single theme.
‘We always finish our conversations’, Dorothy wrote, ‘…with wishing we had a father and a home.’
In the summer of 1789, after Wordsworth had become an undergraduate at St John's College, Cambridge, a long visit to Dorothy at their uncle's house in Norfolk confirmed between brother and sister a profound emotional sympathy which remained with them through life, and made them certain that, one day, they wished to share a home.
The opportunity to do so did not arise until Racedown was offered to them six years later, by which time Wordsworth could contemplate a life whose course, since his Norfolk visit, had done much to shape his political and poetic character, and had left him with more than a little to repent.
He walked heroic distances through France, Switzerland, and Germany in the summer vacation of 1790, discovering for himself the realities of France in the throes of revolution, and the sublimities of the Alps.
The following summer was devoted to a walking tour in North Wales, during which he climbed Snowdon to watch the sun rise — an experience, like his crossing of the Alps, destined to inspire some of the most celebrated poetry in The Prelude .
He was in France again at the end of 1791, and in the new year at Orleans evidently formed the relationship with Annette Vallon which resulted that December in the birth of their illegitimate daughter Caroline.
Caroline was only a few days old when Wordsworth left for home, and during 1793, marooned in England without an income or particular hopes of finding one, he learned helplessly of the rise of the Terror in France following the overthrow of the Girondins in June that year.
His relations gave him up, deploring his French expedition and the revolutionary sympathies it so clearly implied, and despairing that he would ever take the opportunities available to him for making a career in the Church or the law.
He wrote the poetry of social conscience in the remarkable Salisbury Plain , and imbibed the radicalism of friends and acquaintances in London; but the vagabond  existence to which he was increasingly reduced lacked in every sense a clear direction.
Dorothy alone remained a still centre, and when in January 1795 Wordsworth was left £900 in the will of Raisley Calvert, a young friend and admirer who had died of tuberculosis, there seemed nothing further to prevent them from realizing their hopes of a life together.
Silhouette of Dorothy Wordsworth (1771–1855).
This is the only known likeness of Dorothy as a young woman
Racedown Lodge from the garden
The parlour at Racedown Lodge
By the time Wordsworth finally set out from Bristol to Racedown in the autumn of 1795, he had, in the words of The Prelude , ‘Yielded up moral questions in despair’.
The dawn of hope signalled by the French Revolution had ended as murderous confusion, and radicalism in England was increasingly under attack from both repressive government and popular opinion.
Just as Coleridge in 1796 abandoned political life in dismay, so Wordsworth now turned from politics in search of another version of his friend's ‘deep Sabbath of meek self-content’.
It was Dorothy who provided the watchful, loving companionship which, as he famously acknowledged in Book X of The Prelude , helped a new sense of self to be resolved from his doubts and confusions:
…then it was
That the belovèd Woman in whose sight
Those days were pass'd, now speaking in a voice
Of sudden admonition, like a brook
That does but cross a lonely road, and now
Seen, heard and felt, and caught at every turn,
Companion never lost through many a league,
Maintain'd for me a saving intercourse 
With my true self…
She, in the midst
of all, preserv'd me still A Poet, made me seek
beneath that name My office upon earth, and
nowhere else.
It was a tribute for which the events of the next three years provided ample justification.
Hinton House, Hinton St George, the seat of Earl Poulett, 1791
The Wordsworths were not alone at Racedown, despite the remoteness of its setting.
Joseph Gill, John Pinney's hard-drinking cousin, lived as near by as caretaker; Peggy Marsh, described by Dorothy as ‘one of the nicest girls I ever saw’, arrived after a month to help in running the enormous house; and from the beginning Wordsworth and Dorothy were preoccupied with caring for a child not yet three years old called Basil Montagu.
Basil's widowed father, a natural son of the Earl of Sandwich, formed part of Wordsworth's circle of London  friends, and the proposal that Wordsworth and Dorothy should become responsible for the child was from the beginning an important part of their plans for life at Racedown.
‘He is my perpetual pleasure,’ Dorothy wrote in March 1796.
‘He is quite metamorphosed from a shivering half starved plant, to a lusty, blooming fearless boy.’
Recalling, no doubt, the sad disruptions of her own early life, she declared that ‘our grand study has been to make him happy ’, and added that under their Rousseau-inspired regime, in which Basil was taught nothing ‘but what he learns from the evidence of his senses’, he had become ‘certainly the most contented child I ever saw; the least disposed to be fretful.’
His father, also called Basil, visited briefly in March 1797; John and Azariah Pinney stayed on a number of occasions, and at greater length.
But the ordinary distractions of Racedown life were sought among books, in a vegetable garden soon filled with cabbages, carrots and turnips, and in the hills.
Some of these, Dorothy reported approvingly, remained ‘in their wild state covered with furze and broom’, and reminded her of her native north country.
Crewkerne, the nearest post town, was the frequent destination of other walks, and on one occasion Wordsworth and Dorothy continued a few miles further to take in Hinton House, the home of Earl Poulett.
They discovered not only the Poulett mansion but a very fine view, perhaps from the Warren House above the park, and were, Dorothy wrote to a friend, ‘amply repaid’ for their trouble.
Their lives, described by Wordsworth in 1796 as ‘utterly barren’ of conventional excitements, might have continued undisturbed at Racedown had the choice been entirely theirs.
But by the end of May 1797, with the countryside bursting suddenly into beauty after the coldest spring Dorothy could remember, they knew that their unorthodox tenancy was not likely to continue: John Pretor Pinney was already looking for rent-paying tenants.
In the event, the ending of their two Dorset years came with dramatic suddenness, and brought not a narrowing of their lives, as they might have feared, but the beginning of a period marked by profound and creative friendship.
Occupied in their garden on a June day in 1797, they looked up to see a figure standing in a gateway at the top of the gentle slope one hundred yards from the mansion.
A moment later, having leapt the gate, Samuel Taylor Coleridge was bounding down a pathless field towards them.
‘WORDSWORTH & HIS EXQUISITE SISTER’
Coleridge's headlong arrival into the lives of William and Dorothy Wordsworth remained for them all a charged and exhilarating memory.
Speaking of the event almost fifty years later, Wordsworth said that both he and his sister retained ‘the liveliest possible image’ of Coleridge in that moment, and Coleridge himself regarded the warmth with which he was received at Racedown as a standard against which all other greetings could be measured and found to fall short.
At first his visit was intended to last only a few days.
Very quickly, however, the three young people began to exert over one another the complex mutual attraction which remained characteristic of their relationship, and more than three weeks passed before Coleridge finally set off on the road back to Stowey.
The gateway above Racedown Lodge
Deepening friendship and shared creativity marked those weeks together.
Within hours of his arrival, Coleridge was listening to Wordsworth recite a substantial new poem called ‘The Ruined Cottage’; after tea Coleridge replied with two and a half acts of Osorio , and in the morning followed the whole of The Borderers , Wordsworth's north country tragedy.
Coleridge thought The Borderers ‘absolutely wonderful’, and surrounded only by the distractions of friendship and a lovely, unfamiliar countryside, found time at Racedown to make progress with his own play, Wordsworth providing the necessary encouragement as well as some ‘strict & almost severe’ criticism.
By the sixth day at Racedown, Coleridge had reached a settled opinion of his host: ‘Wordsworth is a great man,’ he wrote to John Prior Estlin in Bristol, a compliment which Wordsworth, half a lifetime later, repaid in subtly different terms when he described Coleridge as ‘the most wonderful man I ever knew’.
2
Dorothy's acute and sympathetic judgement that Racedown summer led her to a similar conclusion almost at once.
‘You had a great loss in not seeing Coleridge,’ she wrote to a friend at the end of June.
‘He is a wonderful man.’
In a passage of intense and fascinated observation, she then continued:
His conversation teems with soul, mind, and spirit.
Then he is so benevolent, so good tempered and cheerful, and, like William, interests himself so much about every little trifle.
At first I thought him very plain, that is, for about three  minutes: he is pale and thin, has a wide mouth, thick lips, and not very good teeth, longish loose-growing half-curling rough black hair.
But if you hear him speak for five minutes you think no more of them.
His eye is large and full, not dark but grey; such.
an eye as would receive from a heavy soul the dullest expression; but it speaks every emotion of his animated mind; it has more of the ‘poet's eye in a fine frenzy rolling’ than I ever witnessed.
He has fine dark eyebrows, and an overhanging forehead.
Samuel Taylor Coleridge in 1795.
Portrait by Peter Vandyke
Coleridge's opinion of Dorothy was soon to be recorded by him in words no less intense, and by the time he parted from the Wordsworths on 28 June, they were all determined that their separation from one another should be as brief as possible.
To the pleasures of new friendship, Coleridge, on his return to Stowey, added the prospect of meeting again the loyal and longstanding friend of his youth, Charles Lamb.
Lamb had finally yielded to an invitation from Coleridge to travel west, and wrote at the end of June to say that he hoped to arrive at Stowey the following weak.
Coleridge, his thoughts still at Racedown, immediately saw the opportunity for bringing all his friends together at Stowey, and on 29 June wrote to Joseph Cottle to suggest — unsuccessfully — that he should take the next coach to Bridgwater: ‘T. Poole would fetch you in a one horse Chair.’
More important, he set about gathering the Wordsworths into the Quantock fold, hastening a visit which must in any case have been intended for the near future.
Wordsworth arrived almost at once, and by 2 July Dorothy had also reached Lime Street, after being driven up from Dorset by Coleridge himself ‘over forty miles of execrable road’.
Charles Lamb (177 1834) in 1798.
After a pencil and chalk drawing by Robert Hancock
The difficulty of finding room for his guests in so small a house was farthest from Coleridge's mind.
He was filled with a passionate delight in the company of his friends, of Dorothy especially, and joyfully announced in a letter to Jose Cottle the news that ‘Wordsworth & his exquisite Sister’ had arrived:
She is a woman indeed!— in mind, I mean, & heart-for her person is such, that if you expected to see a pretty woman, you would think her ordinary — if you expected to find an ordinary woman, you would think her pretty!— But her manners are simple, ardent, impressive…
Her information various — her eye watchful in minutest observation of nature — and her taste a perfect electrometer — it bends, protrudes, and draws in, at subtlest beauties & most recondite faults.
To Sara, more hard-pressed than ever at Lime Street, the intellectual and emotional sympathy binding Coleridge and Dorothy must have been both apparent and distressing, even if Dorothy, in De Quincey's words, was a woman possessing ‘no personal charms’: on only the second day of the visit Coleridge and Dorothy were occupied together correcting his poems for the new edition while Sara was left to carry the domestic burdens of the teeming cottage.
One minor incident, soon after the Wordsworths arrived, seemed by accident to express the complex emotions which underlay those high-spirited weeks in the summer of 1797.
Sara upset a skillet of boiling milk on her husband's foot, and left him so lame that he was prevented for days from joining his friends on their lengthening excursions into the Quantock countryside.
While the Wordsworths began to explore a landscape which seemed, in Dorothy's opinion, to contain everything she could want, Coleridge remained very unwillingly at home.
It was probably at his suggestion that the Wordsworths walked one evening to Holford, a small village three miles west from Stowey on the road to Putsham and Kilve.
There, in a wooded dell called Holford Glen, close to the village church, they found an almost inaccessible waterfall which interrupted the Holford brook on its journey to the sea, and which, for them as for Coleridge, quickly became almost a voice of nature, an abiding, animated presence at the heart of their Quantock lives.
They ‘pryed into the recesses’ of the brook which flowed from the waterfall, then followed a lonely road next to the Glen through a woodland of beeches, oaks, and holly, where sheep from the Quantocks and fallow deer moved in the evening light.
Whether knowingly or not, the Wordsworths had entered the deer park surrounding a large unoccupied mansion called Alfoxden, and reached the house itself before deciding to turn back.
The park at Alfoxden had belonged to the St Albyn family since the close of the fifteenth century.
But their Queen Anne mansion, four-square and elegant, had seldom been occupied since the Revd Lancelot St Albyn, last in the male line, had been carried to his grave at Stringston in 1791.
His widow, Anna-Maria St Albyn, did not choose to live in so isolated a place, and her great nephew, heir to  the estate, was still a child.
Those were details unknown to the Wordsworths when they first saw the house, standing alone on its hillside site between the Quantocks and the sea.
They knew only, as they retraced their steps through the deep woodland of the park, that they could no longer be content at Racedown, even had it been possible for them to remain there.
‘Coleridge's society’ had become indispensable, and by the time they made their way back into Lime Street their minds were already filled with ‘dreams of happiness’, to be lived out, they hoped, in some cottage not far away.
Watercolour of Alfoxden from the south.
This is the earliest known picture of the house, and shows it in the first half of the nineteenth century before the ground level at the front of the building was raised
Overleaf:Detail from Day and Masters' map of Somerset, 1782
Charles Lamb reached Stowey on about 7 July, and although, as a London man, he was apt to be contemptuous of mere countryside, he joined the Wordsworths uncomplainingly on their expeditions.
Coleridge, still lame, chafed at his own confinement, especially when his friends set off one evening towards the hills, leaving him useless and lonely in Tom Poole's garden arbour.
Poetry was the result.
While Coleridge waited for the sun to set behind Dowsborough   and Higher Hare Knap, he wrote the first fluent draft of a poem reworked soon afterwards as ‘This Lime-Tree Bower My Prison’.
The poem, addressed in its final form to Charles Lamb, followed his friends in imagination as they walked first ‘along the hill-top edge’, then descended to the waterfall in the ‘roaring dell’ at Holford, and climbed at last high into the Quantocks, from where they looked out upon ‘the many-steepled tract magnificent’of the coastal plain.
The poem is Coleridge's tribute of friendship to his ‘gentle-hearted Charles’— Lamb complained later that he would have preferred ‘drunken-dog’ to ‘gentle-hearted’— but it is a tribute equally to: the quickening power of the natural beauty which the poem so memorably evokes.7sup9;
The distinctive moods of the rich and various landscapes which crowded near to Stowey were becoming for Coleridge almost a reflex of his own moods and thoughts — the broad uplands of the Quantock Hills a counterpoint to the speculative power of a mind ‘habituated to the vast’,the lowland villages an expression for him of the loving companionship of friends and family, the hidden dell, where the voice of nature sounded in the waterfall, a retreat by turns comforting and mysterious to serve his recurrent longing for escape.
As he gathered up his papers in the lime-tree bower, and returned through his orchard to the cottage, the most poetically creative year of his life was just beginning.
The entrance hall at Alfoxden, photographed during the 1930s
The tentative search by the Wordsworths for a Somerset home brought the unexpected discovery, probably made by Tom Poole, that Alfoxden was both empty and available.
John Bartholomew of Putsham, evidently tenant of the Alfoxden home farm, was persuaded that the Wordsworths should take the house for a year, at a rent of only £23, and on 14 July 1797 an agreement was hastily drawn up in Poole's ‘villainous hand-scrawl’ and signed by Bartholomew and Wordsworth.
Old Mrs St Albyn was not consulted.
The new tenants moved into the house at once, and the arrival soon afterwards of their servant Peggy Marsh and young Basil Montagu was final confirmation that the Racedown years were at an end.
Coleridge was in a state of profound happiness and lingering disbelief when he wrote to Robert Southey of the ‘combination of curious circumstances’ which had brought the Wordsworths to Alfoxden.
The mansion was, he said, ‘elegantly & completely furnished-with 9 lodging rooms , three parlours & a Hall — in a most beautiful & romantic situation by the sea side’.
Nor did Dorothy quickly shake off a sense of their improbable good fortune.
She began a letter a month after their arrival with the words, ‘Here we are in a large mansion, in a large park, with seventy head of deer around us’, before going on to describe a house which contained ‘furniture enough for a dozen families like ours’.
Alfoxden had been built by the St Albyns early in the eighteenth century close   to the centre of their ancient park.
It faced south towards a steep slope which gave way, beyond a thick and irregular scattering of trees, to the furze and bracken of the Quantock high ground.
Behind the house fields and woodland dropped gently away towards the sea coast at Lilstock, Kilve and East Quantoxhead, and it was this view which Dorothy and her brother could see from the tall sash-windows of their favourite parlour.
Dorothy was overwhelmed by the beauty which surrounded them:
Wherever we turn we have woods, smooth downs, and valleys with small brooks running down them through green meadows…
The hills that cradle these valleys are either covered with fern and bilberries, or oak woods, which are cut for charcoal…
Walks extend for miles over the hill-tops; the great beauty of which is their wild simplicity: they are perfectly smooth, without rocks.
A housewarming was impulsively decided on to mark the arrival of the new Alfoxden tenants, and on about 17 July Coleridge, seeking ‘change of air’, arrived from Stowey in anticipation of the event.
Though Charles Lamb had by now returned to London — envying his forgotten greatcoat for ‘lingering so cunningly behind’ at Lime Street — the sudden appearance of John Thelwall was more than compensation.
‘Citizen’ John, ‘a little Stout Man with dark cropt Hair’, carried with him a dangerous reputation as an atheist, a mob orator and a Jacobin, and in 1794 had spent several months in the Tower of London before being tried and acquitted on a charge of high treason.l– His relationship with Coleridge had hitherto depended entirely on their animated and frequently argumentative correspondence.
Now, at first meeting, they laid the foundations of a more substantial friendship in the groves of Alfoxden, two disillusioned radicals who had turned their backs on active politics.
‘John Thelwall is a very warm hearted honest man,’ Coleridge wrote to Josiah Wade, ‘and disagreeing, as we do, on almost every point of religion, of morals, of politics, and of philosophy; we like each other uncommonly well.’
He was taken on the indispensable visit to Holford Glen, and it was there, seated by the side of the brook, that the brief exchange took place which Coleridge was still repeating in his old age: ‘Citizen John,’ Coleridge remarked, ‘this is a fine place to talk treason in!’
To which Thelwall replied, ‘Nay!
Citizen Samuel!
It is rather a place to make a man forget that there is any necessity for treason!’
Coleridge's letter of 22 July 1797 to Tom Poole, asking that ‘a fore quarter of Lamb’ be sent over for the Alfoxden housewarming
The housewarming dinner was arranged for Sunday 23 July 1797, and on the day before, Coleridge scribbled a hasty, high-spirited note to Tom Poole asking for a promised fore quarter of lamb to be sent over to ‘the Foxes’ in the morning.
‘I pray you,’ he added, ‘come over if possible by eleven o'clock that we may have Wordsworths Tragedy read under the Trees.’
Fourteen people sat down to dinner at the house, a local man, Thomas Jones, being employed to wait on them at table.
Jones was struck especially by Citizen Thelwall, who, wearing the white   hat of the radical, got up after dinner and ‘talked so loud and was in such a Passion that Jones was frightened’.
Other guests probably included Stowey friends such as John and Anna Cruikshank.
But Tom Poole's cousins at Marshmills were not invited, and would in any case have been horrified to find themselves among this conclave of radicals.
On the very day of the dinner Charlotte Poole was writing in her journal: ‘We are shocked to hear that Mr. Thelwall has spent some time at Stowey this week with Mr. Coleridge, and consequently with Tom Poole.
Alfoxton house is taken by one of.the fraternity…
To what are we coming?’
Charlotte Poole was not alone in feeling suspicious and alarmed.
Although the people of Stowey had by degrees reconciled themselves to the presence of Coleridge, who lived in their midst with his wife and child, Wordsworth's arrival at remote Alfoxden, with a young woman said to be his sister, provided much greater scope for speculation.
‘The wiseacres of the village’, so Joseph Cottle heard from Coleridge, ‘had…made Mr. W. the subject of their serious conversation’ and concluded that a man so given to wandering the hills at late hours ‘like a partridge’, and looking strangely at the moon, must either be a conjuror, a smuggler, or worst of all ‘a desperd French jacobin’who was spying out the ground for a French invasion.
It was the last view which the locals were readiest to believe.
As recently as January that year, the people of North Devon had been ‘greatly alarmed’ by three French frigates and a lugger seen making their way up the Bristol Channel off Ilfracombe.
This optimistic French sortie, intended to achieve the burning of Bristol, had ended disastrously at Fishguard, but both the West Country and the government remained fearful.
Gossip which might have remained merely an irritation led by accident to altogether more dangerous consequences.
From Thomas Jones, who had been so frightened by Thelwall's oratory, stories concerning the ‘emigrant family’ at Alfoxden passed first to Charles Mogg — a former servant at the house— and then to a cook in the household of Dr Daniel Lysons of Bath.
When the stories reached Lysons himself, he wrote at once to the Duke of Portland, the home secretary, alerting him to the ‘very suspicious business’ taking place at Alfoxden, and on 11 August a government spy called James Walsh was dispatched to investigate.
Walsh went first to Hungerford in search of Charles Mogg —‘by no means the most intelligent Man in the World’— and from him received a detailed account of his conversations with Thomas Jones and other villagers at Holford.
What appeared to be the most damaging evidence had been provided by an old man called Christopher Tricky, who lived in a hovel near the dog pound at Alfoxden park gate:
Christopher Trickie and his Wife…told Mogg that the French people had taken the plan of their House, and that They had also taken the plan of all the  places round that part of the Country, that a Brook runs in the front of Trickie's House and the French people inquired of Trickie wether the Brook was Navigable to the Sea, and upon being informed by Trickie that It was not, they were afterwards seen examining the Brook quite down to the Sea.
Wordsworth probably never knew how his walks with Dorothy and Coleridge had been misrepresented by the garrulous old man, and would have been sorry to discover the truth.
Christopher Tricky, formerly a huntsman to the St Albyn family, was the inspiration for Wordsworth's poem ‘Simon Lee, the Old Huntsman’, in which Tricky's vigorous youth and poverty-stricken old age stand in sad contrast.
He was, perhaps, less than worthy of his literary immortality: in 1800 the vicar of Over Stowey, having been cheated in a deal over some turf, called him ‘as rascally faced fellow as ever I met with’.
A cottage on Holford Common.
Watercolour by W.A. Rixon, 1899.
When Wordsworth revisited Holford in 1841, Christopher Tricky's hovel on the common had already disappeared
Walsh reached the Globe Inn at Stowey on 15 August 1797 with instructions to give a ‘precise account’ of anything he discovered, and to seek necessary help from Sir Philip Hales, a magistrate living at Brymore in Cannington.
Walsh's investigations made more rapid progress than he can have expected.
At the bar of the Globe Inn talk between the landlord and a Mr Woodhouse of Stowey turned very quickly to the subject of ‘those Rascalls from Alfoxden’ and of John Thelwall, who had left for Bristol two weeks earlier.
‘I…asked if they meant the famous Thelwall,’ Walsh reported.
‘They said yes.
That he had been down some time, and that there were a Nest of them at Alfoxden House who were  protected by a Mr Poole a Tanner of this Town.’
Walsh was assured that the people concerned were not French — though they were as bad — and he quickly concluded that he was dealing with no more than ‘a mischiefuous gang of disaffected Englishmen’.
There followed three weeks during which, in Coleridge's comical retelling of events, Walsh displayed ‘truly Indian perseverance’ in tracking the poets on their daily excursions into the hills and down to the beach at Kilve.
At first, so Coleridge improbably claimed, Walsh thought he had been found out: ‘for he heard me talk of one Spy Nozy , which he was inclined to interpret of himself, and of a remarkable feature belonging to him’.
The pun on Spinoza was too good for Coleridge to resist, and the remarkable nose he attributed to Walsh may well have been borrowed from his memories of the innkeeper at the Castle of Comfort, on the road from Stowey to Holford: his nose, which was locally famous, was said to be as big as a fist and ‘well warted’.
The former Globe Inn, Nether Stowey, where James Walsh, the government spy, stayed in 1795
The end of the spy story reached Coleridge from the innkeeper of the Globe, who had been ordered to Brymore by Sir Philip Hales (’ Sir Dogberry’as Coleridge called him) to give evidence in person.
The innkeeper, in Coleridge's version of events, could remember nothing remotely suspicious in the activities either of Coleridge or the ‘strange gentleman’ from Alfoxden, though he did recall the amazement of some local farmers when, at a great dinner party, Coleridge and the vicar of Stowey had talked ‘real Hebrew Greek at each other for an hour together’.
Sir Philip angrily pressed the innkeeper to say whatever he knew of Coleridge, and was at last told the innocent truth:
‘Why, folks do say, your honor! as how that he is a Poet , and that he is going to put Quantock and all about here in print; and as they be so much together, I suppose that the strange gentleman has some consarn in the business.’
Sir Philip Hales, Bt. (d. 1824), in a caricature by John Chubb of Bridgwater
Walsh departed, and although Coleridge later refused to see the ‘Spy Nozy’ incident as other than ridiculous, the government's unwanted attentions had marked a time of real danger, as John Thelwall, from bitter recent experience, could have warned.
Local rumour, for its part, had blackened the reputation of both poets beyond recovery, and by late August Coleridge realized that Thelwall's own hopes of settling near Stowey were not only unrealistic but dangerous.
Coleridge wrote sadly to tell him so:
Very great odium T. Poole incurred by bringing me here…when Wordsworth came & he likewise by T. Poole's agency settled here — You cannot conceive the tumult, calumnies, & apparatus of threatened persecutions which this event has occasioned round about us.
If you too should come, I am afraid, that even riots & dangerous riots might be the consequence.
Mrs St Albyn had before long heard the unpleasant rumours concerning the new tenants at Alfoxden, and ordered, in spite of Tom Poole's intercession, that on no account should they remain at the mansion beyond the following midsummer.
As the autumn of 1797 approached time was already running out.
At the end of August 1797 Coleridge was in low spirits and unwell, worn down by the ‘Malignity of the Aristocrats’, who had brought the spy to Stowey, by the need to disappoint John Thelwall's hopes of a Somerset home, and by poverty.
Charles Lloyd had returned to Lime Street by September, but his presence was now more clearly a burden than a pleasure, and his mental instability was soon to result in what Coleridge bitterly recollected as a ‘mad quarrel’ and in vindictive ingratitude.
On 14 October Coleridge wrote abstractedly to John Thelwall that, ‘I should much wish, like the Indian Vishna, to float about along an infinite ocean cradled in the flower of the Lotos, & wake once in a million years for a few minutes — just to know that I was going to sleep a million years more.’
This comforting vision, perhaps opium-inspired, was far removed from the reality surrounding him at Stowey.
‘I have neither money or influence,’ he hold Thelwall, ‘& I suppose, that at last I must become a Unitarian minister as a less evil than starvation — for I get nothing by literature.’
A romanticized view of Culbone Combe, 1803
Culbone Church.
The truncated spire, echoing the spire at Porlock, was added during the nineteenth century
His despondent letter to Thelwall was written immediately following an absence of ‘a day or two’, during which, it seems likely, he walked westward into the Exmoor fringes above Porlock, the home territory of his maternal ancestors, and in a lonely farmhouse near Culbone Church sought the isolation he needed to complete Osorio .
The wild and beautiful landscape around Culbone rises with dramatic suddenness from the Bristol Channel coast near Porlock Weir.
Within a mile of the sea the bracken-covered hills of Exmoor, deeply intersected by wooded combes, reach heights of over 1,000 feet, and only on the lower slopes do farmers derive a living from the inhospitable soil.
It was a landscape which Coleridge probably knew well by the time of his autumn visit, and to whose  spectacular beauty he was to introduce the Wordsworths before the year ended.
. He followed a difficult zigzag path from Porlock Weir to Culbone, climbing through woodland which abounded in ‘wild deer, foxes, badgers, and martin cats’; whortleberries grew in plenty beneath the canopy of trees, and as the ascent progressed, the distant sound of waves breaking on the shore below and glimpses of the Channel and the Welsh mountains were sufficient to fill one eighteenth century traveller with mingled ‘pleasure and astonishment’.
At 450 feet the church was reached, standing utterly secluded in the deep folds of Culbone Combe.
Reputedly the smallest of England's parish churches, it may have developed from an anchorite's cell in the eleventh or twelfth century, and since that time had drawn many pilgrims to its almost inaccessible woodland site.
James Hadley, writing his will in 1532, remembered the church as one of Somerset's ‘holy places’, and by the late eighteenth century it had become the frequent destination of topographical writers who came searching for the romantically sublime.
Coleridge had little sympathy with their overheated prose, and his own response to this charged and mysterious place probably had more in common with that of a later visitor, Samuel Palmer, who in the nineteenth century saw Culbone through visionary eyes.
Coleridge said in later life that the farmhouse to which he now retreated was called Brimstone (no doubt a Coleridgean attempt at Broomstreet, which stood two miles west of the combe).
His more contemporary recollection, however, placed the farmhouse ‘a quarter of a mile from Culbone Church’, a description which has almost always been said to identify Ash Farm, but which is perhaps more likely to refer to the former Withycombe Farm.
Withycombe, which was demolished in the mid-nineteenth century, stood a third of a mile from Culbone Church at the head of the wooded combe which gave the farm a name.
A substantial track led in Coleridge's day from Withycombe to the church, and past the farmhouse flowed a noisy brook on its short journey to the sea.
Ash Farm, Porlock, usually identified as the farm where ‘Kubla Khan’ was written
Whatever Coleridge's precise setting during those few days, the autumn landscape of Culbone drew from him an immediate poetic response.
To the character Alhadra, a moorish woman in Osorio , he gave a lovingly-observed soliloquy which speaks of Somerset not Spain:
The hanging Woods, that touch'd by Autumn seem'd
As they were blossoming hues of fire & gold,
The hanging Woods, most lovely in decay,
The many clouds, the Sea, the Rock, the Sands,
Lay in the silent moonshine — and the Owl,
(Strange, very strange!) the Scritch-owl only wak'd,
Sole Voice, sole Eye of all that world of Beauty!
The other poem which Coleridge wrote during his retreat, and the circumstances of its composition, have entered the mythology of English literary history: while staying at the Culbone farmhouse he took three grains of opium to relieve what he variously described as ‘a dysentery’ or ‘a slight indisposition’, and in the deep reverie which followed composed two or three hundred lines of poetry ‘without any sensation of consciousness of effort’.
Coleridge awoke, he said, retaining ‘a distinct recollection of the whole’, and was eagerly committing the poem to writing when he was called out by a person on business from Porlock who detained him for more than an hour.
When he returned to his room Coleridge was mortified to discover that ‘though he still retained some vague and dim recollection of the general purport of the vision, yet, with the exception of some eight or ten scattered lines and images, all the rest had passed away like the images on the surface of a stream into which a stone has been cast…’
The story of the poem's composition, though evidently much embellished, is remarkable none the less, the poem itself —‘Kubla Khan’— one of the most remarkable in the language.
The primary source for ‘Kubla Khan’ is the book Purchas his Pilgrimage (1614) which Coleridge had evidently brought with him on his Culbone visit — borrowed perhaps from the bookroom or from the well stocked library at Alfoxden — and which describes how ‘In Xanada did Cublai Can build a stately Pallace.’
Other literary sources, including Paradise Lost , have been identified with detective zeal, but it was Culbone and Somerset which provided much of the rest.
Memories of Cheddar, of Wookey perhaps, echoed through the ‘caverns measureless to man’, and the Culbone landscape which had  inspired in his latest writing in Osorio now glowed with the imaginative intensity of his opium vision.
The setting is unmistakable:
But oh! that deep romantic chasm which slanted
Down the green hill athwart a cedarn cover!
A savage place! as holy and enchanted
As e'er beneath a waning moon was haunted
By woman wailing for her demon-lover!
And from this chasm, with ceaseless turmoil seething
as if this earth in fast thick pants were breathing,
A mighty fountain momently was forced:
Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst
Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail,
Or chaffy grain beneath the
thresher's flail: And 'mid these dancing
rocks at once and ever It flung up
momently the sacred river.
One of the caverns at Wookey Hole, the most spectacular of the Mendip cave systems.
Beyond the two standing figures flows the River Axe
His exalted mood faded as swiftly as his dream.
When his few days at Culbone were over, Coleridge descended again into the prosaic lowland world, and by 14 October was home at Lime Street, gloomy and impoverished.
The Ship Inn, Porlock,c .
1910 The inn, which Coleridge must have known well, lay on the route from Culbone to Stowey.
Southey once sheltered from a storm here, and wrote a bad sonnet ‘by the alehouse fire
LYRICAL BALLADS
Despite the financial worries with which Coleridge was frequently preoccupied until the end of 1797, he returned from Culbone with at least one cause for celebration.
Osorio was finished at last, and on 16 October, a few days before his twenty-fifth birthday, he sent a copy of the play, ‘complete & neatly transcribed’, to William Lisle Bowles in Wiltshire.
Coleridge had struggled hard with Osorio , and even now he had little faith that it could succeed on stage.
But in his relief at having finished the play he scarcely cared about its imperfections.
‘…I feel an indescribable disgust, a sickness of the very heart, at the mention of the Tragedy,’ he told Bowles, ‘…
I would rather mend hedges & follow the plough, than write another.’
The completion of so large an undertaking suddenly freed Coleridge's creative energy as the days shortened into a rainy winter.
In October, following a long silence, he finished two more of the autobiographical letters he had been writing for Tom Poole, providing in one of them, the most deeply-felt of all, his loving recollections of his father, and an account of the stormy night by the River Otter when he had almost died.
It was also in the closing weeks of the year that long explorations of the Somerset landscape by Coleridge and the Wordsworths began to have far reaching creative consequences.
During one excursion which probably occurred at this time Tom Poole took his friends to Walford's Gibbet on the Quantock slopes between Holford and Stowey, and there recounted John Walford's tragic history.
Walford, a charcoal-burner who had spent his solitary life in a woodland shelter built of poles and turf, was remembered by Tom Poole as a man ‘remarkable for good temper and generosity’, but one who also possessed ‘ardent feelings and strong passions’.
He was deeply in love with an Over Stowey woman called Ann Rice, but was forced into marriage to a half-mad girl who had visited him at his shelter and who bore him two illegitimate children.
They married in June 1789, and a month later, in despair and rage, he murdered her as they walked in the darkness to the Castle of Comfort Inn.
He was soon arrested, largely through the efforts of Tom Poole's father, and was sentenced to be hanged in chains.
Poole remembered that at the place of execution Ann Rice, ‘almost lifeless’, was brought at John Walford's request from the back of an enormous crowd.
She talked with him for nearly ten minutes, and as the officers  drew her away, Walford snatched her hand and kissed it, ‘some tears for the first time rolling down his cheeks’.
He admitted the murder in the few words he spoke to the people.
‘But I did it without fore-intending it, and I hope God and the world will forgive me.’
On the minds of both Coleridge and Wordsworth the story of John Walford made a deep impression.
It was a reminder that the Quantocks were not merely nature's beautiful and benevolent face, but the setting also of great tragedy, where the extremes of human emotion found expression in the humblest lives.
Some of Wordsworth's most radical contributions to the Lyrical Ballads were to explore the tragic experience of country people, and John Walford's story was itself used by Wordsworth as the subject of a substantial poem.
But the unpublished manuscript, given to Tom Poole, was destroyed in 1931 by Gordon Wordsworth, who evidently regarded the subject of adultery and murder as too sordid even for the twentieth century.4 The effect on Coleridge of what Tom Poole had told them both was perhaps of most significance.
John Walford's fate spoke powerfully of life's arbitrary horror, and of destruction brought down on a good and generous man who had done a terrible thing, but ‘without fore-intending it’.
Such ideas were to preoccupy Coleridge as the year drew to a close.
The Castle of Comfort Inn on the road from Holford to Nether Stowey
Other more ambitious walks also took place that winter.
In early November Coleridge and the Wordsworths, whose deep and intuitive friendship had begun by now to exclude not only Sara but even Tom Poole, set out on the road to  Porlock which Coleridge had taken the previous month.
Coleridge introduced his friends to the steep woodland track leading from Porlock Weir to Culbone, and together they walked on for four miles beneath the trees, before emerging close to Broomstreet Farm and Yenworthy.
By dusk Lynmouth had been reached, and next morning they went the short distance to the Valley of the Rocks, a strange and desolate dry valley running parallel to the coast and bordered by great castellated tors of rock.
The landscape of the valley was quickly reproduced in an unfinished prose tale, ‘The Wanderings of Cain’, a story of murder and remorse whose details were discussed on this November tour.
It was decided that Wordsworth should write the first book or canto of the tale, Coleridge the second, ‘and which ever had done first , was to set about the third’.
But the collaboration was a predictable failure, and Coleridge, having written his own canto ‘at full finger-speed’, found Wordsworth seated before a nearly blank sheet of paper with a look of ‘humorous despondency’ on his face.7sup5; A second  attempt at joint composition followed almost at once, in the course of another tour, and although the two friends were no more successful than before at direct collaboration, a new and remarkable poem began to emerge none the less .
Coleridge proposed to call it ‘The Rime of the Ancient Mariner’.
The Valley of the Rocks,c. 1850
The Great.Track at Holford Beeches, on the Quantock Hills above Alfoxden, photographed c .
1930
The walking tour during which ‘The Ancient Mariner’ was planned and partly written began in failing light on 13 November 1797.
Setting out from Alfoxden at half-past four, Coleridge and the Wordsworths followed the Great Track over the Quantock Hills, and as they marched westward through a ‘dark and cloudy’ evening, agreed that a poem should be written for publication to cover the expenses of their journey.
It was to be a ballad based on the supernatural, as were other popular ballads of the time, and would retell in lively narrative and simple verse form an old mariner's hypnotic tale.
Coleridge and Wordsworth felt confident that the Monthly Magazine would give £5 for the poem, and they were already discussing details of the plot as they descended from the hills at West Quantoxhead.
Immediate inspiration was provided by Coleridge's memory of a conversation with John Cruikshank, his Stowey friend, who had recently recounted his disturbing dream of a spectre ship.
To this element of the developing story Wordsworth soon added several more, as he still remembered over forty years later:
…
For example, some crime was to be committed which would bring upon the Old Navigator, as Coleridge afterwards delighted to call him, the spectral persecution…and his own wanderings.
I had been reading in Shelvocke's Voyages , a day or two before, that, while doubling Cape Horn, they frequently saw albatrosses in that latitude, the largest sort of sea-fowl…
‘Suppose,’ said 1, ‘you represent him as having killed one of these birds on entering the South Sea, and that the tutelary spirits of these regions take upon them to avenge the crime.’
The incident was thought fit for the purpose, and adopted accordingly.
Some further details of the poem were clearly borrowed directly from West Somerset: the harbour from which the mariner set sail can only be the little harbour at Watchet, the hermit's woodland home the wood at Culbone, and the ‘loud bassoon’, whose sound caused the wedding-guest to beat his breast, probably had its original in the bassoon which the vicar of Stowey had just provided for the Stowey church band.
Castle Hill House, Nether Stowey, the home of John Cruikshank, who probably had his dream of a spectre ship here
The harbour at Watchet, c. 1750.
Painting probably by Robert Griffier
‘We began the composition together,’ Wordsworth recalled, ‘on that to me memorable evening.’
But although Wordsworth contributed a few lines, he quickly realized that attempts at collaboration were once again bound to fail: ‘…
Our respective manners proved so widely different, that it would have been quite presumptuous in me to do anything but separate from an undertaking upon which I could only have been a clog.’
They probably stayed that night at Watchet, and there, tradition records, the first lines of ‘The Ancient Mariner’ were committed to writing at the Bell Inn, within sight of the ships in Watchet's decaying harbour.
The route they followed on leaving the town is not known in  detail.
It is certain only that they passed through Dulverton, and within a week were home once more, bringing with them ‘many pleasant, and some of them droll enough, recollections’.
The Bell Inn, Watchet,c .
1910.
Tradition says that ‘The Ancient Mariner’ was begun here
Illustration by Gustav Doré for a edition of ‘The Ancient Mariner’, 1877
Coleridge made rapid progress with the poem, and almost as soon as he reached Stowey he was writing to Joseph Cottle with news of a ballad ‘of about 300 lines’.
‘The Ancient Mariner’ was finally to reach more than twice that length, but even in its early form had clearly developed beyond its original purpose as a magazine ballad.
Having gathered up the elements of his story from Wordsworth and John Cruikshank, Coleridge had, in a week of brilliant creativity, produced not a gothic ballad of the supernatural, but a strange and   capacious metaphor of life itself-of man's lonely voyage on a ‘wide wide sea’, of his struggle with evil, of guilt and imperfect redemption.
Not least, perhaps, the mariner's story spoke of man's tragic and childlike vulnerability to forces of destruction both from within himself and beyond.
That was a truth which John Walford's gibbet continued to proclaim a short distance from the Stowey road, and which Coleridge's own opium-addicted future would bitterly confirm.
Neither Coleridge nor the Wordsworths were in any doubt that ‘The Ancient Mariner’ was a work of great power and originality, a poem, as Coleridge later said, which could not be imitated.
On 20 November, when Dorothy wrote to a friend, talk of the Monthly Magazine had been forgotten.
Instead, they were now proposing that the poem should appear, ‘with some pieces of William's’, in a volume of its own.
The creative preoccupations of November yielded at year's end to familiar concerns about money and the future.
In London during December the Wordsworths learned that both The Borderers and Osorio had been rejected, and Coleridge at home in Lime Street wondered more than ever how and where he was to earn a living.
A letter from Shrewsbury, received in Christmas week, provided one possible answer.
The Unitarian congregation in the town was shortly to lose its minister, and had written on the recommendation of John Prior Estlin to ask if Coleridge would agree to be considered as successor.
Coleridge told Estlin that his heart ‘yearned toward the ministry’, and he was soon able to convince himself that even his unorthodox beliefs might not be a major obstacle to his acceptance of the post, and the income it would guarantee.
On the same day that he heard of the post at Shrewsbury, however, another letter reached him, addressed in an unfamiliar hand.
It came from Thomas and Josiah Wedgwood — rich sons of the famous potter — to whom Coleridge had recently been introduced by Tom Poole.
Their letter enclosed a quite unexpected gift of –100, a sum more than sufficient to free him from the immediate necessity of hard choices, and a testimony of their faith in his genius.
‘My friend T. Poole’, Coleridge wrote, ‘strenuously advised me to accept it.’
But on 5 January, ‘after much & very painful hesitation’, he sent the money back, expressing at the same time ‘no ordinary feelings of esteem and affection’ for his benefactors.
He had decided in favour of Shrewsbury, if the congregation there were willing to appoint him.
Coleridge arrived in the town late on Saturday 13 January, and on the following day preached two trial sermons in the Unitarian chapel.
He wrote laconically that night to John Prior Estlin, leaving unstated the bewilderment he evidently felt as he prepared to exchange Somerset for Shropshire.
‘It is chilling to go among strangers ,’ he had written a few days earlier, ‘& I leave a lovely country.’
If his mood was gloomy, that was not immediately apparent to one  member of his morning congregation.
William Hazlitt, the nineteen-year-old son of the minister at Wem, had walked ten miles through the winter mud to hear the preaching of the now-celebrated poet and philosopher.
It was an occasion he never forgot:
When I got there, the organ was playing the 100th psalm, and, when it was done, Mr Coleridge rose and gave out his text, ‘And he went up into the mountain to pray, HIMSELF ALONE.
As he gave out his text, his voice rose like a steam of rich distilled perfumes,’ and when he came to the two last words, which he pronounced loud, deep, and distinct, it seemed to me, who was then young, as if the sounds had echoed from the bottom of the human heart, and as if that prayer might have floated in solemn silence through the universe.
William Hazlitt (1778–1830) as a young man.
From a portrait by John Hazlitt
Two days later Coleridge visited the Hazlitts at Wem, and the diffident, admiring son of the house listened in awe as ‘the half-inspired speaker’ pronounced on Mary Wollstonecraft, Godwin, and Burke.
Hazlitt carefully observed the visitor's appearance — the broad, high forehead, the projecting eyebrows, and the dark, rolling eyes.
‘His mouth was gross, voluptuous, open, eloquent; his chin good-humoured and round; but his nose, the rudder of the face, the index of the will, was small, feeble, nothing…’.
It was next morning  that Hazlitt came down to breakfast to find Coleridge with a letter he had just received from the Wedgwoods.
The brothers were now offering an annuity for life of £150, ‘no condition whatsoever being annexed to it’.
Presented with so ready a means of escape from a course of action whose wisdom he already doubted, Coleridge's decision was predictable and eager.
He thought briefly, and then, Hazlitt recalled, ‘seemed to make up his mind to close with this proposal in the act of tying on one of his shoes’.
Hazlitt set out with Coleridge that morning on the road back to Shrewsbury, observing how his companion continually moved from one side of the footpath to the other as they walked along, though only later connecting this odd movement with ‘any instability of purpose or involuntary change of principle’.
Coleridge talked incessantly, and ‘in digressing, in dilating, in passing from subject to subject’, he appeared to ‘float in air, to slide on ice’.
He had already invited his new young friend to travel to Stowey a few weeks later, and when they parted after six miles, Hazlitt was possessed by a single thought: ‘I was to visit Coleridge in the spring .’
For eleven more days Coleridge remained at Shrewsbury, elated by his sudden freedom from ‘all pecuniary anxieties’, and longing to be home in Somerset.
He travelled back by way of Westbury-on-Trym, where he paid his personal thanks to the Wedgwood brothers at Cote House.
From Shrewsbury a few days earlier he had already written to Tom Poole:
I wish to be at home with you indeed, indeed-my Joy is only in the bud here I am like that Tree, which fronts me — The Sun shines bright & warm, as if it were summer — but it is not summer & so it shines on leafless boughs.
The beings who know how to sympathize with me are my foliage.
When Coleridge and the Wordsworths met together once more after a separation of several weeks, it was in the knowledge that the Alfoxden year would soon be over.
They seem, in the months that followed, to have lived with a new intensity, half-knowing that their shared joy in creativity and friendship might never be repeated.
For Coleridge and Wordsworth the publication in October of the Lyrical Ballads was a lasting commemoration of their year together.
Dorothy's own attempt to preserve something from those final Somerset months produced a document more private, but hardly less remarkable.
On a Saturday in late January 1798, sitting perhaps at one of the tall windows in her favourite parlour, she began the first of her surviving journals:
ALFOXDEN, January 20th 1798. —The green paths down the hill-sides are channels for streams.
The young wheat is streaked by silver lines of water running between the ridges, the sheep are gathered together on the slopes.
After the wet dark days, the country seems more populous.
It peoples itself in the sunbeams.
Her response to nature had a subtlety beyond the range either of her brother or of Coleridge, and indeed was a response altogether different from theirs.
She showed a profound deference to the beauty she described, never searching for meaning or metaphor in the landscape, never striving to achieve what Keats would later call the ‘wordsworthian or egotistical sublime’.
For her it was sufficient that the Quantock sheep glittered with dew in the morning sunshine, that the full moon rose ‘in uncommon majesty’ over the sea, and that the silk-weaver's dog howled in the dark at the sound of the village stream.
Both Coleridge and Wordsworth recognized their great indebtedness to Dorothy — watchful in minutest observation of nature’— and borrowed freely from her in their poetry.
Cote House, Westbury-on-Trym, the ‘magnificent Seat’ of John Wedgwood, brother of Josiah and Tom
Dorothy's journal makes it clear that the three friends were now in each other 's company almost daily.
They walked in the deer park and its surrounding beech woods; they followed the lanes to Putsham, Holford and Crowcombe; and they were drawn repeatedly to the sea at Kilve and into the Quantocks.
On an afternoon in late February they climbed to the great Iron Age hill-fort at Dowsborough, from where they looked down on ‘a magnificent scene,curiously spread out for even minute inspection’; and on other occasions they watched from the hills as the effects of the weather unfolded over the landscape below.
‘I never saw such a union of earth, sky, and sea,’ Dorothy wrote following one  hill-top walk.
‘The clouds beneath our feet spread themselves to the water, and the clouds of the sky almost joined them.’
View from Dowsborough hill-fort towards the estuary of the Rive Parrett,c .
1900.
After a painting by William Hyde
While Dorothy was making the first entries in her journal that new year Coleridge continued to write poetry with undiminished fluency, both at Stowey and Alfoxden.
He worked furiously to revise and expand ‘The Ancient Mariner’, and on a night in February wrote a poem of wonderful beauty addressed to his infant son.
‘Frost at Midnight’, perhaps the finest of the Conversation Poems, is a meditation on Coleridge's own childhood, and a passionate expression of hope for Hartley's future.
It is set in the Lime Street parlour, where Coleridge sits by the ‘low-burnt’ parlour fire, and Hartley, his ‘cradled infant’, sleeps beside him.
The Somerset landscape has been dissolved in darkness, and the mysterious forces of nature, normally sought by Coleridge high in the Quantocks, or in the dell at Alfoxden, now wash over the sleeping town and reach to the very door of his cottage.
As the frost descends, and in its ‘secret ministry’ of transformation makes icicles along the dripping eaves, Coleridge's meditative mind carries him  to the scenes of his childhood, and imagines for Hartley a future, not in the ‘great city’, but ‘beneath the crags/Of ancient mountain, and beneath the clouds’.
In the poem's final radiant lines, his thoughts remain with Hartley, but are linked now to an evocation of the natural world of Stowey in all its beauty, even the strange beauty at work outside his cottage that February midnight, where ‘silent icicles’ are ‘Quietly shining to the quiet Moon’.
One of the parlours at the Lime Street cottage as it appears today.
Coleridge's inkstand is at the centre of the table
Coleridge must soon have taken the poem to read to the Wordsworths, and in the following month had an even more substantial achievement to show them.
On a day which was among the more remarkable in literary history, he set out from Lime Street, and as on so many previous occasions reached Alfoxden down the lonely tree-shuttered lane through the deer park.
He had brought with him the completed manuscript of ‘The Ancient Mariner’, and read it to the Wordsworths for the first time, so tradition says, in one of the Alfoxden parlours.
The date was 23 March 1798.
That night the Wordsworths walked back with him as   far as the miner's house, a short distance from the beech tree above Woodlands Farm where they often parted.
‘A beautiful evening,’ Dorothy noted.
‘Very starry, the horned moon.’
By the time ‘The Ancient Mariner’ was finally complete, Coleridge and Wordsworth were already clarifying their plans for publishing a joint volume of poetry.
Discussions on the subject had begun late in November, when the ‘old navigator’ had first became part of their lives, but Dorothy's remark at the end of their walking tour that Coleridge's poem would appear ‘with some pieces of William's’was followed by a long silence.
Only after Coleridge returned from Shrewsbury, freed at last from immediate financial worry, could vague hopes be transformed into clearer intentions.
Money to help pay for ambitious future plans was at least one motive for seeking publication.
In early March, during a long visit to the Wordsworths made by Coleridge and Sara — now heavily pregnant with her second child was decided that once Alfoxden had been given up, they should all set sail from England and travel in Germany.
The impetus for suggesting so major an upheaval came from Coleridge, who felt an increasing sense of obligation to live up to the hopes so clearly implied by the Wedgwood annuity.
In Germany, the pre-eminent centre of Europe's intellectual life, he could not only learn the language, but engage in the study of philosophy and religion which he now felt certain was his true vocation.
‘…Money is necessary to our plan,’ he was soon telling Joseph Cottle; and from a volume of poems they might raise sixty guineas.
At first Cottle was asked to consider a new edition of Poems on Various Subjects , or a volume of Wordsworth's poems, or perhaps a joint edition of Osorio and The Borderers .
Finally, the thoughts of the two poets tended towards a volume of another kind, which would reflect the poetic concerns of their many conversations since the beginning of the Alfoxden year.
Those conversations, Coleridge remembered, ‘turned frequently on the two cardinal points of poetry, the power of exciting the sympathy of the reader by a faithful adherence to the truth of nature, and the power of giving the interest of novelty by the modifying colours of imagination’.
These ‘cardinal points’, they now proposed, should find expression through a series of experimental poems in which Coleridge was to concern himself with subjects ‘supernatural, or at least romantic’, and Wordsworth was to ‘give the charm of novelty to things of every day’, seeking for characters and incidents ‘such…as will be found in every village’.
It was from these tentative beginnings that the Lyrical Ballads finally emerged.20
Wordsworth was soon writing verse with greater confidence than ever before.
‘His faculties seem to expand every day,’ Dorothy wrote in early March; ‘he composes with much more facility than he did, as to the mechanism of poetry, and  his ideas flow faster than he can express them.
Most of the poems Wordsworth contributed to the Lyrical Ballads were completed in an astonishing burst of creativity during the next few weeks, and drew their inspiration largely from his immediate surroundings at Holford and Alfoxden.
Christopher Tricky, seen struggling one day to remove an old tree stump near his hovel at the park gate, became, as has already been noted, the subject of ‘Simon Lee, the Old Huntsman’; a remark from Tom Poole led to ‘The Idiot Boy’; ‘The Last of the Flock’ told the story of a Holford shepherd found weeping in the road; and ‘The Thorn’was inspired by a weather-beaten hawthorn seen ‘on the ridge of Quantock Hill’.
The studied plainness of diction in these poems of country life was an important part of their experimental character, but became the object of  much ridicule.
A few more meditative poems, however, achieved a lyrical power which disarmed most critics, and which helped some early readers, such as the young Thomas De Quincey, to see in the collection as a whole that ‘ray of a new morning’ which marked the beginning of English Romanticism.
One hastily written poem in Wordsworth's meditative manner, ‘Lines Written at a Small Distance from my House’, was delivered to Dorothy by young Basil as the Quantock spring was at last arriving:
It is the first mild day of March:
Each minute sweeter than before,
The red-breast sings from the tall larch
That stands beside our door.
There is a blessing in the air,
Which seems a sense of joy to yield
To the bare trees, and mountains bare,
And grass in the green field…
Some of the new poetry Coleridge intended for the joint volume was not written with nearly such ease.
In the first weeks of the year he had probably begun ‘Christabel’, an ambitious medieval romance founded once more on supernatural events.
But the poem remained unfinished, a consequence, he later said, of the vindictive ill will which Charles Lloyd had begun to show towards him, perhaps with encouragement from Robert Southey.
A novel by Lloyd, called Edmund Oliver , appeared in April, and contained a thinly-disguised and unflattering portrait of Coleridge which deeply offended and disturbed him.
The lane to Alfoxden.
Watercolour by W.A. Rixon, 1899
The oak tree in the grounds at Alfoxden, traditionally said to be the ‘huge oak tree’ mentioned in part one of Coleridge's poem ‘Christabel’
When the Lyrical Ballads finally appeared, Coleridge's contributions, other than‘The Ancient Mariner’, amounted to no more than two extracts from Osorio,and a Conversation Poem called ‘The Nightingale’, which was written during April.
‘The Nightingale’ provides a record of one of the evening walks shared by Coleridge and the Wordsworths which had been so much a part of their lives together.
They rest on an ‘old mossy bridge’, probably at Holford, and listen to the singing of the ‘merry Nightingale’, before they say farewell in the darkness and turn for their homes.
Another poem, ‘Fears in Solitude’, was also completed that April, and was probably Coleridge's last substantial poem of the Alfoxden year.
Set in a ‘green and silent spot, amid the hills’, it was not intended for the Lyrical Ballads , but was a political meditation inspired by fears of a French invasion.
Coleridge declares loyalty to his country but contempt for its governors, and then ends the poem, as he begins it, with the Somerset landscape.
He follows a hill-track on his journey home, and looks out with startled pleasure when the coastal plain emerges below him.
There seems a note of valediction in the loving intensity of his description, a desire to record for one last time the  scenes which, for more than a year, had so filled his mind and shaped his thoughts:
…
And after lonely sojourning
In such a quiet and surrounded nook,
This burst of prospect, here the shadowy main,
Dim-tinted, there the mighty majesty
Of that huge amphitheatre of rich
And elmy fields, seems like society
Conversing with the mind and giving it
A livelier impulse and a dance of thought!
And now, beloved Stowey!
I behold
Thy church-tower, and, methinks, the four huge elms
Clustering, which mark the mansion of my friend;
And close behind them, hidden from my view,
Is my own lowly cottage, where my babe
And my babe's mother dwell in peace!…
View from the Quantock Hills towards Minehead and Exmoor, 1890
As he looked out over the familiar landscape that spring day, the poetic miracles which had begun in the lime-tree bower were coming to an end.
William Hazlitt's visit to Somerset, so eagerly anticipated since January, began in fine summer weather towards the end of May.24 Having made the journey from Shropshire more quickly than he expected, he lingered nervously at Bridgwater for two days.
But once he reached Stowey the Coleridges greeted him warmly at Lime Street, where the cottage had gained another new resident only a week before: on 14 May, Sara had been ‘safely delivered of a fine boy’, the child being given the name Berkeley in honour of the philosopher, for whom Coleridge was developing a great admiration.
St Mary's Church, Nether Stowey.
Tom Poole is buried near the church door
When Hazlitt and Coleridge visited Alfoxden the following day, Wordsworth was away from home; but Dorothy provided them with a ‘frugal repast’ and let them see the now-abundant manuscripts intended for the Lyrical Ballads .
They stayed the night at Alfoxden, Hazlitt sleeping in a room filled with ‘round-faced family-portraits’ of the St Albyns, and waking next morning to the bellowing of a Quantock stag.
After breakfast, he and Coleridge walked in the park, taking Wordsworth's manuscripts with them:
…
Seating ourselves on the trunk of an old ash-tree that stretched along the ground, Coleridge read aloud with a sonorous and musical voice, the ballad of Betty Foy .
I was not critically or sceptically inclined.
I saw touches of truth and nature, and took the rest for granted.
But in the Thorn , the Mad Mother , and the  Complaint of a Poor Indian Woman , I felt that deeper power and pathos which have been since acknowledged…as the characteristics of this author; and the sense of a new style and a new spirit in poetry came over me.
It had to me something of the effect that arises from the turning up of the fresh soil, or of the first welcome breath of Spring.
Alfoxden,c .
1890
In the evening they walked home to Stowey in the summer moonlight ‘through echoing grove, by fairy stream or waterfall’— Coleridge lamenting that Wordsworth was unwilling to believe in local superstitions, ‘and that there was a something corporeal,a matter-of-fact-ness , a clinging to the palpable, or often to the petty, in his poetry, in consequence’.
Wordsworth himself arrived at Lime  Street the following day, quaintly dressed, as Hazlitt remembered, in a brown fustian jacket and striped pantaloons, and talking freely in his strong northern accent:
Wordsworth, looking out of the low, latticed window, said, ‘How beautifully the sun sets on that yellow bank!’
I thought within myself, ‘With what eyes these poets see nature!’ and ever after, when I saw the sun-set stream upon the objects facing it, conceived I had made a discovery, or thanked Mr Wordsworth for having made one for me!
Dunster village and castle, 1820
The shy young visitor was soon disputing with Wordsworth almost on equal terms; and next evening, while Coleridge was providing Dorothy with superfluous explanations about the different notes of the nightingale, Hazlitt and Wordsworth ‘got into a metaphysical argument’ which may have inspired two of the most genial of the Lyrical Ballads —‘Expostulation and Reply’, and ‘The Tables Turned’, both of them written ‘in front of the house at Alfoxden’.
26
Hazlitt relished a long summer walk to the Valley of the Rocks, undertaken with Coleridge and John Chester, a farmer's son from Dodington.
Chester, who was soon to accompany Coleridge on the journey into Europe, was yet another who had been drawn to him ‘as flies are to honey’, and now trotted happily beside his two talkative companions, bow-legged and awestruck.
They passed close to Dunster, which lay beneath a wooded hill looking ‘as clear, as pure, as embrowned ’ as a Poussin landscape.
At Broomstreet Farm Hazlitt called ‘The Ancient Mariner’ to their minds by pointing to the bare masts of a ship, outlined against ‘the red-orbed disk of the setting sun’.
And at the Valley of the Rocks, he remembered, Coleridge rushed from the inn when a thunderstorm threatened, ‘to enjoy the commotion of the elements’.
It was probably in the course of Hazlitt's three-week visit that Joseph Cottle also arrived, finally persuaded by Coleridge and Wordsworth that he should travel down to spend a few days discussing the intended volume of poetry.
Its contents were still very much in doubt when Cottle reached Alfoxden; but before his visit ended the famous title had been chosen, and the decision made that the volume should begin with ‘The Ancient Mariner’ and include ‘sundry shorter poems’of Wordsworth's, most of them written since the beginning of the year.
The volume was to be anonymous, since, as Coleridge explained, ‘Wordsworth's name is nothing — to a large number of persons mine stinks ’.
At the end of May Dorothy could write to her brother Richard that ‘William has now some poems in the Bristol press’; and by mid-September, just as Coleridge and Wordsworth were preparing to leave for Germany, the Lyrical Ballads were at last ready to be offered to an indifferent public.
Those last high-spirited weeks at Alfoxden and Stowey were almost at an end by the time Cottle and Hazlitt left for home.
In the little time that remained, plans for Germany were made, and no doubt farewell visits took the three friends by now-familiar routes to the beach at Kilve, to Holford Combe and Hodder's Combe, and far into the hills.
Finally, on Saturday 23 June, the Wordsworths left Alfoxden, and went for the last time down the wooded lane through the deer park, past the beech trees and hollies where, on a day in March, they had sheltered from a hail storm, past Christopher Tricky's hovel near the dog pound, and past the ‘loud Waterfall’, whose sound would always echo in their memories.
Dorothy had ‘not often felt more regret’ than she did that day.
For a week they stayed at the Lime Street cottage, where Sara was already doubting the wisdom of taking part in the German expedition.
As the mother of two small children, the youngest hardly a month old, her eventual decision to remain at Stowey was clearly sensible.
But the months of separation from her husband, and the events those months contained, came to mark a fundamental breach in their relationship, after which there ceased to be any hope that their early married happiness could be recovered.
By early July the Wordsworths had taken up temporary residence at Cottle's house in Wine Street, Bristol, where Dorothy found the noise of the Bristol streets almost intolerable.
‘You can scarcely conceive’, she wrote, ‘how the jarring contrast between the sounds which are now for-ever ringing in my ears and the sweet sounds of Allfoxden makes me long for the country again.’
An opportunity for escape occurred shortly afterwards when she and Wordsworth set off on a walking tour into the Wye Valley.
Wordsworth's poetic fluency had never been greater, and the landscape near Tintern Abbey, revisited after an  absence of five years, released from him a stream of meditative blank verse quite different in style from the humble poems of rural life he had been writing for the Lyrical Ballads .
‘Lines Written a Few Miles above Tintern Abbey’ is a poem in Wordsworth's loftiest philosophical manner, and a triumphant affirmation of God's creative and restorative power at work in nature.
‘No poem of mine was composed under circumstances more pleasant for me to remember than this,’ Wordsworth wrote: Cottle's home in Wine Street was probably the setting in which ‘Tintern Abbey’reached written form, and almost at once it was chosen to take a place of honour as the last of the Lyrical Ballads .
The poem was the finest Wordsworth had yet written, and, coming so soon after his departure from Alfoxden, suggests that the loss to him of the Quantock countryside had been of little real significance.
Although his years at Racedown and Alfoxden had seen the growth of his vocation as a poet, his geographical loyalties lay elsewhere, and it was in the north that his future life, and many of his greatest poetic achievements, would be set.
For Coleridge, the West Country man, the decision to leave for Germany had a more profound importance.
As he took the road to Bridgwater with John Chester, something essential to his happiness remained behind him, both in the rich and various landscape which so closely mirrored the landscape of his mind, and in the generous steadying friendship of Tom Poole.
Sara's continued presence in the Lime Street cottage meant that he would inevitably return to Stowey, however briefly; but his departure in the late summer of 1798 was in most senses final.
I began it upon leaving Tintern, after crossing the Wye, and concluded it just as I was entering Bristol in the evening, after a ramble of four or five days, with my sister.
Not a line of it was altered, and not any part of it written down till I reached Bristol.
Holford Combe
Tintern Abbey,c. 1830
The four travellers arrived in Yarmouth on 15 September, young Basil having been left, with much sadness, in the care of his family in London.
To Tom Poole that day, Coleridge wrote a farewell letter, setting down his sense of all that Poole had been to him since the beginning of their friendship more than four years earlier:
Of many friends, whom I love and esteem, my head & heart have ever chosen you as the Friend — as the one being, in whom is involved the full & whole meaning of that sacred Title — God love you, my dear Poole! and your faithful & most affectionate S T Coleridge
Then, in a postscript, as if feeling that his measured words had not yet said enough, he added with a sudden note of desperation: ‘May God preserve us & make us continue to be joy & comfort & wisdom & virtue to each other, my dear, dear, Poole!’
On Sunday morning, 16 September, they set sail in the packet-boat on a boisterous sea.
Chester and the Wordsworths were violently seasick almost at once.
But Coleridge found that he rather enjoyed the rolling of the deck, and held long and facetious conversations with a talkative fellow passenger.
Very soon the coast of England had vanished in the distance.
Stowey Court and the gazebo, on the road from Nether Stowey to Bridgwater.
From a watercolour by John Buckler, 1840