

INTRODUCTION
THE PROBLEM
Even independently of each other the topics of dementia and care at home have been arousing enormous interest, not only among elderly people in need of care or support and among their relatives and friends, but also among service-providers, policymakers and planners.
The project which we report here came into being because of this concern; it was one of several recent attempts, all part of the same climate of interest, to sustain some highly dependent old people in non-institutional settings.
There are several reasons for this concern with dementia sufferers and with finding ways of sustaining them at home.
The first is one of numbers.
Between now and the end of the century the number of very old people will rise considerably.
The figures below (Table 1.1) show that whereas the total size of the population aged 65 and over will not rise substantially (it will in fact fall between 1991 and 2001), those aged 85 and over will almost double in number in   England and Wales, from just over half a million to almost one million (an increase of 88 per cent).
The reason why this is particularly worrying to those concerned with the elderly mentally frail is that the prevalence of dementia rises markedly with age.
Although the overall prevalence of moderate to severe dementia for those aged 65 and over in Britain cannot be stated with accuracy (because the several studies conducted in this country took place in different locations, at different times, with different types of sample, and using different measures and methods of assessment of dementia; see for example Akhtar AM et al, 1973; Clarke et al , 1984 and; 1986; Bergmann, 1971; Bond & Carstairs, 1982; Gruer, 1975; Gurland et al , 1983; Kay et al , 1964 & 1970; Maule et al , 1984; Williamson et al , l964), it can be estimated as somewhere between one per cent and seven per cent of those aged 65 and over.
Although a recent review of such studies suggests that prevalence may be declining, there is no sure evidence that this is so (Ineichen, 1987).
What is sure, however, is that prevalence rises markedly with age (see for example Kay et al, 1970; Campbell et al , 1983; Maule et al , 1984), and may affect as many as 20 per cent of people over the age of 80.
The reason why dementia is seen as problematic by those who experience it or who are involved in the care of old people will be apparent to anyone who has encountered the frequently devastating effects of this illness: an illness (if of the Alzheimer's type) with, as yet, no known cause, no means of prevention, no treatment, and no cure.
Although there are many types of dementia they can generally be defined as involving progressive and irreversible brain failure.
The dementia sufferer will become increasingly forgetful, and will therefore have growing difficulty in living as a conventional, independent, social being.
Manifestations can vary enormously from one individual to another; a sufferer may — or may not — forget how to wash, dress, eat, go to the lavatory, get up or go to bed; be disorientated in time and place (for example, may get up in the middle of the night, or may wander away from home and be unable to find his or her way back); forget the social conventions of politeness, and may therefore become aggressive or rude (or over-friendly); forget how to communicate, and even his or her own or other people's identity.
Dementia sufferers therefore need people to help them with personal and house care; to safeguard them (and others who may be affected) from risks such as gas or road traffic, from harming themselves or others, or from being harmed by others (for they may become vulnerable to attack, theft, etc), and to provide them with companionship and emotional support in their frequent loneliness and depression (see Norman, 1982).
Providing the necessary care is obviously problematic — and for a number of very different kinds of reason.
Firstly, the illness tends to afflict the very old, the group most likely — largely through widowhood — to be living alone.
The General Household Survey (OPCS, 1985) for instance found that 47 per cent of those aged 75 and over lived alone, compared with 28 per cent of those aged 65 to 74 years.
Studies of dementia sufferers show even higher proportions living alone; for example 53 per cent in the Newcastle study (Kay et al, 1964).
Changes over time also indicate that living alone is on the increase as a feature of old age: the General Household Survey (OPCS, 1985) shows that in 1973, 40 per cent of those aged 75 and over lived alone; ten years later the figure was 47 per cent.
Living alone, although a very real care problem for many dementia sufferers because of the need some of them have for continual safeguarding, might not in itself be a problem for all if they had sons or (more realistically) daughters living nearby who could help with their care.
But this source of help appears to be receding.
As Wicks (1987) states:
‘Today, and in the future, there will be fewer women in the community in the potential carers age groups vis-à-vis those requiring care.
Moreover most of these women, unlike perhaps their mothers or grandmothers, will see themselves as workers, earning an income and pursuing a career — rather like male members of families.
Some of these women, and also a small but growing proportion of elderly people themselves, will have experienced marital breakdown and divorce.
This may make for difficulties in terms of care.
Again, it is likely that women today, and even more so in the future, will not automatically assume that it is their place to provide care when this is required.’
Of course these trends may not continue, or new trends may emerge (for instance higher female unemployment, greater participation of men in caring) but the long-term trend appears to be towards a smaller pool of potential informal carers than existed 50 or even 20 years ago.
Care for the elderly dementia sufferer is also affected by increased budgetary constraints on both health and social services.
Government pressure towards both community and non-statutory care is well known.
For example the Government White Paper, ‘Growing Older’(DHSS, 1981) stated:
‘It is the role of public authorities to sustain and, where necessary, develop — but never displace —(informal and voluntary) support and care.
Care in the community must increasingly mean by the community.’
Very small proportions, even of dementia sufferers, live in institutions; most of their care is indeed provided by relatives or friends, even when they live alone.
The provision of statutory services to the elderly has risen since 1948, but not sufficiently to keep pace with the increasing number of dependants and the decreasing pool of informal carers (even now only 11 per cent of people aged 85 and over receive meals-on-wheels, 37 per cent a home help; OPCS, 1985).
THE BEGINNING OF THE PROJECT
As a result of these various pressures there has been a proliferation of community care schemes in the past few years; schemes to improve on the services already available, to fill gaps, and to provide a less fragmented service to the elderly mentally frail.
We review some of the major schemes in Chapter Two.
The project which we report here was one such scheme.
It came into being following some wider discussions held in 1982 between Age Concern England and the Department of Psychiatry at Guy's Hospital about the community services provided for dementia sufferers.
Gradually these discussions developed into a proposal for an action-research project (in the sense of an action project which would be monitored and evaluated) which  would provide enhanced home support to dementia sufferers, partly through the employment of extra paid carers.
It was proposed initially to carry out the project in the London Borough of Southwark since part of the borough was served by Guy's Hospital and also in the London Borough of Barnet (since it had a consultant psychogeriatrician who had recently moved there from Guy's Hospital).
In the event, however, the project occurred in neither of these areas: not in Barnet because the psychogeriatric service was still in the process of development; nor in Southwark because, although there was an enormous amount of goodwill and enthusiasm for the project, the social services unions (particularly the joint Home Helps Shop Stewards Committee) decided that they could not endorse cooperation with the project, the main reason being that they felt — mistakenly in our view — that a project which employed its own carers might be a threat to the employment of local authority home helps, and that ‘to endorse such a service is not helping the elderly in the long term, it is only carrying out this Government's stratagem in closing Homes and hospitals’.
During the time when negotiations with Southwark were still continuing, the Age Concern Research Unit (ACRU) had been approached by service-providers (the consultant psychogeriatrician, the social services department and the local Age Concern organiser) in Ipswich, Suffolk, with some ideas of their own for a project on the elderly mentally frail.
They were keen that their ideas should become incorporated into the ACRU/Guy's Hospital proposal and that Ipswich should be one of the locations in which the project was carried out.
With the loss of Southwark the project organisers had to find another similar London borough.
Guy's Hospital colleagues were particularly disappointed that the project could not be carried out in Southwark, and it was therefore agreed that we should seek a similar, inner London, largely working-class borough with an established psychogeriatric service, so that findings might be applicable to the Southwark situation.
Another reason for wanting to retain the inclusion of a relatively poor inner-city area was that it is in such areas that the problems of service provision to dementia sufferers are often at their most acute.
The consultant psychogeriatrician in the London Borough of Newham was one of those approached, and as he responded most quickly and positively, Newham became the second area in which the project was to be set up.
We had wanted two contrasting areas (more than two would have been preferable of course in terms of the extent to which one could generalise from our findings but the projects would become expensive and it was acknowledged that we could not include more than two), and Ipswich and Newham were felt to fill this requirement.
We were fortunate to have obtained funding for the project from the Gatsby Trust and from Guy's Hospital Special Trustees.
The project was to be a three-year one and was to employ one action project development officer in each of the two locations (employed by Age Concern at its Research Unit) and three researchers (two employed by Age Concern at its Research Unit, and one, a research psychiatrist, employed by Guy's Medical School); in addition, the funding (which amounted in total to approximately £250,000) was to cover the wages of local people to be employed specifically to work with dementia sufferers.
The aims of the project, which are discussed in more detail in Chapter Two, were to provide flexible ‘packages’ of supplementary home support to dementia sufferers, in addition to the statutory health and social services and the non-statutory services normally available, and to test whether, given this service, it is possible cost-effectively to sustain such people at home for longer than is usually possible with support only from existing forms of health and social service; to explore the circumstances in which the dementia sufferers could cost-effectively be sustained at home, and to examine the circumstances in which it was not possible to sustain them; that is, to identify the limits to care.
THE REPORT
The next chapter describes the aims of the scheme and how both the action project and the research were designed to achieve these aims.
Chapter Three gives a detailed account of the action project from setting it up, operating it, and finally to its termination.
Chapters Four to Seven, which present the research findings, examine: whether the project made any difference to those who received it, compared with those who did not, in terms of institutionalisation, mental or emotional well-being, self-care capacity or receipt of other community services (Chapter Four); the effects of the project upon the principal informal carers of the dementia sufferers (Chapter Five); the major costs of community care for those receiving or not receiving support from the project (Chapter Six); and the limits to care, that is, the characteristics or circumstances of those who could not be supported at home for long even with the Home Support Project ( Chapter Seven).
The final chapter draws some conclusions and shows how the experiences of this scheme can be used to aid decisions about the future care of dementia sufferers in the community.
THE PROJECT DESIGN AND METHODS
The Home Support Project was both an action project (to provide a service for elderly people with dementia which would help those who wished to remain at home rather than be admitted to an institution) and a research project (to evaluate the success of the action project).
This chapter looks at the basic concepts and design of both action and research, and relates our plans to studies and projects carried out elsewhere.
THE ACTION PROJECT CONCEPTS
The kind of service devised was shaped by a number of different beliefs about community care, about the services available, and about the needs of dementia sufferers.
The sources of these beliefs were various: information gathered about existing services, the findings of previous projects and studies (see below), talks with dementia sufferers and their carers and service-providers.
Each source contributed to the attempt to understand what dementia sufferers needed in order to help them stay at home.
Of course it was not possible to devise a service that would be all things to all people: some of the needs would be inconsistent with others, some were already being addressed in other projects, some were less crucial.
It was felt that those chosen cohered in a sensible and manageable way.
The intention was, firstly, to devise a service which was client-centred, which was sufficiently flexible to provide an individually tailored package of care which would meet the wishes of each client, and fit in with his or her timetable rather than with that  of the service-providers.
One of the instigators of the project, in talking about its design, said:
‘I could think of individual old people who were inappropriately placed in long-stay settings, or who were creating excessive stresses at home on relatives…and I could see that something more substantial in the community needed to be provided.
And I had read enough and seen enough from other bits of our work, to feel that a lot of that was to do with coordination of services, or with the fact that services were not packaged to meet individuals' needs.
You had to have meals-on-wheels because that was what there was, and particularly the meals-on-wheels study we did in Islington [Barker & Noble, 1983]which clearly indicated that half the recipients desperately needed meals-on-wheels, but they needed a lot of other things as well, and that for the other half they were inappropriate anyway.
That study, more than anything else probably, made me want to see what we could do in making services more adaptable and appropriate and comprehensive.’
Interview, 4.5.84
Secondly, it was recognised that existing services were often vital but that they were unable to meet all the needs of this special group of elderly people and that different types of service might be required; it was never intended that the project should deprive people of existing services and substitute others for them, but that it should bridge gaps between those already available, whether statutory, voluntary or private.
Of course there is an argument for substitution, and other projects have used such a method (see below); it is often suggested for example that it is particularly hard for the elderly mentally frail to cope with a variety of different service-providers.
However, in order that the scheme could, if successful, be relatively easily incorporated by local authorities into existing patterns of service provision it was decided not to substitute but to see whether it was possible to work alongside other services.
Following from this the aim was that the project should collaborate with existing service-providers in order to ensure that there was no overlap or competition with others but that all were working together for the good of the client; and that the project would, where  necessary, coordinate the services available to each client and thus ensure an appropriate and suitably balanced package of care for that person.
One of the most important elements of the project design was the intention to employ locally recruited people (as in the Kent project; see later in this chapter) to provide any extra care needed; local recruitment was important for it was thus hoped to build on, or build up, neighbourhood contacts around the dementia sufferer and his or her family.
It was also planned that wherever possible these local workers should be employed to work with a specific elderly person, and thus to build up a relationship between the two.
Again, wherever possible, it was hoped that the nature of the role the local workers fulfilled and the hours they worked would be flexible so that they could respond to any changing needs of their client.
It was planned to appoint development officers whose work would cover a local area large enough to keep them occupied full time but sufficiently small to be manageable.
These officers would organise and manage the service; recruit, train and support the local workers; carry out assessments of the dementia sufferers; and take decisions about what extra care — if any — was needed in each case.
It was also envisaged that they would play an advocacy and educational role on behalf of dementia sufferers throughout their area.
Thus it was hoped that they would seize any opportunity of increasing awareness and understanding of mental frailty in old age, among professionals, lay carers and local people in such a way as to increase people's sympathy and confidence in any contacts they might have with elderly mentally frail people.
Finally, the project was to provide a cost-effective service.
It was recognised that what would be most welcomed by policymakers and others was a service that not only helped to keep people out of institutions if that was their wish, but did so in a way that was both acceptable to recipients and less expensive than alternative institutional care.
It was therefore recognised that there might well be some dementia sufferers who could not be helped by this project because their needs would be so great that they would be more expensive to meet in the community than in an institution.
In other words it was recognised that community care is not necessarily, and not for ail, a cheaper form of care.
These were to be the major elements of the action project.
How they were put into practice is discussed in Chapter Three.
THE RESEARCH DESIGN
Action and control samples
A vital feature of this project is that it was not merely an action project with research added on, but action designed so that it could be researched.
In order to evaluate whether the enhanced home support of the action scheme was successful in sustaining at home some people who would otherwise have been likely to enter institutional care, it was necessary for the action to take place in a prescribed geographical area, so that an equivalent, matched area could become a control area.
In other words, people living within the action area could become eligible for the services of the action project whereas those in the matched control area could not.
Ideally the research team would have liked a randomised control experimental design whereby half the eligible people would have been allocated to the action group and the remainder to the control group on a random basis.
However, the research design was inevitably constrained and shaped to some extent by the requirements of the action project.
It was felt that a randomised control design would produce an unworkable scheme in practice: there was only one development officer in each area and it would be difficult to supervise a large number of clients and carers over a widespread geographical area.
It was foreseen that difficult situations might arise in the operation of such a scheme, for example two elderly dementia sufferers could live next door to one another, one able to receive support from the action project and the other not.
It was decided, therefore, to select action and control groups on the basis of geographical area.
This met with the approval of the development officers who felt that it would be much easier to explain to potential clients and their relatives and other service-providers that it was an experimental scheme confined to one area of the borough only.
The first step in the selection of the action and control areas in Ipswich and Newham was a study of the number and pattern of referrals to the hospital psychogeriatric services during the year  prior to the commencement of the study (that is, the year ending 31 July 1983).
This revealed a higher number of referrals to the psychogeriatric service for people in Newham than in Ipswich (understandable in view of the fact that Newham has a larger elderly population: approximately 28,500 people over 65 compared with 18,800 in Ipswich).
Because of this difference in numbers we had to exclude altogether a small area of Newham from our study, in order to achieve a sample size manageable for our purposes.
(We were aiming for approximately 50 clients in each action and control group, a total sample of 200.)
The development officers felt that 50 would be about the maximum number of new cases they could take on over a 12 month period.
From a research point of view, 50 clients in each group would enable some comparisons to be made both within and between areas, although much larger samples would have been preferable.
The area of Newham which was excluded from the study was the north-east corner of the borough which includes Manor Park.
It   differs from the rest of Newham in that it is less typically an inner-city area and rather more middle class with few tower blocks and a higher proportion of owner-occupied housing.
The action and control areas were carefully selected so that they were matched as far as possible in terms both of the number of referrals to the psychogeriatric service in the previous year, and of 1981 census data on the number of elderly people resident, particularly those aged 80 and over, the housing amenities of elderly people and the proportion of elderly people living alone (see Table 2.1).
The action project began on 1 April 1984 and any people aged 65 or over who were referred to the hospital psychogeriatric service during the 12 months to the end of March 1985 and who were diagnosed as suffering from dementia, became members of the action sample if they lived in the action area, and of the control sample if their home was in the control area (so long as they were not living permanently in an institution at the time of referral and they or their carers gave consent for their inclusion).
It was decided to generate the samples from referrals to the psychogeriatric service in each borough, partly because it was easier to do that than to draw them from general practitioners' lists or social services department referrals, but mainly in order to provide the service for people whose illness was likely to be at a relatively advanced stage and who were likely to need extra care if they were to continue to live at home.
Methods and types of data collection
The methods and types of data collection chosen were informed by the research aims.
1.
To discover what difference the action project made (that is, whether it delayed or prevented admission to an institution; whether it delayed deterioration in or improved the physical, emotional or mental well-being of dementia sufferers or their carers; whether it delayed deterioration in or improved family relationships; whether it increased, decreased or had no effect on people's receipt of statutory or other voluntary services).
2.
To discover how cost-effective it was to sustain at home people  who were judged likely to have been in an institution had it not been for the project's services.
3.
To determine the limits to care by examining the characteristics which affected whether or not a person was sustained in the community through the action project.
4.
To monitor the course of the project, that is, to study the implementation of the action project design, to find out whether it operated in the way envisaged, using the means planned, and to examine any problems which arose and any unanticipated consequences.
Data to address these questions were collected largely by interview, and in order to study changes over time, they were collected at regular intervals.
As stated above, the samples of dementia sufferers were to be generated over a period of one year (1 April 1984–31 March 1985); and the development officers were to continue to provide their service for one further year (until 31 March 1986) though no further sample members (project clients in the case of the action sample) were to be generated during the second year.
All sample members were to be followed up by the research team (unless, of course, they died or moved away) for a period of one year from the date of their referral to the project.
In order to collect information about the dementia sufferers, a semi-structured questionnaire was devised (see Appendix I) for use at the time of a person's referral, six months later, and six months after that.
This questionnaire was divided into several sections because it was necessary to collect information about the dementia sufferer from different sources:
1.
From the dementia sufferer him/herself.
Some standardised measure of dementia was needed, partly as a criterion of entry to the project, partly so that action and control samples could be compared to see if they were matched according to level of mental impairment, and partly to compare any changes over time.
It was decided that emotional well-being should also be examined, in order — as stated above — to see if the action project made a difference in that respect.
It was thought appropriate to use — if possible — previously devised and validated scales.
Ruling out scales designed for use with  non-elderly people, for inpatient populations, for administration by clinicians, for information gathering from close relatives, and any not previously validated or not sensitive to changes over time, two scales were selected from the Comprehensive Assessment and Referral Examination (CARE) Schedule (Gurland et al, 1977) namely the Organic Brain Syndrome (OBS) scale and the Depression scale, the former a ten point and the latter a 30 point scale.
It was felt inadvisable, for obvious reasons, to use the dementia sufferers as informants about their family, care or housing circumstances, but, in addition to the OBS and Depression scale questions, they were to be asked whether or not they felt they had sufficient company and adequate help at home.
Finally a simple set of performance tests was sought, to assess whether respondents could actually perform some of the basic activities of daily living (such as counting money, telling the time, reading medicine bottle instructions).
No existing test was found which precisely suited the team's purposes, so one which, though useful, was not entirely suitable for dementia sufferers living at home, was adapted.
This was the Performance of Activities of Daily Living — PADL (Kuriansky & Gurland, 1976).
2.
From a key informant familiar with the dementia sufferer and his or her home circumstances.
Information would be sought about existence of, and contact with, kin, friends and neighbours; about housing facilities and, at later stages, any changes of care or other circumstances since referral.
The informant was expected usually to be the person's nearest relative.
3.
From a service-provider (mainly the development officer for the action sample, or a social services department member for the control sample) or a near relative or friend.
Information about the type and frequency of social or medical services received by the dementia sufferer was to be sought.
It was recognised that several sources might have to be approached in order to obtain comprehensive data on this subject.
4.
From a medical practitioner familiar with the dementia sufferer.
Information was required on his or her physical and mental condition, including any functional mental disorder or behavioural problems.
In order to collect information about the dementia sufferer's informal or family carers it was decided to interview them in depth, using a semi-structured questionnaire (see Appendix I).
The aim was to confine attention to people who had frequent contact with the dementia sufferer, rather than interviewing all nearest relatives, who might or might not have contact with him or her.
A decision, inevitably arbitrary, was therefore taken to include in the sample of principal carers only those who spent a minimum of seven hours per week engaged in activities with or on behalf of the dementia sufferer.
It was recognised of course that not everyone would have such a carer, but that this restriction would provide a more homogeneous sample than would otherwise be the case.
The principal carers were to be interviewed on two occasions, firstly at or around the time of the sufferer's first interview and secondly a year later.
These interviews were to be used partly to obtain or confirm information about the sufferer but also to examine the carer's own contribution to the care of the sufferer; his or her physical and emotional well-being; feelings about or attitudes to the sufferer, towards his/her own involvement, and towards the sufferer's continued residence in the community.
These perceptions and feelings were to be examined qualitatively rather than by means of any standardised measures, since it was felt that such complex issues could not be (or had never successfully been) encapsulated in a standardised scale.
This decision is inevitably open to question since, even if imperfect, the use of a standardised scale would have allowed comparison with other studies of carers.
However, given the small size of our anticipated samples and the fact that they would not lend themselves easily to quantitative analysis it was decided to focus in this study upon qualitative data.
In order to monitor the implementation of the action project plans, a variety of data collection sources were used: study of project records; regular interviews of the development officers by the research team; attendance and recording of discussions at project meetings or other occasions; discussions with other professionals affected by or involved in the implementation of the project.
In order to determine the cost of services received by the action sample, it was decided to use mainly costs already calculated in previously published research, but where a service appeared to have  special local features, an examination of that service would be carried out by the research team.
Clearly the question of how much it costs to sustain at home elderly people with dementia is a very important one, but it is one which is very difficult to answer.
Calculating the cost of any service is a very time-consuming and often virtually impossible task.
For example, the yardstick used for comparison purposes in this project was the cost of a long-stay psychogeriatric bed.
However, there are no published figures for the cost of such a bed.
Health statistics tend to relate to large psychiatric hospitals which include younger patients and often it is not possible to distinguish costs for acute or assessment beds or for outpatient or day hospital attendances.
To attempt to calculate the cost for the long-stay psychogeriatric wards in the particular hospitals in the project would have involved an observational study of all the staff who had an input, for example doctors, nurses, occupational therapists, social workers, community psychiatric nurses, etc to see how much time they spent directly with the patients in the long-stay wards and how much time they spent indirectly in work connected with these patients such as in case conferences, meetings, administrative work, telephone calls and so on.
Any time spent with day hospital patients, on domiciliary visits, or work related to patients living at home, or acute or assessment patients, would need to be excluded.
Any medication or dressings supplied to the long-stay patients would need to be logged.
There would then be the cost of the general services to the hospital, such as catering, portering, cleaning, laundry and maintenance to be allocated on a ward basis.
Finally, the thorny question of accounting for the capital cost of the hospital would have to be tackled.
It was for reasons such as these that it was decided wherever possible to rely on published research in the field.
Particularly useful in this respect was Wright's ‘Costing Care’(Wright et al, 1981).
(For further details of the sources used and the method of calculating the individual unit costs for services, see Appendix IV.)
A public revenue approach to costing was to be adopted, which meant focusing on the cost of services received, and excluding the cost of housing, personal living expenses and informal care from the main calculations.
This was partly for ease of administration by the development officers who had to take into account the cost of all the  services received by the elderly person when designing a package of care, but primarily because this was a new initiative: by enabling the development officers to take on difficult and complex cases without being unduly restricted by considerations of cost, it was hoped to test the limits to this form of community care.
This then was the research design.
Next we look at how our proposals compared with other projects or studies already carried out.
And finally this chapter describes how the research methods worked in practice, before turning in Chapter Three to the operation of the action project.
OTHER PROJECTS AND STUDIES
The Home Support Project was influenced by many research findings and innovative schemes carried out elsewhere.
But it is important to state that although in recent years in Britain, there have been many service innovations whose aim has been to improve the home or community care of elderly mentally frail people (see for example Age Concern England, l983), unfortunately most of these schemes have either not been systematically evaluated (often because they have been very small in scale), or — if they have — results have not been widely disseminated.
This project was therefore able to draw on findings from only a relatively small number of other experimental services.
However, at a more basic level it was also influenced by research which examined the nature of the problem of caring for dementia sufferers at home; this section, therefore, looks first at the problems of care, and then at other innovative projects.
There are three different types of problem in the home care of dementia sufferers: problems concerning the sufferers themselves, their carers, and the provision of appropriate services.
Research in each area indicated a need for more care and/or a new direction in care.
As far as the sufferers themselves were concerned, data showed not only the number of moderately to severely demented elderly people living in the community, but also the fact that they suffered, in addition to cognitive impairment, a variety of behavioural, or other mental or physical impairments.
For example, Levin et al , 1983 concluded, from their 1980 survey of 150 elderly confused  people, that about half were suffering from ‘physical illnesses which were grave enough to impede the performance of daily living activities’, many involving such problems as incontinence, failing, unsteadiness or pain.
Similarly Gilleard, 1984 found a wide range of disabilities in Scottish samples of dementia sufferers and their carers.
For example:
‘Nearly all supporters feel that their relative is not safe outside on their own, they spend a lot of time sitting around at home doing nothing, they cannot occupy themselves, they seem unsteady on their feet, and naturally forget things that have just happened….
Constant questioning and demands for attention, disruption of personal social life and lack of concern for their appearance and personal hygiene also are reported in the majority of cases, as is proneness to falls.’
However, most research on home care problems had understandably focused on the dementia sufferers’ informal supporters.
Some studies covered all types of elderly dependant, though any such sample would include a high proportion of mentally frail elderly people.
For example Charlesworth et al, 1984, by analysis of 1979/80 survey data on 255 elderly people and their 157 carers in north-west England, found that 22 per cent of the carers felt their caring role had either exacerbated or caused a health problem for them; 38 per cent had experienced some restriction in relation to work, and 44 per cent some restriction on their leisure time.
‘The largest single category of problems mentioned, however, was depression and anxiety attributable to the stresses of caring over a prolonged period of time.’
These stresses and strains emerge just as forcibly in studies specifically of the supporters of the elderly mentally infirm.
For instance Levin et al, l983 stated:
‘three-quarters of the supporters expressed distress about helping.
On the self-administered General Health Questionnaire (GHQ) at initial interview, about one-third of the supporters reported a number of symptoms of acute stress sufficient to suggest a need for psychiatric attention’.
There has been considerable analysis of carer strain with a variety of different indices employed (for a useful summary see Gilleard, 1984).
Comparison between studies is therefore difficult; although all make it clear that caring for a dementia sufferer can be extremely stressful.
In order to alleviate that stress, however, it is necessary to distinguish the circumstances under which caring causes strain.
Not surprisingly research has suggested a complexity of factors, and shown therefore the difficulties facing any attempts at alleviation (see for example Eagles et al, l987; Gilleard et al , l984; Gilhooly, 1984; Zarit et al , l980).
Research has also shown that level of stress is not necessarily related to willingness to continue caring (Gilleard, 1984).
Another issue relating to informal care is of course the presence or absence of an able and willing carer, and the effect of such an absence upon the possibility of maintaining a dementia sufferer in the community.
There has been considerable debate about the supportability of those living alone.
For example Bergmann et al, 1978 found that 38 per cent of a sample of 83 patients with organic mental disorder referred to a day hospital assessment unit lived alone; and the authors concluded, after following up the sample for 12 months, that those who lived alone were least likely to be maintained at home for that period of time even with substantial support from social services, and recommended that resources should be concentrated on those who lived with their families.
The third element in the catalogue of community care problems is that of the provision of services itself.
The general inadequacy of services to meet the needs of the frail elderly, and the demented elderly in particular, had been indicated in other surveys.
For example in Newcastle, Foster et al, 1976, had shown, from an assessment of a sample of elderly people living in the community, that even though dementia sufferers received more social and health services support than other groups, nonetheless they still had greater unmet needs than other groups of dependent elderly people.
Other frequently reiterated problems with community service provision are the absence of effective collaboration between the different service agencies (see Wright et al, 1988), and the related fact that services tend to be delivered in a piecemeal and fragmented way without coordination at service delivery level (see for example Challis and Davies, 1980).
Studies of the costs of community care were also available (Nissel & Bonnerjea, 1982; Mooney, 1978; Wright, 1981).
They showed not only that for most elderly people the costs of  community care were considerably lower than those of institutional care (and that home care would therefore remain cost-effective for many even if service provision were greatly increased, when the alternative was admission to an institution), but also that community care was not necessarily cheaper, and that there were some elderly people for whom institutional care would be less expensive (though not necessarily to be advocated solely on that account).
Findings of the kind cited above led the planners of this project to see a need for more intensive and more flexible care for dementia sufferers living at home, particularly for those at the margins of home and institutional care.
Research did not of course point only in one direction as far as service innovations were concerned.
The Home Support Project could, for example, have focused on the needs of supporters, or upon dementia sufferers living with others.
That the project's objectives took the form they did was partly due to the particular interests of those involved and partly to a knowledge of other experimental projects operating at that time.
As already stated, many innovative schemes appeared to be in operation, but there was very little evaluation.
There were, for example, several special day care schemes, relief sitting services for relatives, carers, support groups but each was very small in scale.
Only two systematically evaluated schemes for elderly dependants were evident at that time: Age Concern Liverpool's Intensive Domiciliary Care Scheme (IDCS) for the Elderly Mentally III, and the Kent Community Care Scheme.
The former project, which commenced in 1981, provided intensive support to dementia sufferers living with one informal carer, by specially recruited and trained Aides (see Flynn, 1982).
Care was provided for several hours a day, and replaced most other community services.
A pilot study, using an experimental sample of 23 clients and 17 controls was carried out (Crosby et al, l984), the aims being ‘to compare the costs and benefits of the IDCS with those of conventional community care’.
Unfortunately only interim findings were available at that time and the researchers were careful not to draw conclusions, but there was some evidence that on cost savings the scheme was superior to conventional community care and that strain on carers was decreasing in the experimental group.
A much more important influence on the project was the Kent  Community Care Scheme (whose full-scale findings have subsequently been published in Challis and Davies, 1986, and Davies and Challis, l986).
The details of this highly publicised scheme are well documented (eg Challis, 1988), its main features being: the employment of social workers as case managers, with case loads of 25 to 30 dependent elderly people, and with control over a decentralised budget to enable additional facilities or care (in the shape of specially recruited local helpers) to be purchased over and above the receipt of normal services.
The scheme was evaluated using a matched control sample of cases from adjacent areas.
The scheme did not focus on the mentally frail; although a quarter of the cases involved some confusion or disorientation, only three per cent involved severe confusion.
As is widely known, results showed that those in the experimental group were more likely to remain at home than those in the control group, that the scheme held no cost disadvantages, that levels of subjective stress in carers were reduced, and that there were ‘significant improvements in a range of indicators of subjective well-being and quality of care’ for the clients in the experimental group compared with the control group.
Although the number of dementing elderly people was very small, the researchers concluded that, although these clients posed particularly great care problems, ‘there was some degree of success in the establishment and maintenance of care and reduction of risk through a more structured approach’(Challis, 1988).
Knowledge of these findings made a similar study, but with a focus solely upon mentally frail elderly people, an interesting proposition.
THE RESEARCH METHODS IN PRACTICE:
The samples
It was anticipated that generating the action and control samples in the way described above would produce matched samples of approximately 50 dementia sufferers in each sample.
Table 2.2 below shows first the total number of referrals to the psychogeriatric services in Ipswich and Newham for the year 1984/85, and of these, the numbers forming the action and control samples.
It can be seen that the only disappointment in our achieved samples was the comparatively small size of the control sample in  Ipswich.
Whilst the reasons for this cannot be established with certainty, there is evidence of some migration of the elderly out of the control area since the figures used in the selection were compiled; there is also some reporting of general practitioners being more ready to refer patients living in the action than the control area.
However, since the project was designed for small samples, which would encourage certain types of analysis rather than others, the shortfall in the Ipswich control area was not seen as a great disadvantage.
Table 2.3 shows that although small, the samples were not badly matched, though obviously more closely on certain characteristics than others.
The figures demonstrate something about the characteristics of people with dementia referred to psychogeriatricians: that they are on average around 80 years of age, mainly women, mainly widowed or single, quite likely to be living alone but not without the involvement of relatives or friends, and with fairly advanced dementia (assuming that this is the implication of a score of nearly seven on a scale, running from one to ten, designed mainly to measure impairment of memory).
The figures also show something about the difference between Ipswich and Newham: that Ipswich people are more likely to have an involved relative/friend, tend to live in housing with better amenities, and are much more likely to own their own houses.
The figures also demonstrate how well matched are the action and control samples: that in both places they were well matched on age, proportion with an involved relative/ friend, proportion in owner-occupied housing, and on OBS score; they were less well matched on gender and on proportion without an inside lavatory (though the difference was not great), and least well matched on marital status and on proportion living alone, with the Ipswich control sample and the Newham action sample being more likely to be married and (therefore) not living alone.
These factors have to be borne in mind in later analysis.
Data collection
The numbers of successful data collection episodes for each respondent are shown below (Table 2.4).
It can be seen that data were collected at referral for all those who agreed initially to take part in the project.
The main reason for non-completion at later stages was, of course, the death of the dementia sufferer.
However, while people were in general very willing to cooperate in the data collection, it should be added that it was not always possible to collect all items of information at each stage: for example, a very severely demented person might not be able to respond to questions at all ; it was not always possible to find a medical practitioner with up-to-date information about a person's  medical condition; respondents sometimes refused to perform all the action tests; it was occasionally impossible to find a key informant to give, for example , information about services received by a dementia sufferer or about his/her housing circumstances.
Where data are missing this will, of course, be indicated in the presentation of findings.
Some hostility or distress on the part of the dementia sufferers to some of the memory testing or depression questions, and to the performance tests, had been anticipated; but on the whole this was  not found to be the case.
Interviewees generally responded willingly to all they were asked.
The one point at which the research design was felt to have failed to meet its objectives was in the use of the CARE Schedule OBS and depression scales.
Thompson, l986 has discussed elsewhere the major inadequacies of standardised depression scales; and those of OBS scales were very similar.
Whilst standardised scales have the advantage of producing data in a form which simplifies the process of analysis and facilitates comparisons with other studies, they cannot take into account the whole range of factors which may influence an elderly person's mental state at any one time, or the way in which he or she answers questions.
A study of the literature on the complex process of assessing depression or dementia in elderly people would suggest that such factors might include: the presence of any physical illness(es) or any other psychiatric condition; the respondent's case history; the use of medication, both prescribed and over-the-counter; non-verbal communication; the observations and comments of people familiar with the respondent's behaviour; the respondent's living environment (Thompson, 1986).
With the benefit of experience, the authors feel that a more sensitive, qualitative approach, possibly incorporating a few standardised items, would have been better than using standardised scales for the difficult task of assessing depression and dementia in elderly people.
SUMMARY
This chapter has described the main premises about types of care needed which underlay the way the action project was designed.
It has shown how the action and control samples were selected and the research instruments chosen; also how the research design was influenced by the requirements of the action project, and vice versa.
The action and research designs were also influenced by other innovatory schemes and related research; these too are reviewed.
Finally the chapter has described the achieved action and control samples and has shown that they were well matched and that the response rate was good.
THE ACTION PROJECT IN PRACTICE
For some purposes the action project in operation can best be described directly by the development officers and their support workers (see for example Murphy and Rapley, 1986).
This chapter summarises the way the action project worked, through the researchers' observations, their interviews with the development officers, and their analysis of data about the action sample clients.
PREPARING THE GROUND
The development officers were in post well before the date on which they began to take referrals.
They were therefore involved in negotiating the initial agreement of the statutory services for the project to take place in their areas, and in preparing the ground more fully so that all relevant service-providers knew about the project and understood how it might affect them or vice versa.
Both development officers had considerable experience not only of the elderly mentally frail, but also of implementing new initiatives in care, and of negotiating with other service-providers.
One had formerly been an occupational therapy aide with elderly people and then a voluntary day centre manager; the other had community work qualifications and experience, and had worked both in a local authority and an Age Concern setting.
Neither had been specifically trained in enhanced case management.
During the weeks before the project began, their main tasks were, firstly, informing themselves about dementia and the needs of  dementia sufferers and their relatives (by reading, by talking to service-providers, dementia sufferers and their carers, and by visiting other similar care initiatives such as those in Liverpool and Oxford); they also informed themselves about the action areas where they would be working (finding out where the elderly people lived, what services were available, the individuals who provided them); secondly, they informed others about the new project by visiting social services department teams, health authority staff, voluntary organisations, and general practitioners.
Neither development officer found any marked degree of antipathy or anxiety about the project at this stage.
They stated that almost everyone was ‘supportive’ and ‘welcoming’, apart from(a) some general practitioners who were a little anxious about severely dependent elderly people being sustained at home, and (b) a few people concerned about the risks of bringing unqualified support workers into people's homes with all the attendant risks of exploitation, etc.
The development officers themselves became concerned about the low level of statutory services in their areas, and concluded that the Home Support Project might have to provide considerable input to fill the gap between what statutory services could provide and what the dementia sufferer might need in order to remain at home.
The two areas did differ in the level of statutory service provision; in Ipswich, home help input was available only two or three days a week for up to one and a half hours at a time, and a financial assessment and payment for home help had recently been introduced.
Meals-on-Wheels (organised by WRVS) were available only two days a week; the social services department had only minimal provision for day care in a few Part III homes.
It did however have a Part III home for elderly mentally infirm clients and a day centre operated by a voluntary organisation; there was also a growing private residential sector.
The health authority possessed a day hospital for elderly psychiatric patients, situated within the borough; it also provided day care on two of the long-stay wards, plus some short-stay beds on these wards.
In Newham there were better domiciliary services in 1984 than in Ipswich (for example it was possible for someone to have seven-day-a-week home help and meals-on-wheels cover; there were day centres and day hospitals, and a good deal of voluntary  organisation provision).
But as the development officer said, ‘there are also a lot of people in need, so it's very easy for someone to fall through the net’.
(It should be stressed that the levels of service provision described here refer to 1984.
There have been several changes in both areas since then.)
There were also differences between Newham and Ipswich in their psychogeriatric services, and it was felt by the development officers that these too, along with differences in domiciliary care, would affect the way the Home Support Project operated in the two areas.
In Ipswich there was a multi-disciplinary psychogeriatric team (involving medical staff, a community psychiatric nurse and a social worker).
Each person referred, even if he or she remained at home, was allocated to either the community psychiatric nurse or the social worker (as key worker); their case was reviewed by the team every six weeks, and was never closed, except by death or removal from the area.
In Newham the psychogeriatric services were very dispersed; the psychiatric hospital was outside the borough and the community psychiatric nurses and doctors were separately housed.
The number of community psychiatric nurses in Newham was less than half that of Ipswich, and the hospital social workers did not intervene in cases where a client had not been an inpatient.
The result of this situation was that a key worker system for dementia sufferers did not operate.
These differences led to differing perceptions of their role by the two development officers — in Ipswich the development officer was a little unsure of how she was going to ‘work in with the existing multi-disciplinary team’, whereas in Newham the development officer said she felt she was probably going to spend a good deal of her time negotiating between the different services and ‘getting them to talk to each other’.
A third preliminary task was to prepare the ground for the recruitment of support workers.
Actual workers would only be recruited once there were clients who needed care, but the development officers began to make contact with potential sources of support worker recruitment, for example, churches and church groups, women's groups (Women's Institute, Mother's Union, Young Wives), tenants' associations, community centres; they gave talks to meetings of these groups when possible, partly in order to fulfil another of their roles: to increase general awareness, understanding  and tolerance of dementia, but also to reach possible support workers.
They put up notices about the project in community centres, general practitioners' waiting rooms, and clinics; again not formally advertising posts, but to alert people to the possibility of involvement with the Home Support Project.
Thus they built up a considerable number of contact points across the action areas, and (in Ipswich) even started drawing up a register of people prepared to be considered as support workers.
In addition to preparing for recruitment the development officers began to prepare for the training and employment of support workers.
They developed detailed training proposals (eg on mental frailty among elderly people, on dementia, on services available, on health and safety at work, on confidentiality, on employment and administrative matters, on incontinence, and on diet).
They designed job descriptions, terms of employment and time sheets for support workers;(they were to be paid at a rate equivalent to home helps and care attendants, with increased payments for unsocial hours; there was also to be a lower rate of payment for workers merely sleeping at a sufferer's house, compared with providing active care).
The development officers also prepared forms for their own purposes: assessment forms, case records, and monthly action report forms for discussion with their supervisor.
The development officers were cautious in describing their expectations of the project.
They did, however have unrealised expectations about the number of clients for whom they would need to provide paid support workers even though they predicted that they would not find it necessary to provide such carers for ail clients.
For example one of them said:
‘I don't think we'll always need paid carers — quite often simply a good coordination of what's possible might solve some of the problems and we might not need to employ anyone.’
Development Officer, Newham, February 1984
The other development officer predicted making considerable use of volunteers as well as paid carers: ‘it may be that we have two types of carer, an informal unpaid visiting service, and then the regular paid carers’.
Yet each development officer thought she would end up with far more paid support workers than was actually  the case; one surmise, for example, was that there might come a time when they had 30 clients on their case load each with two paid carers.
They said they would be unable to manage 60 carers and would each require an assistant development officer when the project was fully operational.
The anxiety about case loads was accompanied by a concern over the provision of ‘cover’ together with some concern about the isolation of the development officer's position, which did not fit into any overall management structure at Age Concern England and left them without a full-time support, supervision and management back-up service.
As the following sections show, however, case load problems were not as great as predicted; and although the development officers continued to feel some lack of back-up services they did not consider it a severe impediment to their implementation of the project.
THE FIRST STAGE
Referral and Assessment
Referrals to the project began on 1 April l984.
They were first assessed by the researchers, then — if eligible and in the action areas — they were passed to the development officers.
The information given to the development officers at this stage was the client's name, main address, temporary address (if any), date of birth, date of referral to the psychiatric service, date of domiciliary visit by the psychiatrist, diagnosis, score on the researcher's organic brain syndrome scale, and whether consent for inclusion in the project had been obtained from the client, his or her next of kin, and his or her general practitioner (or hospital doctor if temporarily in hospital).
As Table 3.1 shows, referrals to the action project came at between nil and eight per month (an average monthly rate of 4.5 in Ipswich and 3.4 in Newham).
In Newham the development officer's heaviest referral months were May to September, and January and February (the summer holiday and severest winter weeks); in Ipswich the pattern was slightly  different , with January and February being low referral months, but with October, December and March matching the high referral summer months.
Leaving aside discussion of case loads and the closure of cases (to be covered below) the development officers found this referral rate entirely manageable except towards the end of the referral year when case loads were at their peak and  referrals were also high; for example, the development officer in Newham remarked in January l985 ‘I feel a bit shell-shocked this month with ail the new referrals together with all my problem cases’.
On receipt of a referral the development officer instituted her assessment procedure.
She visited the client, and through an informal conversation obtained as much information as she could about his or her mental state, behavioural problems, self-care capacity, and home care situation.
These she later filled in on an assessment form, She also contacted and talked to the client's nearest relatives or other informal carers.
She then contacted any other service-providers who appeared to be involved with the client, to ask them what help they were providing, and how they saw the client's needs.
No service-provider was hard to contact or reluctant to talk about a client.
Because the development officers had prepared the ground well, the Home Support Project was known to others and was universally welcomed as likely to add to (and not compete with) other services.
The only parts of the Home Support Project which were not clearly understood at first were (a) its method of obtaining clients (it was sometimes thought that any dementia sufferer in the borough could be referred directly to the development officer), and (b) the fact that the development officers could not step in immediately the psychogeriatrician referred a client to the project, but had to wait until the research assessment had been carried out (which would confirm the client's eligibility for the project service).
On a few occasions other service-providers sought to refer clients directly to the project; and very occasionally expressed the wish that the development officers could have acted more quickly with a client whose situation they felt needed immediate action.
PROVIDING THE SERVICE
It has already been stated that the main aim of the service was to be the construction of flexible packages of care for clients by, firstly, liaising with other services to provide or increase where necessary the client's receipt of existing services, and, secondly, by ‘topping up’ existing services (where the development officer thought extra care was necessary to maintain someone at home) through the employment of local support workers.
In practice these were the two main elements of the development officer's service; but there were two additional important elements which had not been fully foreseen: direct support from the development officers to clients and their relatives, and the monitoring of clients' situations over time.
Each of these four elements (together with cases where no support was provided) will be discussed in turn.
Table 3.2 summarises the extent to which each element was involved.
1.
No support provided.
In these cases the clients were often in hospital at referral and were either physically or mentally too frail or ill to be discharged.
The development officers usually accepted this decision as indisputable (but see Table 3.6).
In Newham seven were in hospital at referral, one was at home but his admission to an elderly person's home had already been negotiated and the development officer agreed with this decision.
In Ipswich the situation was more complex: as can be seen from Table 3.2, as many as half the clients referred to the project actually received no service; 19 of the 27 were in hospital at referral, usually having been admitted to the psychiatric hospital following their referral and domiciliary visit by the psychogeriatrician.
Clients in Ipswich were a little older than in Newham, but they had the same mean OBS score (see Table 2.3).
The greater likelihood of their being admitted to an institution in Ipswich may well reflect a greater availability of beds or of places in residential accommodation, as well as a different attitude towards home care on the part of the psychogeriatrician (researchers' fieldnotes indicated that he was more preoccupied by the notion of patients being ‘at risk’ in the community than was the case with the Newham psychogeriatrician).
Because the development officer in Ipswich was not able to see these institutionalised clients in their own homes she understandably found it hard in many  cases to say whether or not she agreed with the decision that they should not return home.
As she said:
‘It's difficult for me to make an honest judgement because…
I have to say that I didn't see them in their homes prior to their being admitted at all.
I can only go on reading their case notes, and knowing a little bit about the home situation from talking to folks…’
Development Officer, Ipswich, September 1984
If other members of the psychogeriatric team had agreed that the development officer should try to support some of these clients, or had been pressing to have them discharged, she would undoubtedly have agreed to try.
But this was not the case.
In five other cases a client was at home but admission to an old people's home was already being organised so the development officer was unable to intervene (though in three of these cases she said she would have been able to provide home support).
In three final cases the client was at home but the development officer felt that no help was needed from the Home Support Project.
(For example one, man was well supported by an able wife, who wanted only two days per week day care; this was arranged by the social worker on the psychogeriatric team; the team's community psychiatric nurse would visit the family regularly.
So the development officer concluded that the project's services were not required.)
2.
Obtaining/increasing support from other services.
For almost a third of the clients for whom the development officers provided a service they obtained or increased cover from other services.
This does not mean that they did not liaise with other services for almost ail clients, merely that for only a third of their clients did they obtain or increase the services of other providers.
These services were: home help, meals-on-wheels, day care, general practitioner, chiropodist, nursing, social worker, voluntary organisation visitor or care attendant.
The two main problems in this area concerned: the existence or non-existence of a key worker system, and the shortage of other services.
As described earlier, in Ipswich a multi-disciplinary psychogeriatric team maintained involvement with all patients whether or not they were admitted to an institution.
In each case the team's community psychiatric nurse or social worker was designated  as key worker and would continue to monitor every patient, as well as to obtain or increase other services when they thought necessary.
It was thus unnecessary for the development officer to fulfil this role in many cases, though as a member of the team herself she sometimes did so.
In particular she did so for clients for whom support worker help was envisaged.
Nonetheless, she was somewhat freer than the Newham development officer to concentrate on putting in support worker help rather than liaising with other services.
The development officer had good working relationships with the key workers, and discussed cases regularly with them both within and outside psychogeriatric team meetings.
She said she occasionally felt that a job she could have been doing was being done by someone else leaving her less than fully occupied, but as her case load increased this feeling appeared to lessen.
In Newham there was no key worker system of the kind in operation in Ipswich.
This led to the development officer having to assume such a role herself, and occasionally this involved her in more work than she felt she could easily provide.
Thus she monitored many clients whose situation was felt to be unstable, and she negotiated widely for other services.
It was in very complex care situations that she particularly expressed feelings of over-involvement.
For example one client lived in ‘appalling, dirty conditions’, in a house which was rapidly becoming unfit for habitation, and with a companion who was becoming ‘more frequently drunk and incontinent’.
The development officer stated that:
‘the social workers won't allocate the case because they're short staffed — and they expect me to get Winnie moved.’
I'm dealing with it all because no one will pick it up, the community psychiatric nurse comes but won't organise anything.
I'm the key worker…
I've had to organise the case conference and push to get Winnie into Part III.’
Development Officer, Newham, September l984
So although the absence of key workers in Newham meant that there were few boundary disputes, it also meant that the development officer could become very closely involved in organising other  services, and perhaps feel that other services took advantage of the Home Support Project and showed less involvement than would have been necessary without the project.
Apart from the key worker problem the inadequacy of other services was, as one would expect, a continuing difficulty in both locations, though the particular areas of difficulty varied.
As stated earlier in this chapter, the main Ipswich problem was the very limited availability of home helps, meals-on-wheels and day care facilities.
More specifically the development officer mentioned the following problems:
The home help service would not lock clients in their homes; its view being that such people should not remain at home if they needed locking in.
In the case of dementia sufferers who wandered away from home if they were able to get out, such a ruling was sometimes difficult for a family to accept.
The means-tested payment for home helps meant that some clients who needed such help were refusing it because they had to pay for it.
Because the project had no say in the choice of home help for a client, the development officer sometimes found a client with a home help whom she thought was unsuitable or would not work well with her support workers.
In some cases the development officer found it easier to substitute support workers for a home help.
Sometimes other service-providers were slow in obtaining a service for clients — eg day care.
Other service-providers (eg social workers, general practitioners) were sometimes working towards a different outcome; that is, they sought institutional rather than continued home care.
In Newham there was a greater availability of home care services but the development officer mentioned the following specific problems in relation to other services (apart from that of getting the social services department to play a key worker role).
In some cases the psychiatric service did not admit people to hospital early enough.
For sheltered housing, which would have greatly  benefitted some clients, there was a long waiting list.
Sometimes other service-providers were slow in obtaining a service for clients — eg day care.
Sometimes other service-providers failed to understand the symptoms of dementia and therefore took inappropriate decisions on clients' behalf; for example, a social worker who had been asked to assess a client for residential care failed to realise that questions about the client's own preferences would have to be phrased in such a way that the client could understand what was being proposed for her.
The district nursing service was inadequately staffed to cope with the needs of incontinent clients.
3.
Providing continuing direct support.
This service was provided for a small proportion of the clients (one in Ipswich and seven in Newham).
Five of the eight were refusers of services whom the development officers visited regularly — usually at least twice a week — to try to get them to accept help.
In the course of their visits they usually also performed direct services for these clients; for example:
‘I've been visiting her twice a week…
I take food in to her — she is not eating properly — and she's also very lonely.’
Development Officer, Newham, September 1984
They also sorted out financial problems, tried to get clients to wash or change their clothes or bedlinen, or brought them home when they wandered away.
In two of the five cases it was the informal carer (a husband, and a wife) who refused help, saying that they could manage and did not need assistance.
In all five cases help of various kinds was eventually accepted: support workers, district nurses, meals-on-wheels, a home help.
In the other three cases where direct support was given, the client was not thought to need extra help; the development officer felt however that the informal carer needed support and she therefore visited once or twice a week for that purpose.
For example, Mrs Owen was caring for her moderately demented husband, and coping well with all practical  tasks, but the development officer said of them:
‘I visit them every week…
I usually just see if there are any problems and sort things out, because — I mean — her social worker doesn't visit, her daughter doesn't visit, no one visits her, and I feel she should…have somebody.
But it is really to support her — he seems fine.’
Development Officer, Newham, July 1985
4.
Monitoring situation only.
In nine cases in Ipswich and nine in Newham relatively infrequent monitoring of the home care situation was all that the development officers provided.
There is of course a fine line between ‘direct support’ and ‘regular monitoring’but the main distinction is that people in the previous category were visited at least once a week to give support or help, whereas people in the ‘monitoring only’category were visited about once a fortnight or once a month so that the development officer could ‘see how things were going’.
In eight of the nine Newham cases, but in only two of the nine Ipswich cases, the development officer continually assessed the situation as unproblematic; in these cases there was good informal care and/or good home help provision.
In a further six cases (one in Newham, five in Ipswich) the development officer said she would have liked to provide a little extra help but a support worker was rejected by the client or his informal carer; and since they did not require the kind of direct help which the development officer could provide, she merely visited occasionally to check whether or not the situation was breaking down.
The final two Ipswich cases were somewhat exceptional: one was a woman who was very difficult to find at home; she was also being helped by two neighbours of whose motives the development officer and others in the psychogeriatric team, were suspicious.
The development officer felt she could not work with them, and they in turn did not welcome the Home Support Project.
The development officer said she felt there was little she could do except visit occasionally.
The final client, the development officer said, needed a good deal of extra support but was a very adamant refuser of help, and frequently refused to let people into her house.
The development officer therefore could not provide even frequent direct help — the most she could manage was to monitor the situation (which in fact broke down five months after  her referral, when the client was admitted to residential care under a guardianship order).
5.
Putting in support workers.
Finally, but most importantly, are the clients for whom support workers were employed: 16 in Ipswich and l8 in Newham (see Table 3.2).
These can be loosely divided into cases where support workers provided major care for the client, and those where they provided supplementary help.
By supplementary help we refer to cases where either support worker help was provided temporarily, to relieve in unusual circumstances, or support workers were employed with a client on average no more than one hour a day, seven days a week.
Using this definition there were l4 cases where supplementary help was provided and 20 when there was major help (seven in Ipswich and 13 in Newham).
The cases in which supplementary help was given can be described as follows:
Temporary care: while informal carer away on holiday 1 while awaiting introduction of home help service l after hospital discharge, to ensure client could cope alone 1
Minor support 1–5 mornings per week to get client ready for
worker input: day care transport 3 1–7 days main meal preparation or help with eating 1 1 or 2 visits per week or fortnight to relieve informal carer 6 1–7 evenings per week to ensure client safe and prepared for night 1
These tasks are self explanatory.
Preparation for day care transport was sometimes an important role because, if left to themselves clients might either not be ready in time, or might be ready too soon and while waiting go out to do something else (forgetting that transport was due); in either case they would consequently miss their transport and therefore their day care.
The 20 cases where major support was provided are harder to categorise and more difficult to make general statements about.
All  but two were women; all but two lived alone; 12 had no daily contact with an informal carer.
The OBS scores ranged from three to ten (with a mean of 7.2; somewhat lower than the mean for the total samples).
What they had in common was that they were all perceived by the development officers as requiring a good deal of care in order to be sustained at home, and as not having all those care needs filled by either informal or statutory carers.
None of them was seen as capable of safely preparing a meal; seven would wander away from home if not watched; four were substantially incontinent; five were thought to be at risk with gas or fires; six were physically frail or had mobility difficulties.
The kind of tasks carried out for them by the support workers is similarly hard to classify.
Although the workers were given written instructions as to their role when they began their work with a client, this role always expanded so that they were eventually performing several functions for the client.
Their tasks can be divided for descriptive purposes into practical and psychological support, although in practice most were a combination of the two.
The major practical tasks performed were:
— helping to get clients up in the morning
— helping clients to wash themselves, toileting and dealing with incontinence
— feeding and making meals
— controlling gas supplies
— dressing
— medication
— helping to get clients to bed, and seeing that they were safe for the night.
The major psychological tasks were:
— orientating clients to time and place and appropriate behaviour
— accompanying them to social events, medical appointments and everyday outings
— persuading people to undertake self-care tasks
— providing companionship
— providing a sitting service for relatives who needed relief.
This completes the description of the kinds of service provided by the development officers.
Since the support worker service was the most innovative and complex part of the project it is described in more detail in the next section.
THE SUPPORT WORKER SERVICE
The development officer took the decision about whether or not a client needed a support worker by considering whether his or her basic needs (for food, cleanliness, warmth, sleep, safety) were being fulfilled, and if not, whether they could be fulfilled by existing informal or formal carers.
If the answer was ‘no’ she attempted to recruit someone to fill the gap.
As far as recruitment is concerned the preliminary quests as described earlier in this chapter appeared to work well for Ipswich but not for Newham.
In Ipswich the development officer built up a register of possible workers through personal contacts or contact with local clubs, associations and the job centre.
She said:
‘I've had no problem recruiting — I've had far more offers than I've been able to use.
There's been no problem matching clients to carers because I've had a biggish pool to choose from — there's been about 30 people on the register at any one time — and I've only been using a maximum of ten at a time.’
Development Officer, Ipswich, July 1985 The Newham development officer however said:
‘I think all the things that I initially tried to recruit carers weren't successful — I went to talk to vicars and community centres and the job centre, and wherever — none of these provided me with…well one vicar provided me with somebody.
But apart from that no one else really provided anyone suitable.
The only way I've managed to get carers is to put up adverts in newsagents, and I've done that twice — And  I've had about 30 people ring up through that, and a lot of them seem pretty good…’
Development Officer, Newham, July 1985
The development officers asked for references, and interviewed everyone before employing them.
Initial training was always provided on a one-to-one basis because workers were recruited at different times to perform tasks of varying types.
Both development officers continued to see all their workers once a week, either individually (as in Ipswich, or in Newham for workers who could not attend a meeting) or as a group.
Weekly group meetings were set up in Newham when five or six workers were on the payroll.
These were discussion sessions in which particular problems and clients could be talked over; they also sometimes involved a more formal training session, with lectures on mental illness, incontinence, first aid.
Support workers could rarely be found and introduced to a client very rapidly.
The project could not be an emergency service, because it tried to recruit workers after obtaining a client, rather than beforehand, so that client and worker could be matched.
This could take up to three weeks, though occasionally the period was as short as one week.
There were few difficulties in actually introducing a worker into a client's home (although some, to be discussed below, developed later).
Most clients were too severely demented to have a very full understanding of who the support worker was; and many would accept anyone into their home without question.
Even service refusers could often be encouraged, after a while, to accept visits from ‘a friend’.
The only initial problems were with:
(i)
one client who was antagonistic at first, and even refused to let the support worker into the house on her second day, but after that ‘Was fine’;
(ii)
a male client who sexually harassed the support worker on her second day; so she withdrew.
Another support worker was introduced more successfully a week later (but see below);
(iii)
the husband of a client, who would not let the support worker into the house, even though previously he had agreed to try the extra help.
At later stages a few problems did develop, but they involved only a small minority of the cases.
These problems were as follows:
In two cases the relatives of a client asked to have the support worker withdrawn.
One was a complicated case in which the client had a number of relatives living nearby, who were said to be always arguing with each other(including about the client's care).
A near neighbour was recruited as a support worker and she too began to become involved in the family arguments.
After she was withdrawn the family accepted another support worker.
In the other case the husband of a client asked to have the support worker withdrawn after four months because he felt that his wife suspected him of having an affair with the support worker.
The development officer also said she believed that the husband thought the Support worker was critical of the way he shouted at his wife.
He would not accept an alternative worker.
In three cases the client did not like, or could not accept, the support worker.
One woman refused to accept a support worker as a night sitter; the development officer said ‘she couldn't accept a stranger in the house at night’.
One client, who tended sexually to  harass his service-providers, eventually (after several months) asked to have his support worker withdrawn because ‘she wasn't loving enough’.
The third client simply did not like the support worker and she was withdrawn fairly quickly.
In none of these cases was an alternative worker seen as possible.
In one case there was some tension between a client's spouse and the support worker because, according to the development officer, ‘she was trying to take over’.
But after some counselling from the development officer the situation improved and the worker was able to continue in post.
In the last case the development officer had obtained the services of an unpaid volunteer to relieve a wife occasionally from the care of her husband.
However, although the wife liked the volunteer, she gradually became depressed by her situation, and expressed anger that the project had not offered her more.
She said that because he was a volunteer she felt she could not call on him in the same way as with a paid worker.
When the development officer realised ‘that she had got to such a low ebb’ she put in a paid worker for a regular two hours per week.
The support workers were encouraged to be fairly flexible with the hours worked, so that they could respond to a crisis with their client, or to any temporary increased need for their services.
Long-term increases in hours worked with a client had to be agreed by the development officer in advance.
Obviously this flexibility was frequently to the client's advantage, but it was also open to abuse.
The development officers had to trust their support workers not to increase their hours unnecessarily; weekly meetings with workers helped to avoid this, but the development officers felt it was impossible to prevent altogether.
The hours worked by support workers varied a good deal, with the average being 14 hours in Ipswich and 12 hours in Newham.
No one could work as many as 35 hours per week since Age Concern was unable to provide full-time contracts; however four support workers in Newham and three in Ipswich did at one time work 20 hours or more per week (see Table 3.3).
Seventeen support workers were employed altogether in Newham and 15 in Ipswich.
Most support workers worked with only one client; but the figures below show that this was not true for ail.
However, support workers who worked with more than one client generally did so sequentially: no one was helping more than two clients (unless they were giving temporary relief) at any one time.
Support workers rarely left because they found other preferred employment or because they disliked the work (this happened with only three of the workers in Ipswich and only four in Newham).
The main reason for ceasing to work for the project was that the project itself had no suitable work to offer.
The development officers expressed few difficulties in supervising and managing their support workers (apart from the particular problems with clients already discussed).
The comments of one development officer may be taken as an indication of how they felt about their workers, and about what characterises a good support worker: Interviewer:
What sort of things characterise a good worker as opposed to a less good one?
Development Officer:
Well, first of all how kind of bright and on the ball they are.
A couple of people who work for me are not too clever — and one feels that you have to repeat instructions, and they — even so they're not undertaken.
I mean one person in particular, who is very good and always does the work, but I feel is probably — ok, she babies people too much, she does everything for them, rather than allow them to do it themselves.
And however much I say, I feel that that's not happening.
However I find that some of the people I think are good, who are, you know, efficient, go and do the job, encourage them (the clients) to do it themselves, aren't so well liked by families as some of those who are much softer and, you know, do everything for them.
So, you know, it's sort of difficult…
I suppose, also, I have — well, one person in particular whose  timekeeping isn't great — I mean obviously this sort of job it's not important to be there on the dot of nine, but I think sometimes she slides.
And in those situations I go and pop in when she is supposed to be there and have a go at her if she's not.
But it's difficult — obviously people have to be taken on trust.
Also, one of my carers — who is very caring, goes all the time, does the work for the person — is very young and quite quiet, and I feel…well last week a doctor came in to see her client, and if it had been one of the older carers I'm sure they would have had a go at the doctor and forced him to do more than he actually did.
But because she's a young girl she didn't feel able to question what the doctor was doing, and let it go.
So I suppose my ideal carer is an intelligent, middle aged woman who isn't too over-protective but has a…warm and friendly manner.
Which some of them are.
Development Officer, Newham, July 1985
THE DEVELOPMENT OFFICERS' WORK LOADS
Earlier in this chapter we described the rate of referral of cases to the development officers, and Table 3. 1 shows the size of their case load month by month.
They did not describe this as unmanageable at any time, except for one month when the Newham development officer had seven new referrals, and already had an open case load of 18, several of whom were extremely problematic.
Case loads of course built up gradually as the samples were generated, and then tailed off after the recruitment year ended.
In Ipswich the largest number of open cases was 16, this occurred in April 1985 (one year from the start of recruitment of cases).
In Newham the heaviest case load month was February 1985, just before recruitment ended; the number of cases held that month was 22 (see Table 3.1).
Along with their cases, development officers also had their support workers.
Table 3.4 shows how many they employed over the course of the project, together with the number of clients held at the same time.
The maximum number of support workers employed in any month was nine in Ipswich and 13 in Newham.
The development officers closed cases frequently: for example, at the end of the recruitment period the development officer in  
Ipswich had had 54 referrals; 39 had been closed by June 1985 and 15 were still open.
The equivalent figures in Newham were 4l, with 25 closed and 16 open.
Cases were closed when a client died, moved away, or went into permanent institutional care.
Reasons for closure are shown below.
As can be seen, approximately two-thirds went into hospital (though, particularly in Ipswich, some of them were later transferred to an old people's home).
Withdrawing support, or not putting in support, was of course sometimes straightforward (for example the clients' residential place came up, he or she became physically ill and was admitted to hospital, existing support at home was adequate).
But it was not always simple.
Ways in which cases came to be closed are therefore reviewed below.
Where clients were already in an institution, or about to be admitted, when the development officers received their names as referrals, they generally accepted that there was little the Home Support Project could do.
In Ipswich in particular— as stated earlier in this chapter — the development officer expressed a certain amount of frustration over institutionalised clients.
With nine she felt she could not tell whether or not she could have provided  support at home because it was impossible to assess their home care potential while they were in an institution.
With a further three she felt she had sufficient evidence to suggest that she could have supported the client at home but was overruled by others.
Again, with a further five clients who remained at home for a while, the Ipswich development officer felt she could have continued home support but was overruled by others who preferred institutional care.
For example, one client was being maintained at home with a support worker, family care and rota-bed admissions to hospital.
But ‘the social worker put her name down for an EMI bed — eventually her name came to the top of the waiting list, and the social worker put her in.
We were all surprised when it happened, we could have gone on supporting her’.
This sort of situation did not occur in Newham, perhaps because places in institutional care were so limited that only those unanimously in need obtained them.
However, for both development officers some eventual admissions to institutions were accepted, though a few somewhat sadly even when they supported the decision.
The reasons given by the development officers for supporting admissions were as follows (also see Chapter Seven on the ‘Limits to Care’):
IPSWICH NEWHAM Clients admitted to institutions with development officer agreement 16 21
— Needed hospital care because of physical deterioration/illness 6 6
— Needed institutional care because of mental deterioration 1 3
— Lonely, needed company 1 3
— Problematic home circumstances 1 2
— Wouldn't accept night sitter — 1
— Informal carer became ill — 1
— Residential care already under negotiation 1 1
— Fire risk/gas risk/risk on roads 5 1
— Risk to relatives — 2
— Too expensive for Home Support 1 1
These figures are a simplification of an often very complex situation.
In many cases several reasons for admission were stated; clients are classified above by the prime reason as stated by the development officers.
It can be seen that in only two cases was the expense of providing support worker help their main reason, but in other cases, too, such a reason was implicit.
For example, fire risk clients could be sustained at home if they had 24-hour-a-day surveillance.
It was only in the case of lonely clients that the development officers said they thought the person would be happier in an institution.
For example the development officer said of one client:
‘She's frightened and lonely at home, so I've recommended Part III.
She's supportable at home, but she can never remember that people have been to see her, so she's always lonely.’
In some cases (but only in Newham) the development officer said she had had to take the initiative or ‘push’ to get a client admitted to an institution.
Normally the decision was taken by several people, often including the development officer; and it was unanimous.
The accounts provided in this chapter of the development officers' work will have shown already the breadth of activities in which they were involved: assessing, visiting and supporting clients and their families; recruiting, training and supervising support workers; negotiating with other service-providers.
They also liaised with each other, their supervisor and the research team.
Finally, and very importantly, they were also responsible for (a) the payment of support workers' wages, and (b) for ensuring that expenditure on clients did not exceed budget limits.
As far as wages were concerned the development officers collected support workers' timesheets each week, ensured that they were received by the wages office, and then distributed pay cheques (or cash) to their workers.
Working to a budget was relatively straightforward.
As the development officers said:
‘A budget ceiling was involved, to enable us to develop services with a shadow or actual weekly running cost that did not exceed that of institutional care.
As development officers
we were allowed, for simplicity, to accept expenditure up to £200 per week, per person.
However, this £200 had to take into account the expense of all the other public revenue services received by the client: the costs of the other services were deducted from the notional £200 and the residue could be used to buy in extra home support.’
Murphy and Rapley, l986
The development officers had been given approximate hourly costs (or costs per visit) of other home services and had to calculate, using these figures, the existing expenditure on each client.
They could then see how much extra care they could provide, up to the £200 ceiling.
What they wanted to provide very rarely brought expenditure close to this ceiling, so they had little problem in deciding whether the project could or could not cost-effectively support a client (see Chapter Six for further details of the cost of care).
However, as the project came to a close the total budget provided in the grant for support workers began to dwindle and the development officers were instructed to make careful calculations of their expenditure in order not to exceed the total available.
Although the development officers’ budget was almost entirely used for the payment of support workers it could also be used for the purchase of goods (for example a single bed for a client coming out of hospital) but not for the purchase of other services.
According to the development officers' monthly reports to their supervisor the distribution of their work could be broken down into roughly three or four elements (though the amount of time spent on each changed somewhat as the project progressed).
For example in June 1984 they said:
‘Half my time is spent with visiting new and on-going clients, a quarter visiting relatives and other professionals involved, and a quarter recording, planning, attending ward rounds, etc — but it changes from week to week.’
Development Officer, Newham
‘Hard to break down, but visiting patients' homes, relatives, neighbours, corner shops, hospitals, GPs, private and local authority Part III Homes, social services, health centres, area clinics, day centres.
Attending case conferences, liaising with  social workers, district nurses.
Discussing and explaining the Home Support Project at the Nurses Education Centre.
Speaking to small community groups.
Visiting Age Concern Ipswich.’
Development Officer, Ipswich By January of the following year they were recording:
‘A quarter of my time is spent directly seeing new and on-going clients, a quarter of my time at ward rounds, meetings, seeing other professionals, etc; a quarter spent with support workers — either possible new ones or on-going workers; and a quarter spent keeping records, fixing meetings, doing wages, etc.
Development Officer, Newham
Visiting patients referred to me, and liaising with relatives and key workers, as well as neighbours, GPs, community psychiatric nurses, social workers.
Attending case conferences, meeting with support workers, recruiting new ones, paying wages; persuading refusers to accept some help.’
Development Officer, Ipswich
Early in the project there had been considerable discussion among the development officers and their supervisor about the ending of the project, and how the care of on-going clients was to be continued after the withdrawal of the development officers.
In each location they negotiated with the social services department an agreement that any continuing clients would be supported by the social services department, either with community services or with a place in institutional care.
In the event there remained only a very few clients with a need for care beyond normal services.
In each place nine clients remained as open cases, but only two in Ipswich and three in Newham were receiving support worker help (the remainder were being regularly monitored).
In Ipswich the home help service took over the care of these clients; in Newham the development officer continued to manage the existing support workers until a new development officer took over (the health authority agreed to fund a continuation of the project for a further three years).
One of these clients was in fact still at home in March  1989.
The service developments which followed the Home Support Project will be discussed at greater length in the final chapter.
SUMMARY
The development officers clearly fulfilled the objectives established for them: they assessed their clients’ needs, negotiated with other service-providers to obtain increased support from existing sources, they recruited local support workers for all clients whom they assessed as needing enhanced care; this enhanced support was obtained quickly and with few difficulties, and clearly several very dependent clients were sustained at home as a result of this care.
The scheme did not operate entirely as anticipated: the main departure was that there were some clients for whom the development officers provided no support, either because they were admitted immediately to institutional care (and the development officers could not always influence this decision in the way they would have liked) or because the clients did not need or want the services of the project.
In other words selecting cases via referrals to psychogeriatric departments did not guarantee clients who needed and were acceptable for enhanced home support.
However, many clients were supported by the scheme, and it is only through comparison with the control sample that one can determine whether or not the project was successful in sustaining them at home for a longer period of time than would have been the case without it.
It is to this question that the report now turns.
THE CLIENTS
This chapter addresses the question of what extra benefit, if any, the project conferred upon those who were members of the action samples.
It concentrates particularly upon benefit in terms of deferment of long-term or short-term institutionalisation (Was the project successful in sustaining at home people who without the enhanced care would have been in institutional care earlier?).
The major objective of the whole project was to examine this question, and it is clearly of great relevance, not only to dementia sufferers and their carers, who on the whole are known to prefer the sufferer to remain at home (see Levin, 1983) but also to service-providers and policymakers anxious to explore the extent to which the pressure towards community care can be implemented in practice.
‘Benefit’, however, can also be assessed in ways other than deferment of institutional care.
This chapter will therefore examine also whether the action project had any effect upon cognitive impairment (Did it help to delay deterioration, or even improve, mental state?); whether dementia sufferers in the action project expressed less worry, sadness, loneliness than those in the control samples; whether the project helped people to maintain their capacity to cope with certain tasks or activities of daily living; and finally whether it succeeded in obtaining more of other community services for its clients than were obtained by those in the control sample (eg more home help, meals-on-wheels, day care, home nursing, and so on).
An additional, and very important, type of benefit is any positive effect (such as decrease in stress or overwork) felt by informal carers.
This question is examined in Chapter Five.
PROJECT ABILITY TO EXTEND HOME STAY
It would be gratifying if the question of the project's ability to delay institutional care could be approached simply by comparing the length of time spent at home following referral to the psychiatric services by control and action sample clients.
Unfortunately, however, this approach is not adequate, for although the samples were well matched (see Table 2.3), inevitably, because of the number of variables relevant to determining whether or not a person remains at home, they could not be perfectly matched.
For this reason, and because the numbers are small, the most appropriate type of analysis is not a crude quantitative approach but the more detailed small-group and case analysis and comparison.
Such analysis can be approached in two major ways: one can either take all those who were sustained at home for, say, six months or l2 months from referral in both action and control samples, and compare the two groups in order to see whether — as one would expect if the project were successful — those still at home in the control sample were less disadvantaged in home care terms, less poorly circumstanced or had fewer problems than those in the action samples.
Or one can focus on relatively homogeneous subgroups in both action and control samples, and compare the length of time each was sustained at home.
Both types of analysis are explored below.
Firstly, however, the crude comparisons between action and control samples in terms of institutionalisation are made.
Table 4.1 shows where the dementia sufferers were living six months and 12 months after referral to the psychogeriatric service.
Table 4.2 shows the total amount of time spent by the clients in institutional care (whether short- or long-term) in the first six months, and in the first 12 months, after referral to the psychogeriatric service.
Both tables show control sample clients doing better in home care: spending less time altogether in an institution, and being more likely to be living at home at the end of the two time periods.
Each table excludes not only any clients who died or moved out of the area before the periods ended (for whom there was no difference between action and control samples), but also all those who at referral went straight into (or remained in) institutional care.
As the previous chapter shows, the  development officers were rarely involved at all with those clients if they were in the action samples; since in no real sense could they be said to have had the opportunity of availing themselves of the action project, they are omitted (in both action and control samples) from most of the following analysis.
This table also shows, as one would expect, that the proportion of clients remaining at home declined between six months and one year (except in the case of the Ipswich control sample, where  numbers were very small); that residential accommodation is the more widely used form of institutional care; and that although there is some difference between Ipswich and Newham, the general picture is much the same in the two locations.
The figures in Table 4.2 suggest, not that the action project made no difference in delaying institutionalisation, but that in both locations it slightly increased the likelihood of institutional care.
Numbers however are small.
There is also the possibility that the action and control samples differed in important characteristics.
If the difference is real, however, it could be that one of the effects of the project involvement was to alert other service-providers to any need for institutional care at an earlier stage than would occur for those in the control sample.
Before such an explanation can be accepted as plausible, however, it is necessary to examine the possibility of sample differences.
For instance it might be suggested that action sample clients were less likely to be admitted straight away to long-term institutional care than control sample clients, for service-providers might have felt that with the Home Support Project such clients could be sustained at home whereas in its absence in the control areas they were not sustainable.
Certainly in Newham a higher proportion of eligible sample members were admitted to institutional care straight away in the control sample than in the action sample (35 per cent compared to 20 per cent); the hypothesis is not supported in Ipswich however, where 31 per cent in the control sample and 37 per cent in the action sample were admitted straight away .
However it may still be useful to compare some of the main relevant characteristics of the samples, omitting those who went straight into institutional care, in order to see whether the development officers had more dependent or problematic clients to deal with than were in the control samples.
A comparison has therefore been made in terms of age, OBS score at referral, extent of informal care at referral, mobility, and a selection of behavioural problems, for both action and control samples, omitting those who went straight into institutional care.
The results — see Table 4.3 — are not conclusive but they certainly do not clearly support any suggestion that action clients were more problematic.
There is virtually no difference between action and control samples in Ipswich in organic brain syndrome and possession of behavioural problems; control sample clients appear older in Newham and more problematic in terms of informal care and in possession of behavioural problems, and in Ipswich in terms of indoor mobility; only in Newham on OBS score and indoor mobility can action sample clients be seen as more problematic than the control samples.
Therefore it does not look as though the explanation of the action clients' failure to be supported at home for longer than control samples is due to their more problematic home care potential (at least as far as the characteristics described above are concerned).
As outlined earlier in this section, an alternative form of analysis can be adopted in the light of the probability that the action and control samples were imperfectly matched.
First we look at all those in both action and control samples who were still at home  either six months or l2 months from the date of their referral to the psychiatrist for the elderly.
If the action project were succeeding in sustaining at home people who without its services would have been in an institution at an earlier date, then we would expect the action sample clients still at home at six months and 12 months to be more disadvantaged in the possession of factors likely to affect home care potential.
The factors selected were mean OBS score at time of first assessment, whether the sufferer was singly or doubly incontinent at least once daily, whether he or she engaged in persistent wandering away from home, whether he or she lived alone, and whether he or she had no closely involved informal carer.
The results are shown in Table 4.4.
Table 4.4 does not support overall the hypothesis that among those still living at home six months and 12 months after referral, the action samples would contain higher proportions of people suffering from a selection of ‘home care disadvantages’.
For both locations the evidence is in the expected direction for OBS score at both time points (though the difference is very small), and for Newham for percentage living alone and proportion having no closely involved informal carer.
But for other factors the difference is in the other direction.
It is also worth while examining the Table for differences between the two time points; one might have expected that those sustained at home for 12 months would possess fewer ‘home care disadvantages’ at referral than those sustained for six months.
Yet this does not appear to be the case.
This tends to suggest that one should look more closely at the characteristics of those sustained or not sustained at home, and at the decision to admit to an institution.
As for differences between Ipswich and Newham, Table 4.4 indicates that in Newham people in poorer home care circumstances (in both action and control samples) are remaining at home compared with Ipswich; in particular they are more likely to suffer from persistent wandering, to live alone, and to have no closely involved informal carer.
More useful comparisons than those made in Table 4.4 are perhaps to be made by means of subgroup analysis, even though with this method one is necessarily handling very small numbers.
However, such analysis can often be suggestive if not conclusive.
More homogeneous action and control subgroups can therefore be    sensible choice since one would expect those with less advanced organic brain syndrome who are well supported at home, to have less need of the Home Support Project.
To create an even greater homogeneity we excluded also all those who were doubly incontinent at referral (since we know that the project found such people very hard to support; see Chapter Seven), and all those whose condition — either mental or physical — was deemed too poor at referral for them to remain at home at all.
These restrictions provided sub-samples of 15 action and five control in Ipswich, and 11 action and ten control in Newham.
We can now ask whether the action sub-samples were more likely to be still at home at six months and l2 months from referral (as one would expect, if the project were to be accounted successful) than the control sub-samples.
In the action sub-samples (Ipswich and Newham grouped together) 57.7 per cent were at home at six months and 23.1 per cent at l2 months, but in the control sub-samples 66.7 per cent were at home at six months, and 40 per cent at 12 months.
Again then there is no evidence that the project achieved greater success in sustaining people at home than did the normal services (in fact the reverse appears to be the case).
However, there is a final type of analysis which, through case study, can compare even more closely action sub-sample with control sub-sample.
If we focus on all those clients who were still at home one year after referral, we can ask again whether the Home Support Project was sustaining more disadvantaged people than were still at home in the control sub-sample, and we can examine the interplay of a greater number of factors than those presented in Table 4.4.
In Ipswich 12 people were still at home in the action sample, three of them with considerable support from the project.
The first was an 87-year old widow with an OBS score of eight, living on her own in a local authority flat; she had very poor mobility, was subject to falls, and had an increasing tendency to incontinence; she could not manage her own personal care nor the care of her home.
She had children living nearby, but they gave only limited assistance; she also had a home help.
A project support worker visited her daily to ensure that she ate, and to help keep her clean and safe.
The second was also an 87-year old widow with an OBS score of eight, and living  alone in her own house.
She needed help to walk on stairs but was otherwise mobile, and indeed frequently wandered out of the house.
She could not manage her own personal care or care of her house, and was deemed to be at risk when on her own.
She had a very involved son and daughter-in-law but both went out to work and therefore could not manage continual care (although she had respite hospital care two weeks in six).
A project support worker visited to help with her personal care and play a safeguarding role at times when other care was not available.
The third person was an 81-year old widow, again with an OBS score of eight, living alone in her own house.
She was unable to manage her food preparation or heat regulation and was at some risk from gas and on roads.
She had no involved carer apart from our project support workers who prepared meals and handled other aspects of her personal and environmental care as required.
In the Ipswich control sample, out of the nine still at home at the end of one year, there was no one whose home care potential (without project supporters) was as poor as that of those three.
For instance only four-were living alone and all these people had much lower OBS scores than the three being sustained by the project (one had a score of three and the other three of five); they were also able to manage much more of their own care than the former group, being mentally and, to some extent, physically more capable.
The others still at home in the control sample lived with very involved spouses or children, who shared the care with day centres and temporary admissions to hospitals or Homes.
In Newham the picture was more complex, though not dissimilar, with the project tending at one year to be supporting people living on their own whose dementia was advanced or who for other reasons could not manage their own care, or needed some safeguarding care.
There were 11 people still at home at one year, five of them with project support workers.
These five were very similar to the Ipswich group; all except one were women; all lived alone; only one had a closely involved relative (and like the similar Ipswich case it was a working daughter who needed help to care for her mother when she was unavailable).
In other ways they varied: three had very high OBS scores, were unable to manage much of their own personal and environmental care, and needed safeguarding.
The other two had lower OBS scores (four and six) but one had such poor mobility that she was incapable of doing much for herself, and the other was disorientated and lonely, and was felt to require some companionship and support.
In the control group there were 14 people still at home at one year, but only eight lived alone and only four did so without closely involved relatives.
If our expectations are to be upheld these four should either have low OBS scores and be able to manage a good part of their own care, or they should have good support from other sources.
None had a score as high as nine, and indeed two had scores of two and four (rising to five at second and third assessments).
All except one had good mobility; none was incontinent; none wandered from home.
Those with closely involved spouses or other relatives were all very well supported at home.
The more detailed analysis presented here therefore strongly suggests that the Home Support Project does make a difference.
There are some types of case which it cannot sustain, and some which do not need it in order to remain at home; but there is a group — those with relatively severe dementia, probably living alone, and unable to receive the care they need from elsewhere (usually because they do not have able and willing involved relatives) who appear unlikely to have remained at home had it not been for the involvement of the Home Support Project.
It would appear that differences between action and control samples are masked by the fact that the action samples contain people who need little or no input from the Home Support Project in order to remain at home, as well as a few for whom that input is crucial.
For example, if one examines the number of people still at home at one year by whether or not they possessed what appear to be the three key traits of living alone; not having an informal carer who can cope with all necessary care; and having a high OBS score (eight out of ten or more), then
— half the action sample clients with support worker involvement possessed all three, and the other half two out of three;
— none of the action sample clients without support workers possessed all three, and only one-fifth possessed two out of three;
— one of the control sample respondents possessed all three traits, and one-quarter two out of three.
It can be concluded therefore that the action project appears to make a difference in terms of the length of time people are sustained at home, but only to a certain type of dementia sufferer, and the numbers affected are likely to be small unless a wide geographical area is covered.
OTHER POSSIBLE PROJECT BENEFITS
This section will ask whether the Home Support Project had any effect upon mental and emotional state, capacity to cope with daily living tasks, and receipt of other community services.
As far as mental state is concerned we first examined the OBS score over time of all dementia sufferers not admitted straight away to long-term institutional care.
Table 4.5 shows that, as we would expect, cognitive impairment increased over the year in all samples.
But it increased slightly more in the action samples than in the control groups.
Numbers are of course too small to draw any conclusion from this finding; what is clear is that the action project made no evident difference to clients' cognitive impairment.
As far as emotional state is concerned we have compared respondents' answers between first and second assessments to the following questions:
— Do you worry?
What kind of things do you worry about?
In the past month?
— Have you been sad or depressed during the past month?
— Have you felt lonely in the past month?
IF YES — How often have you felt lonely?
— In general how happy are you?
Are you — very happy, fairly happy, not very happy, or not happy at all?
Table 4.6 takes all those who were able to give an answer at both first and second assessments (third assessment is omitted as numbers able to give an answer on all three occasions were very small), and compares the action and control samples on: the number who admitted to worrying in the past month; said they had been sad or depressed; said they had often been lonely; and admitted to being not very or not at all happy (for analysis of all items in the depression scale used in the interviews see Lindesay & Murphy, 1988).
Of course, because of the cognitive impairment of our respondents, the interpretation of answers to these questions should be approached with caution (see Thompson, 1986).
Even though the table excludes those unable to give an appropriate answer on both occasions the answers which were given could mean a variety of different things; for example, that the respondent really was feeling worried when she said so, or that she thought ‘worried’ meant something else, or that she thought the answer meant something else, or that she answered at random .
However, it was still felt that a comparison between action and control samples might be interesting, merely to see whether there was any clear difference between the two samples over the six month period.
Unfortunately, as Table 4.6 shows there were no strong differences, and certainly none showing action sample clients faring significantly better than control samples.
Table 4.6 shows that worry and sadness were expressed by nearly half our samples of dementia sufferers at both time periods; loneliness was less often admitted, though one in five to a quarter of the samples did admit it; while saying that they were not very or not at all happy was the least common sentiment, this being expressed by approximately only one in six of the samples.
One can have more confidence, however, in the assessment of various activities of daily living.
In this part of the interview the respondents were asked to perform a variety of tests so that the interviewers could observe their capacity to cope with some of the   tasks usually needed for people to live independently.
These tests (see Appendix I for list of questions used) covered naming and locating articles, holding them, and using them appropriately.
The articles were: a comb, cup, a spoon, a jar of sugar, gloves, a watch, a purse, coins, and a bottle of pills.
Most of the respondents could manage the tests associated with the comb, cup, spoon, sugar and gloves.
But items such as the ability to name four parts of a watch, to tell the time, to identify three coins, and follow verbal and written instructions in order to select the correct one of two tablet bottles, had more discriminatory power.
Table 4.7 compares the action and control samples between first and second assessments, omitting all those who died or moved away before the second interview, and any who refused to take part in the tests on either occasion.
Failing a test was defined as being seen or heard to carry it out incorrectly (eg to say the time was twenty past nine when the watch indicated a quarter to four), or being unable to attempt it (eg being unable to answer when asked to identify a particular coin).
Again the table shows no evidence that action sample clients were more likely to improve their ability, or less likely to deteriorate, than control sample respondents.
Overall the samples showed a slight deterioration between first and second assessments (except on identification of coins).
Even at first assessment the difficulties faced by these dementia sufferers are apparent: two-thirds could not identify three coins, three out of five could not name three or four parts of a watch, and one half could not tell the time or correctly select a medicine bottle.
Finally, we examined receipt of community services, to see whether the project was able to attract more support from outside the scheme than the control samples were able to command.
A comparison is therefore made in Table 4.8 between action and control groups at the time of the second assessment (approximately six months after the first assessment) on receipt of some of the main forms of statutory help to those living at home: home help, meals-on-wheels, social worker, community psychiatric nurse, district nurse or bathing assistant, and day care (day centre or day hospital).
The results are shown separately for Ipswich and Newham because, even though numbers were small, there were some differences in service provision in the two locations.
As far as Ipswich is concerned, with the exception of the community psychiatric nurse, no one service was received by more than a minority of either sample.
Because the control sample of people still at home at second assessment was so small, no conclusions are possible.
Although those in the control sample in Ipswich appear more likely to be in receipt of home help than those in the action sample (perhaps in compensation for their lack of Home Support Project help) the mean number of home help hours received by those who were getting any was higher in the action than control sample (3.8 hours per week compared with 2.4 hours in the control group).
In Newham there was much less chance of dementia sufferers being visited by a community psychiatric nurse, but social services receipt was much higher than in Ipswich (see Chapter Three).
Most people in both action and control groups were receiving home help (and there was little difference in the mean number of hours received by the samples: 3.8 hours for the action group and 3.3 hours for the    control group).
Meals-on-wheels several days a week were also more likely in Newham than Ipswich.
The main difference between the action and control sample in Newham was that the control sample was significantly more likely to be in receipt of day care (perhaps in compensation for their lack of project help.)
Conversely slightly more of the action sample were receiving meals-on-wheels by the time of the second assessment but this is probably because more of the control sample were out receiving day care and therefore were less likely to require them.
In summary then, the action project appears not to have made a great deal of difference to people's receipt of other services, except that it has probably kept some sufferers away from day care and has increased home help hours for its own clients (and probably allayed the need for home help among other clients).
SUMMARY
Using a number of different types of analysis, in order to create well-matched subgroups, comparisons were drawn between action and control samples on the length of time sample members were sustained at home following referral to the psychogeriatric service.
On almost ail counts there was no evidence that the project achieved greater success in sustaining people at home than did normal services (in fact the reverse appeared to be the case).
Numbers were small; but a final case study approach revealed that for people who lived alone, had no informal carer who could manage all necessary care; and had a high level of cognitive impairment, the Home Support Project was likely to prolong home care beyond that of those who had received only the usual services.
The project made no evident difference to levels of cognitive impairment, nor to stated feelings of worry, sadness, loneliness or unhappiness.
Nor did it seem to make any difference to ability to perform everyday activities (such as selecting the correct coins for shopping) which were poor for many in both samples.
The conclusion to be drawn from this chapter is clearly a somewhat negative one: the action project has made some difference  to certain kinds of dementia sufferer, but overall its impact has been negligible.
However, with larger samples, and a focus upon those most likely to benefit (severely demented people living alone and without wholly involved informal carers, yet not requiring 24-hour-a-day care), a scheme such as the Home Support Project could play a major role in delaying the need for institutional care.
THE INFORMAL CARERS
It is well known that the majority of dementia sufferers living at home receive the main part of their care from family, friends and neighbours (see for example Bergmann, 1978; Levin et al, 1983).
Our samples were no exception: Table 5.1 takes a loose definition of ‘carer’ and shows — for the three points in time — whether the dementia sufferer lived with someone who helped in some way to care for him or her, and if not, how frequently he or she was visited by someone on an informal caring basis.
These caring visits could be by neighbours, friends or relatives, whose visits could be to check that the sufferer was all right, to give emotional support, or to provide help with personal or household tasks.
Even within the categories used in the table there were, of course, great variations in the amount of assistance people gave.
For example, among those carers living with a dementia sufferer, there were some who gave little care because the sufferer did not need much, because they went out to work, or because they themselves were frail; and at the other extreme were people who ‘did everything’ for a sufferer, and rarely left the house without him or her.
Among the visits received by those who did not have a carer living with them, there was similar variation, from a ten-minute visit by a neighbour to check that the sufferer was coping, to the all-day visit by a son or daughter who came to do cleaning, shopping, deal with finances, provide companionship, and so on.
Nonetheless, the table does show that most dementia sufferers are far from isolated or neglected by friends, neighbours and relatives.
At the time when the Home Support Project first collected information about them, the  majority got some informal care at least four days a week,(three-quarters in the Ipswich control group and the Newham action group, two-thirds in the Ipswich action group and just over a half in the Newham control group).
Most of this care was provided by relatives, but one-fifth of all the samples was — at the time of first data collection — receiving some informal care from friends or neighbours.
Because the definition of ‘informal carer’ can be so vague, we decided to focus on each person's principal carer (if there was one), defined on the objective criterion that he or she spent a minimum of seven hours per week (on average one hour per day) doing things with or on behalf of the dementia sufferer, rather than rely on the more subjective criterion of who appears to be most responsible for the sufferer.
If more than one informal carer spent seven or more hours a week on such care then we selected the one who spent most time.
Using these criteria (as well as that which stipulated that they should not be paid carers) we felt we would achieve a more homogeneous sample than if we had included people less closely involved, and one which would be confined to those with a significant input into the care of the dementia sufferer.
Seventy-four per cent(123) of the dementia sufferers were identified as having such a principal carer (81 per cent in Ipswich, and 67 per cent in Newham).
Of these 123, a full interview was obtained with l04 principal carers at the time of the patient's referral to the project (six carers refused to be interviewed, and it was not possible to interview a further nine for reasons such as the carer's ill health or death or because the patient and carer soon moved out of the area; for the remaining four some information was obtained by telephone).
Approximately one year after their initial interview, a further interview was sought with the principal carers whose relative was still alive (though we did interview a sample of those whose relative had died) and who had not already been living in an institution at the time of the first carer interview.
AT FIRST INTERVIEW
The principal carers were, as other studies testify (see for example Charlesworth et al, 1984) mainly women (67 per cent ) and mainly married (75 per cent ).
Table 5.2 shows the relationship of the principal carer to the dementia sufferer.
Again, as would be expected, they were mainly spouses, daughters or daughters-in-law.
Because of the division of principal carers into spouses and children it is meaningless to give their mean age: 56 per cent were under 65 years of age, and 22 per cent were 75 or over.
Just under half lived in the same household as the dementia sufferer (45 per cent); most of the remainder lived within easy reach: 14 per cent in the same street or only a few minutes' walk away, 20 per cent within two miles, ten per cent within five miles, and only 11 per cent further than five miles away (although in Newham 36 per cent of the principal carers lived more than two miles away compared with only 12 per cent in Ipswich).
Most of the carers were not in paid employment (particularly the spouses) but 13 per cent worked part-time and 21 per cent full-time.
Turning to the principal carer's involvement with the dementia sufferer, it was easy to see the tremendous amount of time and energy expended by most of them.
Seventy-nine per cent saw the sufferer daily (and if they did not live with him or her this often involved several visits per day).
The kind of practical tasks they carried out for the sufferer were of course very variable.
Those most frequently performed were:
preparing food and drinks: 53 per cent— one or more times a day
clearing away, washing up: 42 per cent— one or more times a day
assisting with medication: 39 per cent— one or more times a day
dressing and undressing: 33 per cent— one or more times a day
In addition, a quarter of the principal carers provided daily help with getting up, washing face and hands, and going to bed; the majority also helped with shopping, enabling the sufferer to go out, finances, washing, ironing and house cleaning.
Toileting, bathing, hair washing, and feeding were less common tasks but even so 22 per cent gave some help with toileting, 39 per cent with bathing, 40 per cent with hair washing, and 12 per cent with feeding.
Carers were asked whether they found it difficult to cope with any of the tasks they performed.
Most (67 per cent) said ‘no’; that it wasn't the tasks themselves which were difficult.
For those who did mention difficulties, the most frequently stated was toileting or dealing with incontinence.
For example:
Interviewer:
Is there any job that you find particularly onerous?
Carer:
The shitty pants.
I seem to get an awful lot of shitty pants — they're both [carer's father and his brother, who live together]incontinent in their own way…
I did get them incontinence pads but they won't use them.
Daughter, not living with sufferer, 1st Interview
In general the difficulties can be categorised as those which were hard because they were unpleasant tasks in themselves (eg dealing with sickness or incontinence, washing soiled clothes); those which were hard because of the dementia sufferer's behaviour or characteristics (eg he or she was uncooperative, aggressive, heavy), and those which were hard because of features of the carer's life or characteristics (eg the journey to the dementia sufferer's home was a long one, the carer's spouse disliked her helping, she had no washing machine, she found it hard to manage caring tasks as well as her work).
The proportions whose answers fell into each of these categories were as follows:
the task itself is unpleasant (41 per cent of those who found tasks difficult; l3 per cent of all principal carers)
task hard because of dementia sufferer's characteristics/ behaviour (53 per cent of those who found tasks difficult; l7 per cent of all informal carers)
task hard because of features of carer's life or characteristics (12 per cent of those who found tasks difficult; four per cent of all informal carers)
The practical tasks a carer has to carry out for a dementia sufferer are not necessarily, of course, the hardest part of care.
The symptoms of the illness itself, and the way in which these affect the carer, are well known to be difficult (see Gilleard, 1984; Sanford, l975).
For example, being kept awake by a sufferer who cannot sleep having to be continually watchful of someone who may do dangerous things, and having to cope with continual questioning or aggression may become unbearable.
We asked principal carers, therefore, which of a list of symptoms the person they cared for suffered from.
The results are shown in Table 5.3 and indicate that substantial numbers were experiencing each symptom, with some posing a problem for the majority of carers (losing or hiding things, dangerous or risky behaviour, falling, repeating questions or actions, being restless, angry or irritable, despondent or depressed, or uninterested in what was going on).
The carers were asked how they felt about these problems, and whether any were difficult to cope with.
Most of the 104 (69 per cent) had difficulty with one or more of them.
For example:
‘Oh, its been a strain — I didn't mind at first because she'd stay down at her flat for short periods of time, but obviously as her memory's got worse she doesn't realise that she's got a flat, and the only thing she knows is in here, and this is the only place she wants to be — here.
And all the time she's here it's ‘What can I do?’ and ‘Can I do this?’
And she sits over there and she counts the cars in the street.
And about every five minutes she says ‘There's six cars down there’.
And it's the same thing over and over again.’
Daughter, not living with sufferer, 1st Interview
The mean number of problems mentioned was 1.5.
Those most frequently discussed as difficult to cope with were:
aggression or violence: mentioned by 13 people
wandering: mentioned by 13 people
night disturbance/difficulty sleeping: mentioned by 11 people
embarrassing behaviour: mentioned by 10 people
dangerous or risky behaviour: mentioned by 7 people
being cross, irritable: mentioned by 7 people
The kind of things the carers said were:
‘The lack of sleep is getting me down.’
‘She has awful headaches and cries a lot, and I find this very hard to cope with — that's the greatest strain on me.’
‘He's just very difficult and hard to manage when he has these sort of fits and becomes rude and aggressive.’
‘It's embarrassing when he answers the door to visitors with no trousers on.
And he irritates me by repeating things over and over again.’
‘I'm tired by the constantly disturbed nights — and the aggressiveness and abuse worry me a lot.’
‘Dealing with money is the worst problem.
She's constantly losing it and then she blames someone else.
And there's arguments…’
‘The forgetfulness and repeating things all the time — it drives me round the bend.’
The nature of the difficulty carers experienced with these problems was either tiredness, anxiety or worry, embarrassment, sadness, fear or irritation.
The concept of stress or strain is difficult to define (but see Gilleard, 1984).
It is, however, a term clearly understood in everyday language.
We asked our principal carers to talk about how they felt as a result of looking after (or helping to look after) the dementia sufferer.
Did they find it a strain, and if so, how much of a strain?
Within their concept of stress or strain — often used either together or interchangeably by respondents, carers could include anxiety, fear, irritation, tension, despondency, etc.
It is a composite concept, an agglomeration of feelings which are not pleasant and are seen as an emotional state which cannot continue  indefinitely but from which one eventually requires temporary or permanent respite in order to restore health and calm.
For example:
Interviewer:
So you say you've found it a bit of a strain?
Carer:
Phew — ha — that is putting it mildly.
Even the day before I go (to her house) I'm thinking ‘How many hours is it before I get there?— I've got to go tomorrow — What's it going to be like?’
And last time I went I couldn't stand it.
I said ‘That's it — I'm going’, and I found myself walking out…
It's her — she's very, very difficult.
It hangs over me the whole time.
Nephew, not living with sufferer, 1st Interview
or:
Interviewer:
So how do you feel about the way she is?
Carer:
Sometimes I feel that I could get to the point where I'd let her get on the bus [transport to day care]in the morning and then ring them up later and say ‘Don't bring her back because I won't let her in’…
You know that you can't do anything, you can't go anywhere, you can't make arrangements to do anything.
It must make you angry — it does me…
Daughter, living with sufferer, 1st Interview
From analysis of all the comments made by the principal carers at their first interview it was possible to summarise overall reported feelings of strain (Table 5.4).
The kind of comments made by those who found the situation a moderate or considerable strain were:
‘It's a terrible strain.’
‘I'm weepy with exhaustion and worry.’
‘It's almost impossible to cope.’
‘It was getting on top of me.’
‘It gets me down.’
‘It's a big strain — I dread getting up some days.’
‘You don't know what to do with yourself at times it's such a strain.’
Those who were classified as finding the situation a minor or occasional strain said such things as:
‘He is a strain — but it's not what I have to do for him — it's the way he is — he's always been like that.’
‘I didn't mind doing it — but I was glad to get a break.’
‘It's alright, but I do wish I had more time to myself.’
‘It's not exactly a strain — but it does get wearing.’
‘It's a bit of a strain at times.’
And those who said they did not find it a strain expressed themselves for example as follows:
Interviewer:
How did you feel about helping her with those activities?
Carer:
How did I feel?
I really enjoyed it…
Since she's gone there's been a gap…it made my life better, because — she had a garden I could use…and it was like a job — I felt I was led to do that job…and she used to be so pleased to see me, she used to almost embrace me with tears in her eyes.
I said ‘Come on’, I said, ‘Let's go in the sitting room and sit down, and you tell me all about it’.
And this seemed to straighten her out.
Neighbour of sufferer living alone, 2nd Interview
However most of those for whom we had relevant information did feel strain, often considerable, and often very acute.
How, therefore, did principal carers view the dementia sufferer's continued home care?
What type of care did they wish for him or her?
Table 5.5 summarises their views at the time of their first interview.
It is interesting that half the carers said they would like to see the dementia sufferer in residential care.
Not surprisingly this is less true for Newham than for Ipswich carers; for in and around Ipswich there was an abundance of both private and local authority Homes, whereas in Newham provision was more restricted and there were no privately owned Homes.
A 50 per cent preference for residential care might be considered high, but it should be remembered that the dementia sufferers in this sample were mainly already in the advanced stages of their illness, and also that only 3l per cent of the principal carers were spouses, and it is among spouses that the highest preference for home care appears (see Gilhooly, 1986).
Among our samples, for instance, 79 per cent of the spouses said at first interview that they wanted the dementia sufferer to remain at home, compared with 36 per cent of the non-spouses.
Nearly a third of the principal carers complained at the first interview about the adverse effects of looking after the dementia sufferer upon their own physical or mental health.
Twenty-two  out of these 29 said they would prefer the sufferer to be in institutional care; the remainder said they would like increased care at home.
The kind of comments they made about their health were:
‘I'm very tired and weepy with exhaustion.’
‘I feel absolutely worn out.’
‘I'm a prisoner in my own home — it's a great worry — it gets me down.’
‘It's affecting my health — I'm very tired and irritable.’
‘I fell apart at the seams — I was in tears all the time, and my doctor put me on pills.’
Many of the carers complained that they had no social life; for example a 90-year old widow's daughter, who had her mother living with her, said she was hardly ever able to get out, and had not had a holiday for eight years.
Family relationships were also felt to suffer, with l6 carers specifically mentioning the friction and tension caused by their caring role.
All but two of these l6 said they would prefer the dementia sufferer to be in institutional care.
Only five people specifically mentioned the adverse effect on their work: one daughter said she had had to give up work, and two sons and two daughters-in-law complained of being called away from their work to deal with a problem affecting their mother.
A YEAR LATER
Preferred place of care
How many of those who said they would prefer their husband, wife, mother, etc to go into institutional care had had this wish granted within one year?
And had the views of those whose spouse, mother, etc was still at home changed or not one year later?
As is already known, a high proportion of our samples had died or gone into institutions one year from their referral to the psychogeriatrician.
Table 5.6 shows that the proportions still at home were very low for those who had no principal carer, whose carer wanted institutional care, or where we were unable to interview or ascertain the carer's preferences.
It was mainly from among those   with a principal carer who wanted the dementia sufferer to remain at home that those who did remain at home were to be found (if one excludes those who died or moved away, and compares place of care for those whose principal carer said initially that he or she preferred home or institutional care the difference between the two groups is significant at the 0.001 level).
In other words the principal carer's preference is very strongly associated with where the sufferer is living one year after referral.
It is reasonable to assume that the carer's preference provides some part of the causal explanation; but it is also likely that the carers’ preferences were influenced by the severity of the sufferer's condition, and by whether long-term institutional care was expected, already planned, or already known to be unlikely.
We re-interviewed those principal carers whose relatives, etc had moved to permanent institutional care by the end of one year.
Those who had preferred that solution were uniformly content with it; though they sometimes expressed feelings of guilt or voiced complaints about the particular institution.
Those who had initially wanted to go on looking after the dementia sufferer at home (nine carers) were also mainly content with the institutional care arrangement.
In seven cases there was acknowledged to have been a deterioration in the dependant's condition, so that the principal carer accepted or had even requested institutional care.
For example one woman set fire to her kitchen accidentally and the carer, her  neighbour, realised that it would not be safe for her to remain at home; another carer, a husband, found himself becoming so stressed that he struck his wife; he then requested institutional care.
The two sets of carers who were not content with the institutionalisation decision were: the male friend of a single woman who said it had been a pleasure to visit her daily and help look after her; after five months she was admitted to hospital under a guardianship order because she was felt to be at risk.
In the other case, two neighbours were helping to care for an 88-year-old single woman; service-providers were not happy with this care and were suspicious about the neighbours' management of the woman's finances, so she was also admitted to hospital under a guardianship order.
A more important question concerns the views of those principal carers whose dependant was still at home at the end of one year.
Firstly, how did those who had initially preferred institutional care react to the continuing home care?
Secondly, were those in the action samples coping better than those in the control samples (in other words, what difference did the action project make to them)?
There were five informal carers who said at their first interviews they would prefer the dementia sufferer to be in an institution but who had not had that preference fulfilled a year later (Table 5.6: three in the action samples, two in control; four in Ipswich, one in Newham).
It should be stated, however, that what the carers actually said was a good deal more complex than a simple preference for institutional care.
For example, at first interview Mrs Kitchener's daughter expressed a great deal of antagonism to her mother, talked at great length about the difficulties she experienced in caring for her mother and said that she had often told her mother — and other people — that she ought to be in a Home.
By contrast Mrs Cowan, s son-in-law said that it was no trouble to him to visit his mother-in-law every day and help take care of her, but that he would ideally prefer her to be in residential care because there she would have constant care and companionship, which was what she really needed.
In these two cases, the motivation for the institutional preference was quite different: one based on what was felt to be best for the sufferer, and the other largely on what was best for the carer.
The other three more closely fit the latter than the former model: Mrs Mitchell's daughter wanted her mother admitted permanently  to the local psychiatric hospital (knowing that she would not be eligible for residential care because of the severity of her condition); but she also added —‘not that I don't want her at home too — I love my mother — it's just that the strain is too much for me’.
Mrs Cummings' daughter-in-law was similar to, though less antagonistic than, Mrs Kitchener's daughter, in that she said she found looking after her mother-in-law a strain, that it was time-consuming, and putting a strain on her marriage; she and her mother-in-law had never got on very well, and she ‘would like to get her into a Home,’.
The final carer was Mrs Wilkins' nephew.
He also said that he found his responsibilities ‘a very great strain’, because his aunt was such a difficult, domineering person, and he would like to see her in a Home — partly because she needed more care and more company.
After one year, one would expect that out of these five those in the action sample would be happier than those in the control about the continued home care; and this was clearly the case.
The two control sample carers (Mrs Mitchell's daughter and Mrs Wilkins' nephew) were both still quite definite about wanting to see their relative in institutional care; Mrs Mitchell's daughter said that she was becoming more and more anxious about her mother being at risk at home; and Mrs Wilkins' nephew saying that she was more than ever in need of care, and the strain upon him of having to cope with her difficult personality was making him wish even more acutely for institutional care.
Of the three action sample carers, two had moved towards a preference for home care: Mrs Cummings' daughter-in-law, though appearing ambivalent, said she was happy for Mrs Cummings to remain at home now that the project, and the services it had generated, had made caring for her mother-in-law so much easier; and Mrs Cowan's son-in-law said: ‘she likes her own home so she's entitled to stay there’.
The third case was impossible to assess, for Mrs Kitchener's daughter did not want to be interviewed again, but the development officer's account at a time when Mrs Kitchener had been known to the project for about a year gives some indication of the situation:
‘Nothing's changed for Mrs Kitchener, other than— the family who support her, the two daughters are still at war — Mrs Kitchener now has six days a week day care…
But one  of the daughters was sleeping in with Mum at night — but she's upped and offed — that's the daughter who lost her husband.
The daughter who lives round the corner that gives most of the support [PC]is heading for a breakdown herself, she's under considerable stress about Mum, but can't get cooperation from her brother and sister as to what should happen regarding the mother's future…
I've spoken with the daughter on the telephone within the last couple of months, and each time our telephone conversations are exactly the same — the daughter's at the end of her tether, she doesn't know what to do.
Why won't she take up the offer of just a fortnight's short-stay?
‘But my sister won't agree to mother going into that place’.
And so it continues…
It's the situation between the daughters.
And they haven't been able to totally accept what's wrong with Mum, you know, that some of her behavioural problems aren't her being vindictive.
There isn't a lot of love for Mum — they adored their Dad — it's the old thing, ‘We promised Dad on his death-bed that we'd always care for Mum’, it's a very real thing to them…’
Development Officer, Ipswich, July 1985
The development officer said she felt the project had been unable to help much, because of the attitude of the relatives; the principal carer had not been relieved in any way, and therefore her preference for institutional care (without the ability to make it happen) remained.
Turning now to those carers who said in their first interview that they wanted their relative to remain at home, one would expect that those in the action sample would be more likely to have retained that preference than those in the control sample (assuming that the project has provided extra home care when needed and therefore indirectly or directly assisted or relieved the principal carers).
The findings indicate however that it is not so much the carers' preferences which do or do not change but their feelings about the feasibility of those preferences.
For in both action and control samples the majority still stated, one year later, that they wanted the dementia sufferer to remain at home: only one in the action sample, and two in the control sample stating a clear preference for  institutional care.
This is perhaps not surprising: their preference for home care at the first interview indicates that they have a stronger commitment to looking after the dementia sufferer than those who said in the first interview that they would prefer institutional care.
Most of the home-preference group were, for instance, living with the sufferer (8 out of l2 in the action sample and 10 out of 15 in the control sample).
One year later there was some indication that the control sample carers were finding it harder than the action sample to talk in terms of a simple preference for home care.
Thus, out of the 11 still preferring home care in the action sample nine answered quite specifically in terms of the feasibility of continued home care (albeit with a wish in some cases for more community services).
For example Mrs Snell, who was looking after her husband said that she could still manage to look after him at home; she was doing a little more for him than last year because he was physically frailer and more uncooperative, but she was getting the right amount of help and was quite satisfied.
Mrs Neil's nephew, who lived next door but one and provided daily care, said
‘Oh yes, she should stay where she is, she's alright at home — I suppose the only circumstances in which I wouldn't be able to manage would be if she needed a lot more done for her — personal things like.’
Similarly Mr. Pope, who was looking after his wife, said he did not want her to be anywhere else but at home:
‘We'll end our days here together in this house’
, though he did say he would like another short-stay admission for her as
‘the last one did me good.’
And Mrs White's brother and sister-in-law said:
‘Oh, she's alright at home.
If things keep as they're going now and she gets the services she's getting I've no grumbles, she'll stop for a long while.
She's happy at home — she doesn't want to move anywhere else.’
The two action sample people who, despite their commitment to caring, and the existence of the Home Support Project, could not state an unequivocal preference for home care at second interview were evidently under considerable pressure, as the following excerpts from their interviews show.
The first is from the elderly sister of Miss Wainwright.
They had lived together for a long time, but the sister was now reaching the conclusion that the situation could not continue much longer:
‘She's having a short stay in hospital at the moment so that I can have a holiday.
I know she is going to need permanent care very soon — everyone's urging me in that direction.
I don't like it…but I think my decision is almost made…
I don't want to push her out of the house but I just know I've reached the stage of not being able to cope any more.’
The second case is that of Mrs Nolan who lives alone in a flat in a tower block.
Her carer is her daughter whose flat is in the same block.
The daughter's second interview unfortunately did not take place until shortly after her mother had been admitted to long-stay care but it illustrates well the mixture of feelings which can be expressed.
‘She was going off for short stays at the Home, and then every weekend to give me a break.
But I still felt as though I'd have a nervous breakdown if I had to cope for much longer….
But I felt guilty about her being in a Home…she just had to go in in the end — and I know it's the best place, it's safe and she has company all the time…’
However, as stated above, nine out of the 11 in the action sample who said at second interview that they continued to prefer home care gave much more unequivocal answers; stating not merely that they would not like the dementia sufferer to be in institutional care, or that they would feel guilty about him or her going into residential care (as did the carers of Miss Wainwright and Mrs Nolan), but also that home was where they envisaged and wanted the sufferer to remain.
In the control sample the picture was slightly different; of the 13 who stated a preference at first interview for home care and whom we were able to interview again one year later, six stated an  unequivocal preference for home care, five a preference for home care but a recognition of the necessity for, or a competing preference for, institutional care, and two a clear preference for institutional care.
The differences between the samples (although of course the numbers are far too small for any quantitative analysis) can be summarised as follows:
As with the action sample those carers who continued to express a clear preference for home care talked in terms of it being no bother to continue caring, or even if it was ‘a bother’, home was the best place for the dementia sufferer, and he or she and the carer were ‘coping’.
For example Mr Cannon's niece said:
‘At the moment he can still manage to live alone — though there is a risk…
It's no bother to me to help…
I'm quite willing to go on doing it.
After all I promised my Auntie before she died [Mr Cannon's wife]that I'd take care of him…and he's a sweet old man, he's always grateful for what you do for him.’
Or Mrs Mannings' daughter, who had her mother living with her:
‘I think I need the occasional break, but nothing more permanent.
You see, no one can look after my mother like I can…
I can cope with anything now — unless my own health gave out.’
Or Mrs Fisk's daughter:
‘I wouldn't like her to go into a Home…
I'm the type to stick at something even if it gets on top of me, whereas my sister would put her in a Home.’
Those with mixed feelings or less unequivocal preferences were very different.
Comments from two of the five carers in this situation will illustrate their conflicting views; first the wife of Mr Skipton:
‘He's going to have a short stay in a Home soon to give me a break.
It will be nice but I feel awfully guilty about agreeing to it…
[In talking about continued home care]I can stand the strain at the moment, but I don't know for how long I can go on.
Sometimes I feel I'd like to pack a bag and just go…sometimes you think you can't manage for another minute.’
Second was the husband of Mrs Chapple; Mrs Chapple had just been admitted to hospital and seemed unlikely to return home:
‘I don't think I can have her home.
The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak…
I hate her being in Goodmayes [Psychiatric Hospital], but there's no alternative with her being incontinent.
I'd have her home like a shot if the incontinence could be stopped…
I don't like her being there, and I'm lonely on my own.
Looking after her gives me something to do.’
After one year several carers, therefore, were experiencing mixed feelings about continuing to look after the dementia sufferer, particularly in the control samples.
Was the same trend evident in their reported feelings of strain?
Feelings of strain
Table 5.4 summarised carers' expressed feelings of strain at first interview.
For those whose dementia sufferer was still at home one year later, expressed feelings of strain can be compared with their earlier statements (see Table 5.7).
Numbers are very small, and of course tabular data are only an extremely crude summary of a very complex range of feelings; however (excluding those whose attitudes were not known or impossible to summarise), it appears that three carers in the action samples felt the strain had lightened, four that it had remained the same and five that it had worsened.
In the control samples no one said the strain had lightened, five that it had remained the same, and six that it had worsened.
The differences are therefore in the  expected direction but so slight as to be unremarkable.
One may however ask whether those in the action sample who said that the   strain was less than it had been a year ago attributed this to the effects of the Home Support Project.
Two of the three involved have been mentioned in the previous section: first was Mrs Cummings' daughter-in-law, who had become more content with continued home care after one year.
At first interview she said the strain of looking after her mother-in-law was considerable, that it was putting a strain on her marriage in that she and her husband were always quarrelling these days, and that she had got to the point when ‘I feel I can't go on any longer’.
One year later she and her husband were expressing their thanks to the Home Support Project for helping them to go on looking after Mrs Cummings at home, and said that although it was still a strain it was ‘nowhere near as hard as it has been, now that we've got other people to help us’.
Secondly were Mrs White's brother and sister-in-law who were reported earlier as saying at second interview that they thought she should remain at home ‘if things keep as they're going now, and she gets the services she's getting’.
At first interview they had said that they worried about Mrs White, especially when they could not get over to see her, and that it was a bit of a strain on them both because neither of them was ‘in perfect health’.
At second interview however they said it was no problem to them to visit her, and that they now go only once a week, and ‘do not mind carrying on’.
The third person with diminished strain was Mrs Rogers' daughter; this case was unusual, however, in that after her initial diagnosis Mrs Rogers' cognitive impairment had been rediagnosed; and following a hysterectomy the symptoms had abated.
The daughter no longer had to provide care but said ‘I merely go to see her for a chat and the company nowadays’.
Where reported strain had increased, this was usually described among both action and control sample carers as due to deterioration in the sufferer's condition (which to the action sample carers even enhanced home care could not help).
One would expect that in the control sample carers' reports would more often include the difficulties of coping alone or without adequate support and help.
This did not appear to be the case.
For example among the action sample carers who reported increased strain was Miss Wainwright's sister (mentioned above), who in discussing the effect on her, said:
‘I get enough help — yes, I'm quite satisfied…but it's just that…she has to be watched all the time; and it's very hard to cope with her lack of response; and she follows me everywhere…
I don't get angry with her but I do leave the room to calm down…
I'm under more strain than I was — I get upset more quickly, my mind's often in a turmoil.’
Others in the same position made similar points:
‘It's all too much for me — especially her attitude — she's so different.’
‘The trouble is that she's constantly demanding, day and night.’
‘He's more uncooperative.’
‘I get plenty of help…but her constant moaning is hard to manage.’
Similarly among the control sample carers reporting increased strain the following comments were made:
‘I get enough help at home…
It does get me down though — especially with her blindness — the strain is just too much.’
‘He's just become more and more difficult to manage — he wanders, and he has to be kept clean…
He's very uncooperative and aggressive, not at all like what he used to be…oh yes, it is a strain.’
‘I get quite enough help — there's people traipsing in and out all the time…
It's a terrific strain though — she can't walk, she clings, she cries, she's getting frailer and mentally getting worse.’
‘It was a terrible strain — especially when she became incontinent.’
Apart from these four there was also one carer (a wife) who fractured her hip and just could not manage to look after her husband any longer: ‘he could not understand my condition and became nasty and demanding’.
Finally there was Mr Skipton's wife (mentioned above) who talked at length about the strain of looking  after her husband but is known to have refused most offers of help.
Like the others she reported the main problem as being a deterioration in her husband's symptoms.
‘He's deteriorated over the year — sometimes he doesn't recognise me now; and I have to fight him to get him to do anything.
He goes out alone…and sometimes he goes to the bank and draws out large sums of money…it's worse than dealing with a child…the most wearing part is the mental strain, not the washing and things like that; it's the having to take the lead all the time…[24; 1H I can stand the strain at the moment, but I can't say for how long.
Sometimes you think you can't manage for another minute.’
So although those carers in the action sample were grateful for the help they received from the Home Support Project (and almost without exception carers throughout the action samples expressed the same sentiment), there is scant evidence that it contributed to allaying feelings of strain.
SUMMARY
Most people got some informal care, and three-quarters had someone who spent on average at least an hour a day doing things with them or on their behalf.
Carers expended a tremendous amount of time and energy in this role.
Most said they did not find the actual tasks they performed for the dementia sufferer difficult, but two-thirds found one or more of the symptoms of dementia difficult to cope with, and most described feelings of strain.
At first interview half the carers said they would prefer the sufferer to be in institutional care, and it was overwhelmingly from among these who wanted the sufferer to remain at home that those who did remain at home for the year were to be found.
Comparisons between action and control carers would suggest that there is a slightly greater move towards home care preferences and diminished strain among the action sample carers at follow-up interview but there is no overwhelming evidence in this direction.
The findings would support a conclusion that what helps carers most is the temporary  removal of the sufferer from the home, either for day care or for temporary institutional care, rather than extra help in the home whilst the dementia sufferer is still there.
If this is the case then the Home Support Project was unlikely to have a marked effect on carers’ views except when it was instrumental in organising or increasing respite care.
THE COST OF HOME CARE
This chapter will consider how much it costs to support dementia sufferers at home.
There are two main methods of measuring costs: one can either include only public expenditure costs, or one can also include opportunity costs.
The analysis presented in this chapter largely takes the former course, for as Wright et al, 1981 say, ‘If minimising public expenditure is the criterion to be used for choosing patterns of care, the public expenditure basis is the one to go for’.
However, there are difficulties in following the public expenditure approach to its full logical conclusion.
For example, hospital costing returns do not include any allowance for capital costs and community care costs need to include Housing Benefit, social security benefits and payments such as Attendance Allowances.
Capital costs have been included in our estimated costs of a bed in a psychiatric hospital, but we have omitted Housing Benefit and social security benefits because they vary by individual circumstances and thus would jeopardise the generality of our results.
However, we have made allowance for housing costs and for the personal expenditures of people living in the community at the end of the analysis.
We have also omitted the time of unpaid informal carers and their lost employment opportunities.
The cost of all significant community services provided for each of the clients (including day hospitals and day centres) has been included, plus of course the time of support workers and a proportion of the time of the development officers (see Appendix IV).
The focus is therefore upon the services provided, but with an allowance made at the end for average housing and personal living costs, in order to make a  sensible comparison between people living at home and those in institutions.
This chapter should be read in conjunction with Appendix IV which sets out details of the costs included.
Inevitably the analysis is relatively crude since it is difficult to gather data about the financial circumstances of dementia sufferers or about the total amount of care provided for them in the community.
Nonetheless it was possible to obtain information about the major services received, and their costs are presented below.
This chapter first presents some general findings about the cost of community services for different types of dementia sufferer, and shows how they increase over time.
It then compares the costs incurred for control samples with those of action sample clients, and finally examines the most important question as far as this project is concerned: whether those who were sustained at home with project support for six or l2 months after their referral to the psychogeriatrician cost more, less, or about the same to keep at home compared with the cost of institutional care (taking into account the probability of their being in an institution were it not for the project support).
COST OF COMMUNITY SERVICES
Overall costs
Chapter Four has presented information about the services received by action and control sample clients.
As it shows, most people are in receipt of some services (though they are often fairly minimal at the time of a person's referral).
By the time of the second or third assessment, if people are still at home the typical situation involves a mixture of two or more services, such as home help, meals-on-wheels, nursing, day care, and so on.
The total mean weekly cost of these services at the three time periods is presented in Table 6.1.
The table shows, firstly, that there was a difference between Ipswich and Newham; at each assessment period Newham Services were costing more.
This could either have been because their services were more expensive, or because they were providing more of them.
Both factors appear to have been operating; Chapter Four has shown the greater volume of major services (such as home help and day centres) being used by sample members in Newham.
But services were also somewhat more expensive in Newham.
For example home help was costed at £2.92 per hour in Ipswich, and   £4.17 in Newham; most day care in Ipswich was provided in Residential Homes which was calculated as involving no extra cost unless transport was provided, whereas in Newham day care was usually provided in day centres, involving a cost of just under £5 per day on top of the cost of transportation (see Appendix IV.
Secondly Table 6.1 shows that community service costs increased markedly between first and second assessment (as one would expect, given that referral to the psychogeriatric service, even without the operation of the Home Support Project, is usually the signal for an assessment of home care needs).
In Newham the cost of services continued to rise slightly to the time of the third assessment, but in Ipswich they dropped back a little.
This was due to the fact that in Ipswich more of the heavy consumers of community services had died or gone into institutional care by the time of the third assessment, leaving a smaller proportion of heavily dependent people than in Newham.
Thirdly of course, Table 6.1 shows that even people with some recognised degree of dementia cost much less to sustain at home (in terms of community service costs) than if they lived in an institution.
Even one year after their diagnosis as dementia sufferers, the public service costs of community care were between £100 and £180 per week cheaper than care in residential accommodation or a long-stay ward.
Table 6.1 makes no distinction between different types of dementia sufferer.
One would expect those whose dementia was more advanced or who had more problematic home circumstances to be heavier consumers of community care services, and thus to cost  more to sustain at home.
This certainly appeared to be the case; those whose score on our cognitive impairment scale (the OBS scale) was between eight and ten cost more in community services than those whose score was between two and seven (see Table 6.2).
Similarly those who lived alone cost more in community services than those who lived with others (Table 6.3).
In Tables 6.2 and 6.3 the differences between the two groups are all in the expected direction, with the scale of the difference between the less costly and more costly being very similar for both variables; some of the differences are large enough to be statistically significant, for example that between those who lived with others or alone in Newham at second assessment (significant at the one per cent level).
Comparison between action and control samples
The cost of community care for action sample clients is of course higher than for people in the control samples because the cost of support worker time plus a proportion of the time of the development officers was included in the assessment of community service costs at the time of second and third assessments.
Cost differences between action and control samples are shown in Table 6.4.
The differences between action and control samples at the time of referral was unexpected.
Differences in sample characteristics may explain some part of it (for instance in Ipswich the action samples contained a higher proportion of heavily dependent people who went straight into institutions after their referral to the psychogeriatric service).
Some part of the variation between action and control groups at first referral is also probably due to the slightly greater difficulty in the collection of data about control sample clients than about those in the action sample, where the development officers were engaged in detailed meetings about clients' circumstances with service-providers of all kinds.
Inevitably less time could be spent by the researchers in doing this on behalf of the control samples; though by the time of the second and third assessments, the circumstances of, and services received by both action and control sample members were well known both to researchers and development officers.
The costs of community services to control sample members at both second and third assessments were considerably lower than those of the action samples, even though in both boroughs they increased  during the year.
But in the action samples the costs increased six-fold in Ipswich and three-fold in Newham between referral and third assessment, whereas in the control samples they only doubled in both Ipswich and Newham.
Four cases have been selected as illustrations; the items included in their weekly community care costs are shown below.
Case I A 009 (Action sample, Ipswich, costs at time of second assessment) £ Day care (2 days p.w.
at Part III, escorted transport) 14.10 CPN (2 visits p.w.) 23.20 Proportion of time of development officer 23.38 60.68 Case I C 050 (Control sample, Ipswich, costs at time of second assessment) £ Home help (l 1/2 hours p.w) 4.38 Meals-on-wheels (2 p.w.) 2.78 Day care (2 days p.w., at Part III, unescorted transport) 4.70 CPN (1 visit p.m.) 2.90 14.76 Case N A513 (Action sample, Newham, at time of third assessment) £ Meals-on-wheels (7 p.w.) 13.09 District nurse (1 visit p.m.) 0.93 Project support worker (21 hours p.w.) 63.00 CPN (1 visit per fortnight) 6.66 Proportion of time of development officer 16.56 100.24 Case N C 512 (Control sample, Newham, at time of third assessment) £ Day hospital (1 day p.w.) 36.09 Day centre (3 days p.w., escorted transport) 35.25 71.34 
Action project clients sustained at home
Finally we examine in detail those who were sustained at home with project support for six or l2 months after their referral to the psychogeriatrician, and ask whether they cost more, less, or about the same to keep at home compared with the cost of institutional care.
In order to make this analysis meaningful we have used the findings reported in Chapter Four in order to make a prediction about whether or not clients would have been at home had they not been supported by the Home Support Project.
It was suggested in Chapter Four that people who possessed three specific characteristics would have been highly unlikely to remain at home for any length of time.
Possession of even two out of the three characteristics made continued home care unlikely, but we shall confine our attention here to those who possessed all three in order to look as exclusively as possible at those for whom the Home Support Project's service was crucial.
The three characteristics were: an OBS score of eight or more, living alone, and without a closely involved informal carer (only one of the control sample clients still at home at one year possessed all three of these characteristics).
Of those with the required characteristics, we found eight at home in the action samples at six months and six at 12 months.
The costs of their community care are shown in Table 6.5.
This table shows that those whom we predicted as unlikely to remain at home for long without project support were in general relatively expensive to care for at home.
At all except three points their community services cost about £100 or more per week.
The three whose costs were unexpectedly low at second assessment were exceptional cases for the reasons stated at the foot of the table.
The costs shown in Table 6.5 should be compared with our estimate of £220 per week in a psychiatric hospital, and £l65 in residential care.
All were therefore being kept at home at a cost below that of institutional care.
If the omitted community costs (housing costs and personal living expenses) are added to the above community service costs they would add on average another £60 per week (see Appendix IV).
Even in these circumstances project support would still in all cases be cheaper than hospital care, and in four cases cheaper than residential care (and only a proportion of these clients would have been considered eligible for residential care).
PROJECT COST-EFFECTIVENESS
Cost is not of course necessarily the major consideration; none of the people the project sustained to six months or one year wanted to be anywhere else but at home.
Nonetheless cost is obviously important.
As well as showing the average or individual costs of community care under the Home Support Project it would clearly also be useful to show whether the project was or was not cost-effective overall; that is, whether the costs of running the service were greater or lower than the total public expenditure saved through sustaining at home people who without the project would have been in institutions.
Unfortunately this is a calculation which can be made only very crudely since it is impossible to say with total accuracy (even though we can make control sample comparisons)(a) which clients would have been institutionalised in the absence of the project, and (b) whether they would have been admitted to a long-stay hospital or to residential accommodation.
However, by making some assumptions, a rough approximation of public expenditure saving can be reached.
These assumptions are:
— that at any one time ail action sample clients who lived alone, had an OBS score of eight or more, and had no closely involved informal carer would have been in an institution without the project.
The data show that the development officer in Newham had on average five such clients per week when the project was fully operational (that is excluding the period in which her case load was either building up or running down).
The development officer in Ipswich had four such clients during the same period.
— that in Newham each such client cost £92 a week less in the community, and in Ipswich £108 less (even with Home Support Project input) than in an institution, assuming that two-thirds of the clients would have entered a hospital and one-third residential accommodation (see Table 3.5).
The sum saved is based on a calculation of the average community service costs of all relevant clients at six month and/or 12 month assessment.
With the application of these conditions it is possible to conclude that when operating at capacity, in Ipswich the project saved £432 per week in institutional costs (or £22,464 per annum) and in Newham £460 per week (or £23,920 per annum ).
Since the conditions applied are almost certainly too restrictive (the project may well have sustained somewhat more than four to five clients per week who would otherwise have been in an institution) the total annual sum saved is almost certainly nearer £24,000 — £26,000.
However the total annual cost of the project at that time, extrapolating from the months when it was operating at capacity to produce a cost for a 12-month period, would have been £42,000 in Newham and £25,680 in Ipswich (excluding the cost of the research); see Table 6.6.
These figures show that the project cost  slightly more than the estimated amount saved in Ipswich, and about £16,000 — £18,000 more in Newham (where the amount spent on support workers was much higher).
If cost-effectiveness is of paramount consideration it would clearly be advisable for any future project to focus particularly on those clients shown to be most likely to benefit from its services.
In that way it would increase the number of such clients supported and thus become an even more cost-effective service.
It should be borne in mind however that this project has been able to consider only short-run cost-effectiveness.
In the long run such a scheme might help to keep at home people who in the early months need only limited assistance.
And of course it should also be borne in mind that cost-effectiveness is not the only consideration in assessing the value of such a scheme.
SUMMARY
This chapter has shown the cost of the major community services for dementia sufferers in different circumstances.
For example, it has shown how those living alone or having higher levels of cognitive impairment cost more in community services than those living with others or having lower levels of cognitive impairment.
It has also shown that more was spent on services in Newham than in Ipswich (partly because Newham clients had more services and partly because services were more expensive).
Costs increased for all clients in the year following their referral to the psychogeriatric service but they increased more steeply in the action than control samples.
Those clients whom we estimated as least likely to have remained at home had it not been for the Home Support Project were, as expected, particularly heavy consumers of community services.
Even so, they were generally being sustained at home at a cost below that of institutional care.
The chapter ends with an approximate calculation of the overall cost of the project, and this is compared with a calculation of the total sum saved through the operation of the project.