

Hypertension and Diabetes Mellitus
P.J. Pacy
Dr Paul Pacy qualified from St George's Hospital, London, in 1976.
He moved to Birmingham for his early clinical experience and to research on aspects of hypertension in diabetes which formed his MD thesis.
He is now pursuing his clinical and research interests in diabetes and metabolism at the Clinical Research Centre, Harrow.
Introduction
Epidemiological studies, mainly in the non-diabetic, have demonstrated that hypertension is one of several major risk factors for atherosclerosis (Keys, 1975; Miller et al, 1981).
Since the widespread use of insulin therapy during the 1920s, macrovascular disease has become the major cause of morbidity and mortality in the diabetic subject in both the UK and USA (Entmacher et al, 1964; Marble, 1976; Tunbridge, 1981).
Any attempt to improve the prognosis of diabetics must address this central observation.
This chapter will attempt to delineate the relationship between hypertension and diabetes with specific reference to prevalence, effect on prognosis, pathophysiological mechanisms and treatment.
Prevalence of Hypertension in Diabetes
It is often claimed that hypertension is prevalent in diabetic subjects (Christlieb, 1982), although the evidence for such a statement is conflicting and by no means universally accepted.
An association between hypertension and diabetes has been suspected for over 70 years.
As early as 1907 it was reported that there was a frequent association between hyperglycaemia, hypertension, atherosclerosis and obesity (Elliott, 1907).
Several years later it was observed that 39 per cent of 500 diabetic patients had systolic blood pressure greater than 150 mm Hg (Kramer, 1928), and in the same year another study showed that hypertension was almost three times more common in diabetics than non-diabetics (Bell & Clawson, 1928).
By the end of the 1920s the majority of published work suggested that hypertension was more prevalent in diabetics (Major, 1929); however, such a view was by no means unanimous.
John (1932) found that hypertension was only more prevalent in diabetics who were over 40 years of age, while another study failed to confirm an excess prevalence (Sherrill, 1933).
However, numerous methodological problems arising in these papers make comparison of the results extremely difficult.
These problems include failure to  standardise the definition of hypertension and diabetes, the use of either IV or V Korotkoff phases for diastolic blood pressure and a failure to take account of obesity or differentiate between the types of diabetes.
More recent studies have managed to overcome several of these problems.
Pell & D'Alonzo reported that hypertension was more frequent in diabetics at 37 per cent prevalence compared to matched non-diabetics at 24 per cent, employed at the Dupont Electric Company (Pell & D'Alonzo, 1967).
They also demonstrated that such differences in hypertension were present in the prediabetic state.
In contrast, a large clinic-based survey failed to show similar findings and the authors felt that hypertension was no more common in diabetics than non-diabetics (Keen et al, 1975).
Several large population-based surveys have confirmed that the blood pressure in diabetics is higher than in non-diabetics (Ostrander et al, 1965; Kannel & McGee, 1979), the difference being more marked in females.
In addition, two recent American studies — one from a diabetic clinic population (Christlieb et al , 1981), the other a community-based study in elderly subjects (Barrett-Connor et al , 1981)— appeared to confirm the excess frequency of hypertension in diabetes.
Importantly, in the community-based study the higher level of systolic blood pressure in diabetic subjects persisted even after correcting for obesity, although the relationship was not as strong.
Several large population surveys have shown an independent relationship between blood glucose and blood pressure with ethnic differences between whites and blacks also apparent (Dunn et al, 1970; Sive et al , 1971).
The prevalence of hypertension is significantly greater in non-diabetic blacks than whites (Comstock, 1957; Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program Co-operative Group, 1977), and similar findings have been confirmed in a recent clinic survey of diabetics at a District General Hospital (Pacy et al, 1985).
Forty per cent(203/507) of diabetics under 65 years of age were hypertensive using the current World Health Organisation criteria (systolic blood pressure ≥ 160 mm Hg, diastolic blood pressure ≥ 95 mm Hg; World Health Organisation, 1979).
Blacks (48.9 per cent) had a greater prevalence than whites (37.5 per cent (P<0.05) and Asians (35.4 per cent(P<0.05).
Females (49.1 per cent) had a greater prevalence than males (33.0 per cent )(P<0.001), a trend noted for all ethnic groups.
Those not receiving insulin therapy had a greater prevalence (45.6 per cent) than those on insulin (30.7 per cent )(P<0.001), although this relationship was not found in blacks in whom the prevalence of hypertension was similar regardless of the type of diabetic therapy.
As in several previous studies, isolated systolic hypertension was the commonest finding (Epstein et al, 1965; Garcia et al , 1974, Hawthorne et al , 1974; Kannel & McGee, 1979) and isolated diastolic hypertension the least common in all ethnic groups.
Multiple regression analysis showed a positive relationship between age and systolic (P<0.00001) and diastolic (P<0.00001) blood pressure and a negative relationship between duration of diabetes and diastolic blood pressure.
(P<0.004).
A control non-diabetic group was not recruited in this study so that it was not possible to determine whether the prevalence of hypertension in diabetics was greater than in non-diabetics.
However, available data from non-diabetic populations in the age range surveyed in the diabetic clinic study have revealed prevalence rates in both sexes of between 20 and 25 per cent(Epstein et al , 1965; Garcia et al , 1974; Hawthorne et al , 1974; Kannel & McGee, 1979) which would suggest that in non-insulin-treated diabetics at least hyper-tension is more prevalent than in non-diabetics in all ethnic groups.
Although all these studies have been conducted in adult subjects, it appears that higher levels of systolic blood pressure are present in adolescent diabetics compared to non-diabetics both in Europe (Florey et al, 1976) and the USA (Moss, 1962).
The majority of data indicate that hypertension is prevalent in diabetics and at all ages their systolic blood pressure is probably higher than in non-diabetics.
Evidence of higher levels of diastolic blood pressure at least before middle  age is lacking, provided there is no evidence of renal impairment.
Prognosis of the Hypertensive Diabetic
The majority of evidence appears to support the concept that hypertension has an adverse effect on prognosis in the diabetic.
A greater mortality in hypertensive compared to normotensive diabetics was reported in one study but no comparison with non-diabetic hypertensives was made (Hayward & Lucena, 1965), while a 10-year prospective study of 370 diabetics showed that hypertension was no more hazardous in diabetics than non-diabetics (Pell & D'Alonzo, 1970).
In contrast, data from life insurance applicants suggested that for comparable degrees of hypertension the impact on mortality was greater in diabetics, and particularly marked in those aged less than 40 years (Goodkin, 1975).
The Framingham study (Kannel & McGee, 1979) has revealed that female diabetics have a 4-fold and males a 2-fold increased mortality compared to age- and sex-matched non-diabetics.
In addition, coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular accidents and in particular intermittent claudication occurred more frequently in diabetics of both sexes.
However, this study demonstrated that the increased prevalence of macrovascular complications was not accounted for by the increased frequency of cardiovascular risk factors including hypertension.
Similar findings had previously been reported from the Joslin Clinic in the USA, although the specific role of hypertension was not evaluated (Kessler, 1971).
Evidence of a detrimental effect of hypertension has been derived from the Whitehall male civil servant study (Fuller et al, 1983).
A nonlinear relationship was observed between coronary heart and stroke mortality with the two hour postprandial blood glucose.
Diabetics and those with postprandial blood glucose levels between 5.4–11.
O mmol/l had increased mortality compared to those with blood glucose <5.4 mmol/l Age and hypertension were most strongly related to coronary heart and stroke mortality within both the diabetic and glucose-intolerant groups.
Therefore it appears that hypertension has an additive deleterious effect on overall prognosis in the diabetic.
Classification of Hypertension
As in the non-diabetic the hypertension in diabetes can be divided into primary (essential) and secondary.
Despite numerous secondary conditions (i.e., acromegaly, Cushing's and Conn's syndromes, phaeochromocytoma and thyrotoxicosis) in which elevated blood pressure is associated with impaired carbohydrate metabolism, these are probably no more frequent in the diabetic than the non-diabetic hypertensive.
Likewise, other conditions, such as renal artery stenosis secondary to atherosclerosis, which might be expected to occur more frequently in the diabetic, appear not to do so (Munichoodappa et al, 1979).
However, renal dysfunction, especially in long-standing insulin-dependent diabetes, is the exception, although whether hypertension is the cause or a result of the nephropathy remains uncertain.
Several classifications have been proposed although a modification of that recently advocated (Christlieb, 1982) appears a practical and useful guide for management (Table 3.1).
It is important to subdivide the hypertensive diabetic into insulin-dependent (Type 1) or non-insulin-dependent (Type 2).
Each type may have hypertension with or without evidence of nephropathy.
The form of the elevated blood pressure may be isolated systolic, isolated diastolic or a combination of both.
Although this basic classification will suffice for the vast majority of hypertensive diabetics, it is extremely important to delineate the numerically small percentage of those whose elevated blood pressure is associated with neuropathy as these will present an additional therapeutic challenge.
Table 3.1 Practical classification of hypertension associated with diabetes mellitus
Several authorities have stated that malignant hypertension (implying the presence of arterial fibrinoid necrosis and usually a diastolic blood  pressure <140 mm Hg with retinal changes such as haemorrhages, exudates and papilloedema) is rare in diabetics and that generally the degree of hypertension tends not to be severe (Drury, 1983).
In a recent study the mean systolic blood pressure of hypertensive diabetics (n =203) was 174±27 mm Hg and diastolic blood pressure 89±14 mm Hg (Pacy et al, 1985).
Similar mean blood-pressure levels were recorded in both those receiving insulin and those on diet with or without oral hypoglycaemic agents, demonstrating that hypertension in the diabetic is not particularly severe.
Pathogenesis of Hypertension
Blood pressure is dependent upon two factors: cardiac output and peripheral resistance.
However, the precise role of these in the diabetic hypertensive is not known.
Several pathophysiological mechanisms have been implicated including premature atherosclerosis, increased circulating blood volume, a role for insulin, body sodium and catecholamines, abnormal central blood-pressure regulation and abnormalities of function or structure of plasma renin which will now be reviewed.
Premature atherosclerosis
It is now well established that diabetics are prone to early atherosclerosis (Epstein et al, 1965 Pirart, 1978; Kannel & McGee, 1979) which appears no different from that in non-diabetics (Robertson & Strong, 1968).
When this occurs in the great blood vessels it may result in loss of the normal damping mechanism of the cardiac output due to the relative inelasticity of these vessels.
Clinically the reduced compliance in the great vessels will be manifest as an elevation of the systolic blood pressure, which is perhaps the reason for its frequent occurrence in the diabetic subject (Pacy et al, 1985).
Insulin and sodium
In the non-insulin-dependent diabetic it has been postulated that insulin may play a key role in the pathogenesis of elevated blood pressure.
It is now established that insulin has an antinatriuretic action resulting in increased sodium reabsorption probably from the proximal convoluted tubules.
It has been shown that only physiological concentrations of insulin c. 30–40 μ U/ml are required for such an effect (De Fronzo, 1981).
Many non-insulin-dependent subjects are overweight and are therefore likely to be hyperinsulinaemic as a result of insulin resistance.
This may result in increased sodium reabsorption with subsequent increased exchangeable body sodium (De Chatel et al, 1977).
Indeed, increased exchangeable sodium in diabetics has been reported by one group of research workers who also showed that diuretic therapy lowered blood pressure while reversing the 10 per cent increased exchangeable sodium to normal (De Chatel et al, 1977; Weidmann et al , 1979).
Studies using alloxan-induced diabetes in rats (Christlieb, 1974) and in poorly controlled human diabetics (Christlieb et al, 1975) have suggested that hyperglycaemia per se may be associated with increased blood volume (possibly secondary to an osmotic effect of chronic hyperglycaemia).
Such an effect along with the antinatriuretic effect of hyperinsulinaemia expands  the extracellular compartment at the expense of intracellular dehydration.
As long as fluid intake remains adequate to compensate for ensuing polyuria the blood volume will remain expanded with resultant elevation of cardiac output and thus blood pressure.
Renin-angiotensin system
A possible pathological role for the renin-angiotensin system has been proposed.
In normotensive and hypertensive diabetics without evidence of nephropathy both raised and normal levels of plasma renin activity have been found ( Christleib et al, 1976; De Chatel et al , 1977; Burden & Thursten, 1979).
Although studies have revealed that only a small subgroup of such diabetics have reduced plasma renin, in those with nephropathy both plasma renin activity and plasma aldosterone tend to be decreased (Christlieb, 1978).
This may be due to a reduction of free water clearance resulting in elevation of the blood volume and suppression of renin while the osmotic effect of hyperglycaemia may further exacerbate the problem.
In addition, the physical effect of thickening of the arteriolar walls in the kidney may prevent release of renin from the juxtaglomerular apparatus (Schindler & Sommers, 1966).
Defectively synthesized renin (big renin or prorenin) has been shown to have reduced physiological activity (De Leiva et al, 1976).
It has also been reported that diabetics may have increased vascular sensitivity to angiotensin II (Christlieb, 1976; Weidmann et al, 1979).
This may be important as weight loss with accompanying reduction of blood pressure in obese non-diabetic hypertensives has been shown to be accompanied by reduced levels of plasma renin activity and aldosterone (Tuck et al, 1981).
Catecholamines and the nervous system
Abnormalities of the nervous system have been implicated in the development of hypertension in diabetes.
An American report found heart rate to be positively related to blood glucose (Stamler et al, 1975).
However, the relationship between blood glucose and blood pressure appeared independent of heart rate and therefore by implication either increased sympathetic activity or parasympathetic denervation.
Similar findings were reported in a British study (Jarrett et al 1978).
Diabetics have been found to have greater pressor responsiveness than non-diabetics with more pronounced elevation of systolic blood pressure following exercise (Karlefors, 1966).
Plasma catecholamine levels tend to be normal in the majority of diabetics except in those with ketoacidosis, autonomic neuropathy and poor glycaemic control (Christensen, 1972; Christlieb, 1976; Zadik et al, 1980), although hypertensive diabetics may have increased sensitivity to circulating catecholamines (Christlieb, 1976; De Chatel et al , 1977).
Obesity
In the non-diabetic there is now considerable data showing a positive relationship between body mass index and blood pressure (Boyle, 1970; Wilcox, 1978; Brennan et al, 1980; Hovell, 1982).
The evidence for this statement is based on three separate observations.
First, hypertensive subjects tend to increase their weight as the disease progresses (Chiang et al, 1969; Tyroler et al , 1975).
Secondly, hypertension is more frequent in obese than non-obese subjects (Paffenbarger et al, 1968; Stamler et al , 1978; Weiss et al , 1978).
Lastly, weight loss is frequently accompanied by a reduction in blood pressure (Ramsay et al, 1978; Reisin et al , 1978; Fagerberg et al , 1984; MacMahon et al , 1985).
The pathological mechanisms for this relationship are poorly understood, although several hypotheses have been proposed (Messerli, 1982).
Elevated blood pressure itself or antihypertensive therapy may result in an inappropriately high energy intake, and secondly obesity per se either due to metabolic changes or consequent upon an increased energy and possibly sodium intake with lack of exercise may predispose an individual to high blood pressure.
In addition, it is possible that hypertension and obesity are linked by a common but as yet unknown factor.
Finally this relationship may simply be fictitious, arising from observations with an inappropriately sized sphygmomanometer cuff (Ragan & Bordley, 1941; King, 1967; Maxwell et al, 1982).
However, a Belgian study in which cuff width and arm circumference were taken into account revealed that even after correcting for this relationship, weight appeared correlated to blood pressure (Demanet et al, 1976).
Many non-insulin-dependent (Type 2) diabetics are overweight and this may be one reason for the high prevalence of hypertension observed in this group.
This association, as implied previously, may relate to the antinatriuretic action of insulin which is perhaps the common link between obesity and elevated blood pressure (Bjorntorp, 1982).
Other factors
Several other abnormalities have been described which may be relevant with respect to elevated blood pressure in diabetics.
These include increased platelet aggregation and blood viscosity and decreased vascular bed distensibility (Khosla et al, 1979; Faris et al , 1982).
In addition, especially in insulin-dependent patients, diabetic nephropathy initially presenting as either overt proteinuria or microalbuminuria may play a key role in the pathogenesis of hypertension.
Is Treatment of Hypertension in Diabetes Beneficial?
There is currently no evidence that adequate antihypertensive therapy in diabetes improves prognosis.
However it has been stated that at worst similar results to those in non-diabetics might be anticipated (Christlieb, 1982).
In non-diabetics there are now excellent data showing a beneficial effect on several cardiovascular complications by conventional antihypertensive drugs in those with diastolic blood pressure ≥ 105 mm Hg (Veterans Administration Cooperative Study, 1967, 1979), while the evidence is conflicting in those with pressures between 90 and 104 mm Hg (Kaplan, 1983; Toth & Horwitz 1983) despite claims to the contrary (Hypertension Detection and Follow-up Program Cooperative Group 1979; Australian Therapeutic Trial, 1980).
There is no evidence that treating any level of elevated systolic blood pressure is beneficial.
It must be borne in mind that the majority of these data have been derived from subjects younger than 65 years (Koch-Weser, 1978) so that the effect of hypotensive drugs in the older age-groups regardless of their blood-pressure status was largely unknown until the recent publication of the European Working Party Trial which did show significant benefits in the elderly (Amery et al, 1985).
Recently there has been speculation that the generally disappointing effects of hypotensive drug therapy in mildly hypertensive subjects may result from the deleterious metabolic side-effects of the agents themselves Multiple Risk Factor Intervention Trial Research Group (1982).
In the majority of studies the most frequently used drugs have been thiazide diuretics and beta-blocking agents.
Their potentially adverse effects with particular reference to the diabetic will now be outlined.
Adverse Effects of Antihypertensive Agents
Thiazides have been shown to impair carbohydrate,(Lewis et al, 1976; Ames & Hill, 1982; Murphy et al , 1982; Bengtsson et al , 1984), lipid and lipoprotein metabolism (Goldman et al , 1980; Joos et al , 1980; Grimm et al , 1981), and may result in impotence (Report of Medical Research Council Working Party on Mild to Moderate Hypertension, 1981).
Thiazide diuretic agents might adversely influence carbohydrate metabolism in several ways.
The importance of potassium depletion has been suggested in several studies (Conn, 1965; Gorden, 1973), and in another potassium supplementation was noted to reverse the detrimental effect on carbohydrate metabolism  (Helderman et al, 1983).
In addition, there is some evidence that thiazide diuretic agents reduce tissue sensitivity to insulin (Hicks et al , 1973), accelerate the lack of insulin in the prediabetic subject (Weller & Borondy, 1965) and possibly reduce pancreatic insulin secretion (Shapiro et al , 1961).
It has also been reported that frusemide inhibits glucose transport (Jung & Mookerjee, 1976).
A number of mechanisms have been implicated to account for the adverse effect of thiazide diuretics on lipid metabolism, which include reduced lipoprotein lipase activity secondary to the decrease in insulin action (Grimm et al, 1981).
Changes in plasma volume may be important (Ames & Hill, 1976), although several observations make this rather unlikely (Tarazi et al, 1970; Joos et al , 1980; Grimm et al , 1981).
In addition, thiazide diuretics have been reported to inhibit phosphodiesterase activity (Senft et al , 1966) resulting in elevated cyclic 3, 5-adenosine monophosphate levels which in turn might stimulate lipolysis in fat tissue (Himms-Hagen, 1972).
β-blockers may also adversely influence carbohydrate, lipid and lipoprotein metabolism which appears particularly pronounced with the non-cardioselective agents (Tanaka et al, 1976; Wright et al , 1979; Leren et al , 1980; Day et al , 1982; Veterans Administration Co-operative Study Group on Hypertensive Agents, 1982; Bengtsson et al , 1984).
β-blockade might impair carbohydrate metabolism either as a consequence of direct β-adrenoreceptor blockade or as the result of relatively unopposed α activity, either of which might suppress insulin release.
Indirect evidence of the latter being important is available from studies of the hyperglycaemic effect of clonidine, an α-adrenergic agonist (Hoefke, 1980).
β-blocking agents may adversely influence lipid and lipoprotein levels secondary to alpha; -adrenergic stimulation which may inhibit lipoprotein lipase activity (Day et al, 1982).
In addition, catecholamine levels are elevated during β blockade (Rahn et al , 1978) and studies in vitro have demonstrated that catecholamines inactivate lipoprotein lipase (Ashby et al , 1979).
There has been considerable concern about the use of β-blocking drugs in diabetic patients in connection with hypoglycaemia and the peripheral circulation.
These drugs may aggravate hypoglycaemia (Newman, 1976; Lager et al, 1979), may result in undamped hypertensive surges secondary to hypoglycaemic catecholamine release (McMurty, 1974; Shepherd et al , 1981) and may threaten the peripheral circulation by arteriolar constriction (McSorley & Warren, 1978; Vale & Jeffreys, 1978).
Although symptoms such as tachycardia and tremor are masked, sweating, a predominantly α-mediated response, appears more pronounced during hypoglycaemia with β blockade (Molnar & Read, 1973; Viberti et al, 1978).
Despite such theoretical problems, a clinical study found that β-blocking agents were safe in insulin-treated diabetics (Barnett et al, 1980).
The adverse effect on the peripheral circulation is probably due to α-mediated vasoconstriction in the blood vessels.
In addition, these agents may aggravate cardiac failure, a common complication in the diabetic (Garcia et al , 1974; Kannel & McGee, 1979).
Many of the other hypotensive agents may also have side-effects that may be especially detrimental to the diabetic and these are shown in Table 3.2.
Diet and Blood Pressure
The generally disappointing effects of conventional drug therapy in mild hypertension have resulted in revived interest in non-pharmacological means of lowering blood pressure.
In non-diabetics several individual dietary modifications such as diets low in sodium (MacGregor et al, 1982; Hoffman et al , 1983) and fat (Rao et al , 1981; Puska et al , 1983) while high in potassium (Khaw & Thom, 1982; MacGregor et al , 1982) and fibre (Wright et al , 1979; Rouse et al , 1983) have been shown to lower blood pressure.
Exactly how sodium restriction exerts its hypotensive action and why in only certain people remains unknown.
It has been observed  that sodium restriction tends to be more beneficial in hypertensives who have low plasma renin activity and in whom the aldosterone response to lowering dietary sodium is poor (Vaughan et al, 1973).
The reduction of intravascular fluid volume secondary to sodium restriction may be a relevant factor.
An effect on the endogenous natriuretic hormone which may influence vascular tone via an effect on cellular ATPase, modifying the sodium content of vascular tissue, may be important (De Wardner & MacGregor, 1980).
Table 3.2 Complications of oral hypotensive drugs with reference to their use in diabetic subjects
Likewise, how potassium may influence blood pressure is not clearly understood.
Proposed mechanisms include stimulation of the erythrocyte sodium: potassium pump, alteration in  sodium and volume status, effects on plasma renin, neurogenic mechanisms and an influence on the peripheral vasculature (Tannen, 1985).
Lowering total dietary fat while increasing the percentage of polyunsaturated fat is believed to beneficially influence blood pressures via linoleic acid which is increased by such dietary manipulation.
Linoleic acid is a precursor of prostaglandin synthesis from arachidonic acid.
The resultant prostaglandins may have a natriuretic or renal vasodilatory effect and thereby lower blood pressure (Galli, 1980; Iacono et al, 1981).
Table 3.3 Summary of controlled studies of dietary manipulation on blood pressure in non-diabetic subjects
Dietary fibre may exert an influence on blood pressure due to several mechanisms.
These include an effect on gastric emptying and intestinal transit time, the reduction of intraluminal  pressure and colonic faecal transit, all of which may alter central blood pressure regulation via afferent nerves from the gastrointestinal tract (Anderson, 1981).
The antinatriuretic effect of insulin has also attracted interest (De Fronzo, 1981).
High-fibre diets tend to be associated with lower postprandial insulin concentrations than low-fibre diets (Jenkins et al, 1977).
Additionally, the effect of fibre on other gastrointestinal hormones such as gastric inhibitory polypeptide, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and glucagon may be important, probably through their effect on insulin and its antinatriuretic role (Anderson, 1980).
The effects of such diets individually appear small, which raises the possibility that combining several of these factors may have a more substantial effect.
Indeed, a non-controlled (Dodson & Humphreys, 1981) and a controlled (Beard et al, 1982) trial have shown such a combined diet does lower blood pressure and, importantly, the quantity of antihypertensive medication required for good blood pressure control.
Some of the studies on the effect of dietary manipulation and blood pressure are shown in Table 3.3.
It must be stressed that many other dietary components such as calcium, other divalent ions and trace elements may be equally important with respect to blood pressure (McCarron et al, 1982; Saltman, 1983).
These aforementioned studies were in non-diabetic hypertensive subjects but raised the possibility that similar effects might occur in diabetics.
Recently there has been a reappraisal of general dietary considerations for diabetics on both sides of the Atlantic (Nuttall, 1980; Nutrition Sub-Committee of the British Diabetic Association's Medical Advisory Committee, 1982).
The recommendations currently include an increased quantity of unrefined or complex carbohydrate and cereal fibre with a reduction of total fat and salt.
Such a diet somewhat resembles that of the native Ugandan community where hypertension was exceedingly rare (Orr & Gilks, 1931).
Application of this diet has produced encouraging results in essential hypertensives (Dodson & Humphreys, 1981).
The composition of this combination approach diet compared to that considered a ‘normal’ Western diet is shown in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4 Composition of the modified diet compared to that considered representative of modern western diet
Values for a modern diet in the UK are derived from the National Advisory Commission on Nutrition Education Report (1983) and the Annual Report of the National Food Survey Committee (Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries & Food, 1979).
Reproduced with the permission of the Controller of her Majesty's Stationery Office.
In mildly hypertensive non-insulin-dependent patients a recent controlled study using an intended diet shown in Table 3.4 lowered systolic and diastolic blood pressure, improved glycaemic control and reduced weight during a three-month period (Dodson et al, 1984).
In addition, this diet lowered serum triglyceride levels, increased HDL 2 -cholesterol and in hyperlipidaemic  patients lowered serum cholesterol (Pacy et al , 1984 c).
In an attempt to evaluate the factors possibly responsible for the reduction of blood pressure linear Pearson correlations were determined between changes in blood pressure and several other variables.
Positive correlations were observed between a reduction in the urinary sodium: potassium ratio and urinary sodium excretion with systolic (P<0.001 and <0.03, respectively) and diastolic blood pressure (P<0.001 and <0.01, respectively).
Weight loss was positively correlated with only the reduction of systolic blood pressure (P<0.01).
Multiple regression analysis confirmed that the reduction in the urinary sodium: potassium ratio was most important relating to the decrease of systolic (P < 0.0006) and diastolic blood pressure (P < 0.001)(Dodson et al, 1984).
Blacks had as beneficial a response to the diet as whites (Pacy et al, 1985), although results in Asians were generally disappointing (Dodson et al , 1983).
The blood-pressure-lowering effect of the diet was similar to that of bendrofluazide (10 mg daily), which significantly worsened glycaemic control and tended to elevate total lipid levels in hyperlipidaemic subjects (Pacy et al, 1984a).
Likewise, the dietary hypotensive response was comparable to metoprolol (400 mg daily), which was associated with the onset of intermittent claudication and shortness of breath in two of 25 patients.
In hyperlipidaemic subjects metoprolol tended to increase serum triglyceride levels (Pacy et al, 1984b).
Compliance with the diet appeared satisfactory from studies in diabetics and non-diabetics over at least three months.
In one study analysis of dietary histories in 29 of 50 diabetics revealed that compliance was adequate for unrefined carbohydrate (39 per cent daily energy), fibre (34 g/day) and sodium (100 mmol/day), although dietary fat was higher than intended (33 per cent daily energy)(Pacy et al, 1984c).
More long-term data are scarce, but evidence suggests compliance may be maintained for at least four years with good blood pressure control and improved cardiovascular risk in non-diabetics (Dodson et al, 1982, 1985).
Treatment of the Hypertensive Diabetic
The non-insulin-dependent diabetic
In the light of current data for non-insulin-dependent diabetics without evidence of nephropathy and whose diastolic blood pressure is less than 110 mm Hg, the high-fibre low-fat and low-sodium diet described earlier appears to be the preferred therapy and should be continued for at least three months.
The obese diabetic (Ideal body weight > 120 per cent: Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, 1959) must be encouraged to lose weight as this has been found to have a blood-pressure-lowering effect which may or may not be related to concomitant reduction of dietary sodium (Reisin et al , 1978; Tuck et al , 1981; Fagerberg et al , 1984).
However, it must be borne in mind that work from the non-diabetic population has suggested that only between 30 and 50 per cent of patients are sodium sensitive (Kawasaki et al, 1978).
Therefore it is unlikely that all patients can be expected to respond favourably to such a diet.
It would also appear prudent to encourage increased exercise as preliminary work in non-diabetics shows this may have a beneficial effect on blood-pressure levels in hypertensives (Roman et al, 1981).
Lastly, as part of general health care, it is extremely important to discourage cigarette smoking.
Should these general measures fail after a minimum three-month period the drug of first choice is probably a cardioselective β-blocking agent such as atenolol or metoprolol or alternatively a calcium antagonist such as nifedepine.
The latter agents may not cause abnormalities of either carbohydrate or lipid metabolism (Donnelly & Harrower, 1980; Faergeman et al, 1984; Rodjmark & Andersson, 1984), despite several case reports (Charles et al , 1981; Bhatnagar et al , 1984), and they may have fewer side-effects than cardioselective β-blocking drugs.
If satisfactory control of hypertension is not achieved with dietary modification and one of these agents, then they can be used in combination.
There seems little justification for  the use of thiazides in these patients.
In those with diastolic pressure over 110 mm Hg on repeated measurement the above drug regimen can be initiated concurrently with dietary modification as control of the hypertension is more urgent.
Resistant hypertension poses a problem.
The recently developed angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, captopril and enalapril, possibly have a place here.
They may be effective alone, but there needs to be caution with their introduction, especially enalapril which may cause hypotension when combined with other agents.
Choosing a low dose and avoiding volume depletion will minimise this potential risk.
If these agents alone are not completely successful, they can be combined with other agents such as diuretics but, once again, perhaps thiazides are best avoided in diabetics and frusemide used as an alternative.
We do of course need some good studies on the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in diabetic patients.
Alternatives to these new agents are prazosin which influences pre- and post-load, or hydralazine which influences after-load (Breckenbridge, 1984).
For patients with isolated systolic hypertension perhaps there is only a place for dietary therapy, as although this form of hypertension is associated with increased mortality and morbidity (Kannel et al, 1980), evidence is lacking that drug therapy is beneficial.
It is also worth bearing in mind that data on the benefits of conventional antihypertensive therapy have been derived to a large extent from subjects less than 65 years of age (Koch-Weser, 1978).
Thus in both types of diabetes the threshold for commencing conventional drug therapy should be higher in patients over 65 years of age, although benefit has been shown in older non-diabetics in a recent study (Amery et al, 1985).
The insulin-dependent diabetic
In patients without evidence of nephropathy a similar diet and drug regimen can be used and, if there are features of nephropathy, the inexorable decline of renal function may be slowed by good control of hypertension (Mogensen, 1982; Parving et al, 1983).
It has been suggested that blood pressure should be controlled at as near normotensive levels as possible to achieve maximal benefit.
There are preliminary data showing that high unrefined carbohydrate diets lower serum creatinine levels in those with renal failure so this could be combined with the suggested drug regime (Rivellese et al, 1984).
When renal failure supervenes with sodium and water retention contributing significantly to hypertension, then a diuretic may be particularly useful.
Again there are advantages in choosing frusemide in preference to a thiazide in view of the increased risk of impotence and lipid abnormalities with the latter.
With the decline of renal function it is extremely important to monitor serum electrolytes closely, especially in those on diuretic therapy.
Finally there may be a role for either haemodialysis or continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis, and cadaveric renal transplantation must not be forgotten, although assessment for such treatment can only be undertaken at a few specialist centres.
In the neuropathic diabetic supine hypertension with accompanying postural hypotension is extremely difficult to treat.
Many of these patients will have hypoaldosteronism and in the face of renal sodium loss the diabetic may well be sodium depleted.
In this situation low-sodium diets are contraindicated and a mineralocorticoid may be required.
Fludrocortisone is often used, although such replacement therapy must be closely monitored to prevent further elevation of the blood pressure.
General measures such as the use of elastic tights and elevating the head of the bed to reduce morning postural hypotension may be of benefit.
One should attempt to withhold all conventional hypotensive agents for as long as possible as they will tend to exacerbate the postural hypotension.
In addition, as the natural history of this extremely distressing condition is to improve with time, considerable counselling and encouragement will be required.
Summary
There is now good evidence that diabetics have higher levels of blood pressure, particularly systolic blood pressure, than age- and sex-matched non-diabetic subjects.
Hypertension is prevalent, with systolic hypertension appearing the most frequent in non-insulin-dependent diabetics, possibly reflecting the frequency of obesity in this group.
Evidence for increased diastolic hypertension is less strong and is probably related to renal dysfunction.
As in the non-diabetic, hypertension is more common in black compared to white and Asian diabetics.
It is likely that hypertension adversely affects overall morbidity and mortality in diabetes and has deleterious effects on the more specific diabetic complications.
However, only treatment of hypertension in diabetics with nephropathy has been shown to improve prognosis, although this statement is based on very few patients.
High unrefined carbohydrate, high-fibre, low-fat and low-sodium diets may be the initial treatment of the diabetic with mild hypertension in whom thiazide diuretic agents are relatively contraindicated.
Cardioselective β-blocking drugs appear the drugs of choice in the hypertensive diabetic in whom dietary therapy has failed or who has more severe hypertension, although there may be an important role for the calcium antagonists.
However, a great deal more work in both the short and long term is required before the most appropriate hypotensive regimen in diabetes mellitus can be formulated.
Lipids, Lipoproteins and Diabetes Mellitus
P.M. Dodson
Dr Paul M. Dodson qualified at St. Bartholomew's Hospital, London, in 1974.
He spent his early years in training at Southampton General Hospital and the Royal Berkshire Hospital, Reading.
He returned to St Bartholomew's and Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, in 1979 to research hyperlipidaemias that led to his MD.
He moved to Dudley Road Hospital, Birmingham, as Senior Registrar in Medicine and Diabetes in 1982 and his current research interests include nutrition in hypertension, diabetes mellitus, lipid metabolism and retinovascular disease.
Introduction
Although microvascular disease is the specific lesion usually associated with diabetes mellitus, atherosclerosis, particularly of the coronary vessels, accounts for the major morbidity and mortality in diabetic patients.
The evidence for this is derived from reported clinical and autopsy data in which macrovascular disease accounts for about 75 per cent of all deaths in diabetics, compared to approximately 50 per cent in the non-diabetic population (Ganda, 1980).
Atherosclerosis appears to proceed at a more rapid rate and is more extensive in the diabetic (Crall & Roberts, 1978), but the process does not differ in its morphological appearance nor in its anatomical distribution compared to the non-diabetic (Strandness et al, 1964; Robertson & Strong, 1968).
This may be of considerable importance, for in the non-diabetic there are long-established relationships between lipid and lipoprotein levels and macrovascular disease (Gordon et al, 1981; Miller et al , 1981).
Similar relationships may be of equal importance in the diabetic subject.
This chapter will therefore examine the relationships between serum lipids and vascular disease in the non-diabetic and the diabetic, together with an outline of lipid metabolism in diabetic patients.
Other factors well known to have a prominent effect on serum lipid levels, for example, obesity, diabetic control, drug therapy, alcohol consumption and diet, will be discussed.
Lipid Metabolism
The major large lipid molecules of plasma — triglycerides, cholesterol, cholesterol esters and phospholipids — are predominantly transported by stable complex water-soluble macromolecules, designated lipoproteins.
These are made  up of a core of non-polar lipids (triglyceride and cholesterol esters) with polar lipids (phospholipids, free cholesterol and apoproteins) located on the outer part of the macromolecules (Galton, et al, 1982).
Free fatty acids, which are bound to albumin, are quantitatively less important than the lipoproteins but may be very significant in the context of poorly controlled diabetes with accumulation and production of ketone bodies.
The main classes of lipoprotein which can be identified by ultracentrifugation are chylomicra, very low density lipoprotein (VLDL), low density lipoprotein (LDL), intermediate density lipoprotein (IDL) and high density lipoprotein (HDL).
The composition of these are shown in Table 4.1.
The apoprotein components of the lipoproteins are also demonstrated in view of the recent realisation of their importance in lipid metabolism.
Table 4.1 Major lipoprotein classes: composition and physical characteristics
Figure 4.1 shows a scheme of the metabolism of lipoproteins and the important regulatory enzymes.
The main triglyceride-carrying lipoproteins are secreted by the small intestine and liver as exogenous chylomicra and endogenous VLDL.
These are delipidated in peripheral tissues principally by the action of lipoprotein lipase which is secreted by adipose and muscle tissues and attached to the capillary endothelium.
Important constituents of VLDL and chylomicra are three apolipoproteins, namely, apo- C II, C III 1 and C III 2, which may be either inhibitory (C III 1 and C III 2) or an obligate activator (C II) of lipoprotein lipase (Galton et al, 1982).
Degradation of VLDL produces remnant particles (IDL) which undergo further delipidation to yield LDL.
LDL, the major cholesterol-containing lipoprotein, is therefore almost exclusively derived from endogenous metabolism of VLDL.
LDL is catabolised by peripheral tissues containing high-affinity cell-surface receptors which bind this lipoprotein, the specificity probably directed to the apo-B component of LDL (Goldstein and Brown, 1974).
This process is followed by endocytosis and lysosomal breakdown of LDL.
Exogenous cholesterol released inside the cell represses 3-hydroxy 3-methyl glutaryl co-enzyme A (HMG/ COA) reductase and there is an increase in the intracellular esterification of cholesterol  (Goldstein and Brown, 1977).
This supply of cholesterol to the cell by LDL produces feedback inhibition of intracellular cholesterol synthesis by repression of the rate-limiting enzyme.
During the breakdown of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins in plasma, the C-apoproteins are lost from the particle and associate with HDL which may act as a reservoir for them.
Figure 4.1.
A scheme for the metabolism of  lipoproteins and some of their regulatory enzymes.
Abbreviations: TG, triglyceride; FFA, free fatty acid; VLD, very low density lipoprotein; HLD, high density lipoprotein; αGP,sn -glycerol 3-phosphate.
Regulatory enzymes: 1, hexokinase-phosphofructokinase; 2, hormone-sensitive triglyceride lipase; 3, lipoprotein lipase; 4, 3-hydroxy 3-methyl glutaryl coenzyme A reductase.
Figure adapted from that of Galton et al(1982).
Reproduced by permission of John Wiley.
HDL is mainly synthesised in the intestine and liver.
HDL of hepatic origin is secreted as a discoidal particle containing mostly phospholipids.
The discoidal HDL picks up free cholesterol from the cell membranes and, possibly, from remnant particles and LDL.
The lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase (LCAT) system is active in this process and generates cholesterol esters in the HDL and converts them into a spherical shape.
A mature spherical HDL particle is thus formed after acquiring apo-A particles from intestinal HDL.
Therefore, HDL may be responsible for the return of cholesterol from the periphery to the liver where mature HDL particles are recognised by hepatocyte receptors, leading to uptake and finally degradation for biliary excretion of cholesterol (Tall & Small, 1978).
There are at least two major sub-fractions of mature HDL, HDL 2 and HDL 3 .
It is thought that the small cholesteryl ester-poor HDL 3 particles are converted to HDL 2 as they acquire cholesterol and later apolipoprotein E, and that it is the HDL 2 which may release cholesterol in the liver (Rothblat & Phillips, 1982; Gordon et al, 1983).
It is also possible that apoproteins and phospholipids resulting from the breakdown of VLDL to LDL transfer to HDL 3 to form a particle resembling HDL 2 (Patsch et al, 1978; Tall, 1979).
A description will now be given of the aetiological theories and relationships that lipids and lipoprotein levels may have with atherosclerosis.
Lipids and Atherosclerosis
The pathognomonic lesion of atherosclerosis is the fibrous plaque which is probably due to proliferation of the smooth muscle cell in the arterial wall following an initial breach in the arterial intima (Ross & Glomset, 1976; Ross & Marker, 1976).
This event, according to Ross and co-workers, is followed by deposition of intra-cellular and extracellular lipid and accumulation of other components, including collagen (Ross & Glomset, 1976; Ross & Marker, 1976).
The exact cause of the initial breach in the intima is still not identified.
The disruption of the endothelial barriers occurs experimentally with most forms of injury, including chemical, mechanical and immune.
Several theories of the factors causing smooth muscle cell proliferation have been made.
These include decline of the negative feedback of ageing stem cells of the arterial media thus allowing more rapid replication (Martin et al, 1975; Haylick, 1976), and an  as yet unidentified platelet factor formed during the platelet-release reaction (Ganda, 1980).
Finally, LDL has been implicated both as a factor responsible for the initial breach and in the increased smooth muscle cell proliferation (Ross & Marker, 1976; Small, 1977).
The suggestion that LDL may be having a primary effect is supported by the finding of premature atherosclerosis in the presence of most primary hyperlipidaemia, in particular familial hypercholesterolaemia, in which elevated LDL levels are characteristically found.
Other evidence suggesting that LDL is important is that LDL enters the arterial intima from plasma at rates directly related to its plasma concentration (Niehaus et al, 1977; Nicoll et al , 1981) and accumulates particularly in atheromatous regions (Nicoll et al , 1981).
Endothelial injury increases this process and in some experiments can even be initiated by raised serum lipids, including LDL (Ross & Marker, 1976).
Other direct mechanisms may also be operative, as the response of platelets to aggregating agents is enhanced in the presence of media rich cholesterol (Shattil et al, 1975), and might promote thrombotic processes underlying atherosclerosis.
However, other compelling evidence that serum lipids and lipoproteins are causal or primary in the development of atherosclerosis derives from prospective clinical studies in the non-diabetic population and these will be described briefly.
Many studies have shown a relationship between serum cholesterol levels and ischaemic heart disease (Keys, 1970; Kannel et al, 1971; Wilhelmsen et al , 1973; Rosenman et al , 1976; Kannel et al , 1979), and this relationship holds even within the normal range of serum cholesterol concentration.
This is well demonstrated in the 14-year prospective Framingham Study, for individuals younger than 50 years the risk of coronary heart disease increased over 5-fold with increasing serum cholesterol levels from 4.6–8.7 mmol/l (Kannel et al, 1979).
Other reports have demonstrated an even stronger positive association with plasma LDL cholesterol which is the main cholesterol-carrying lipoprotein (Castelli et al, 1977; Gordon et al , 1977b).
A further test of the hypothesis that increased serum cholesterol and LDL levels are causative is that cholesterol lowering should reduce the incidence of ischaemic heart disease.
The recent Lipid Research Clinics primary prevention programme (Lipid Research Clinics Program, 1984), in support of other studies (Dayton et al, 1969; Committee of Principal Investigators, 1978) has demonstrated a significant reduction in the incidence of all coronary artery disease events among patients in whom serum cholesterol was effectively reduced using a combination of diet and cholestyramine.
In contrast, levels of HDL tend to show an inverse relationship with the incidence of coronary artery disease, and hence the name, the protective lipoprotein (Castelli et al, 1977; Gordon et al , 1977b; Miller et al , 1977a).
The mechanism of the protective function may be as follows: cholesterol is mobilised from the arterial wall by HDL 3 which is converted to HDL 2 by this process of cholesterol enrichment.
Another aspect of the protective function for HDL is possibly reduction of LDL uptake by competitive binding with the LDL receptor, thereby reducing the cholesterol supply to the endothelial cell (Miller et al, 1977 b).
These associations have also been confirmed in angiographic studies, as the severity of coronary artery disease increases with increasing LDL and with decreasing HDL levels (Tan et al, 1980; Miller et al , 1981).
The protective effect of HDL against atheroma formation is believed to be due to the HDL 2 subfraction (Miller et al, 1981).
The role of serum triglyceride remains controversial.
Several studies have reported a positive association with ischaemic heart disease, but after correction for the effect of cholesterol serum triglyceride does not appear to be an independent risk factor (Hulley et al, 1980).
Also, these studies did not take into account HDL levels, which are well known to be inversely related to serum triglyceride concentrations (Hulley et al, 1980).
Another site of damage in diabetes may be the  microcirculation which might be important in disease of the myocardium in diabetic subjects.
Little data are currently available on serum lipid and lipoprotein levels in relation to microvascular disease, although recent studies in microcirculation in sites other than the myocardium suggest that hyperlipidaemia and increasing LDL levels may be implicated (Dodson et al, 1981a, 1982).
There are abundant data to support causal associations between serum cholesterol and LDL with macrovascular disease in the non-diabetic (Lewis, 1983).
In view of the similarity of atherogenesis in the diabetic and non-diabetic (Strandness et al, 1964; Robertson & Strong, 1968) it is likely that similar relationships apply in diabetic subjects, although the evidence that this is true is not so strong.
Lipid Levels in Diabetes Mellitus
Table 4.2 Major abnormalities in circulating lipids found in poorly controlled or newly diagnosed diabetics
A number of studies have reported that hypertriglyceridaemia and hypercholesterolaemia are common in diabetes mellitus.
A summary of the major abnormalities of circulating lipid and lipoproteins found according to the type of diabetes are shown in Table 4.2.
Despite extensive research, the exact prevalence of hyperlipidaemia has not been determined due to methodological differences.
The major problems include the definition of the normal range for fasting cholesterol and triglyceride, failure to divide diabetics into appropriate insulin- or non-insulin-dependent categories, and also the inclusion of newly diagnosed diabetics together with those with long-established disease.
Albrink stated that ‘hypertriglyceridaemia is the hyperlipidaemia par excellence of the diabetic’(Albrink, 1974).
Most studies support this statement with prevalence rates for hypertriglyceridaemia ranging from 20–50 per cent,(New et al , 1963; Wilson et al , 1970b; Hayes, 1972; Albrink, 1974; Garcia et al , 1974; Kaufman et al ; 1975; Chase & Glasgow, 1976; Nikkila &  Hormila, 1978; Mancini et al , 1980; Lisch & Sailer, 1981; Pacy et al , 1985), depending on type of diabetes, diabetic control, age, sex, ethnic origin and nutritional status (in particular , fat and alcohol intake).
For example, in the large Framingham population (Garcia et al , 1974), 239 diabetics, of equal sex distribution and age range 30–62 years, were studied prospectively.
Thirty-nine per cent of these were insulin treated, 39 per cent were managed on oral hypoglycaemic agents and 22 per cent were not receiving treatment or following a diabetic diet.
In this group, 38 per cent of males and 27 per cent of females demonstrated hypertriglyceridaemia.
Interestingly, a more marked sex difference was noted for hypercholesterolaemia with prevalence rates in females at 48 per cent and in males 28 per cent.
All these prevalence rates were strikingly increased when compared to matched non-diabetic controls except that of hypercholesterolaemia in males.
Similar findings to these have also been reported in true Type 1 (insulin-dependent) diabetes (Kaufman et al, 1975).
One recent study has also defined the types of hyperlipidaemia by ultracentrifugation and classified according to the Fredrickson types in a group of 86 Type 2 diabetics and a control group.
(Mancini et al, 1980).
Hypertriglyceridaemia was well represented with a marked increase in Type 2b, the type with combined hyperlipidaemia, at 24 per cent compared to 2 per cent in the control group.
Type 4 hyperlipidaemia, representing mainly hypertriglyceridaemia, was also increased at 18 per cent in the diabetics compared to 10 per cent in controls.
Although other types of hyperlipidaemia were not identified in this study, primary hyperlipidaemia, for example, Type 5 characterised by gross increase of the triglyceride-rich lipoprotein, are well documented to occur with diabetes mellitus (Bagdade et al , 1967; Glueck, 1977).
Other primary familial hyperlipidaemias may also occur (Brunzell et al, 1975).
The prevalence rate of hypercholesterolaemia in diabetics has been reported to be similar to the non-diabetic population, that is from 8 per cent to as high as 52 per cent(Hayes, 1972).
However, in the majority of studies a high prevalence rate of hypercholesterolaemia has been found (New et al, 1963; Wilson et al , 1970b; Chase & Glasgow, 1976; Mancini et al , 1980; Sosenko et al , 1980; Yano et al , 1982; Pacy et al , 1985).
Clinical factors relating to hypercholesterolaemia are similar to those for hypertriglyceridaemia and include obesity, poor diabetic control, increasing age, sex and type of diabetes.
It should be noted that there is some evidence from two studies that mean levels of serum cholesterol are higher in subjects with just impaired glucose tolerance than age-matched controls (Ostrander et al, 1980; Yano et al , 1982).
This raises the possibility that abnormalities may even predate the onset of overt diabetes, and might date from adolescence or before (Tzagournis et al, 1968; Florey et al , 1976; Voors et al , 1981).
Studies are therefore mostly in agreement that hypercholesterolaemia and hypertriglyceridaemia are more prevalent in both Type I and 2 diabetic subjects, especially at diagnosis of diabetes.
But the degree of diabetic control appears very important, as the best controlled diabetics may have lipid levels similar to non-diabetics (Wolff & Salt, 1958; Nikkila & Hormila 1978), whereas increasingly poor control may be associated with significant increases in serum lipids and lipoprotein levels (Sosenko et al, 1980).
Diabetic treatment, particularly in Type 2 patients, may also have a profound effect.
For example, higher levels of serum lipids are often associated with diabetic treatment of diet either alone or in combination with an oral hypoglycaemic agent when compared to those on insulin treatment (Lisch & Sailer, 1981).
Likewise obesity appears to be an important determinant, with a trend for higher triglyceride levels to be observed in the more obese diabetic subjects (Braunsteiner et al, 1966; Nikkila & Hormila, 1978).
Recent attention has also been given to the diabetic with regard to ethnic differences in serum lipid levels which have been observed in the non-diabetic population.
It appears that black males and females of West Indian origin  have a strikingly lower prevalence of both hypercholesterolaemia and hypertriglyceridaemia compared to those of Asian or European extract (Pacy et al, 1985).
These differences might, of course, partly contribute to the dissimilar patterns of cardiovascular disease seen in different ethnic groups (Cruickshank et al , 1980).
Lipoprotein Levels in Diabetes Mellitus
Several studies have reported that abnormal lipoprotein levels frequently accompany diabetes mellitus (Hayes, 1972; Garcia et al, 1974; Chase & Glasgow, 1976; Nikkila & Hormila, 1978; Mancini et al , 1980; Lisch & Sailer, 1981; Steiner, 1981).
Abnormalities that may occur in poorly or newly diagnosed diabetes are shown in Table 4.2; these include increased VLDL and LDL levels in all types of diabetes as already mentioned, but with good diabetic control both these abnormalities may completely resolve (Nikkila & Hormila, 1978; Lisch & Sailer, 1981).
With regard to HDL levels, in general diabetic women have lower HDL-cholesterol levels than diabetic men when compared with non-diabetic controls (Gordon et al, 1977 a; Beach et al , 1979).
However, there are differences between Type I and 2 diabetes: HDL levels are generally either normal or low in Type 2 diabetes (Lopes-Virella et al, 1977; Kennedy et al , 1978; Reckless et al , 1978; Taylor et al , 1981; Rendel et al , 1982): Studies on the subfractions have shown either an increase in the level of the HDL 3 subfraction (Durrington, 1982), or a reduction in HDL 2 .
Reduced lipoprotein lipase activity may give rise to low HDL levels and hypertriglyceridaemia in this type of diabetes.
Other factors which may relate to lower HDL levels include poor diabetic control, increasing age, obesity, an inverse relationship to serum triglycerides, androgens, smoking and, although controversial, a high carbohydrate dietary intake (Ganda, 1980).
Sulphonylurea therapy commonly instituted in diabetic subjects has also been implicated (Calvert et al, 1978), but more recently refuted (Taylor et al , 1982).
In contrast, HDL levels may be elevated or normal in Type I diabetic subjects (Garcia et al, 1974; Mattock et al , 1979; Lopes-Virella et al , 1983).
The reason for an increase may be related to increased VLDL catabolism, which in turn produces the apoproteins and lipids forming an integral part of HDL.
With regard to HDL subfractions in insulin-dependent diabetics, data are conflicting but some studies have demonstrated a significant increase in HDL3 in males but not in females (Mattock et al, 1980).
Other factors independent of diabetes which may elevate HDL levels in a particular patient include moderate alcohol intake (Hulley et al, 1979), exercise (Hartung et al , 1980), ethnic origin (Pacy et al , 1985) and oestrogens (Bradley et al , 1978).
A reduction of HDL levels may also be caused by hypolipidaemic therapy, in particular probucol, and β-blocking drug therapy used in the treatment of hypertension (Dodson, 1982a).
Aetiology of Raised Triglyceride and VLDL Levels in Diabetes Mellitus
Insulin plays a crucial role in triglyceride and VLDL metabolism, particularly as the clearing enzyme lipoprotein lipase is dependent on insulin for its activity (Brunzell & Bierman, 1978).
In insulin-deficiency states (as in Type I diabetes) lipoprotein lipase activity, estimated by post-heparin lipolytic activity, may be impaired with resultant hypertriglyceridaemia.
If severe, this may result in the diabetic lipaemia that is particularly seen in poorly controlled or newly diagnosed diabetics (Bagdade et al, 1967).
Restoration to normal circulating insulin levels promptly restores enzyme activity with a decrease in serum triglycerides (Kissebah et al, 1974).
The aetiology of hypertriglyceridaemia in Type I diabetics subsequently controlled and established on insulin is less clear but would appear to centre round the control and activity of lipoprotein lipase.
Some studies have demonstrated no deficiency in lipoprotein lipase activity (Jones et al, 1966; Nikkila & Hormila, 1978), while others have suggested that there may be a relative deficiency of activity on prolonged stimulation with heparin infusion (Brunzell et al , 1973).
It is therefore possible that subtle abnormalities of lipoprotein lipase activity may occur.
It is probable that in most hypertriglyceridaemic insulin-dependent patients, the main defect is at the lipoprotein lipase level and hence there is a clearance defect.
A contributory factor in the mechanism of diabetic hypertriglyceridaemia may be increased free fatty acid turnover which is consistently found in uncontrolled diabetes (Lewis et al, 1972).
As free fatty acids are the precursors of synthesis of triglyceride for incorporation into VLDL in the liver, it is not surprising that VLDL-triglyceride turnover may be increased in diabetics (Nikkila & Kekki, 1973).
This may therefore give rise to increased endogenous triglyceride synthesis and release in the form of VLDL.
This component of overproduction may therefore be an additional aetiology to that of the clearance defect described above.
Some diabetics may also have underlying familial forms of hypertriglyceridaemia per se (Brunzell et al, 1979).
In contrast, in Type 2 diabetes, lipoprotein lipase activity is relatively intact (Nikkila et al, 1977) but overproduction of VLDL is the most likely cause of the hypertriglyceridaemia.
The explanation for this may be that free fatty acids are released from adipose tissue in the presence of insulin resistance, and in the presence of increased circulating insulin levels an increase in hepatic synthesis of triglyceride will tend to occur, especially if the liver retains normal insulin sensitivity (Topping & Mayes, 1972; Kissebah et al, 1974).
This will lead to enhanced VLDL formation and release.
The situation may therefore be one of predominantly increased production of VLDL; however, it is also likely that a clearance defect is operative, as the rate of disappearance of intravenous Intralipid was reduced in a study of Type 2 diabetics, possibly due to low fatty acid incorporation into adipose tissue (Lewis et al, 1972).
The relative importance of increased secretion and/or impaired catabolism of circulating triglyceride in causing diabetic lipaemia has yet to be determined.
However, it is probable that varying degrees of impairment of peripheral uptake of triglyceride interact with enhanced, normal or decreased secretion of VLDL to produce the wide range of lipid levels observed in untreated diabetes.
More recent research has identified structural abnormalities in the composition of VLDL in patients with hypertriglyceridaemia.
These have consisted of altered ratios of the ‘modulator’ C-apolipoproteins found in VLDL.
The obligate activator apo-C II has been shown to result in poor activation of lipoprotein lipase in vitro when present in very low or excess amounts in VLDL.
Excess of Apo-C III 2 has also been demonstrated in diabetic subjects with severe hypertriglyceridaemia (Holdsworth et al, 1982).
Catabolism of VLDL by lipoprotein lipase is impaired in vitro with this C-apoprotein abnormality and may therefore produce a clearance defect in vivo .
Further research is needed in this area and it is possible that important abnormalities in the ‘modulating’ apoproteins may be found.
Aetiology of Raised Cholesterol and LDL Levels in Diabetes Mellitus
Cholesterol in the blood is mainly transported by LDL, and attention must therefore be focussed on LDL metabolism.
The production of increased LDL levels is probably by three major mechanisms.
The first is the suggestion of an absolute increase in LDL synthesis (Kissebah et al, 1976), which may be corrected by improved diabetic control (Bennion & Grundy, 1977).
The second mechanism may be through the effect of insulin which actually may increase the number of LDL receptors at a cellular level (Chait et al, 1978).
Therefore in insulin-deficient states a decrease in receptor numbers would be expected with consequent delay in LDL clearance.
The third mechanism is now well documented in vitro and involves non-enzymatic glycosylation  of apoprotein B of LDL (Gonen et al, 1981; Kim & Kurup, 1982; Witzum et al , 1982).
A 2- to 3-fold increase in the amount of glucose bound to lysine of apoprotein B has been demonstrated in the serum of diabetic subjects.
This finding may be important, since it is known that chemical modification of lysine amino groups of the apoprotein may interfere with the specific LDL receptor binding and hence clearance of LDL (Gonen et al, 1981; Kim & Kurup, 1982; Witzum et al , 1982).
An interesting finding which may also be relevant is that there have been reports of a triglyceride-enriched LDL present in diabetics, regardless of type and treatment (Schonfeld et al, 1974; Mancini et al , 1980).
The mechanism and pathophysiological significance of this abnormality remain unclear, but it may be a remnant particle accumulation which might in itself be atherogenic (e.g., like LDL).
Other factors, which might be contributory to hypercholesterolaemia in diabetics, include increased VLDL levels which contain a small amount of cholesterol, and a diet, high in total and saturated fat, that was previously employed in the treatment of diabetes.
Important Factors Influencing Lipid Levels
Diabetic control
A number of studies have suggested that good glycaemic control in diabetes may reverse a number of the lipid and lipoprotein abnormalities.
Hayes, in 1972, reanalysed lipid levels after short-term introduction of diabetic therapy.
Good glycaemic control produced a reduction in the prevalence of hypercholesterolaemia from 52–12.5 per cent with a similar decrease in hypertriglyceridaemia (50–17.9 per cent).
Longer term analysis still showed a reduction in the prevalence rates, but it was not as impressive.
Other later short-term studies have confirmed these findings (Tamborlane, 1979; Dunn et al, 198 1), and deterioration of glycaemic control has also been shown to elevate lipid and lipoprotein levels (Sosenko et al , 1980; Lopes-Virella et al , 1981).
Generally, the effect on triglyceride metabolism of excellent diabetic control is more profound than it is on cholesterol and LDL.
Therefore, some authors have suggested that plasma lipid levels are a further test of diabetic control, and if abnormal levels are detected careful attention should be paid to improving blood glucose control.
Dietary effects
Dietary therapy has long been the cornerstone of diabetic management.
The modern diabetic diet consists of high unrefined carbohydrate, and fibre, with a low fat content.
Many studies have now shown that this sort of regimen improves total serum cholesterol and LDL levels in both insulin-dependent and non-insulin-dependent diabetics in the short and long term (Simpson et al, 1979a, b; Dodson et al , 1981b).
If more viscous fibres are used (e.g., guar gum preparations), more marked changes in serum cholesterol levels may be seen (Dodson et al, 1981b; Aro et al , 1981).
Serum triglyceride levels are generally unaltered in both short- and long-term studies (Dodson et al, 1985), providing unrefined carbohydrate is used, as opposed to refined carbohydrate which has been shown to be hypertriglyceridaemic in some studies (Reaven, 1980).
Recent studies of hyperlipidaemic diabetics treated with a high-fibre unrefined carbohydrate and low-fat content diet have demonstrated a significant reduction in both cholesterol and triglyceride levels on this type of diet (Pacy et al, 1984a).
The situation with regard to HDL and its subfractions is unclear.
Some short-term studies of the diabetic diet have shown either a reduction of HDL cholesterol (Rivellese et al, 1980; Simpson et al , 1981), no effect (Dodson et al , 1984) or significant elevations (Dodson et al , 1981 b).
Data on HDL 2 are more scanty but it would appear that there may be an elevation of this subfraction in the longer term in diabetics on a dietary regimen similar to that currently  recommended by the British Diabetic Association (Pacy et al, 1984 c).
The exact mechanisms of these effects are not entirely clear but are probably multifactorial and related to changes in improved diabetic control, dietary fat intake, and weight reduction.
It would therefore appear that nutritional modifications in themselves have an important effect on serum lipids and lipoproteins.
The current recommended diabetic dietary regimen appears to result in a reduction in lipid cardiovascular risk.
Alcohol intake, serum lipids and obesity
Alcohol may have several effects on serum lipids.
These include enhancement of alimentary lipaemia if a meal is preceded by alcohol (Wilson et al, 1970a), and chronic alcohol-related hyperlipidaemia in susceptible individuals.
The main mechanism of these effects is probably increased incorporation of both dietary and endogenous fatty acids into VLDL by the small intestine (Lewis, 1976).
Alcohol may also affect cholesterol metabolism by decreasing catabolism to bile acids (Lefevre et al, 1972).
The most frequent effect of excess alcohol intake on serum lipids is elevation of triglyceride levels.
Severe lipaemia due to chronic alcohol abuse may result in recurrent attacks of pancreatitis and diabetes mellitus.
In this situation there may be a familial hyperlipidaemia, the expression of which is heightened by alcohol ingestion or poor diabetic control.
Obesity is a common finding, particularly in Type 2 diabetes.
Excess alcohol intake tends to contribute to obesity with increased VLDL production and an associated reduction of HDL levels.
Antihypertensive and other drug therapy
There has been recent concern with regard to the precipitation and aggravation of diabetes mellitus by thiazide diuretics (Murphy et al, 1982), and β-adrenoreceptor blocking agents and others used in the treatment of hypertension.
These drugs may also adversely affect serum lipids and lipoproteins.
A lowering of HDL-cholesterol, with elevation of serum cholesterol and triglyceride, has been well documented in non-diabetics (Goldman et al, 1980), but little studied in the diabetic.
However, it would appear that serum triglyceride levels are significantly increased by thiazide diuretics in normolipaemic Type 2 diabetics, whereas in those formerly hyperlipidaemic there is only a minor increase (Gill et al, 1984; Pacy et al , 1984 a).
, B-blocking agents have been associated with similar effects (Dodson, 1982; Pacy et al, 1984b), but HDL-cholesterol levels were not affected by either group of drugs in diabetic subjects (Dodson, 1982; Pacy et al , 1984 b).
Other therapeutic agents well known to adversely affect serum lipid levels include oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives, androgens, and moderate dosage of corticosteroid therapy.
Lipids Levels, Diabetes Mellitus and Atherosclerosis
Several studies have addressed possible relationships between macrovascular disease and serum lipids and lipoproteins but, whatever the contribution serum lipids make to macrovascular disease, many other interrelating factors have to be considered.
Even so, using multivariate analysis to adjust for many of these, including cigarette smoking, sex, duration of diabetes, hypertension and obesity, the Framingham investigators concluded that all these are insufficient to account for the excess incidence of coronary heart disease, particularly in female diabetics (Garcia et al , 1974).
However, as in the non-diabetic, data are available suggesting a link between serum lipids and, in particular, coronary heart disease.
A possible role for triglyceride in the pathogenesis of macrovascular disease of diabetes mellitus was postulated by Albrink in 1963 in a retrospective study of 139 patients (Albrink et al, 1963).
He contrasted the lower plasma triglyceride levels and less evidence of atherosclerosis observed in the 1930s, with the higher levels of these features in the 1950s.
Further evidence  suggesting a positive link has been demonstrated in other cross-sectional studies (New et al, 1963; Ahuja et al , 1969; Santen et al , 1972; Albrink, 1974; Lamda et al , 1974; Reckless et al , 1978; Seviour et al , 1985).
New found that fasting triglyceride levels were significantly higher in diabetics aged between 31–50 years with complications compared to those without, although no such relationship was observed in diabetics over 50 years of age (New et al, 1963).
No association was found with cholesterol levels, but a distinction was made between macrovascular and microvascular complications in this study.
Similar findings were recorded by Santen, who compared lipid levels in 52 diabetics with macrovascular disease, and a well age- and sex-matched normotensive control population (Santen et al, 1972).
The mean fasting triglyceride and cholesterol levels in the diabetic macrovascular disease group were significantly higher than controls in the 30–59 age-group.
In those aged 60–69 years similar trends were observed only for fasting triglyceride.
The effect of obesity was considered but, although mean levels of triglyceride were increased by 28 per cent in obese subjects, the levels were still increased in lean diabetics with macrovascular disease compared to lean controls.
Albrink demonstrated a similar association in a subsequent study, with 82 per cent of diabetics greater than 50 years of age with clinically apparent atherosclerosis having triglyceride levels greater than 1.7 mmol/l compared to 50 per cent of those without atherosclerosis (Albrink, 1974).
In addition, several studies in diabetics have suggested that raised serum cholesterol levels are also associated with the presence of macrovascular disease.
Lamda found that 68.2 per cent of diabetics had cholesterol levels greater than 6.5 mmol/l and, of the 23 diabetics with cholesterol levels above 7.75 mmol/l, 87 per cent had cardiovascular complications (Lamda et al, 1974).
Reckless reported a large series of 154 diabetics who were examined for the presence of macrovascular complications with relation to actual lipoprotein levels (Reckless et al, 1978).
Clinical evidence of vascular disease was found in 38.3 per cent of patients and 30 per cent were hyperlipidaemic.
Vascular disease was more common in those with higher concentrations of cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL and VLDL, and was less prevalent in those with higher HDL levels.
In insulin-dependent patients and all male patients, cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol were positively associated with vascular disease but there was no inverse relationship with HDL.
In the non-insulin-dependent diabetics and in all females, a strong inverse relationship was noted with HDL cholesterol.
A weak positive association was only demonstrated with serum triglyceride, VLDL-triglyceride and LDL in females.
A more recent study in a small number of patients has emphasised these sex differences (Seviour et al, 1985).
In 16 female Type 2 diabetic patients with clinically overt macrovascular disease, significantly higher serum triglyceride and lower total HDL-cholesterol levels were shown compared to those without macrovascular disease but who were well matched for age, duration of diabetes, weight and glycaemic control.
Interestingly, HDL 2 subfraction levels were also studied with mean levels 79 per cent lower in those with macrovascular disease.
Although these cross-sectional studies suggest a similar positive relationship as in the non-diabetic between coronary heart disease and increasing serum cholesterol, triglyceride, VLDL and LDL levels, and possibly a negative association with HDL, confirmation of their contribution should be sought from prospective studies.
The Framingham Study, in 1974, reported a 16-year follow-up of diabetic patients but did not include measurement of HDL or LDL cholesterol.
The subsequent Framingham Study in 1977 reported a shorter term follow-up and included serum lipids and lipoproteins in a multivariate analysis in a total cohort of 4939 subjects (Garcia et al, 1974).
However, only 10.4 per cent of these were diabetic.
A separate multivariate analysis of diabetics was not reported but, using standardised logistic regression  coefficients for incidence of coronary heart disease, strong relationships were demonstrated in the whole group, as shown in Table 4.3.
LDL-cholesterol levels were positively associated with coronary heart disease in both women and men, although this effect was stronger in men.
Both sexes also demonstrated a strong negative relationship with HDL-cholesterol.
However, serum triglyceride levels did not prove to be a significant factor for coronary heart disease in this multivariate analysis and this is probably because of the correction made for the inverse relationship between triglycerides and HDL.
Thus in the Framingham Study, triglycerides do not appear to be an independent risk factor.
This has also been supported by observations in Japanese and Hawaiian men (Chung et al, 1969), and is consistent with the low rate of macrovascular disease found in Pima Indians (Ingelfinger et al , 1976) and Bantu diabetics (Shapiro et al , 1973), in both of whom hypertriglyceridaemia is extremely common.
Prospective studies have also been performed in subjects with impaired glucose intolerance.
In both the Whitehall and Hawaiian Studies (Fuller et al, 1980; Yano et al , 1982), increasing serum cholesterol levels carried a higher coronary disease mortality but multivariate analysis did not demonstrate serum cholesterol as an independent risk factor in either report.
Table 4.3 Multivariate analysis of serum lipid and lipoprotein levels, for the incidence of coronary heart disease in the Framington Study, 1977
It would therefore appear that, as in the non-diabetic, consistent evidence points to serum cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol as positive risk factors for coronary heart disease in the diabetic.
HDL-cholesterol may also be a predictor with an inverse relationship, particularly in female diabetic subjects.
Therefore, part of the explanation for diabetes mellitus conferring an increased incidence of vascular complications may be the adverse effects of diabetes on serum lipid and lipoprotein levels.
These conclusions are probably most valid for the female Type 2 diabetic subject, in whom it is interesting to speculate that serum lipid levels may have been towards the upper end of the normal distribution even in adolescence.
Thus, by the time of diagnosis of diabetes in middle age, these subjects may have already had 30 years or more of exposure to these atherogenic factors (Jarrett, 1984).
Future clinical research will no doubt give us further insight into the role of lipid abnormalities in the development of macrovascular disease in the diabetic.
Biochemical aspects which may also be important include further elucidation of the metabolism of HDL and its subfractions, the apoprotein B composition and its effect on LDL metabolism, and the interrelationships of serum lipids with other factors, for example, platelet function.
Diagnosis and Management of Hyperlipidaemia in Diabetic Subjects
Like moderate hyperglycaemia, significantly elevated lipid levels are often not associated with clinical features so patients need regular screening for hyperlipidaemia.
The initial test of a random serum cholesterol and triglyceride estimation is sufficient.
A random, as opposed to a fasting, sample has advantages as this can be performed in the routine diabetic clinic and in particular does not require a separate visit with alterations in timing of hypoglycaemic drug therapy.
A random cholesterol estimation of greater than approximately 6.5 mmol/l in a diabetic patient aged less than 60 years should be repeated after a 1 2-hour overnight fast (and taken before morning hypoglycaemic therapy) on two further occasions to establish the diagnosis of hyperlipidaemia.
The level of fasting cholesterol at which the diagnosis of hypercholesterolaemia is made will vary from clinic to clinic.
In our clinic we have chosen > 6.5 mmol/l in the under sixties for both sexes.
We do not see the need for the level to be higher in diabetics than in non-diabetics.
Above this level the rate of coronary heart disease increases steeply in non-diabetic prospective studies (Kannel et al, 1971; Goldbourt et al , 1985).
Hypertriglyceridaemia is more difficult to define (Hulley et al, 1980), but it is our practice to institute active treatment of fasting serum triglyceride levels consistently 5 mmol/l or above in diabetic subjects when we are confident it is not secondary hypertriglyceridaemia.
When hyperlipidaemia is identified in a diabetic subject, attention must be focussed on diabetic control, obesity, diet, alcohol intake and drugs such as thiazides or β-blocking agents.
The achievement of good glycaemic control, with HbA 1 ≤10 per cent at a satisfactory body weight, is an essential first step in the management of diabetic hyperlipidaemia.
A common factor to improving diabetic control and weight loss is modification of dietary intake.
The general dietary recommendations for diabetics of a diet high in fibre and unrefined carbohydrate, combined with a reduced fat content, appears to lower serum lipids as well as improving diabetic control in hyperlipidaemic diabetic subjects, and should therefore be advised (Pacy et al, 1984 a, c).
Total energy content should be adjusted to obtain weight loss in obese subjects.
Attention should be directed towards the type of fat consumed.
Saturated table and cooking fats should be replaced with those of a polyunsaturated nature, a manoeuvre which has been shown to lower serum cholesterol levels (Keys et al, 1965).
Predisposing factors must be searched for and treated.
For example, thyroid and renal disease, alcohol abuse and chronic pancreatitis may be identified.
Attention should be focussed on concomitant drug therapy, for example, thiazide diuretics, which may be important aetiological factors.
It must be remembered that hyperlipidaemia in a well-controlled diabetic may also represent a primary familial disorder, and it is often difficult to differentiate between this and diabetes complicated by hypertriglyceridaemia.
A careful family history and investigation of first-degree relatives may be helpful.
If hyperlipidaemia persists despite simple measures then drug therapy may be instituted.
Combined hypercholesterolaemia and hypertriglyceridaemia is the common form requiring treatment.
The agent of choice is one of the more recent clofibrate analogues (e.g., bezafibrate), which lowers both cholesterol and triglyceride levels by reducing cholesterol and triglyceride synthesis.
This agent may also improve blood glucose control (Wahl et al, 1980).
If hypercholesterolaemia is a persisting problem then the anion-exchange resins, cholestyramine or colestipol, may be effective in lowering serum cholesterol by increasing the excretion of bile salts.
When inadequate response occurs or there is difficulty in compliance owing to the need to ingest a large bulk of exchange resins, a further agent may be required (e.g., bezafibrate).
Severe lipaemia is rarely found but requires more urgent treatment.
Cessation of alcohol abuse with which this condition is often associated may dramatically reduce the lipaemia, but other methods can be employed.
These include continuous insulin infusion or plasma exchange.
Severe lipaemia in an undiagnosed diabetic will usually resolve with the institution of insulin therapy and effective diabetic control.
However, it must be emphasised that generally hyperlipidaemia combined with diabetes mellitus can be adequately treated with attention to dietary measures, promoting weight loss and improving glycaemic control.
Platelets and Diabetes Mellitus
D.J.
Betteridge
Dr John Betteridge obtained his BSc in biochemistry in 1969 and qualified MB BS from King's College Hospital Medical School in 1972.
After Senior House Office appointments at the Royal Postgraduate Medical School and the Brompton Hospital, he moved to St Bartholomew's Hospital as Junior Registrar and subsequently as Research Fellow supported by an R.D. Lawrence Memorial Fellowship from the British Diabetic Association.
He obtained his MD in 1979 following studies of lipid and lipoprotein metabolism in diabetic and hyperlipoproteinaemic subjects.
From 1979 to 1981 he was Senior Registrar in Medicine at the Royal United Hospital in Bath and during that time carried out research into platelet function in diabetes and hyperlipoproteinaemic states.
He was awarded his PhD in 1985.
Dr Betteridge is currently Senior Lecturer in Medicine at University College, London, and Honorary Consultant Physician at University College Hospital.
His main research interests are in the biochemistry of vascular disease in diabetes and hyperlipoproteinaemia.
Introduction
The already high incidence of vascular disease in non-diabetic western populations appears to be still higher in diabetic subjects and, although there have been suggestions of a specific diabetic large-vessel disease (Lundbaek, 1973), there is little evidence to suggest that atherosclerotic lesions in diabetics are distinct from those in non-diabetics (Strandness et al, 1964).
However, atherosclerosis appears to be more extensive and to develop at an earlier age in diabetic patients (Robertson & Strong, 1968).
These pathological findings are in agreement with clinical studies, the most convincing evidence coming from the prospective community study in Framingham.
All major clinical manifestations of atherosclerosis were found to have an increased incidence in diabetics (Garcia et al, 1974).
Many factors may contribute to the increased incidence of large-vessel disease in diabetic patients, as in non-diabetic subjects; however, the increased incidence in diabetics has not been fully explained in terms of known risk factors (Jarrett et al, 1982).
Therefore other metabolic abnormalities have been sought in diabetic subjects which might contribute to the increased vascular risk.
In this chapter the possible role of enhanced platelet function in the development of diabetic vascular disease will be discussed because of the postulated role of platelets in early lesions of atheroma and their importance in the development of thrombus on pre-existing atheromatous plaques leading to final arterial occlusion.
In addition, Colwell et al (1978) have postulated that abnormal platelet function secondary to the diabetic state may contribute to the development of the specific microvascular disease of diabetics which makes an important contribution to morbidity and mortality in the diabetic population, principally through retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy and possibly also a cardiopathy (Keen & Jarrett, 1982).
Structure and Physiology
Platelets which, like red blood cells, do not contain a nucleus, are the smallest of the formed elements of blood, circulating as biconcave discs approximately 2–3 μ m in diameter.
They are formed from megakaryocytes which, in the final process of maturation, become amoeboid in shape and their pseudopods penetrate the marrow sinusoids.
These pseudopods fragment in the blood flow with the nucleus remaining in the bone marrow.
The normal circulating count varies in man between 150 and 400 × 10 9 /l and mean platelet survival is about 9.9 days.
Platelets are removed from the circulation in the spleen and liver.
Platelets have a central role in normal haemostasis.
Through their properties of adherence to vascular or foreign surfaces and their aggregation with other platelets they can initiate haemostasis.
Platelets also participate in the fluid phase of coagulation through their active biochemical contents and by providing surfaces for reactions to take place.
Platelets may also contribute to the development of atherosclerosis.
Structure
Platelet structure and its relationship to platelet function has been given tremendous impetus, through the application of electromicroscopy to the study of platelet anatomy and the development of techniques for isolation of physiologically active platelets and their preservation for ultrastructural study.
The subject has been reviewed (White et al, 1981) and will be briefly described here (see Figure 5.1).
The peripheral zone comprises the platelet cell surface, the surface connected open canalicular system, the exterior coat or glycocalyx, the unit membrane and the submembrane region.
The glycocalyx of platelets is thicker and more dense than surface coats of other blood cells and is rich in glycoproteins (Berndt & Phillips, 1981), which is not surprising bearing in mind the number of receptor functions and transport mechanisms active at the platelet surface.
Using various surface-labelling probes many different glycoproteins have been identified on the platelet surface (> 30) and some, notably Ib, IIb, III and IV, are present in high concentration and their functional roles are emerging.
The trilaminar unit membrane of the peripheral zone which provides the physiochemical separation between extracellular and intracellular constituents has important components including the sodium/potassium ATPase.
The membrane lipids, important as sources of arachidonic acid for the cyclo-oxygenase reaction, are distributed asymmetrically with sphingomyelin and phosphatidyl choline on the outside and phosphatidyl inositol, phosphatidyl ethanolamine and phosphatidyl serine on the inner surface (Schick, 1979).
The submembrane region contains a regular system of filamentous elements (White, 1969), which can be seen lateral to the circumferential band of microtubules in discoid platelets (Zucker-Franklin, 1970).
These filaments, which are in close association with the cell membrane, may be concerned with the maintenance of platelet shape and in pseudopod formation in conjunction with actin-binding protein and α-actinin (Lucas et al, 1976; Schollmeyer et al , 1978).
The so-called sol-gel zone of platelets contains the important microtubules and microfilaments.
Microtubules, of which tubulin is the major protein constituent, are located in a circumferential band in the equatorial plane just under the cell wall in discoid platelets, which suggests that they may be important in maintenance of the platelet cytoskeleton.
In addition, microtubules may be involved in the internal alignment    of platelet organelles before the release reaction and, furthermore, may help govern the degree of response to circulating agonists (White et al , 1981).
Figure 5.1 Platelet Ultrastructure.
EC, exterior coat; CM, trilaminar unit membrane; SMF, sub-membrane filaments; CS, surface connected canalicular system; MT, microtubules; Gly, glyocogen; M, mitochondria; G, granules; DB, dense bodies; DTS, dense tubular system.
White et al(1981).
Reproduced by kind permission of Churchill Livingstone.
The second system of fibres in the sol-gel zone of platelets comprises the microfilaments (White, 1971).
They resemble actin filaments found in other contractile cells such as muscle, and platelet actin has a 100-fold excess over platelet myosin (Pollard, 1975).
The microfilament system provides the contractile capacity for the release reaction seen in activated platelets (Adelstein & Pollard, 1978).
Cohen et al(1980) have postulated that the actin filaments are anchored to the platelet membrane by α-actin (glycoprotein III), a transmembrane protein.
The actin filaments extend into the cytoplasm from this point and form long filaments orientated concentrically around the platelet granules.
The myosin filaments would interdigitate between the actin filaments in opposite directions and help to push the platelet granules into the centre of the platelet for release into the surface-connected open canalicular system.
The platelet organelle zone is rich in several types of organelles.
In addition to mitochondria, platelet cytoplasm contains numerous granules and dense bodies which have been distinguished by density, ultrastructural studies and biochemical content.
The dense bodies (250–300 nm), so-called because of the electron-dense opaque internal content when visualized with the electron microscope, are the storage sites for 5-hydroxytryptamine, adenine nucleotides, calcium and pyrophosphate (Holmsen & Weiss, 1979).
α-granules are the most numerous of platelet organelles and they have a variety of densities and staining characteristics.
These granules (300–500 nm) store many proteins, some of which are specific to platelets such as platelet factor 4, β-thromboglobulin, low-affinity platelet factor 4 and platelet-derived growth factor.
In addition α-granules contain proteins which are found in other cells and plasma such as fibrinogen, fibronectin, albumin and factor VIII-related antigen.
It is probable that there are different types of α-granules with different granular contents which may be released in different situations (Kaplan, 1981).
Platelets also possess a variety of lysosomal enzyme-storage organelles containing acid hydrolases including β-glucuronidase and β-galactosidase (Holmsen, 1975).
Platelets contain two important membrane systems, the surface-connected open canalicular system and the dense tubular system.
The canalicular system consists of tortuous invaginations of the platelet wall running through the platelet cytoplasm and therefore greatly increasing the total surface area of platelet/ plasma contact (Behnke, 1970).
This system remains patent despite platelet contraction, adhesion and aggregation, and probably serves for the release of the contents of the platelet-storage granules to plasma (White, 1973).
The dense tubular system which probably represents residual smooth endoplasmic reticulum is discrete from the open canalicular system (Behnke, 1970) but forms very close relationships with it in certain areas of the cytoplasm (White, 1972).
An important physiologic role for the dense tubular system is calcium sequestration through the activity of the calcium/magnesium ATPase (Cutler et al, 1978).
Haemostasis
A series of complex reactions involving the vessel wall, plasma proteins and platelets occur to reduce the loss of blood following injury to the vasculature.
Platelets contribute to these complex reactions in three main ways: they adhere to exposed collagen and form a physical plug to occlude the wound; they release active substances from their secretory granules which help to consolidate the initial platelet plug; they play an important role in interacting with the coagulation system and certain intrinsic coagulation reactions occur preferentially on the platelet surface.
The process of platelet plug formation has been reviewed by Sixma & Wester (1977).
Macroscopic observations of haemostatic plug formation have been made in animal models, particularly the hamster cheek pouch and the  rabbit mesentery.
Whereas transection of a capillary causes no bleeding, arterial transection results in vessel-wall contraction, retraction and brisk bleeding.
Contraction is probably only important in the larger arteries and no contraction or retraction is seen when a vein is transected.
Immediately following transection of the blood vessel there is accumulation of platelets on the exposed connective tissues at the edge of the wound.
This is seen as a greyish-white accumulation of material which grows and obstructs blood flow.
Eventually bleeding stops but may restart through channels in the platelet plug which are then occluded again.
The haemostatic plug protrudes from the vessel and the blood behind the plug becomes stagnant.
Histological studies of platelet plug formation have been performed in animals and in biopsies of human skin followed bleeding time studies (Sixma & Wester, 1977; Wester et al, 1979).
The earliest finding is the platelet adhesion to collagen fibres followed by aggregation and formation of a platelet plug.
There is some fibrin formed at the edges of the wound and at the plug periphery but no fibrin is seen within the plug for about 15–30 minutes.
In the first minute of the plug formation the platelets retain their granules and remain loosely packed.
However, subsequently they become more closely packed and release their granules and the plug becomes a dense mass of interdigitated platelets.
The major changes to the plugs in the hours following transection of the vessel are that lytic areas initially seen at the edges of the plug also develop in its centre and the degranulated platelets resemble empty vesicles.
The pseudopodia disappear and the platelets appear round once more(Wester et al , 1979).
In addition, there is increased fibrin formation with masses of fibrin between the platelets eventually forming a network of thick strands after 24 hours (Hovig et al , 1968).
The platelet plays an important role in interacting with the coagulation system and certain intrinsic coagulation reactions occur preferentially on the platelet surface which appears to protect coagulation enzymes from inactivation by plasma proteinases and localises fibrin formation within and around the platelet plug (Walsh, 1981).
Fibrin deposition strengthens the platelet plug and the haemostatic barrier is complete.
There is also infiltration of polymorphonuclear and mononuclear cells in the wound and sometimes in the plug itself and interestingly along the blood vessel near the wound (Wester et al, 1979).
As can be seen from the above description, the formation of the haemostatic plug or ‘primary haemostasis’ involves many properties of platelets including adhesion, aggregation, degranulation and release reaction, and these platelet properties will be briefly described.
Platelet adhesion
It is thought that the platelet is necessary for the maintenance of normal vascular integrity in that patients with thrombocytopaenia show a generalised haemorrhagic tendency and bruising when the platelet count falls below about 5 × 10 9 /1, spontaneous bruising and more severe bleeding being possible as the platelet count falls below 20 × 10 9 /1.
In addition, haemorrhage can also occur due to qualitative platelet defects such as essential thrombocythaemia.
The mechanism for the maintenance of this functional integrity is yet to be established, but presumably would involve platelet adhesion to the endothelium.
Platelets do not usually adhere to normal endothelium but the reasons why normal endothelium is inert with respect to stimulating platelet adhesion and aggregation is not fully understood (Shattil & Bennett, 1981).
However, Moncada et al(1976a) demonstrated that endothelial cells were capable of producing a potent anti-platelet aggregatory agent and it was subsequently suggested that continuous production of this substance, now called prostacyclin, explained the apparent protection against adhesion and aggregation conferred by the normal endothelium (Moncada & Vane, 1979).
Subsequent experimental work has cast doubt on this suggestion.
For instance, in the rabbit, doses of aspirin sufficient to inhibit prostacyclin production do not lead to platelet adhesion to intact  endothelium (Dejana et al , 1980).
In addition, several studies have demonstrated that the amounts of prostacyclin normally found in the circulation are probably too low to have an appreciable effect on platelets (Steer et al , 1980; Haslam & McClenaghan, 1981; Greaves & Preston, 1982), and endothelial cells in culture produce little prostacyclin unless stimulated by thrombin for instance (Weksler et al , 1977).
Platelets will adhere to a variety of surfaces, both artificial and naturally occurring, the most important in vivo is the adhesion to collagen which occurs when the blood-vessel endothelium is damaged.
This will be discussed later in this chapter.
Platelet aggregation
Platelet aggregation, or platelet-platelet stickiness, can be regarded as a special case of platelet adhesion and follows adhesion of platelets to injured surfaces.
Normally, as has been described, aggregation is apparent in experimental wounds within seconds.
Aggregation has been studied in vitro more than any other platelet activity because of the development of a simple photometric method for its measurement (Born, 1962).
This is based on the observation that the optical density of stirred platelet-rich plasma (PRP) falls as aggregates develop and returns to normal as they disperse.
Aggregation in vitro , which is an active process (Vargaftig et al, 1981), is dependent on pH, temperature, mechanical stirring, calcium-ion concentration, the concentration of platelets in the PRP and the time elapsed between the performance of the aggregation tests and the preparation of the PRP (Mills, 198 1).
Numerous natural and artificial substances are capable of causing platelet aggregation (Table 5.1), and depending on the nature of the aggregation agent and its concentration, aggregation may be reversible or irreversible and have one or two phases.
Table 5.1 Platelet aggregation agents
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) was the first agent discovered that caused aggregation (Gaarder et al, 1961).
ADP induces aggregation directly and leads to the platelet release reaction (MacMillan, 1966).
A single phase of aggregation followed by rapid disaggregation is seen with low concentrations of ADP.
At threshold concentrations a second phase caused by ADP release from the platelets is seen and at high concentrations a single phase with irreversible aggregation is observed (Hardisty et al, 1970).
Primary ADP-induced aggregation requires fibrinogen (Niewiarowski et al, 1971), which appears to be involved in early transitory interactions between platelets (Mustard et al , 1978).
Other plasma protein co-factors, possibly adsorbed coagulation factors of the vitamin K-dependent group, may also be required (Miale & Kent, 1975).
ADP may play a central role in the initiation of physiological platelet aggregation.
This nucleotide is extruded from activated platelets and also may be derived from injured tissues and erythrocytes (Bergvist & Arfos, 1976).
At low concentrations of collagen, platelet aggregation is dependent on the release of arachidonic acid from platelet membrane phospholipid and the subsequent metabolism of arachidonic acid via the prostaglandin pathway (Packham, 1976).
However, at higher concentrations collagen also causes release of ADP from platelet granules and this is independent of the prostaglandin pathway.
For collagen to promote platelet aggregation it must possess its triple helical structure and must be present as fibrillar  collagen (Zucker & Borelli, 1962).
Adrenaline induces a biphasic response when added to platelet-rich plasma (MacMillan, 1966).
The first wave of aggregation induced by adrenaline is associated with uptake of calcium by platelets, and it has been suggested that a localised flux of calcium into the platelet plasma membrane enables the platelets to stick together (Gerrard et al, 1981).
Unlike other aggregating agents (ADP, collagen and thrombin) adrenaline does not cause initial platelet shape change (seen as a transient increase in optical density of platelet-rich plasma).
These other aggregating agents which cause shape change before platelet-platelet aggregation release calcium initially from an intracellular structure, probably the dense tubular system, so that there is an elevation in cytoplasmic calcium before plasma membrane calcium is altered (Gerrard et al, 1981).
The mechanisms by which platelet sticks to platelet during aggregation are not fully understood.
However, extracellular calcium is necessary and there is considerable evidence, particularly from studies of thrombasthenic platelets, that the platelet surface glycoproteins IIb and III are involved (Nurden & Caen, 1974, 1975; Phillips & Agin, 1977).
More recently, fibrinogen has been strongly implicated in platelet-platelet interactions.
Platelets activated by thrombin were found to produce haemagglutinin activity with fixed bovine erythrocytes (Gartner et al, 1980), and subsequently the same group have shown that this agglutinin is bound to platelet membranes and appears in the incubation fluid following platelet activation by thrombin (Gartner et al , 1980).
It is highly likely that this agglutinin is fibrinogen (Gartner et al, 1980; Berndt & Phillips, 1981).
Indeed, the role of fibrinogen in platelet aggregation has been recognised for many years (Born & Cross, 1964; Brinkhaus et al, 1965).
ADP-stimulated platelets exhibit increased fibrinogen binding and the features of the binding suggested a fibrinogen receptor on the platelet membrane which required extracellular calcium (Bennett & Vilaire, 1979; Peerschke et al, 1980).
Platelet-release reaction
The release of platelet-derived material and the profound biochemical and morphological changes that occur after platelet stimulation have been termed the platelet-release reaction (Grette, 1962).
On stimulation, platelets release their dense bodies, α-granules and lysosome-like granules (see Table 5.2), but the integrity of the membrane structures, cytoplasm and mitochondria is preserved.
Initial experiments were performed on porcine platelets stimulated by thrombin but subsequently many substances (secretagogues) have been found to provoke platelet aggregation: ADP, adrenaline and collagen as well as thrombin provoked release of 5-hydroxytryptamine and nucleotides from platelets (Mills et al, 1968).
In addition, immune complexes (Humphrey & Jaques, 1955), arachidonic acid (Kaplan et al , 1979) and thromboxane A 2 (Hamberg et al , 1975) cause platelet release.
More recently, the degranulating action of platelet-activating factor has been demonstrated (Chignard et al, 1979; McManus et al , 1979).
Some secretagogues (e.g., ADP) stimulate the release of certain granules (dense bodies, some α-granules but not the lysosomal granules), whereas thrombin stimulates secretion of all types of granule including lysosomes (Holmsen, 1977).
In addition to these ‘physiological stimuli’ many ‘non-physiological’stimuli stimulate platelet degranulation including calcium ionophores (Gerrard et al, 1974), lectins (Greenberg & Jamieson, 1974) and latex and viral particles (Holmsen, 1977).
As reviewed by Skaer(1981)it is probable that there are many different types of granule.
In addition, the response to various secretagogues in terms of which granules are released and to what extent varies.
This suggests that platelets must possess very sophisticated intracellular control mechanisms.
Table 5.2 Subcellular localisation of secreted platelet constituents.
Dense body contents are discharged through the platelet-surface membrane (Skaer, 1981), and this occurs from between 4 seconds and 3 minutes after addition of the secretagogue.
Mobilisation of the internal calcium occurs after 0.75–1.8 seconds following the addition of thrombin (Feinstein, 1980).
Therefore the release of intracellular membrane-bound calcium precedes the onset of the stimulus-induced degranulation.
A further factor involved in the stimulus to degranulation may be the breakdown of phosphatidyl inositol  with the accumulation of diglyceride (Rittenhouse-Simmons, 1979)(1-stearoyl, 2-arachidonyl diglyceride).
The diglyceride may be important in promoting membrane fusion of the dense body granule with the platelet-surface membrane and also as a substrate for the formation of prostaglandin endoperoxides and thromboxane A 2 which are powerful degranulation stimuli (Bell et al, 1979).
In addition, the actual breakdown of the membrane polyphospoinositides by calcium-stimulated enzymes may promote degranulation as they have highly charged polar head groups which would tend to impede membrane fusion (Allan & Mitchell, 1979).
As has been seen, the platelet α — granules contain a large number of proteins and are very numerous in the platelet cytoplasm.
For instance, α-granule fibrinogen forms approximately 10 per cent of the total platelet protein (Holmsen & Weiss, 1979).
Not all α-granules may respond in the same way to secretory stimuli; for example, Zucker et al (1979), who found that over 80 per cent of platelet factor VIII-related antigen was present in the α-granules could only demonstrate the release of 30 per cent of this in response to stimulation with collagen.
Similar findings have also been described for fibronectin (Ginsberg et al, 1979).
Although there are several possible explanations for these findings as reviewed by Skaer (1981), it is possible that some α-granules may remain refractory to secretory stimuli.
The contents of the α-granules, unlike those of the dense bodies, are discharged into the open canalicular system.
α-granule nucleoids have been demonstrated by electronmicroscopic studies in the canalicular system (White, 1974), and it is likely that normal secretion involves not only fusion of these granules with the canalicular system but also platelet contraction.
The evidence for this is derived from the use of differing secretagogues (Gerrard et al, 1974).
Platelet prostaglandin metabolism
Over recent years there has been increasing interest in these widely distributed and biologically important compounds, and their importance in platelet biochemistry and platelet-vessel wall interactions has been emphasised.
The prostaglandins and thromboxanes are produced from certain 20-carbon atom polyunsaturated fatty acids with varying degrees of unsaturation.
The most abundant of these acids in human tissue is arachidonic acid (Crawford, 1983).
Most arachidonic acid is esterified in membrane phospholipid complexes, and in order to act as a substrate for the enzyme complex prostaglandin synthetase the free acid must be liberated by the action of phospholipase A 2 .
The activity of this membrane enzyme thus provides the first control step in the prostaglandin pathway by limiting the availability of arachidonic acid substrate (Figure 5.2).
Figure 5.2 The prostaglandin pathway Arachidonic acid, AA; prostaglandin, PG; thromboxane, TX.
Free arachidonic acid is then acted upon by the system of microsomal enzymes known as prostaglandin synthetase which is composed of cyclo-oxygenase and peroxidase activities.
In the presence of molecular oxygen, the cyclo-oxygenase activity converts arachidonic acid to a 15-hydroperoxide endoperoxide known as prostaglandin G 2 , which is then converted by the  peroxidase activity to a 15-hydroxy endoperoxide known as prostaglandin H 2 (Lands, 1979)(see Figure 5.2).
Prostaglandin H 2 is an unstable compound which has a half-life of approximately five minutes, and once formed is rapidly transformed either enzymically or non-enzymically to the classical prostaglandins, prostaglandin D 2 , E 2 and F&sub2α;.
Most tissues are capable of synthesizing these unstable endoperoxides and prostaglandins and it is products formed further along the prostaglandin pathway which determine the biological effects observed in different tissues.
The synthesis of the prostaglandins E 2 and F&sub2α was demonstrated in platelets stimulated with thrombin by Smith and Willis (1971).
These authors found that oral administration of aspirin was associated with inhibition of platelet prostaglandin synthesis and suggested that this finding might explain the known effects of aspirin in inhibiting the platelet-release reaction and in prolonging the bleeding time (Quick, 1966).
However, it was difficult to accept this concept as the prostaglandins measured were not proaggregatory.
This was resolved a short time later when an unstable product of a short-term incubation of arachidonic acid with cyclo-oxygenase prepared from the vesicular gland of sheep was found to induce platelet aggregation (Willis & Kuhn, 1973).
This product was subsequently found to be prostaglandin H 2 and the unstable endoperoxides prostaglandin G 2 and prostaglandin H 2 were found to be released during platelet aggregation (Hamberg et al, 1974).
In addition, when these  compounds were added to platelets they provoked aggregation (Hamberg & Samuelsson, 1974; Hamberg et al , 1974).
Platelet aggregation induced by endoperoxides appeared to be greater than that which could be accounted for by the endoperoxides alone, and Hamberg et al(1975) were able to demonstrate that in platelets endoperoxides are further metabolised to a very unstable compound, thromboxane A 2 .
Thromboxane A 2 has a half-life of 30 seconds at body temperature and degrades spontaneously to the stable metabolite thromboxane B 2 (Hamberg et al, 1975).
Subsequently, the microsomal fractions of human platelets have been shown to contain an enzyme which converts the endoperoxides, prostaglandin G 2 and H 2 to thromboxane A 2 , and the enzyme has been designated thromboxane synthetase (Needleman et al, 1976).
Thromboxane synthetase also catalyses the conversion of prostaglandin H 2 to a C-17 hydroxy acid known as 12-hydroxy-5.8.10-hepta-decatrienoic acid and malondialdehyde (Diczfalusy & Hammarstrom, 1977).
However, prostaglandin H 2 conversion to these compounds may also occur non-enzymically (Van Dorp et al, 1978).
It appears from experiments in which platelet-membrane fractions have been separated that thromboxane synthesis is associated with intracellular membranes known as dense tubular membranes (Carey et al, 1982).
Platelets can also metabolise arachidonic acid by a lipoxygenase enzyme system to yield a variety of hydroxy acids via their respective hydroperoxide intermediates (Hamberg & Samuelsson, 1974; Nugteren, 1975).
The biological activity of these compounds remains to be determined.
However, 12-L-hydroperoxy-5,8,10, 14-eicosatetraenoic acid may inhibit prostacyclin synthetase and cyclo-oxygenase (Siegel et al, 1979).
In 1976, a new relatively inactive arachidonic acid metabolite characterised as 6-oxo-prostaglandin F 1α was isolated from several tissues including guinea-pig lung (Dawson et al, 1976).
In the same year, Moncada et al(1976a) reported the presence of an enzyme in aortic tissue which converted prostaglandin endoperoxides to a potent unstable inhibitor of platelet aggregation.
This factor also relaxed arterial smooth muscle and was named prostaglandin X (Moncada et al, 1976 a).
Prostaglandin X rapidly lost activity in neutral and acidic media with the formation of a relatively inert substance subsequently identified as 6-oxo-prostaglandin F&sub1α; and prostaglandin X was identified as 9-deoxy-6, 9-epoxy-Δ 5 -prostaglandin F&sub1α; and renamed prostacyclin (Johnson et al, 1976).
The microsomal enzyme converting prostaglandin H 2 to prostacyclin was named prostacyclin synthetase and prostacyclin was found to be the major product of arachidonic acid in the walls of arteries and veins in several animal species and man (Moncada & Vane, 1978).
However, prostacyclin synthetase although present in many tissues is not present in platelets (Moncada & Vane, 1979).
Thromboxane A 2 is a more powerful pro-aggregatory substance in platelets than the endoperoxides, and it has been proposed that it is the arachidonic acid metabolite that mediates platelet aggregation and the release reaction (Hamberg et al, 1975).
Whether platelet endo-peroxides have a proaggregatory role in their own right or only when converted to thromboxane A 2 has been the subject of many studies (Bunting et al, 1983).
However, from experiments using thromboxane synthetase inhibitors it appears that when platelets are activated and the prostaglandin cascade is triggered by release of endogenous arachidonic acid then the endoperoxides generated exert their proaggregatory effects by their conversion to the more potent compound thromboxane A 2 .
However, when the thromboxane generation is suppressed it is probable that endoperoxides can be proaggregatory themselves (Bunting et al, 1983).
It has been proposed that endoperoxides and thromboxane A 2 activate platelets by acting as calcium ionophores, hence mobilising intracellular free calcium (Gerrard et al, 1978).
However, all prostaglandins that induce platelet aggregation cause a monophasic reversible ‘primary’ response at low concentrations and a monophasic irreversible ‘secondary’response at high concentrations.
In this way the activation of  platelets by prostaglandins resembles that produced by ADP and adrenaline.
This is unlike the activation induced by the powerful stimulus of calcium ionophores in that prostaglandins induce platelet dense body secretion and α-granule secretion but not secretion of lysosomal hydrolases (MacIntyre, 1979).
For this reason and others (reviewed by MacIntyre, 1981), including studies with antagonists, desensitisation experiments and measurement of calcium ionophore activity, it is thought that platelet activation by prostaglandins and thromboxanes is receptor-mediated although a suitable radiolabelled ligand is not available for definitive demonstration (MacIntyre, 1981).
Defreyn et al(1981) have demonstrated a deficiency of thromboxane formation and platelet aggregation in platelets from a patient with a familial bleeding tendency, thus emphasizing the importance of thromboxane production in the physiology of platelet function.
Thromboxane A 2 is a powerful vasoactive compound, and the activity of the rabbit aorta-contracting substance released from sensitized guinea-pig lungs described by Piper and Vane (1969) is accounted for by this substance (Hamberg et al, 1975).
Because of its highly unstable nature, various thromboxane A 2 -generating systems have to be used in order to study its vasoactive properties.
Using these techniques it has been shown that thromboxane A 2 is a potent contractor of isolated vessel segments from several species including coronary arteries from pig and cattle, human umbilical artery and rabbit aorta (Moncada & Vane, 1979).
In addition, strips of bovine cerebral conductance arteries and human basilar arteries contract with thromboxane A 2 (Boullin et al , 1979; Ellis et al , 1979).
The effect of thromboxane A 2 on differing vascular preparations has also been studied in vivo using thromboxane synthesized in vitro by incubations of endoperoxide with platelet microsomes.
Using this technique, Dusting et al(1978) were able to show short-term vasoconstriction in femoral and vascular beds of the dog following injection of the thromboxane close to the vessels.
Prostacyclin has powerful metabolic effects on blood platelets.
It has the most potent effect of the naturally occurring prostaglandins in inhibiting platelet aggregation, being 30–40 times more potent than prostaglandin E 1 and 10 times more potent than prostaglandin D 2 in vitro (Gryglewski et al, 1976; Moncada et al , 1976a).
Prostacyclin can also bring about disaggregation of platelet aggregates in vitro (Moncada et al, 1976a; Ubatuba et al , 1979).
In addition, using animal models, prostacyclin applied locally has been shown to inhibit thrombus formation in response to ADP in the hamster cheek pouch microcirculation (Higgs et al , 1977), and given systemically prostacyclin inhibited thrombus formation induced electrically in rabbit carotid artery (Ubatuba et al , 1979).
Similar findings were observed with prostacyclin either applied locally or given systemically in the coronary artery of dog (Aiken et al, 1979).
When given systemically prostacyclin protected against sudden death (secondary to platelet aggregation) in the rabbit following intravenous injection of arachidonic acid (Bayer et al, 1979).
Gryglewski et al(1978) incorporated collagen strips into extracorporeal circuits in animals and showed that prostacyclin brought about disaggregation of platelet aggregates formed on the collagen strips.
Similarly, prostacyclin inhibited platelet aggregation on rabbit subendothelium but only prevented platelet adhesion at higher doses (Higgs et al, 1978).
In man prostacyclin infusion inhibited platelet aggregation measured ex vivo at a threshold dosage of 2 ng/kg/min, and with increasing doses there was increased inhibition of ADP-induced aggregation (Fitzgerald et al, 1981).
Although platelets cannot synthesize prostacyclin they do possess the enzyme 9-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (Wong et al, 1980).
This enzyme can transform 6-oxo-prostaglandin F&sub1α;, the stable hydrolysis product of prostacyclin, into 6-oxo-prostaglandin E 1 which does possess antiaggregatory effects (Quilley et al, 1980).
However, the possible biological role of this metabolite in platelet function remains to be determined, as plasma levels of 6-oxo-prostaglandin  E 1 (measured by gas chromatography, mass spectrometry techniques) did not increase following intravenous infusion of prostacyclin (Jackson et al, 1982).
The potent inhibitory action of prostacyclin on platelet aggregation correlates with its ability to stimulate the platelet adenylate cyclase system, thus increasing cyclic AMP levels within the cell (Tateson et al, 1977).
Stimulation of adenylate cyclase follows binding of prostacyclin to a platelet membrane receptor which it shares with prostaglandin E 1 , but is distinct from the prostaglandin D 2 receptor (Miller & Gorman, 1979).
Shepherd et al(1983) have calculated that each human platelet has 4200 high-affinity binding sites for prostacyclin with a dissociation constant of 16 nmol.
In keeping with its stronger anti-platelet aggregatory effects compared to prostaglandin E 1 , prostacyclin stimulation of adenylate cyclase activity is more potent and more sustained (Gorman et al, 1977).
By enhancing platelet cyclic AMP levels through its stimulation of adenylate cyclase, prostacyclin can reduce cytoplasmic calcium levels which determine platelet shape change, aggregation and the release reaction (Käser-Glanzmann et al, 1977).
In addition, platelet phospholipase A2 (Minkes et al , 1977) and cyclo-oxygenase (Malmsten et al , 1976) are inhibited by the elevated cyclic AMP levels.
Prostacyclin is the major product of arachidonic acid metabolism in blood vessels and the synthesis is highest in the intima (Moncada et al, 1977).
Capillaries also generate prostacyclin (Goehlert et al, 1981) and studies with cultured cells have demonstrated that it is endothelial cells which are the main source (Weksler et al , 1977).
Thus when endothelium was stripped from rabbit aorta in vivo prostacyclin production at the luminal surface of the vessel was virtually absent and recovery of prostacyclin production was slow over a period of 70 days coinciding with the appearance of neointimal cells (Eldor et al, 1981).
Prostacyclin in contrast to thromboxane A 2 produced relaxation in most arterial preparations tested in vitro and was a potent vasodilator when tested in isolated perfused heart preparations (reviewed by Moncada and Vane, 1979).
In addition, Dusting et al (1979) demonstrated increased blood flow in the coronary arteries of the intact heart in open-chested dogs following application of prostacyclin.
Prostacyclin is a potent vasodilator in the microcirculation as demonstrated using the hamster cheek pouch preparation by Higgs et al(1982) and in the cerebral microcirculation of the cat by Ellis et al (1979).
In intact experimental animals prostacyclin has a vasodepressor effect and this was observed to an equal degree when injected intravenously or intra-arterially (Armstrong et al, 1978).
This work suggests that prostacyclin is not inactivated in the pulmonary circulation unlike other prostaglandins.
However, the vascular activity of prostacyclin in vivo is very short-lived and is less than its chemical half-life at physiological temperature and pH (i.e., < three minutes).
This suggests that biological inactivation takes place very rapidly in vivo and that most metabolites of prostacyclin have little vasodepressor activity apart from 6-oxo-prostaglandin El (reviewed by Whittle and Moncada, 1983).
Platelets, Thrombosis and Atherosclerosis
Thrombosis
Platelets are undoubtedly involved in the final occlusion of atheromatous arteries and form the major component (the ‘white head’ of aggregated platelets) of the occlusive thrombus (Davies & Thomas, 1981).
This sudden and often catastrophic event is most likely precipitated by fissuring of an underlying atheromatous plaque, as detailed analysis of obstructed coronary arteries at postmortem invariably shows that the thrombus is found in association with haemorrhage into a plaque.
(Chapman, 1965; Constantinides, 1966; Friedman, 1970).
In addition to their apparent central role in the pathogenesis of the arterial thrombus, increasing  interest has focussed on platelets and the coronary microcirculation with the finding of platelet aggregates in the coronary microcirculation in some cases of sudden cardiac death (Haerem, 1972; El-Maraghi & Genton, 1980).
These findings have stimulated an increasing amount of research into the mechanisms involved yet the pathogenesis of thrombus formation remains to be clarified.
Certainly platelets do not normally adhere to arterial endothelium if it is not damaged but the explanation for this antithrombotic property of intact endothelium remains obscure.
Following the discovery of prostacyclin it was suggested that endothelial cell production of this very potent antiaggregatory substance might explain this important property (Moncada et al, 1977; Moncada & Vane, 1978).
However, this suggestion has not been confirmed experimentally, as has been discussed previously.
Platelets will rapidly adhere and aggregate if the endothelial barrier is breached, as has been shown in many studies in experimental animals (reviewed by Mustard et al, 1983), and platelets adherent to collagen release the contents of their α and dense granules.
Fissuring of an atherosclerotic plaque would also expose collagen fibres, and the adhering platelets could release agents such as thromboxane A 2 and ADP, which would rapidly lead to adhesion and aggregation of more platelets and growth of the thrombus.
In addition, prostacyclin generation is probably reduced in the region of the atherosclerotic plaque, possibly due to the high content of lipid peroxides in advanced atherosclerotic lesions (Glavind et al , 1952).
It is known that fatty acid peroxides inhibit prostacyclin generation (Moncada et al, 1976 b; Salmon et al , 1978).
Thus the production of prostacyclin by cultured smooth muscle cells obtained from plaques of the experimental atherosclerotic rabbit consistently produced less prostacyclin when compared to control cells (Larrue et al, 1980).
Furthermore, prostacyclin production measured by bioassay and 6-oxo-prostaglandin F&sub1α; concentrations was reduced in perfused heart preparations from atherosclerotic rabbits (Dembinska-Kiec et al, 1977).
Similarly, prostacyclin production in human atherosclerotic tissue appears to be reduced.
Sinzinger et al(1979) demonstrated decreased prostacyclin generation from atherosclerotic tissue compared to normal arterial tissue and could find no difference between early and advanced lesions.
D'Angelo et al(1978) found no prostacyclin generation in atheromatous plaques from three subjects.
In addition to the probable decreased prostacyclin production in the region of the atheromatous plaque possibly due to inhibition of prostacyclin synthetase by lipid peroxides it is known that certain fatty acid hydroperoxides also induce platelet aggregation (Mickel & Horbar, 1974).
Thus diminution of prostacyclin production and stimulation of platelet aggregation both mediated by lipid peroxides could contribute to thrombosis on atheromatous plaques.
Increased thromboxane A 2 production may also contribute to thrombogenesis in atherosclerotic vessels.
Thus platelet thromboxane A 2 production (measured as the stable degradation form thromboxane B 2 ) is increased in patients with arterial or venous thrombosis (Lagarde & Dechavanne, 1977) and myocardial infarction (Szczeklik et al, 1978).
Similarly, following acute ligation of the coronary artery in dogs, high levels of thromboxane B 2 were found to be associated with cardiac arrhythmias (Coker et al, 1981).
In addition, thromboxane B 2 levels were found to be elevated in the peripheral blood of patients with Prinzmetal angina (Lewy et al , 1979; Robertson et al , 1981) and in coronary sinus blood of patients with unstable angina (Hirsh et al , 1981).
Although the above description of experimental findings would suggest that exposure of collagen and lipid peroxides due to rupture of the atheromatous plaque could be of importance in thrombogenesis, together with enhanced platelet thromboxane A 2 formation and diminished vessel wall prostacyclin formation, Born has questioned this series of events (Born, 1983).
He has pointed out that platelet aggregates grow very rapidly and, although platelet adhesion to  collagen is almost instantaneous, there is a lag period (several seconds) before aggregation proceeds (Wilner et al, 1969).
In addition, mural platelet thrombi can occur during passage of anticoagulated blood through artificial extracorporeal systems (Richardson et al.1976), which suggests that under certain circumstances collagen or other vessel wall constituents are unnecessary for activation of platelets.
Born has assembled evidence to suggest that the important trigger to thrombogenesis in vivo is ADP and that at sites of vascular injury enough ADP is released from damaged cells to initiate thrombogenesis (Born, 1983).
Whatever the physiological stimulus to platelet aggregation and thrombus formation it appears that it is the fissuring of an atheromatous plague often with extrusion of plaque lipid contents which triggers thrombus formation (Bouch & Montgomery, 1970).
The nature of this obviously very important event remains unclear.
However, a possible explanation has been put forward by Brooks et al(1971), which proposes that softening of the atheromatous plaque may be due to the presence of unusual lipids (cholesteryl esters of hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid) found in high concentrations in ulcerated plaques (Harland et al , 1971) which are thought to produce smooth muscle cell necrosis at the base of the plaque.
Atherogenesis
As has been discussed above, platelets are a crucial factor in thrombogenesis associated with atheromatous arteries.
However, over recent years the possible role of platelets in the early stages of the atheromatous process has been emphasised (Ross & Glomset, 1976).
Of course the advanced atherosclerotic plaque is a very complex structure, but the early lesion is very much a process which involves the intima of the artery and is characterised by proliferation of smooth muscle cells which have migrated from the media of the artery (Woolf, 1983).
The fact that this early lesion is intimal suggests a response to a factor or factors in the blood, and the ‘response to injury’ hypothesis is central to current thinking on the atherosclerotic process.
It was Virchow in the middle of the nineteenth century who first put forward the concept of arterial wall injury leading to the development of the atheromatous plaque.
In the middle of the twentieth century Duguid (1946) emphasised the importance of arterial thrombi in the genesis of the plaque and pointed out that it was Rokitansky who first put forward the ‘encrustation hypothesis’.
The role of platelets in the process (which has resulted from the work of several groups:(Chandler & Hand, 1961; Murphy et al, 1962; French, 1966; Ross et al , 1974) as put forward by Ross and Glomset (1976) is really a bringing together of the Virchow and Rokitansky hypotheses of more than a century ago in that platelets may themselves contribute to vessel injury, thrombosis and atherogenesis (Mustard et al , 1983).
The functions of the endothelial cells of the arterial intima have been reviewed by Majno and Joris (1978), who highlighted several important aspects of endothelial cell physiology.
These included: a barrier function to the formed elements of blood and plasma macromolecules; resistance to platelet thrombi; active transport of substances from blood; synthesis of factors involved in vessel wall-blood interactions and vascular repair processes.
Thus endothelial cells synthesise many elements of their underlying connective tissue including fibronectin, elastin, collagen, proteoglycans and microfibrils (Buonassisi, 1973; Howard et al, 1976; Jaffe et al , 1976; Bornstein & Sage, 1980) which controls vessel permeability as well as stimulating thrombosis following loss or damage to endothelial cells (Smith et al , 1979).
Exchange of macromolecules across the endothelium involves active vesicle formation, and transendothelial channels and intercellular clefts (Simionescu et al, 1976; Chien, 1978).
The resistance of intact endothelium to platelet aggregation does not solely depend on its ability to synthesize prostacyclin as has been discussed previously.
Other factors which may be involved in this important property are: secretion of plasminogen activator  (Loskutoff & Edgington, 1977), a membrane-associated ADPase (Lieberman et al, 1977), the presence of heparin-like membrane proteoglycans (Thorgeirsson & Robertson, 1978); the ability to take up and degrade vasoactive amines (Johnson & Erdos, 1977) the uptake and clearance of circulating thrombin (Lollar & Owen, 1980) and surface charge (Sawyer & Srinivasan, 1973).
From the above description it can be seen that the endothelial cell has many important properties and endothelial damage is proposed as the initial event in the ‘response to injury’ hypothesis.
In the postulated series of events breach of the endothelial barrier would expose sub-endothelial smooth muscle cells and connective tissue to plasma constituents including lipoproteins, platelets and macrophage-type mononuclear cells (Harker & Ross, 1979).
Following endothelial injury, platelets would adhere to the injured site, form microthrombi and release their granular contents which include a potent α-granule-derived mitogen that stimulates migration and focal proliferation of intimal and medial smooth muscle cells (Ross & Vogel, 1978).
Subsequently there would be synthesis of collagen, elastin and proteoglycans by smooth muscle cells, intracellular and extracellular lipid accumulation and thrombosis associated with the lesion.
Support for this sequence of events has come from animal models of atherosclerosis and studies using cell-culture techniques, and as Born (1983) has pointed out caution is necessary in translating these findings to the human situation.
However, there does seem to be considerable evidence linking platelets to the development of proliferative arterial intimal lesions following experimental removal of endothelium in animal experiments, either mechanically or chemically (reviewed by Mustard et al, 1983).
In addition, the emerging information regarding the properties of the platelet-derived growth factor argues for an important role in the atherogenic process of this platelet α-granule constituent.
Platelet-derived growth factor has been highly purified and appears to consist of two polypeptide chains of molecular weight 14000–17000 covalently joined by disulphide bonds (reviewed by Bowen-Pope and Ross, 1984).
Following its purification it has been possible to study the biological properties of platelet-derived growth factor.
Important amongst these properties are its ability to: induce chemotaxis by vascular smooth muscle cells (Grotendorst et al, 1982); fibroblasts (Seppä et al , 1982) and monocytes (Deuel et al , 1982); increase rates of fluid phase pinocytosis (Davies & Ross, 1978) and protein synthesis (Owen et al , 1982); increase the number of LDL receptors (Chait et al , 1980) and somatomedin receptors (Clemmons et al , 1980) as well as stimulate proliferation of connective tissue cells.
It remains to be seen whether cells can respond to platelet-derived growth factor in vivo and, at the moment, its role in atherogenesis remains speculative but attractive.
As has been discussed, the ‘response to injury’ hypothesis depends on initial endothelial injury and little is known about loss of endothelium in vivo either spontaneously or in response to risk factors for atherosclerosis.
Although endothelial replication is increased in response to hypertension or hyperlipidaemia (Florentin et al, 1969; Schwartz et al , 1980), this does not necessarily imply that the arterial intima is denuded of endothelium.
In addition, studies with the electronmicroscope have not shown significant areas of denuded intima in early hyperlipidaemia in animal models despite there being increased endothelial turnover (Taylor et al , 1978).
These findings have led to the suggestion that altered endothelial function without endothelial loss may be important in permitting platelet thrombus formation.
In this regard, Gryglewski et al(1978) showed that prostacyclin formation in segments of blood vessel from cholesterol-fed monkeys was reduced.
These authors, on the basis of these experiments, suggested a primary role for prostacyclin deficiency in the development of atherosclerosis in these animals.
However, this suggestion depends on the assumption that prostacyclin is continually produced by arterial wall to prevent platelet aggregation.
This assumption is not tenable as it is now recognised that the unstimulated output of prostacyclin by  blood vessels is low (reviewed by Dollery et al, 1983).
However, factors that reduce the ability of the vascular endothelium to produce prostacyclin may impair the ability of the vessel to respond to vascular injury (Dollery et al, 1983).
Recent work (Faggiotto & Ross, 1984; Faggiotto et al, 1984) has cast more light on the ‘response to injury’ hypothesis in cholesterol-fed monkeys.
These workers have emphasised that the initial lesion in this model of atherogenesis is the adherence to endothelium of monocytes which then appear to migrate into the subendothelium, accumulate lipid and become lipid-laden macrophages or foam cells.
It was only after some months that endothelial denudation was observed with platelet mural thrombus attached to exposed lipid-containing macrophages.
These authors postulate that in as yet an unexplained way it is the accumulation of these lipid-laden foam cells in the sub-endothelium that damage the endothelium, thus allowing the subsequent developments in the formation of the atheromatous plaque to proceed.
Platelet Function in Diabetes Mellitus
Introduction
Despite increasing numbers of research communications concerned with platelet function in the diabetic there remain many conflicting reports and unresolved questions.
Many factors contribute to this unsatisfactory situation.
For instance, there is no absolutely satisfactory test of platelet function.
Many studies have been performed using in vitro tests and it is difficult to be certain of the relevance of these tests to platelet function in vivo .
Platelets are studied in an artificial environment and the very process of preparing the platelet sample for study may affect their behaviour.
However, there is no doubt that the development of the turbidometric method for the study of platelet aggregation in vitro (Born, 1962) gave tremendous impetus to the study of platelet function.
In more recent years, as understanding of platelet physiology has increased, newer tests have been applied to the study of platelets from diabetic subjects which may be more relevant to platelet function in vivo .
It has become possible to measure plasma levels of β-thromboglobulin and platelet factor 4 which are specific platelet proteins (Niewiarowski, 1977; Moore et al, 1975).
They are stored within platelet α-granules (Niewiarowski, 1977) and are released to the surrounding plasma during platelet aggregation induced by thrombin, collagen, ADP, adrenaline and various lectins (Holmsen et al, 1969,1975).
β-Thromboglobulin (MW 35 000) is the most abundant specific platelet protein and its platelet concentration is 30–104 times higher than in other tissues (Ludlam, 1979).
Since it is cleared from human plasma with a half-life of 100 minutes (Dawes et al, 1978) an elevated plasma β-thromboglobulin level may be a useful indicator of enhanced in vivo platelet activation and ‘release reaction’.
Platelet factor 4 has a very short half-life (Musial et al, 1980) compared to β-thromboglobulin, which therefore makes it less sensitive for the detection of the ‘in vivo ’ platelet-release reaction, but it is a useful measure of artefactual in vitro secretion during and after blood sampling (Kaplan & Owen, 1981).
In recent years the importance of the prostaglandin pathway in platelets in relation to platelet aggregation has become apparent and several studies have attempted to assess the activity of this pathway in platelets from diabetic subjects.
In addition, prostaglandin metabolism may play a crucial role in the interaction between platelets and vascular endothelium and several studies have examined the effect of the diabetic state on prostacyclin synthesis and the balance between prostacyclin and thromboxane.
Further attempts to estimate platelet function in vivo have involved isotopic labelling of platelets and measurement of platelet survival and assessments of platelet aggregation in whole blood.
However, all these tests have potential limitations and results must be interpreted with caution.
In addition to problems intrinsic to the  methodology of platelet function, problems also arise from the diabetic groups studied.
Many of the early studies of platelet function in diabetic subjects failed to take into account other factors known to influence platelet function, particularly the presence or absence of diabetic vascular complications.
This has led to difficulties in interpretation of the possible sequence of events in the development of enhanced platelet reactivity in diabetics.
In other words, are observed platelet abnormalities related to the disturbed metabolic state of diabetes or are they secondary to the presence of vascular disease?
More recent studies have attempted to overcome this problem by electively studying diabetics free from clinical evidence of vascular disease.
However, it is difficult to be completely sure of the absence of vascular disease on clinical grounds alone and, for this reason, some groups have studied platelet function in diabetic children and adolescents in whom vascular disease would be unlikely.
Platelet-adhesion studies
Early studies of platelet function in diabetes used in vitro tests of platelet adhesion.
A variety of techniques were used involving glass beads or fibres in a column.
Anticoagulated blood or platelet-rich plasma was passed through the column at a fixed flow rate and platelet counts were performed before and after exposure to these foreign surfaces — the difference being the number of platelets adhering.
In general these techniques are tricky and difficult to reproduce and conflicting results were reported.
Whereas increased platelet adhesion was reported in diabetics with evidence of microvascular and macrovascular disease (Mayne et al, 1970), no increase in adhesion was found in diabetics with retinopathy (Heath et al , 1971).
However, the majority of studies did show increased adhesiveness in diabetic subjects with (Valdorf-Hansen, 1967; Badawi et al, 1970; Hellem, 1971) and without (Shaw et al , 1967; Hellem, 1971) vascular disease.
Platelet aggregation
Turbidometric studies
For in vitro aggregation studies citrated blood is carefully centrifuged to produce platelet-rich plasma.
Aliquots of platelet-rich plasma are then placed in an aggregometer and stirred at 37°C.
Various agonists, for example, ADP, collagen, adrenaline and thrombin, are then added to the platelet-rich plasma to induce aggregation which is measured as a change in optical density.
Studies of in vitro aggregation in diabetics date from the late sixties and early seventies.
These early studies were performed in diabetics with and without clinical evidence of vascular disease.
However, as Colwell et al have pointed out (Colwell et al, 1983) if enhanced platelet aggregation were to contribute to the pathogenesis of diabetic vascular disease then evidence of it should be present before the development of vascular disease.
Later studies have taken care to define the diabetic population studied in terms of the presence or absence of complications.
Increased platelet aggregation has been reported in patients with neuropathy (O'Malley et al, 1975) retinopathy (Heath et al , 1971; Bensoussan et al , 1975) and coronary artery disease (Szirtes, 1970).
However, conflicting findings have appeared.
For instance, in a study of 25 retinopathy patients — the marker most commonly used for microvascular disease — platelets exhibited enhanced platelet aggregation to the agonists adrenaline and arachidonic acid but not to ADP (Creter et al , 1978).
On the other hand, platelet sensitivity to ADP was exaggerated in retinopathy patients studied by Khosla et al and was significantly greater than that in diabetics without retinopathy (Khosla et al, 1979).
The majority of reports of platelet-aggregation studies in diabetics without clinical evidence of vascular complications have found increased aggregation to various agonists, particularly ADP and collagen (Sagel et al, 1975; Halushka et al , 1971; Stuart et al , 1979; Halushka et al , 1981 a; Silberbauer et al , 1981; Janka et al , 1983).
However, the occasional study has failed to demonstrate increased platelet aggregation in  diabetics free of vascular disease (Petersen & Gormsen, 1978; Corbella et al, 1979) and certainly it would appear from the studies as a whole that platelet aggregation is more enhanced in diabetics with complications.
Platelet aggregation in whole blood
Recently a new method of measuring platelet aggregation has been described (Cardinal & Flower, 1980) which enables platelet aggregation in response to various agonists to be studied in whole blood.
When two electrodes are suspended in whole blood, a monolayer of platelets will form and the conductance between the electrodes is constant.
However, further platelets aggregate to the platelet monolayer when an aggregation agent is added and an accretion of platelets occurs between the two electrodes.
This resulting increase in impedance between the electrodes may be observed on a pen recorder.
This may be a more physiological approach to the study of platelet aggregation as platelets are studied immediately after blood sampling in the presence of red cells, white cells and the heavier platelets that are removed by the centrifugation step in techniques using platelet-rich plasma.
These cells may be important modulators of platelet function in vivo through their ability to take up adenine nucleotides and synthesize and release regulatory prostaglandins (Roos & Pfleger, 1972; Blackwell et al, 1978).
In addition, important regulators of platelet function, such as prostacyclin and cyclic AMP, may have been degraded to inactive products during the time taken to prepare platelet-rich plasma.
This technique has been applied to the study of platelet function in diabetic subjects (Jones et al, 1985).
In response to the agonist arachidonic acid (1 mM) which acts via the prostaglandin pathway, and collagen (1 μg/ml) which acts partly directly by adhesion and also via prostaglandin synthesis, whole blood samples from the diabetic subjects showed increased platelet aggregation.
No significant differences were seen with the higher dose of collagen (5 μg/ml), probably because the impedance aggregometer is more sensitive to smaller platelet aggregates than to the larger aggregates which would have been induced by the high-dose collagen (Ingerman-Wojenski et al, 1982).
The diabetics chosen for this study were free of clinical evidence of vascular disease, which suggests that the platelet abnormalities in this diabetic group were due to the diabetic state (Jones et al, 1985).
Spontaneous platelet aggregation
Several studies have attempted to assess whether there is evidence of increased circulating platelet aggregates in diabetic subjects.
The platelet aggregate ratio as described by Wu and Hoak (1974) depends on the ratio of the platelet count performed on platelet-rich plasma derived from blood mixed with formalin to that in platelet-rich plasma prepared without formalin.
Formalin fixes platelet aggregates which would be removed during the centrifugation to produce platelet-rich plasma.
Therefore the platelet-aggregate ratio would be low in the presence of circulating platelet aggregates.
It is important to remember that other factors may affect the platelet-aggregate ratio such as the rate at which blood is drawn through the sampling needle (Rohrer et al, 1978).
However, Davis et al demonstrated that a group of 15 insulin-dependent diabetics without clinical evidence of complications had a significantly reduced platelet aggregate ratio of 0.75 ± 0.6 (± s.d.) compared to age- and sex-matched control subjects with a ratio of 0.91 + 0.11 (Davis et al 1982).
No difference in the platelet-aggregate ratio was found between a group of 15 diabetics diagnosed after the age of 30 years (six treated with insulin), some of whom had vascular complications compared to age- and sex-matched controls.
No details were given of the glycaemic control or other metabolic parameters of the two groups of diabetics studied (Davis et al, 1982), and it is difficult to account for these findings.
Dettori et al(1983) assessed the platelet-aggregate ratio in 92 ‘adult onset’ diabetics and compared the results to 50 control subjects of a similar age.
No differences were  observed in the diabetic group as a whole compared to controls.
However, when the patients were divided into those with good control (HbA lc <9 per cent) and bad control (HbA lc <9 per cent ) it was found that the group with poor control had a significantly reduced platelet-aggregate ratio.
Along with this there was a highly significant inverse relationship between platelet-aggregate ratio and HbA lc .
No such correlation was seen with various parameters of lipid metabolism (Dettori et al, 1983).
In a further study of the platelet-aggregate ratio in diabetic subjects, Preston et al found a significant reduction in the diabetic group and this was due mainly to those diabetics with evidence of microvascular complications (Preston et al, 1978).
The above studies have attempted to assess the presence of circulating platelet aggregates.
Other studies have measured ‘spontaneous’ platelet aggregation in platelet-rich plasma and whole blood in vitro using a variety of techniques but mostly involving agitation by stirring.
The platelet aggregates formed in this way are fixed with formol.
It is difficult to assess the significance of ‘spontaneous’ platelet aggregation, that is platelet aggregation induced by stirring alone without the addition of an aggregatory agent.
However, the phenomenon is unusual in healthy individuals and it is conceivable that circulation stresses may have similar effects on platelets in vivo .
Studies of this kind have demonstrated increased spontaneous in vitro platelet aggregation in insulin-dependent diabetic subjects free from vascular disease (Krzywanek & Breddin, 1981; Paulsen et al, 1981; Silberbauer et al , 1981).
Platelet-specific proteins
Initial reports of β-thromboglobulin levels in diabetic subjects were conflicting.
Whereas in one study no significant increase in β-thromboglobulin was found (Campbell et al, 1977), other studies revealed higher levels of β-thromboglobulin in diabetic patients (Burrows et al , 1978; Preston et al , 1978).
It has been suggested that the different findings in these studies were due to the different techniques applied to the collection of blood samples.
In the study of Campbell et al blood samples were collected into plastic tubes containing PGE 1 in addition to EDTA and theophylline (Campbell et al, 1977).
In the other studies PGE 1 was not present in the sample tubes (Burrows et al, 1978).
However, it is now generally accepted that β-thromboglobulin levels are elevated in diabetics (Davis et al, 1979) and further evidence came from a large study of β-thromboglobulin and platelet factor 4 in diabetics compared to age- and sex-matched controls (Betteridge et al , 1981).
It is known that there is a significant increase in the level of β-thromboglobulin with age (Ludlam et al, 1975; Zahavi et al , 1980) and a sex difference in old healthy subjects (Zahavi et al , 1980).
Both β-thromboglobulin and platelet factor 4 levels were significantly elevated in diabetics compared to age- and sex-matched controls (Betteridge et al, 1981).
Levels of β-thromboglobulin and platelet factor 4 were highly significantly correlated both in control subjects and diabetic patients, confirming that these two proteins are released from the same platelet pool and presumably at the same rate.
A significant positive correlation was found between, B-thromboglobulin and malondialdehyde formation in washed platelets stimulated by arachidonic acid.
Malondialdehyde is a stable end-product of the prostaglandin pathway in platelets.
The significant positive correlation of β-thromboglobulin to platelet malondialdehyde formation suggests that the enhanced platelet-release reaction may be in part linked to increased platelet prostaglandin synthesis in diabetic subjects (Betteridge et al, 1981), possibly leading to generation of unstable endoperoxides and thromboxanes which are powerful inducers of platelet aggregation and release reaction (Hamberg et al , 1975).
β-Thromboglobulin levels have been shown to be elevated in various types of vascular disease.
Ludlam et al(1975) found elevated levels in patients presenting with subacute venous thrombosis.
Stewart et al(1983) described significantly higher levels of platelet-specific proteins in patients with transient cerebral ischaemia, and  Handin et al (1978) found elevated levels in patients following myocardial infarction.
Cella et al(1979) found elevated β-thromboglobulin levels in patients with peripheral vascular disease but not in patients with cerebro-vascular disease.
Platelet-specific protein levels have been compared in diabetics with and without clinical evidence of vascular disease (Betteridge et al, 1981), and although there was a more pronounced increase in diabetics with retinopathy, those diabetics without clinical evidence of vascular disease still had higher levels of platelet-specific proteins than controls suggesting that the enhanced platelet activation may not just be a consequence of vascular damage but may precede its development.
So far elevated levels of platelet-specific proteins have been discussed purely as a likely measure of enhanced in vivo platelet-release reaction in diabetic subjects.
However, do these platelet-specific proteins have a physiological role in their own right?
The important platelet mitogen, platelet-derived growth factor which is an α-granule constituent along with β-thromboglobulin and platelet factor 4 has been discussed earlier in this chapter.
Both β-thromboglobulin and platelet factor 4 have antiheparin activity.
However, it is doubtful whether this property of the platelet-specific proteins has any physiological importance, since the concentration of heparin is probably insignificant (Niewiarowski & Paul, 1981).
Nevertheless, these proteins also react with other glycosaminoglycans such as heparin sulphate (Barber et al, 1972; Niewiarowski et al , 1979).
Heparin sulphate occurs on the surface of many cells including endothelial cells (Lindahl & Hook, 1978) and there is evidence that both platelet factor 4 (Busch et al, 1980) and β-thromboglobulin (Hope et al , 1979) bind to cultured endothelial cells.
In addition, β-thromboglobulin appears to inhibit prostacyclin synthesis in bovine aortic endothelial cells (Hope et al , 1979).
Platelet factor 4 appears to act as an inhibitor of collagenase which suggests a possible physiological role in connective tissue metabolism (Hiti-Harper et al, 1978).
However, the possible physiological roles for β-thromboglobulin and platelet factor 4 remain to be determined.
Platelet prostaglandin and thromboxane production
As discussed previously, prostaglandins, thromboxanes and their precursor arachidonic acid are critical substances in platelet metabolism (Samuelsson, 1977), and there have been several studies of the activity of the prostaglandin pathway and thromboxane synthesis in platelets from diabetic subjects.
Halushka et al(1977) demonstrated that diabetic platelets synthesised greater amounts of prostaglandin E 2 in response to various agonists compared to platelets from matched control subjects.
Most of the patients studied were free of clinically detectable vascular disease.
Subsequently, increased serum concentrations of the prostaglandins PGE 2 and PGF&sub1α; were demonstrated in the serum of diabetic children (Chase et al, 1979).
Although the findings indicated increased activity of the platelet prostaglandin pathway in diabetic subjects, they did not explain the increased platelet aggregation as these prostaglandins are not in themselves aggregatory.
The formation of the potent aggregating substance thromboxane A 2 in diabetic platelets has to be assessed indirectly because it is very labile with a half-life of approximately 30 seconds in aqueous solution (Hamberg et al, 1975).
Malondialdehyde is a stable product of the conversion of endoperoxides to thromboxane A 2 by the microsomal enzyme thromboxane synthetase and is formed in equimolar amounts (Diczfalusy et al, 1977).
Stuart et al(1979) showed that platelets obtained from pregnant diabetic women synthesised increased amounts of malondialdehyde.
In addition, Betteridge et al (1981) found increased synthesis of malondialdehyde in washed platelets stimulated by arachidonic acid in 23 insulin-dependent and 25 non-insulin-dependent diabetics (20 males, 28 females) compared to 30 control subjects.
Forty-one per cent of these diabetics had levels of malondialdehyde formation greater  than the highest result seen in the control group, and this difference was highly significant (Betteridge et al, 1981).
Thromboxane A 2 formation has also been assessed by the measurement of thromboxane B 2 by radioimmunoassay.
Thromboxane A 2 spontaneously rearranges to form thromboxane B 2 which is stable and considerably less potent (Friedman et al, 1979).
Several studies have shown that diabetic platelets synthesise increased amounts of thromboxane A 2 as assessed by thromboxane B 2 levels (Ziboh et al, 1979; Butkus et al , 1980; Lagarde et al , 1980; Halushka et al , 1981b).
Butkus et al(1980) measured thromboxane B 2 generation in response to exogenous arachidonic acid quantitated by electron-capture gas chromatography in a group of 180 insulin-dependent subjects.
Although platelet thromboxane generation was elevated in diabetics without clinical evidence of vascular disease, the difference did not reach statistical significance.
However, those diabetics with retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy, peripheral vascular disease or coronary vascular disease did show significantly enhanced platelet thromboxane generation compared to controls (Butkus et al, 1980).
Ziboh et al(1979) also found that diabetics with complications had higher platelet thromboxane generation than diabetics without complications.
However, in the study of Halushka et al(1981 b) thromboxane generation appeared to be increased in diabetics without complications, and evidence of increased thromboxane generation comes from studies using experimental animals, for instance the spontaneously diabetic BB-Wistar rat (Subbiah & Deitemeyer, 1980) and the streptozotocin diabetic rat (Johnson et al , 1980).
In addition, a recent study has assessed platelet thromboxane production in insulin-dependent diabetics with and without coronary artery disease (Butkus et al , 1982).
Platelets from diabetics with coronary artery disease had higher thromboxane production than those without coronary disease and platelets from diabetics in general produced more thromboxane than those from non-diabetics.
However, those non-diabetics with coronary disease showed high thromboxane production (Butkus et al, 1982).
Prostacyclin
The discovery of this highly important cyclo-oxygenation product of arachidonic acid, which is the most potent endogenous anti-platelet aggregatory agent known (Moncada et al, 1976a), has stimulated interest in the possible effects of the diabetic state on its metabolism.
Harrison et al(1978) found decreased prostacyclin production in aortic rings taken from severe streptozotocin diabetic rats.
This original observation has been confirmed and extended by other workers.
Silberbauer et al(1980) induced a mild form of diabetes in Göttingen miniature pigs by repeated administration of streptozotocin.
The amount of prostacyclin generated (assayed by inhibition of ADP-induced aggregation) by vascular tissue was significantly reduced in these mildly diabetic animals (Silberbauer et al, 1980).
The time-course of development of reduced vascular prostacyclin production was studied by El Tahir et al(1982).
Although there was a slight reduction in aortic prostacyclin production in acutely diabetic rats (diabetic for up to 15 days), the differences were not statistically significant.
However, in chronically diabetic rats (diabetic for eight weeks) vascular prostacyclin was markedly reduced (El Tahir et al, 1982).
The reduced production of vascular prostacyclin in chronically diabetic rats studied by Harrison et al(1980) was restored to normal by chronic (eight days) but not acute insulin treatment.
This suggests that low prostacyclin production may be a consequence of arterial endothelial cell loss or damage and this requires restoration by normalisation of metabolism for some days before prostacyclin production returns to normal (Harrison et al, 1980).
It is obviously difficult to study arterial prostacyclin production in diabetic subjects.
However, in a small study of vascular tissue removed at operation prostacyclin generation was found to be reduced in tissue from diabetics  (Johnson et al, 1979).
Furthermore, Silberbauer et al(1979) showed that vein biopsies obtained from insulin-dependent diabetics generated significantly less prostacyclin compared to age- and sex-matched controls.
On the other hand, Davis et al(1981) found that venous prostacyclin production was lower in a small group of diabetics with nil or minimal retinopathy compared to diabetics with proliferative retinopathy.
This finding, albeit in very small numbers, would seem to suggest that reduced prostacyclin production may not have a role in the development of microvascular disease.
However, it is likely that this finding may indicate increased prostacyclin production in response to vascular injury (Dollery et al, 1983).
Attempts have been made to measure plasma prostacyclin levels indirectly by radioimmunoassay measurement of 6-keto-PGF 1 α, a stable metabolite of prostacyclin.
Using this method conflicting findings have been reported in studies of diabetic subjects (Dollery et al, 1979; Davis et al , 1981), and it is now generally accepted that there may be considerable non-specific interference in assaying this metabolite in plasma which might explain the different findings (Greaves & Preston, 1982; Dollery et al , 1983).
Two recent studies have examined the effect of the diabetic environment on prostacyclin production by cultured human endothelial cells (Paton et al, 1982 a; Patel et al , 1983).
When these cells were incubated with serum from diabetic patients prostacyclin production was inhibited.
The nature of the inhibitory factor or factors in the diabetic serum is not understood, but a likely contender would be lipid peroxides which are known to inhibit prostacyclin production and to be elevated in diabetic plasma.
In addition to the findings that vascular prostacyclin production may be decreased in diabetes, it has been shown that platelets obtained from diabetic subjects show diminished sensitivity to the antiaggregatory effects of prostacyclin in vitro .
(Onodera et al, 1981; Betteridge et al , 1982; Jones et al , 1985).
The pathogenesis of this finding is not known but it appears to be unrelated to any effect of the diabetic state on platelet prostacyclin receptors as prostacyclin binding appears to be normal in diabetic platelets (Shepherd et al, 1983).
Platelet Function and Diabetic Control
The overall effect of diabetic control on platelet function remains to be clarified.
Studies in this field are difficult to interpret due to the inherent variability of the measurements of platelet function.
In addition, sample timing in relation to metabolic control in diabetic patients may be crucial.
Hypoglycaemia, as might be expected, may affect platelet function substantially (Hutton et al, 1979; Hilsted et al , 1980), presumably by stimulating the release of counter-regulatory hormones, particularly adrenaline which is known to be a potent stimulus for platelet aggregation.
Thus platelet aggregation induced by ADP in vitro was enhanced following hypoglycaemia and this was associated with a fall in platelet count (Hilsted et al, 1980).
More recently, β-thromboglobulin has been shown to rise markedly during controlled hypoglycaemia in a group of insulin-dependent diabetics (Monnier et al, 1984).
This latter finding provides further evidence of the in vivo platelet activation and release reaction.
Therefore it is apparent that possible stimulation of platelet function by hypoglycaemia must be borne in mind when interpreting the results of longitudinal studies of ‘tight’ glycaemic control on platelet function.
Hypoglycaemia may be asymptomatic (Calabrese et al, 1982) but still lead to secretion of adrenaline (Rizza et al , 1979) and hence activation of platelets.
In addition, if samples for platelet function studies are taken from diabetic subjects during episodes of metabolic decompensation leading to diabetic ketoacidosis or the non-ketotic hyperosmolar syndrome, then platelet aggregation and consumption may be stimulated (Kwaan et al , 1972; Paton, 1981).
As well as these acute metabolic derangements found in diabetes producing acute effects on platelet function, other factors known to influence platelet function in non-diabetics  may be operative in the diabetic population under study, such as the presence of vascular disease, ingestion of aspirin-like substances, exercise, smoking, and the use of the contraceptive pill.
For these reasons studies detailing the effects of diabetic control on platelet function must be interpreted with caution.
More work is needed in this area along with more reliable, reproducible and physiological assessments of platelet activity.
In addition, it is important to know which of the altered plasma factors in the diabetic state are responsible for enhanced platelet function.
If ‘tight’ diabetic control leads to restoration of platelet function to normal, is this a reflection of the fall in blood glucose, alteration in plasma lipids and fatty acids, restoration of normal endothelial cell integrity or other mechanisms?
However, bearing in mind these constraints; what is the current evidence linking diabetic control and platelet function?
Associations between glycaemic control and parameters of platelet function have been sought both in cross-sectional studies and prospective studies and conflicting findings have been reported.
Platelet-specific proteins
In an early study of β-thromboglobulin in a mixed group of 72 diabetic subjects no correlation was found with simultaneous measurements of plasma glucose concentration (Burrows et al, 1978).
Platelet factor 4 showed a significant positive correlation with plasma glucose concentration in a small group of insulin-dependent diabetics but no correlation was seen for β-thromboglobulin and no relationship was found for either of the platelet-specific proteins in a larger group of non-insulin-dependent diabetics (Davi et al, 1982).
Several studies have sought relationships between glycosylated haemoglobin as a measure of overall glycaemic control and platelet-specific protein levels but no correlations were found (Mathews et al, 1979; Betteridge et al , 1981; Davi et al , 1982).
Equally conflicting results with regard to glycaemic control and platelet-specific protein levels have been reported in longitudinal studies.
In nine newly diagnosed non-insulin-dependent diabetics mean β-thromboglobulin levels fell from 74 ng/ml (range 24–177 ng/ml) to 39 ng/ ml as treatment with diet and hypoglycaemic agents reduced mean blood glucose concentrations from 14.3 to 8.5 mmol/l.
(Preston et al, 1978).
However, in longitudinal studies of moderately well controlled insulin-dependent diabetics treated with CS11 for two weeks (Delamothe & Betteridge, 1985) or four to eight weeks (Rosove et al, 1984) which led to significant lowering of mean plasma glucose and glycosylated haemoglobin levels, no changes were observed in platelet factor 4 or β-thromboglobulin levels.
On the other hand, in a short-term study using the artificial pancreas, normalisation of blood glucose for 48 hours led to a significant fall in β-thromboglobulin levels (Voisin et al, 1983).
As has been discussed elsewhere in this book, hyperlipoproteinaemia is common in diabetes mellitus and in some studies correlations have been sought between platelet-specific protein levels and fasting total serum cholesterol, triglycerides and the individual lipoproteins.
These measurements were available in 49 of the diabetic subjects studied by Betteridge et al(1981).
Small but statistically significant correlations were found between, B-thromboglobulin levels and total triglyceride, VLDL-triglyceride, LDL-cholesterol and HDL/total cholesterol ratio.
The correlations were positive apart from the correlation with HDL/total cholesterol which was negative.
These findings suggest that changes seen in platelet-specific proteins in diabetes might be secondary to associated hyperlipoproteinaemia.
In addition, these correlations between individual lipid and lipoprotein concentrations and platelet-specific proteins may explain the changes of platelet-specific proteins with instigation of diabetic therapy (Preston et al , 1978), as lipid levels would be expected to be elevated in uncontrolled diabetes and to fall with improved control (Paisey et al , 1978; Simpson et al , 1979).
This suggested association between lipid and lipoprotein levels and enhanced platelet function in diabetes is supported by many studies which have described abnormal platelet function in hyperlipidaemic non-diabetic subjects (Nordoy & Rodset, 1971; Carvalho et al, 1974; Shattil et al , 1977; Colman, 1978; Joist et al , 1979; Tremoli et al , 1979) which have measured in vitro platelet aggregation, platelet factor 4, plasma antiheparin activity and a bleeding-time test.
In addition, the platelet-specific proteins β-thromboglobulin and platelet factor 4 were highly significantly elevated in a large group of hyperlipaemic subjects compared to normolipaemic controls (Zahavi et al , 1981).
The mechanism of lipid-induced effects of platelet function has received considerable attention.
Shattil et al(1975) studied the effect of incubating normal platelets with cholesterol-rich liposomes.
This led to a substantial increase in platelet cholesterol concentration, the bulk of this increase being associated with the platelet membrane.
Along with these changes in cholesterol concentration the cholesterol-rich platelets showed enhanced sensitivity to adrenaline and ADP measured by aggregometry and 14 C-serotonin release.
Conversely, platelets incubated with ‘cholesterol-poor’ liposomes showed a reduced cholesterol content and significantly reduced sensitivity to ADP.
On the basis of these findings, Shattil et al(1975) postulated that cholesterol enrichment of the platelet membrane might affect the membrane fluidity and consequently the sensitivity to aggregating agonists.
In support of this suggestion the same workers (Shattil et al, 1977) found that platelets from patients with Type 2 hyperlipoproteinaemia had a higher cholesterol/phospholipid ratio and other workers have found an elevated platelet-free cholesterol in patients with the same condition (Miettinen, 1974).
In addition, Shattil and Cooper (1976) described increased platelet membrane microviscosity following incubation of platelets with ‘cholesterol-rich’ liposomes and Sinha et al (1977) found an impaired response of the membrane-associated enzyme adenylate cyclase to the stimulating effect of various agents including prostaglandin E 1 as shown by a decrease in production of cyclic AMP.
More recent studies have demonstrated that increases in the cholesterol/phospholipid ratio of platelets resulted in increased liberation of arachidonate (Wörner & Patscheke, 1980).
In addition, Aviram and Brook (1983) have provided evidence for a direct effect on in vitro platelet function for the cholesterol-rich lipoprotein, LDL and the triglyceride-rich lipoprotein, VLDL.
These workers incubated the purified lipoprotein for 30 minutes with gel-filtered platelets and demonstrated that VLDL and LDL increased thrombin-induced platelet aggregation and 14 C-serotonin release induced by adrenaline ADP and thrombin.
However, Hassall et al(1983), who examined the relationship of in vitro aggregation to adrenaline, ADP, collagen and thrombin to prevailing.
Lipid and lipoprotein concentrations in a normal male population, found little relationship between VLDL and platelet sensitivity except for a reduced adrenaline response in subjects in the lowest quintile for VLDL concentrations.
In contrast, total and LDL cholesterol concentrations did appear to influence platelet sensitivity to adrenaline and to a lesser extent ADP (Hassall et al, 1983).
Lipoproteins may indirectly affect platelet function by altering vascular endothelial cell function.
Recent experimental work has suggested that lipoproteins (VLDL) obtained from diabetic animals (streptozotocin diabetic rats) may be more toxic to cultured porcine endothelial cells than lipoproteins obtained from control animals.
This effect which may be due to increased lipid peroxide levels in diabetes was reversed by insulin treatment (Arbogast et al, 1982).
Other studies have shown increased lipid peroxide levels in lipoproteins isolated from diabetic patients (Nishigaki et al, 1981) and animals (Higuchi, 1982).
These findings suggest that lipoprotein abnormalities in the diabetic state may also indirectly affect platelet function by damaging vascular endothelium.
There is as yet no direct measure of endothelial damage in the intact animal.
However, some recent studies have measure plasma levels of Factor VIII-related  antigen as an indirect measure of endothelial cell damage together with β-thromboglobulin levels.
Rak et al(1983) found that plasma levels of both proteins were elevated in diabetics including children.
It is difficult to determine therefore whether endothelial damage preceded the evidence of enhanced platelet-release reaction or not.
Janka et al(1983) studied Factor VIII-related antigen and β-thromboglobulin levels in groups of diabetics with and without vascular disease.
These authors found an increase in Factor VIII-related antigen in all groups of diabetics whereas β-thromboglobulin was only elevated in diabetics with retinopathy.
This study suggests that endothelial damage (as assessed by Factor VIII-related antigen levels) may precede evidence of in vivo platelet aggregation.
Recently, Winocour et al(1983) have been able to examine the time-course of alterations in platelet function and vascular endothelial cell damage as assessed by measurement of plasma levels of von Willebrand Factor and Factor VIII-related antigen in rats made diabetic with streptozotocin.
These authors found that whereas enhanced platelet function (increased aggregation to ADP) was detectable as early as three days following induction of diabetes, elevated levels of the Factor VIII components were not seen for 14–28 days.
Therefore, these findings suggest that in this experimental model evidence of enhanced platelet function occurs before evidence of endothelial damage, suggesting that the enhanced platelet aggregation is not merely secondary to endothelial cell damage.
In this study no difference was observed in the plasma cholesterol concentration between control and diabetic rats.
However, plasma triglycerides were elevated in the diabetic animals soon after the induction of the disease and the authors speculated that this may have contributed to the development of the platelet and vessel-wall changes.
Platelet aggregation
The relationship between platelet aggregation and diabetic control is even more confounding than that for the platelet-specific proteins, various studies either showing no change, increased or decreased platelet aggregation in response to improved glycaemic control.
Platelet aggregation in response to adrenaline showed striking changes when studied before and after stabilisation of poorly controlled diabetics (Peterson et al, 1977) in that the lag phase following the addition of adrenaline was prolonged from a mean of 19 to 65 seconds following stabilisation.
In addition, there was a significant inverse correlation between glycosylated haemoglobin levels and the lag phase, suggesting that the platelets were less sensitive to adrenaline when better glycaemic control had been achieved (Peterson et al , 1977).
More recently, platelet-aggregation responses have been studied in diabetics treated with CS11 or the artificial pancreas.
After strict metabolic control was achieved in 10 insulin-dependent diabetics for 24 hours with the aid of the artificial pancreas, mean blood glucose levels falling from 13.3 mmol/l to 5.1 mmol/l, a significant decrease in the aggregation response to ADP, was observed (Giugliano et al, 1982).
Along with this there was a significant reduction in circulating platelet aggregates.
No such changes were observed in a group of eight insulin-dependent diabetics whose glycaemic control was only monitored during the study period (Giugliano et al, 1982).
Other authors found similar findings with regard to circulating platelet aggregates.
A group of 92 diabetics were divided into 39 with poor control (glycosylated haemoglobin >9 per cent) and 53 with good control (glycosylated haemoglobin <9 per cent ) and the results of the platelet-aggregate ratio analysed.
Diabetics with poor control had platelet-aggregate ratios significantly lower than those with good control, indicating the presence of more circulating aggregates in the poorly controlled group.
In addition, a significant inverse correlation between the platelet-aggregate ratio and glycosylated haemoglobin was found for the whole group (Dettori et al , 1983).
Juhan et al(1982) also studied the effect of glycaemic normalisation by the artificial pancreas  on platelet function but employed other techniques.
These authors attempted to assess platelet function in citrated whole blood by determining the platelet aggregates formed following electromagnetic agitation for 15 minutes.
The aggregates formed were fixed with formol and the results expressed as the percentage of platelets aggregated compared to a reference platelet count performed before the agitation.
After 24 hours of normoglycaemia platelet aggregation returned to levels seen in non-diabetic controls (Juhan et al, 1982).
Using CS11 to obtain improved glycaemic control for longer periods other workers have failed to demonstrate changes in platelet aggregation in vitro (Rosove et al, 1984; Delamothe & Betteridge, 1985).
However, one study has not only shown persistence of enhanced platelet reactivity in response to collagen and sodium arachidonate despite a 1 6-week period of near normal glycaemic control but also an increase in platelet reactivity to ADP (Jackson et al, 1984).
Thromboxane
Thromboxane production by platelets stimulated with arachidonic acid showed a significant positive correlation with the fasting plasma glucose concentration obtained at the same time in a group of 15 diabetics studied by Halushka et al(1981 b).
In addition, platelet thromboxane synthesis was lower in a group of diabetics treated with CS11 for six months compared to a control group on conventional therapy (McDonald et al , 1982).
However, when normal platelets were incubated with increasing glucose concentrations in vitro thromboxane production was unaffected (Best et al, 1979), and the findings of Halushka et al (1981 b) and McDonald et al (1982) have not been supported by a recent study of platelet thromboxane generation before and after CS11 (Jackson et al , 1984).
These authors measured thromboxane generation in response to arachidonic acid and collagen in a group of 11 diabetic patients with neuropathy.
Before CS11, arachidonic acid-stimulated thromboxane production was enhanced in the diabetics compared to controls and this enhanced production persisted after CS11 for 16 weeks.
On the other hand, collagen-stimulated thromboxane production was similar to controls before CS11 apart from at the lowest collagen concentration (0.5 μg/ml) when thromboxane production was in fact lower than that seen in control subjects.
After CS11 this apparent subnormal thromboxane production returned to normal (Jackson et al, 1984).
This finding may be due to a reduced level of arachidonic acid in platelet membrane phospholipids of diabetic subjects as described by Jones et al(1983).
This reduced level of arachidonic acid showed a negative correlation with glycosylated haemoglobin (Jones et al, 1983).
The finding therefore of an increase in collagen-stimulated thromboxane production by CS 11 could be explained by an increased availability of arachidonic acid from membrane phospholipids (Jackson et al, 1984).
Prostacyclin
Information about the effect of diabetic control on prostacyclin production comes from animal studies.
Harrison et al(1980) demonstrated that the reduced prostacyclin release (measured by bioassay) from aorta and renal cortex of streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats was restored to that seen in control non-diabetic rats by chronic (eight days) treatment with insulin.
However, no effects were seen on prostacyclin production acutely after the start of insulin treatment.
It is likely that chronic insulin treatment is necessary to allow endothelial cell loss or damage to be repaired (Harrison et al, 1980).
These findings have been extended in the streptozotocin diabetic rat by Rogers and Larkins (1981).
These authors measured the production of 6-oxo-prostaglandin F 1 α, the stable metabolite of prostacyclin by rat aorta.
They demonstrated that the reduced production of 6-oxo-prostaglandin F 1 α, seen in chronically diabetic rats (four-six weeks) could be restored by a dose of insulin (8 U/kg/day) that only partially corrected their plasma glucose and body weight (Rogers & Larkins, 1981).
The studies discussed so far have dealt with the effects of insulin deficiency in the experimental diabetic rat on prostacyclin production and the effects of insulin treatment.
However, the possible role of peripheral hyperinsulinaemia as a risk factor for vascular disease has been emphasised (Stout, 1981), and pertinent to this hypothesis are the findings of Lasche and Larson (1982).
These authors studied the effects of high insulin concentrations on prostacyclin production by rat aortic rings in vitro and demonstrated that prostacyclin production was significantly reduced in the presence of insulin at concentrations of 2500, 500 and 250 μU/ml (Lasche & Larson, 1982).
Thus a possible deleterious effect of hyperinsulinaemia may be the inhibition of prostacyclin production by arterial wall.
The sensitivity of platelets from diabetic subjects to the antiaggregatory effects of prostacyclin has been examined in a cross-sectional study using the electronic whole blood platelet aggregometer (Jones et al, 1985).
A positive correlation was found between glycosylated haemoglobin concentration and the prostacyclin concentration necessary to inhibit ADP-induced platelet aggregation by 50 per cent.
This finding suggests that under situations of poor glycaemic control platelets from diabetic subjects are less sensitive to the antiaggregatory effects of prostacyclin (Jones et al, 1985).
Sulphonylureas and Other Agents
There are a variety of sulphonylurea agents available for the therapy of diet-failed non-insulin-dependent diabetic subjects, varying mainly in their half-life and mode of excretion.
In addition to their hypoglycaemic action it is probable that some or all of these compounds may have antiplatelet effects.
Thus gliclazide depresses various parameters of platelet function in vitro and appears to inhibit arachidonate release from platelet phospholipids (Tsuboi et al, 1981) and to activate platelet adenylate cyclase leading to increased levels of cyclic AMP (Lagarde et al , 1975).
In addition,ex vivo platelet aggregation to ADP and adrenaline was significantly reduced in diabetic subjects treated for up to a year with therapeutic doses of gliclazide (Poari et al , 1979).
These authors considered that the antiplatelet action observed was unrelated to effects on glycaemic control as the two effects were dissociated in time (Poari et al, 1979).
However, other workers who studied the effect of gliclazide in diabetic subjects have felt that the beneficial effects of gliclazide on platelet function were likely to be due to its hypoglycaemic action rather than to any direct effect on haemostatic function (Paton et al, 1982 b).
Gliclazide is the sulphonylurea that has received most study in terms of possible effects on platelet function.
However, other sulphonylurea preparations may also have antiplatelet effects.
Thus tolbutamide in high concentrations has been shown to inhibit platelet aggregation and interfere with the platelet-release reaction (Roth et al, 1971).
In addition, in a study of diet, diet plus glibenclamide and diet plus gliclazide on plasma glucose and platelet function in a group of newly diagnosed non-insulin-dependent  diabetics , both glibenclamide and gliclazide reduced the increased platelet sensitivity to ADP seen in the diet period (Klaff et al.1979).
Furthermore, glibenclamide therapy was associated with a significant reduction in the platelet-aggregation response to adrenaline (10 μmol) and collagen (750 μg/ml).
Obviously further work needs to be done in this area, and long-term studies now in progress using antiplatelet agents such as aspirin and dipyridamole need to be evaluated for possible protective effects on the development of microvascular and macrovascular disease in diabetic subjects.
In addition, the newer agents such as prostacyclin and its stable analogues and thromboxane synthetase inhibitors need to be similarly evaluated.
Certainly a thromboxane synthetase inhibitor has been shown to reduce urinary albumin excretion in insulin-dependent diabetics (Barnett et al, 1984).
A further potentially exciting area yet to be explored in the diabetic population is the dietary substitution of the ω-3 series of fatty acids such as eicosapentaenoic and decosahexaenoic acids  which has been shown to favourably affect platelet function in non-diabetic subjects (Siess et al, 1980; Thorngren & Gustafson, 1981; Lorenz et al , 1983).
Conclusions
In this chapter I have described some aspects of platelet physiology and biochemistry and the possible role of this interesting cell in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis and thrombosis.
A tentative conclusion that could be drawn from the discussion of platelet-function abnormalities in diabetics would be that the increased platelet reactivity may represent a prethrombotic state and contribute to the as-yet-unexplained increased vascular risk in these patients.
However, although there have been tremendous developments in this field there remain many unanswered questions.
As knowledge of basic platelet metabolism increases it will be more easy to identify platelet abnormalities and their pathogenesis in diabetes mellitus.
Future developments hopefully will lead to better and more reliable tests of platelet function able to establish the prethrombotic state with more certainty.
This would enable prospective studies to be performed to determine the importance of platelet function in the development of vascular disease.
In addition, improved therapeutic agents with more specific and controlled effects on platelet metabolism may be developed allowing more effective intervention.
Certainly two recent preliminary reports of prospective studies of currently available antiplatelet agents and the progression of vascular disease in diabetics have been disappointing (Abraira et al, 1985; Kohner & Baudoin, 1985).
The effects of the diabetic state on the vascular endothelium and its interaction with platelets and other formed elements of blood need to be explored, which will require specific measurements of in vivo endothelial cell metabolism.
In addition, the role of the numerous growth factors and their control in platelets, macrophages and endothelium needs to be explored in diabetes and should lead to new insights in the development of diabetic vascular complications.
Managing Diabetes
K.G. Taylor
Dr Ken Taylor qualified and spent his early training years in London.
His MD research project at St Bartholomew's Hospital concerned lipid metabolism in relation to diabetes.
In 1978 he took up a Senior Registrar post in Diabetes at the General Hospital, Birmingham, and in 1981 his present post as Consultant Physician at Dudley Road Hospital, Birmingham.
His special interests include factors contributing to the development of atheroma and its complications and prevention by ensuring that patients benefit fully from the practical application of current knowledge and developments.
During Myocardial Infarction
From the earlier chapters it is apparent that myocardial infarction is an all-too-frequent occurrence in diabetic patients, whether they are insulin-dependent or not.
Mortality is 33–38 per cent as opposed to 17–18 per cent in the non-diabetic population (Partamian et al, 1965; Czyzk et al , 1980; Gwilt et al , 1984).
Possible reasons for this 2-fold difference are as follows.
Myocardial infarction may lead to increased secretion of counter-regulatory hormones, catecholamines and cortisol which antagonise the actions of insulin and cause a deterioration in the metabolic environment.
Elevation of blood glucose, ketone bodies and free fatty acids in particular may be deleterious to the injured area of myocardium and predispose to arrhythmias (Oliver et al, 1968), impaired contractility or larger infarcts (Kjekshus and Mjøs, 1972; Liedtke et al , 1978; Vik-Mo & Mjøs, 1981) compared to non-diabetics, predisposing to cardiogenic shock or left ventricular failure.
Diabetic patients may have a damaged myocardium due to extensive atheroma and/or small-vessel cardiomyopathy before infarction (Hamby et al, 1974; Regan et al , 1977; Factor et al , 1980), which would make them more likely to develop cardiogenic shock or heart failure.
A study to determine if excellent metabolic control reduced the mortality from myocardial infarction in patients with diabetes was disappointingly negative (Gwilt et al, 1984), but a similar study on a smaller number of patients in Scotland showed considerable benefit (Clark et al , 1985) indicating the need for further investigation.
Pre-existing disease of the coronary macro-circulation and perhaps microcirculation may be the most important factors affecting mortality from acute myocardial infarction in diabetic patients.
Although there may not be any benefit on  mortality from very good diabetic control immediately following myocardial infarction, it is clearly undesirable to have uncontrolled diabetes at this time.
An interesting feature that has emerged recently is the number of patients who are newly diagnosed as diabetic at the time of their myocardial infarction (Oswald et al, 1984).
This study suggested an overall prevalence of undiagnosed diabetes of 5.3 per cent in patients presenting with acute infarction.
It used to be thought that this was temporary diabetes resulting from the stress of infarction, but present data suggest that these patients have undiagnosed diabetes before infarction (Husband et al, 1983; Oswald et al , 1984).
Clearly those looking after patients following infarction need to be aware that a significant number will be known diabetics and some will have undiagnosed diabetes, and they will all tend to have a higher mortality than non-diabetics.
Myocardial infarction will tend to cause a deterioration in the diabetes.
It goes without saying that testing of the urine for glucose and ketones should be mandatory for all patients admitted with infarction and this should be continually charted for those found to be diabetic.
Ketonuria is an important indicator that diabetes is inadequately controlled.
While urine testing remains the single most useful screening test for diabetes and the adequacy of its management, blood testing in addition provides definitive information and avoids the pitfall of a high renal threshold not uncommon in older patients, or the problem of not having a urine specimen immediately available.
A reasonable course is to measure the blood glucose of all patients when they present with infarction.
For known diabetics the blood glucose can be rechecked four-hourly for at least the first 48 hours.
An alternative to blood testing by the laboratory is the use of a test strip in conjunction with a reflectance meter.
This is standard now in many coronary care units and is reliable provided staff are competent with the technique.
If the blood glucose is above 20 mmol/l a sample should be sent to the laboratory for a definitive result.
Although infarction can be expected to disturb diabetes it does not invariably do so.
For some patients observation with little change in regime may be all that is necessary.
The diet following infarction will obviously be quite light.
Non-insulin-dependent patients may be receiving diet alone, or diet and oral hypoglycaemic agents.
Undoubtedly metformin therapy should be discontinued as this drug can predispose to lactic acidosis if tissue hypoxia occurs (Bergman et al, 1978; Luft et al , 1978; Nattrass & Alberti, 1978).
This is more likely following infarction when cardiac output may be reduced and therefore tissue perfusion impaired.
If patients are receiving sulphonylureas at the time of admission there is no contraindication to their continuation, although one should be wary of the very long-acting chlorpropamide as hypoglycaemia is more likely.
Although patients with infarction may vomit at presentation or secondary to opiate administration, this usually settles with antiemetics and may not interfere with oral therapy.
A recent study did not identify a blood glucose level above which complications developed in the diabetic patient with infarction (Gwilt et al, 1984), and one has to rely on clinical judgement of what is reasonable.
Probably a blood glucose of 12 mmol/l or above on more than one occasion should indicate oral therapy for the patient on diet alone or insulin for the patient on maximal oral therapy.
Clearly a short-acting sulphonylurea such as tolbutamide or a medium-acting one such as glibenclamide is particularly useful in this situation.
If insulin is required a convenient regime is to use a highly purified porcine or human short-acting insulin subcutaneously.
A single dose may be needed to reduce a markedly elevated blood glucose and then glycaemic control may be maintained with twice-daily injections.
In some cases it may be necessary to resort to three or four injections of short-acting insulin.
The dietitian will need to be informed so that regular amounts of carbohydrate can be provided in a suitable form.
When the patient is over the acute episode and begins recovery the insulin requirement usually  decreases.
A decision can then be taken whether to revert to oral agents or continue with insulin.
If the latter course is chosen the patient can either be transferred to a once-daily insulin regime with a long-acting insulin or alternatively a twice-daily regime perhaps with a fixed combination of short- and intermediate-acting insulin.
If the patient is left on insulin following discharge from hospital the question of continuing insulin therapy can be reviewed in the diabetic clinic.
Clearly it is important to review all these patients after discharge from hospital and decide their long-term management.
A minority of patients will run a very stormy course after admission with myocardial infarction complicated perhaps by arrhythmias, severe heart failure and reinfarction.
They will be maximally stressed and probably able to take little orally due to vomiting and/or impaired gastrointestinal absorption.
Under these circumstances an intravenous infusion of insulin provides a very convenient and reliable method for managing the diabetes.
The principal limitation to intravenous therapy with insulin is the availability of skilled and diligent nursing staff to ensure that the apparatus is correctly set up, the infusion rate is as instructed and the insulin is infused into the patient.
However, on a coronary care unit with adequate, trained and qualified staff this is not usually a problem.
Highly purified  porcine or human short-acting insulin is added to a small volume of normal saline and infused using a pump set at a rate dependent on blood glucose monitoring.
The blood glucose should be monitored hourly after commencing an intravenous insulin infusion to ensure that the patient is not becoming hypoglycaemic.
This may not be obvious clinically in a sedated poorly perfused patient with a complicated infarction.
Once a satisfactory level is achieved then blood glucose monitoring can be extended initially to two-hourly.
At least one major centre is using a continuous intravenous insulin infusion for all diabetics with infarcts (Lamb, 1984).
For patients with complicated infarctions requiring intensive insulin therapy the recovery phase will be heralded by a diminishing insulin requirement.
At this stage it is convenient to change to an insulin regimen intermediate between the intravenous infusion and the relaxed regimen of one or two injections per day in the well patient.
Six-hourly subcutaneous injections of highly purified short-acting insulin usually meet the requirements and are continued for one or two days before the final transition is made to the patient's customary insulin regimen.
Sliding scales should be mentioned at this point.
They tend to be frowned upon by those caring for diabetic patients.
They are frequently written in a way that omits insulin when the blood glucose is within the normal range, and they usually fail to take account of the insulin resistance induced by increased ketone body production.
Occasionally diabetic patients can become severely ketotic without being very hyperglycaemic.
The most important principle of insulin therapy in the insulin-dependent patient is that insulin must be given regularly to inhibit lipolysis and prevent ketosis.
The foregoing is summarised in Figure 6.1.
Who should look after the diabetic patients on the coronary care unit or the intensive therapy unit?
I believe all doctors and nurses using these units are more than capable of managing most of the diabetic problems.
The role of the physician with an interest in diabetes is to ensure that they have the necessary treatment policies and training and that he is readily available for advice on the more difficult cases.
To Reduce the Risk of Coronary Artery Disease
One of the most important aims of modern diabetic care must be to delay the onset of chronic complications by optimal management.
Let us consider why careful management may be beneficial.
We have evidence from studies on non-diabetics that treating hypertension reduces the incidence of stroke, congestive cardiac failure and possibly myocardial infarction (Veterans Administration Co-operative Study Group on  Antihypertensive Agents, 1967,1970; Hypertension Detection and Follow-Up Program, 1979).
Studies on serum cholesterol levels in non-diabetics have shown that a degree of primary prevention of coronary artery disease is achieved by lowering serum cholesterol levels in high-risk populations of males with significant hypercholesterolaemia using diet and drug treatment (The Lipid Research Clinics Coronary Primary Prevention Trial, 1984) or diet alone (Hjermann et al, 1981).
Hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia are common accompaniments of diabetes and it is not illogical to anticipate similar benefits if these atherogenic factors are dealt with effectively in the diabetic patient.
Figure 6.1 The management of the blood glucose during myocardial infraction.
Hyperglycaemia per se is an important factor predisposing to atheroma, possibly via an effect on platelet aggregation or on structural proteins comprising the tissues of the arterial wall or by mechanisms unknown.
There have been no studies yet in diabetics showing that a group with really good glycaemic control has a lower incidence of coronary artery disease than a well-matched control group.
Such studies will be difficult to mount because they will need large numbers of patients followed over many years to demonstrate any benefit.
It is surely unjustifiable not to provide optimal control of blood glucose in the rest of the diabetic population while the results of these studies are awaited, provided that the means of achieving optimal glycaemic control are acceptable to patients, free from undesirable effects and not unduly expensive.
Three major steps forward in diabetic care in this century have been the discovery of insulin, the development of treatment programmes for diabetic ketoacidosis and the management of pregnancy in the diabetic patient.
This latter  breakthrough brought together diabetologist and obstetrician to produce comprehensive care, with improved glycaemic control contributing to dramatic decreases in perinatal mortality and morbidity (Karlsson & Kjellmer, 1972).
I suspect that we are about to witness a similar phenomenon with regard to the chronic complications of diabetes, including coronary artery disease, due to comprehensive patient care with special emphasis on control of blood glucose, blood pressure, lipids and a decline in the prevalence of cigarette smoking.
Type 1 Diabetes
This type of diabetes is diagnosed usually in the first half of life, exposing those affected to abnormal levels of blood glucose and other metabolites for decades.
Many of these individuals will lose their remaining endogenous insulin secretion as β-cell destruction progresses, becoming wholly dependent on exogenous insulin with the associated problems of more difficult glycaemic control.
A prime requirement for the prevention of chronic complications such as coronary heart disease appears to be good glycaemic control, because many associated abnormalities such as hyperlipidaemia (Sosenko et al, 1980) and perhaps increased platelet aggregation (Petersen et al , 1977) may be improved as the blood glucose level is normalised.
Undoubtedly the ideal solutions would be (I) preservation of significant β-cell function by selectively suppressing immunological destruction permitting at least some degree of physiological glucose homeostasis or (2) a miniature insulin pump that would infuse insulin subcutaneously, regulated by a sensor indicating the tissue fluid glucose level together with a suitably programmed microprocessor system.
Both these approaches are being actively investigated and one day we may see a revolution in management of Type I diabetes.
For the moment we have to rely on intermittent subcutaneous injections which impose quite definite restrictions.
If the same dose and type of insulin are given at the same time each day and either the food intake or the amount of physical activity fluctuates to a significant degree, the consequences are going to be unacceptable hyperglycaemia or hypoglycaemia.
In the not-too-distant past the attitude of physicians was very much to avoid even the suggestion of hypoglycaemic reactions at any time, and always to keep a little glucose in the urine, especially at bedtime.
The diabetic clinic of those days did not even have blood glucose results available when patients were seen: now most clinics enjoy this advance.
Two more recent developments have been home blood glucose monitoring and the glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA 1 ) or fructosamine — indicators of the integrated blood glucose level over the preceding few weeks.
Home monitoring is now possible using test strips either in conjunction with a meter or simply using visual assessment.
The real advantage with this development is that the patient can now start to appreciate how the blood glucose varies with diet, exercise and illness.
Measuring the blood glucose at home will not in itself result in improved glycaemic control.
The patient must understand the achievable range of blood glucose and have the knowledge and confidence to attain that range consistently by balancing the dose of insulin with diet, exercise and inter-current illness.
We are expecting much more of patients than in the past.
Undoubtedly some will be unable to cope with this emphasis on self-management because they lack either the intelligence or perhaps, more importantly, the motivation to do so.
For those who are capable of learning how to modify diet and insulin dose to suit prevailing circumstances and want to do so, the ability to determine their own blood glucose has been a major step forward, permitting more satisfactory glycaemic control and a more adventurous approach to many activities (Skyler et al, 1978; Sonksen et al , 1978; Walford et al , 1978).
The other important development has been the glycosylated haemoglobin level.
This gives an indication of the ambient blood glucose level over the previous two or three months and is the  best single indicator we have at present of glycaemic control.
We can now classify patients as having good or bad glycaemic control.
More importantly, we can supply patients with their results so that they can see how effective their personal management has been.
If the result is unsatisfactory it can be used as a motivating factor to persuade them to try and make an improvement.
Serum fructosamine concentration looks a possible alternative to HbA 1 (Baker et al, 1985): it is reliable and reflects the integrated blood glucose level over three to six weeks versus eight to 12.
Advantages of fructosamine are that it does not depend on the haemoglobin level and it will probably be considerably cheaper.
The principal aim of the modern diabetic clinic must be to prevent complications, and therefore it needs to be organised so that Type 1 patients can be motivated and educated successfully to manage their diabetes.
A programme of teaching is required, taking place outside the diabetic clinic at times convenient to the patients, avoiding loss of time from school and work.
The programme needs to be practical so that patients can apply what they have learned to their own situations.
It needs to cover the essentials of self-management: diet, insulin, type and duration of action, injection timing and technique, measuring blood glucose and the normal range, hypoglycaemia, exercise and illness.
It should include assessment and provide feedback on progress with glycosylated haemoglobin levels.
Diet
It was in the late 1970s that the potential hazards of traditional carbohydrate restriction were fully realised.
Carbohydrate restriction had been used in the preinsulin era to try to control hyperglycaemia.
When insulin was introduced its use in less severe form was continued with the intention of keeping the dose of insulin down and controlling the blood glucose.
The hazard of this diet was that patients had to have an alternative source of energy so they turned to fat.
Foods such as fatty meats, cheese, cream and butter were often eaten in liberal amounts.
These foods contain saturated fat and cholesterol and their effect is to tend to increase the serum cholesterol (McGill et al, 1968; Keys, 1970).
Diabetics tend to have higher serum cholesterol levels than non-diabetes (Santen et al, 1972), and the old diabetic diet only recently abandoned may have been a contributing factor.
Enthusiasm for a change in dietary recommendations for diabetic patients was fuelled by growing awareness of links between the serum cholesterol level and coronary heart disease, and dietary fat intake and serum cholesterol in the non-diabetic population.
Suddenly the inadvisability of having an atheroma-prone group on a high-fat diet was fully recognised.
The diet currently recommended for diabetics in the UK is relatively low in fat and high in unrefined carbohydrate and fibre (British Diabetic Association, 1982).
The diet should have a beneficial effect on blood lipids without contributing to hyperglycaemia.
If attitudes to the content of the diabetic diet have changed radically, the importance of the regularity of meals and snacks is as important as ever for the patient on intermittent injections of insulin.
Now that the aim is to keep the young diabetic's blood glucose in single figures as much as possible, the risk of hypoglycaemia is increased and there is much less latitude for missing breakfast after a late night or delaying a meal.
This is probably one of the most difficult factors for the young diabetic to accept and undoubtedly a great advantage of continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion is that it permits the patient greater flexibility in relation to the timing of meals with manual boluses of insulin 30 minutes beforehand.
Perhaps the greatest single problem with diet as an instrument of therapy is persuading patients to comply with it.
There are three ingredients required for successful compliance: first, the patient must be motivated to comply; second, he must be informed about diet in a way that is individually appropriate; thirdly, realistic and attainable objectives must be set.
The patient is then rewarded by achieving these objectives and motivation is enhanced.
The  motivational ingredient is the most difficult.
Successful motivation depends on emphasising positive tangible benefits.
Promises such as‘you will avoid complications’ or ‘live longer’may be grasped with enthusiasm by the over-forties but are unlikely to appeal to youngsters.
Informing appropriately has been neglected in the past.
Diet used to be taught by personal interview and printed diet sheet.
It is odd that doctors accepted this approach because as medical students we were never taught in this way, rather by demonstration and participation.
To make matters worse many dietary instructional leaflets required a reading age not attained by the target population.
The old way to teach about an aspect of diet, say party-eating at Christmas, would be to discuss it and hand out a leaflet.
The modern way is to meet a group of patients over a party-type meal and discuss how to cope with the problems that may arise.
Experienced diabetic patients make good practical teachers.
Hopefully this approach may avoid the extremes of complete abandonment of dietary principles on the one hand and obsessional self-denial on the other.
Insulin
A very important advance has been highly purified insulin, and more recently we have had human insulin from recombinant DNA which will probably become the major source of the world's insulin in the future.
We have insulins which cover a wide range of duration of action, but we still have injections which must be the least palatable aspect of life for the patient requiring insulin.
A patient commencing insulin needs to be taught and to learn about the equipment, its care and storage, drawing up insulin, injection technique, sites to use and timing of injections.
This is the easy part, proving difficult only for those with unsteady hands, poor vision or failure to comprehend.
More difficult is conveying that injections must be self-administered and must not be missed.
Self-administration is important because it implies the acceptance by the patient that he has diabetes and realises the importance of self-reliance.
Most people caring for diabetic patients realise the importance of the patient actively participating in the very first injection of insulin.
It is symbolic of the attitude that injecting insulin need not be frightening or difficult and can be coped with by the patient from the very beginning, with just a little guidance.
Failure to achieve this goal at the outset may result in a patient who depends on others for insulin injections, misses injections or does them with a very poor technique.
The result is an unhappy patient and poor glycaemic control.
The answer to the question ‘which insulin regime?’ must be ‘the one which produces the most satisfactory glycaemic control over 24 hours'.
There is no virtue in several injections of insulin if the patient is well controlled on a single injection each day, but this state of affairs is unlikely to be the case in a patient who has had diabetes for a number of years and has little residual β-cell function.
It is probably better psychological strategy to start the newly insulin-requiring patient on two injections of insulin per day so that there is early acceptance of this regimen.
Bringing a group of patients together is a useful way of getting patients currently content with one injection a day to enquire why they are not having two injections a day as are the other patients they have met.
We are spoilt for choice with insulins.
There are highly purified porcine and bovine varieties, human insulin synthesised from porcine insulin (semi-synthetic) and human insulin from recombinant DNA (biosynthetic).
The one subject on which there seems to be unanimity, is that purity of insulin has been an important advance (Andreani et al, 1977).
Species of insulin is less important although there may be advantages in using porcine rather than bovine insulin (Clark et al, 1982).
Interestingly, there is no convincing evidence that human insulin is preferable to porcine (Home & Alberti, 1982).
This explains the reluctance of many clinicians in the UK to change patients from porcine to semi-synthetic or biosynthetic human insulin.
Any trend  towards human insulin might increase if the price were to decrease below that of porcine insulin.
There is considerable individual variation with regard to insulin requirement.
Most will need two injections of intermediate-acting insulin a day with some short-acting to cover breakfast, a mid-morning snack and lunch.
Theoretically short-acting insulin in the evening would cover the evening meal and bedtime snack, but some patients readily become hypoglycaemic with short-acting insulin at this time.
The dawn phenomenon — rising blood glucose due to an increased insulin requirement in the early morning — is seen in most diabetics and presents practical problems in a few (Bolli & Gerich, 1984, Editorial, 1984).
This may be the cause of marked prebreakfast hyperglycaemia sometimes with ketonuria.
A stratagem that may solve this problem is to give short-acting insulin alone before the evening meal and intermediate-acting insulin at bedtime (Tattersall & Gale, 1981; Francis et al, 1983).
The dawn phenomenon may also be successfully controlled in patients receiving infusions of insulin, although the nocturnal infusion rate may need modification (Geffner et al, 1983; Levy-Marchal et al , 1983; Bending et al , 1984).
Another method of producing 24-hour glycaemic control is to use a very long-acting insulin (36 hours) injected before breakfast to provide the baseline insulin and supplement it with injections of short-acting insulin before breakfast and the evening meal (Phillips et al, 1979).
It may have a wider application with the advent of ‘pen’ syringes now available utilising cartridges for short-acting insulin.
Depression of the plunger delivers two units of insulin obviating the need for drawing up and simplifying the procedure for when patients are out and about.
A third injection of short-acting insulin can be added at midday if required.
Suggestions that this can lead to relaxation of the guiding principles of regular rations and insulin are disquieting.
A very useful development in insulin therapy in recent years has been the fixed-dose mixture of insulin, either 30 per cent short-acting and 70 per cent intermediate-acting (Mixtard) or equal parts of the two insulins (Initard).
Another insulin manufacturer has now produced a fixed mixture of insulins very similar to Mixtard, called Actraphane.
It is only available as a semisynthetic human insulin, whereas at present there are porcine and semisynthetic preparations of Mixtard.
Evidence is accumulating that probably less benefit is achieved by juggling with proportions of short- and intermediate-acting insulin than was previously thought (Roland, 1984).
The fixed dose mixtures are certainly useful for patients who are unable or unwilling to draw up two different insulins.
Only recently has the importance of the timing of insulin injections in relation to meals become fully realised.
This applies to patients taking short-acting insulin to cover meals and snacks.
The best results are obtained if insulin is administered at least 30 minutes before the meal (Lean et al, 1985).
This leads to lower postprandial glucose levels and less frequent episodes of hypoglycaemia.
A most useful exercise in the diabetic clinic is inspection of injection sites.
Many patients habitually use one or two sites and develop hard subcutaneous plaques or disfiguring insulin hypertrophy.
It is fruitless asking patients if their injection sites are satisfactory, as they invariably say that they are; they come to regard the abnormal as normal.
Absorption from such sites is very likely to be erratic, leading to poorly controlled diabetes and possibly unexplained hypoglycaemia.
How much insulin does a patient need?
Enough to keep him ketone-free with single-figure blood glucose levels most of the time, at as near ideal body weight as possible and avoiding hypoglycaemia.
The most common pitfall in managing insulin-requiring diabetes is to respond to elevated blood glucose levels by increasing the dose of insulin.
Certain key aspects need to be reviewed before increasing the dose of insulin, including diet, injection technique and condition of injection sites.
A most undesirable feature is the production of an obese diabetic by inappropriately increasing the insulin  dose and failing to detect latent hypoglycaemia.
Insulin dose needs to be titrated against the results of home monitoring of blood glucose levels, a careful search for evidence of hypoglycaemia and a continuous record of bodyweight.
Continuous subcutaneous infusion of insulin
This can be a very effective method of achieving good glycaemic control for diabetic patients requiring insulin (Mecklenburg et al, 1982, 1985).
Patients need to be carefully selected so that they are sensible and responsible.
It is particularly appropriate for young patients with diabetes of only a few years' duration and without complications.
Significant retinopathy is a contraindication as it may deteriorate with greatly improved glycaemic control (Lauritzen et al, 1983).
Patients with brittle diabetes or recurrent staphylococcal infections are also unsuitable for infusion pumps.
Patients need intensive education in the use of the pump and changing the needle and infusion set.
The pump delivers a continuous but adjustable basal rate and boluses can be given before meals.
It is essential that patients ensure there are no leaks of insulin where the infusion set is connected to the syringe.
They need to be able to measure accurately their blood glucose and test the urine for ketones when unwell.
It is a wise precaution for them to carry conventional insulins and have a regimen organised should they be troubled by pump failure.
It is also essential that they have a telephone number where diabetic expertise is continuously available.
It is not advisable to let patients travel outside the country with a pump.
How long should a patient use a pump?
This is not an easy question to answer.
A very useful role for the pump is to determine more accurately the patient's insulin requirement, and improve the patient's understanding of the effect of diet, insulin, exercise and minor illness on the blood glucose.
A useful scheme is to try the patient on a conventional insulin regime after three to six months on a pump.
Home monitoring
The time-honoured method has been by urine testing, but with the renal threshold in the not so elderly being of the order of 10 mmol/1 glycosuria is only going to occur when the blood glucose is in double figures.
This method is perhaps more acceptable for those who cannot or will not cope with blood testing or who have very stable diabetes because of some residual β-cell function.
Blood testing enables patients to see how their diet, exercise, illnesses and insulin affect the blood glucose.
They can confirm or refute the idea that they may be hypoglycaemic.
Initially a meter was thought to be desirable for accurate monitoring, but now there are available test strips which do not require a meter and are sufficiently accurate for the purpose if correctly used (Ferguson & Prosser, 1980).
Patients do not need to home monitor every day when their diabetes is stable but rather two or three days a week testing three or four times during the day.
If it is to be of maximum benefit they must be able to perform monitoring correctly, interpret the results and use the information to modify diet or insulin dose as appropriate.
Not all patients on insulin will benefit from regular home monitoring.
Particularly suitable candidates are those with unstable diabetes and evidence of poor control with elevated glycosylated haemoglobin levels.
Type 2 Diabetes
This is more prevalent than Type I and usually presents in the over-forties.
It is often associated with obesity and may be latent for some years before diagnosis.
Patients often have concomitant hypertension and at the time of diagnosis may already have angina and claudication.
There is a strong familial component to this type of diabetes and perhaps ideally the primary medical care service should provide an annual postprandial blood glucose test for those over 40 years with a first-degree relative who has developed diabetes before the age of 65 years.
This might reduce the length of exposure to the   atherogenic factors of hyperglycaemia and disordered lipid metabolism.
The single most useful measure for preventing Type 2 diabetes in the industrialised nations would be a reduction in energy intake with a consequent reduction in the prevalence of obesity, hyperlipidaemia, glucose intolerance and possibly hypertension.
Diet
The importance of diet in this group of patients is that for some diet alone will suffice, while for the rest there must be a good dietary compliance if control is to be optimal at a steady weight whether using oral agents or insulin.
Regularity of meals remains important, especially for the obese.
Many of these patients claim that they cannot be fat because they eat only one meal a day.
This meal may of course be of gargantuan proportions and much snacking of high-energy foods may precede its consumption.
Three regular meals a day avoiding snacks often leads to weight reduction.
The content of the diet for Type 2 patients need not be different to those with Type 1.
It is helpful to classify patients with Type 2 diabetes into obese and non-obese.
A useful concept is that of ideal bodyweight derived from the Metropolitan Life Insurance tables.
The data are based on a different population than is seen in British clinics but it provides quantitation of the degree of obesity in practice.
In our clinic we have constructed a centile graph for percentage ideal or desirable bodyweight based on medium frame size, so that knowing actual weight and height we can derive the percentage ideal bodyweight at a glance without calculation (Figure 6.2).
We are generous and define obesity as being more than 120 per cent ideal body weight.
Selecting a target weight for the obese is important and it is essential that this is realistic.
It is counter-productive to expect a 50-year-old patient who is 160 per cent ideal bodyweight to join the ranks of the non-obese; even if heroic efforts achieve this miraculous transformation, it is very unlikely it could be sustained for 20 years.
It is once again a matter of setting the patient an achievable and sustainable objective.
In this case if our 50-year-old reduced his weight by a stone or so and maintained it indefinitely it may well be enough to control the diabetes.
For the non-obese patients, simply reducing the intake of refined carbohydrate may control the diabetes for a time at least.
These patients may be at or below their ideal bodyweight so it is important they do not lose more weight.
Some patients may try to starve themselves in order to avoid oral agents or insulin, and this needs to be identified immediately.
Some physicians devalue dietary therapy for Type 2 diabetes by either commencing oral therapy concomitantly with diet or by giving diet alone no more than a month's trial.
The patient quickly concludes that tablets are the real treatment and the diet of secondary importance.
Not surprisingly they may consequently pay it little attention and even discard it altogether.
The results of this approach are that some individuals may be committed to lifelong drug therapy which they do not need.
Others may subsequently develop poor control on tablets because of their dietary indiscretions.
Some patients may need drug therapy at diagnosis if they are thin and have lost much weight with severe hyperglycaemia, are very symptomatic or perhaps with evidence of infection.
However, many Type 2 patients can be commenced on diet alone and reviewed in a month.
A considerable proportion will be greatly improved and it is worth waiting another couple of months to see further improvement before commencing drug therapy.
If this approach is effective the patients have the reward of feeling better for their efforts and see the relationship between diet and diabetes.
This provides valuable motivation to continued effort.
A point worth making here is that patients need to understand from an early stage the meaning of diabetes, that they have diabetes now and that they will always have it.
The following is not unusual.
A new patient attends the diabetic clinic and is informed that he has diabetes.
He sees the dietitian, is put on a diet and is instructed in urine testing.
His urine tests show glycosuria  which over the months abates.
He feels that he is cured now and stops testing.
He gradually forgets about the diet.
This pitfall can be avoided by ensuring that the subject is covered in an educational programme and by providing long-term follow-up with a system that seeks out those who do not attend the clinic.
Oral agents
There is still considerable debate about the role of tablets in the treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
When they were introduced they offered an alternative to insulin for the patient not responding to diet alone.
A study was later published which seemed to indicate that patients on tablets had a higher mortality from coronary heart disease than other groups not receiving oral therapy (University Group Diabetes Program 1970).
A criticism of these data was that the groups were not comparable and that this difference could have accounted for the results rather than the effects of therapy.
Later work from a retrospective study suggested that sulphonylurea therapy may reduce levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (Kennedy et al, 1978).
A subsequent prospective study demonstrated that neither metformin nor glibenclamide had an adverse effect on serum total cholesterol, triglyceride, HDL-cholesterol or the apoproteins A-I and B (Taylor et al, 1982).
The introduction of biguanides was met with some scepticism of their efficacy and fears about the possibility of precipitating lactic acidosis.
Later it was realised that this problem was particularly associated with phenformin and, provided metformin is avoided in the presence of renal or hepatic impairment, tissue hypoxia or significant ketone body production, it is safe (Bergman et al, 1978; Luft et al , 1978; Nattrass & Alberti, 1978).
Phenformin has subsequently been withdrawn from the register of prescribable drugs in the UK.
More has been learned about the mechanisms of action of the two oral hypoglycaemic families of drugs — the sulphonylureas and the biguanides.
The sulphonylureas increase plasma insulin levels in patients in whom they are effective and they may also enhance tissue sensitivity to insulin via a postreceptor effect (Lockwood et al, 1984).
Metformin lowers blood glucose not by an effect on insulin secretion but by inhibiting hepatic gluconeogenesis, possibly increasing peripheral low-affinity insulin receptors, and it may exert a postreceptor effect (Lord et al, 1983; Lockwood et al , 1984).
One distinct advantage of metformin over the sulphonylureas in obese Type 2 patients is that it does tend to suppress appetite and certainly therapy is usually associated with weight loss (Taylor et al, 1982).
Disadvantages with metformin are that a minority of patients may develop a metallic taste in the mouth, indigestion or loose bowel actions.
These side-effects may be avoided by using only 500-mg tablets with a maximum of three per day taken after meals.
Some patients do not complain of the side-effects or relate them to therapy, so it is worth questioning patients carefully to see that all is well.
Successful therapy is measured by a loss of glycosuria, blood glucose levels less than 10.0 mmol/l postprandially and a glycosylated haemoglobin of 10.0 per cent or less.
If this is not achieved with diet and metformin then the alternatives are adding in a guar gum preparation or a sulphonylurea.
Guar gum is a complex polysaccharide which cannot be digested or absorbed and it appears to have two effects.
First, it takes up water and swells after ingestion so, taken before meals, it exerts a satiating effect and may decrease energy intake.
Secondly, it seems to reduce glucose absorption in the small intestine (Blackburn et al, 1984).
There are a number of reasonably palatable preparations of guar now available.
If guar gum proves ineffective or unpalatable then a sulphonylurea can be added, preferably avoiding the excessively long-acting chloropropamide.
If an obese diabetic patient has poor glycaemic control with steady or increasing bodyweight, the explanation is one of noncompliance with diet.
This situation is very difficult to handle and it is worth trying to avoid  early escalation of treatment with sulphonylureas and then progressing to insulin.
It is important to ascertain why dietary compliance is poor.
It may be lack of understanding of the appropriate diet or an inability to put it into practice.
One can try very hard on an outpatient basis to inform the patient and other members of the family, particularly the spouse.
We often admit patients with this problem to the diabetic unit for a few days to demonstrate how effective the right diet can be.
This also gives a good opportunity to educate about diet and test that knowledge in practical terms as well as enhancing motivation to comply.
If obese Type 2 patients who are not complying with diet are given sulphonylureas which stimulate insulin secretion or insulin itself, the consequences are all too frequently an even more obese patient with glycaemic control still very poor — a very undesirable situation.
It is essential that this group of patients grasp the essential dietary principles at the outset.
For the non-obese Type 2 patient reducing the intake of refined carbohydrate may be effective, but many may need to progress to a sulphonylurea with intermediate duration of action such as glibenclamide.
Frequently patients respond to a small dose and indeed some patients may be very sensitive to this drug and care needs to be taken that hypoglycaemia does not occur.
For this reason it is prudent to commence with the smallest dose of glibenclamide, namely 2.5 mg.
Patients need to be cautioned about not missing meals and using alcohol with discretion when receiving sulphonylureas because of the risk of precipitating hypoglycaemia.
If a patient has lost much weight and particularly if underweight, then a good case can be made for commencing insulin.
The other indication for insulin is of course when glycaemic control is poor on a maximal dose of a sulphonylurea.
Sometimes metformin is added to sulphonylurea therapy, usually because the patient is having difficulty coming to terms with the prospect of insulin.
It is very easy for the physician to fail to appreciate how poorly controlled some Type 2 patients really are.
Patients may only record negative urine testing results in the preprandial state and starve themselves before the diabetic clinic.
This is an area which has been generally illuminated by the glycosylated haemoglobin level which gives a much surer guide of the true state of glycaemic control.
For the non-obese patient over 65 years who needs a sulphonylurea, a short-acting drug like tolbutamide has much to commend it as the elderly are more prone to hypoglycaemia.
If this drug fails to control the diabetes than a more potent preparation such as glibenclamide may be required.
A case can be made for giving tolbutamide to those 65 years and over who are obese Type 2 patients and need an oral agent.
The reasoning here is that renal function tends to decline with age and renal elimination is important in preventing accumulation of metformin, at least theoretically increasing the risk of lactic acidosis (Luft et al, 1978).
Insulin therapy
When a Type 2 patient requires insulin, perhaps the first question to ask is ‘One or two injections a day?’
The answer depends partly on the age of the patient.
It is always difficult to choose an arbitrary age but perhaps under 60 years two injections and over 60 one injection.
The implication is that two injections are better than one, which is not always true, and that less strict glycaemic control is acceptable with a shorter expected lifespan, which seems reasonable.
Although two injections a day may be desirable the next question is whether it is possible.
This depends on the patient's eyesight, manual dexterity and willingness.
For those commencing two daily injections, the fixed insulin combinations can be very useful as older patients often find mixing insulins a difficult exercise.
However, for patients in their forties it is usually a simple matter to establish them on similar insulin regimens to the Type I patients.
For the over sixties a once-daily insulin will often produce satisfactory control.
However, if  control is very poor in spite of a satisfactory diet with a single daily dose of c.50 units of insulin, it is better to consider two injections rather than increasing the dose.
Before resorting to this it is worth ensuring that the injection technique is satisfactory and the injection sites are healthy.
It is too easy to assume that older patients cannot inject their own insulin and thus need to involve relatives or the district nurse.
The best approach is for the patient to be totally independent if at all possible.
The second best is under the watchful eye or with the help of a relative.
Using a person outside the family circle, such as the district nurse, is positively the last resort.
It is undesirable because the patient is totally dependent on someone coming into the home from outside and of course it is extremely expensive in terms of nursing time.
The following questions need answering when deciding if the patient can become independent with their injections.
(I) Is the eyesight adequate to see the marks on the syringe?
Sometimes this can be helped by a magnifier fitted to the syringe, or a separate magnifying glass.
(2) Can the patient remember to have the injection and the correct dose?
Someone living with the patient may be able to remind them of these points.
(3) Does the patient have the manual dexterity to draw up the insulin and inject it?
Keeping the regimen simple is important, so that mixing of insulin is not required.
If two injections are required, attempting to use the same dose morning and evening may be helpful.
Fixed-dose syringes can be very useful, and perhaps a relative can draw up the insulin and the patient administer it.
Monitoring control
Many patients with Type 2 diabetes retain some degree of endogenous insulin production, and this may explain their tendency to have more stable blood glucose levels in contrast to patients with Type I diabetes.
Consequently, Type 2 patients do not need to assess control quite as frequently as the Type I patients once good glycaemic control has been achieved.
For patients on diet alone a check on the blood glucose and glycosylated haemoglobin by the general practitioner or diabetic clinic will suffice, with the patient testing the urine for glucose twice weekly avoiding using early-morning specimens.
This needs emphasising to patients, as some on diet alone quickly learn that they have glycosuria after meals so solve the problem by testing the urine after the overnight fast or before meals.
This is an interesting example of the patient learning what is expected (no glycosuria) but adopting the wrong solution.
The correct approach is dietary modification or, if that is satisfactory, oral agents so that there is no postprandial glycosuria.
Indications for home monitoring of blood glucose in these patients are a raised glycosylated haemoglobin or a low renal threshold.
The glycosylated haemoglobin has been a very useful advance for the Type 2 patients with latently poor control.
These patients may be on diet alone or diet and oral agents with records of urine results which they have continually mislaid.
The blood glucose level checked by the practice nurse or diabetic clinic is perhaps just in single figures but with close questioning the patient has had very little to eat for several hours.
The glycosylated haemoglobin result is markedly elevated, revealing the extent of poor control.
Useful clinical pointers are the unavailability for various reasons of the patient's urine tests — lost book, came out in a hurry, left it on the bus — occurring with each clinic visit, and an enquiry as to when the patient last had something to eat.
Some patients regard diabetic clinic days as holy days and fast for them!
Hypertension
This is more common in diabetic patients and is an important causative factor of coronary artery disease in its own right.
It is stating the obvious, but regular measurement of blood pressure using the correct technique is an essential feature of  good diabetic care.
Regularly means annually for normotensive patients and more frequently for the known hypertensives.
If blood pressure is elevated the first question must be ‘Am I using the correct size cuff?’
If the circumference of the upper arm is 33 cm or more a large cuff should be used (Maxwell et al, 1982).
The diagnosis of hypertension requires more than one reading.
Additional reasons for checking the blood pressure are marked retinopathy or any evidence of proteinuria.
Having measured the blood pressure it is essential to record it prominently and if hypertension is diagnosed to ensure it is adequately treated.
It is extremely worrying that in non-diabetics half the cases of hypertension are undiagnosed, half those diagnosed are untreated and of the half that are treated half are inadequately controlled (WHO Expert Committee on Hypertension, 1978).
There is no reason to believe that diabetic patients fare better and they may do less well.
With regard to treatment, this subject has already been covered in some detail.
An important principle of treatment is that it should control the hypertension to an acceptable degree, be free from side-effects and not cause either an unacceptable deterioration of glycaemic control or have an adverse effect on blood lipids.
An unacceptable deterioration of glycaemic control occurs when control cannot readily be restored by a minor alteration of the treatment regimen.
To control blood pressure at the expense of the blood glucose level or with elevated lipid levels does not represent successful treatment.
Lipids
If hypertension has been neglected in the diabetic care of the past, lipids might not have existed for the attention they have received.
Occasionally hyperlipidaemia may be overt with eruptive xanthomata, lipaemia retinalis or lipaemic serum which blocks the autoanalyser and causes pseudohyponatraemia.
Usually it is covert and can only be diagnosed by specifically measuring blood lipids.
A problem with diagnosing lipid disorders is that everyone has been obsessed with examining fasting specimens, a requirement which presents two obstacles for diabetics.
Firstly, it requires an extra visit to the hospital and, secondly, fasting is difficult for the patient on insulin.
There is not a great difference between the serum cholesterol level in the fasting or in the fed state and it is certainly worth using a random cholesterol as a screening test.
If this is satisfactory then no further action is required, as the fasting cholesterol will be lower than the random determination.
Serum triglyceride levels are more affected by the ingestion of food, but one quickly learns to gauge what amounts to satisfactory random cholesterol and triglyceride results and when a fasting specimen is required.
The right time to measure lipids for the newly diagnosed diabetic is when good control has been achieved and thereafter probably yearly up to the age of sixty.
The treatment of hyperlipidaemia in the diabetic patient falls into three natural stages:(1) control of the diabetes by appropriate diet and oral agents or insulin if necessary;(2) reassessment of the diet if hyperlipidaemia persists;(3) drug therapy only when the diabetes and the diet are right.
Smoking
There are few studies on the prevalence of smoking in diabetics but one from the West of Scotland suggests there is little difference compared to their non-diabetic fellows (Kesson & Slater, 1979).
This reflects badly on those involved with diabetic care because it suggests that not enough attention has been devoted to discouraging this atherogenic activity in an atheroma-prone group.
A major problem is that those caring for patients are only too well aware of the restrictions they are tending to impose.
Patients are advised to eat regular meals, avoid certain foods, take tablets or inject themselves with insulin, monitor their blood glucose levels, to be careful with alcohol and see their doctors regularly.
Many physicians regard giving anti-smoking  advice as just too much and this falls by the wayside.
Although understandable, this attitude cannot be condoned.
Perhaps the best approach is to devise methods by which patients conclude for themselves that smoking is harmful and undesirable.
Self-help groups can be very useful and ideally every physician caring for diabetics should have access to a person skilled in helping people to rid themselves of the smoking habit.
Who Should be Responsible for Diabetic Care?
For many years there has been much debate in the UK about who should care for diabetic patients — general practitioners or hospital-based doctors.
This question has been answered to some extent by a recent paper which showed a significantly higher mortality and morbidity among diabetics discharged solely to primary care in the community compared to those cared for by the hospital diabetic clinic (Hayes & Harries, 1984).
If all diabetics were looked after solely by general practitioners, undoubtedly some would be cared for by doctors without a real interest in the subject.
If all diabetics were cared for solely by the hospital, then diabetic clinics would be overloaded leading to difficulties maintaining standards, and the expertise and interest in the community would probably decline.
Perhaps the way forward lies with a physician with an interest in diabetes based in each district general hospital providing a nucleus of expertise and sharing care with interested general practitioners.
This would reduce the strain on hospital clinics, stimulate interest and expertise in diabetes in the community and ensure diabetic patients had a regular review in a specialist clinic.
Perhaps general practitioners wishing to provide some diabetic care should have a period of training in the specialty and work for a period in a diabetic clinic to enhance their experience.
Their practice nurses would need some specialist diabetic training and they would need a dietetic service.
The practice would need to be able to accurately check the blood glucose, weigh the patient, examine the eyes and record the results.
A cooperation card could be used to facilitate communication between diabetic clinic and general practice.
Organisation of Diabetic Care in Hospital
The diabetic clinic is the focal point of diabetic care in the hospital.
It needs to be organised to provide a happy, relaxed but efficient environment for seeing patients.
The prime objective for a clinic is that the patient returns to be seen again and everything is secondary to that objective.
Although achieving good control and all the other objectives are very important, none of these is likely to be achieved if the patient persistently fails to attend.
Undoubtedly, the skill of medical care in all specialties is balancing what the patient will accept with what the patient should accept.
For example, if the patient says ‘I cannot possibly measure my own blood glucose because I am at work all day’, the patient might be lost if the doctor were to insist.
However, if the patient were introduced to other patients who were monitoring their own blood glucose levels.
the situation might be quickly resolved.
Attendance at clinic is probably encouraged by avoiding long delays and making the visit worthwhile.
The biggest problem with the diabetic clinic is that time tends to be very limited and perhaps it is best regarded as a place for assessment and the identification of problems, with a little time for education.
The major part of teaching, motivating and assessing what has been learned should take place outside the diabetic clinic.
A solution we have adopted at my hospital has been a Diabetic Unit.
This consists essentially of a group of nurses specially trained in diabetic care, and exclusively devoted to that specialty providing a seven days a week, 24 hour per day service.
They staff a unit which can take six inpatients and functions as a day unit.
Out-patients visit with or without an appointment  and can telephone if they have problems.
The Unit is educational first and foremost, so that patients are admitted to the beds only if they are fully ambulant and not requiring parenteral therapy.
Those admitted to the acute wards with severely uncontrolled  diabetes are transferred when they are sufficiently recovered and undergo assessment of their self-management.
Patients poorly controlled in clinic are referred to the Unit as outpatients and only if this fails to resolve their problems is a short admission considered.
Inpatient status does permit more intensive teaching and assessment of where management is failing.
A dietitian is responsible for the Unit and visits twice a day.
Patients can be seen at times of their choosing by nursing staff, which may be early morning before school or work, late evening or at weekends.
If any difficulties arise for the nurses, medical staff are readily available.
The Unit provides an excellent forum for training nurses and doctors about the practical problems of diabetes, whether they are hospital or community based.
It has the great asset of open access and staff/patient relationships are excellent.
Patients meet there and discuss mutual problems informally.
It is complementary to the diabetic clinic and is quite at home dealing with children or pregnant diabetics.
Young children are not admitted to the Unit, but there is close liaison with the Paediatric Department.
It is a system that would lend itself to any sizeable district general hospital.
The Future
The future should see more contact between interested primary-care physicians and hospital-based diabetologists, with training programmes in most districts for doctors and nurses covering all aspects of care.
The newly qualified doctors of the 1980s know too little about diabetes when at least I per cent of the population suffer from this disorder with the prevalence rising.
Better organisation of care should also be associated with some time in the medical student curriculum being devoted to the practical aspects of diabetes.
We look to improved insulin delivery systems, perhaps suppression of the immunological insult to the islet and methods of enhancing insulin receptor activity.
Even with these advances I am sure that diabetic care will focus on helping patients to care for themselves effectively.