

O
Oar, Silver,
symbol of judicial authority displayed in the Admiralty Court in Doctors' Commons.
DC 26.
Obelisk, Blackfriars Road,
see ST GEORGE'S FIELDS AND OBELISK.
Obenreizer, Jules,
London representative of a firm of Swiss vintners, from whom he embezzles some money.
Fearing the discovery of this by Vendale, an English associate of the firm, he plans to kill him, and believes at first that he has done so.
Having found that Vendale's identity is not what it is believed to be, he tries to use this discovery, but is thwarted by Bintrey.
Eventually he is killed by an Alpine avalanche.
His niece Marguerite , whose marriage to Vendale Obenreizer tries unsuccessfully to prevent, plays a leading part in rescuing her lover from the Alpine chasm into which he has fallen whilst struggling with Obenreizer.
CS 20.
O'Bleary, Frederick,
one of Mrs Tibbs's boarders, ‘an Irishman recently imported’ who was ‘in a perfectly wild state; and had come over to England to be an apothecary, a clerk in a government office, an actor, a reporter, or anything else that turned up — he was not particular’.
He loses no opportunity to boast of the glories of his native land.
SB 45.
observance question,
the debate which loomed large in Victorian society as to whether strict respect for the Sabbath could or should be enforced by law.
NN 16.
See also SUNDAY UNDER THREE HEADS.
observed of all observers, the.
Shakespeare,Hamlet , III.
i.
LD ii 16.
ochre (sl.),
money.
odd-or-even,
a game played by holding in the closed hand one or two items, the other player having to guess at the number.
BR 37;OCS 25.
‘Ode to an Expiring Frog’,
one of Mrs Leo Hunter's poetical effusions, quoted to Pickwick by her husband.
It resembles ‘To a Log of Wood Upon the Fire’ in Horace Smith's Gaieties and Gravities (1825).
PP 15.
of all the girls that are so smart…,
Quilp is satirically quoting a song by Henry Carey (1687–1743), ‘Sally in our Alley’:
‘Of all the girls that are so smart
There's none like pretty Sally.’
OCS 50.
officer, a government.
CD's notes for writing the first instalment of Hard Times reveal that the object of his satire here was ‘Marlborough House Doctrine’ and ‘Cole’, i.e. Henry Cole (1808–82), civil servant and one of the main organizers of the Great Exhibition of 1851.
From 1852 Cole was General Superintendent of a ‘Department of Practical Art’ which was located at Marlborough House in London's West End.
The Department was intended to promote the study of industrial design for textiles, pottery, etc., and Cole campaigned against over-elaborate and inappropriate representational decoration on such things.
HT i 2.
officer, half-pay,
an officer of the army or navy retired, temporarily or permanently, from active service, and receiving half the pay of his rank on retirement.
Offley's,
well-known tavern in Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, west London, where ‘there was once a fine collection of old boys to be seen round the circular table…every night between the hours of half-past eight and half-past eleven’.
SB 39.
‘Off She Goes’,
a popular dance tune of the early nineteenth century mentioned by Henry Mayhew, in his London Labour and the London Poor as being in the repertory of street musicians.
SB 51.
Oft in the stilly night,
opening line of a popular song by Thomas Moore, included in his National Airs (1815):
Oft, in the stilly night,
Ere Slumber's chain has bound me;
Fond Memory brings the light of other days around me.’
LD i 23;SB 19.
ogre in the story book,
one of the giants slain by Jack the Giant-Killer.
Sensing Jack's approach, the giant cries out:
Fee, Fi, Fo, Fum
I smell the blood of an Englishman.
Be he alive or be he dead
I'll grind his bones to make my bread.’
MED 3.
oh, but for such Columbia's days were done…,
from Thomas Moore's ‘To the Honourable W. R. Spencer.
From Buffalo, upon Lake Erie’(Epistles, Odes, and Other Poems , 1806).
MC 16.
O'Hara, Kane (1714? -82),
writer of burlesques.
‘In hurry post haste for a licence’, song from Tom Thumb (1780).
PP 10.
‘Oh blame not the bard’,
the title of one of Thomas Moore's Irish Melodies (1807–34).
OCS 35.
Ohio River,
contrasted with the Mississippi as ‘the awakening from a terrible vision to cheerful realities’.
AN 14.
oh powers of heaven!
Byron,Don Juan , IV.
xxxv.
SB 45.
O'Keeffe, John (1747–1833),
dramatist.
Songs by, quoted or referred to: ‘The Glasses sparkle on the Board’,PP 7; ‘I am a Friar of Orders Grey’,SB 41; ‘Old Towler’,OMF iii 10.
Comedy,Wild Oats; or, The Strolling Gentleman (1791),NN 23.
‘O lady fair!’,
a glee for three voices by Thomas Moore.
The second verse runs:
And who is the man, with his white locks flowing?
Oh, Lady fair! where is he going?
A wandering Pilgrim weak, I falter,
To tell my beads at Agnes' altar.
Chill falls the rain, night winds are blowing,
Dreary and dark's the way we are going.
GE 13.
Old Bailey,
the Central Criminal Court for the City of London and the Shire of Middlesex (now for Greater London), formerly known as the Sessions House in Old Bailey.
Burned by the Gordon rioters in 1780 (see GORDON, LORD GEORGE) it was rebuilt and enlarged in 1809, and reconstructed again twice in this century.
The Old and New Courts described,SB 31; ‘hold up his hand at the Old Bailey’, i.e. to plead guilty.
Darnay's trial at,TTC ii 2.
Old Bourne,
tributary, no longer existing, of the Fleet River in London, from which Holborn takes its name.
MED 1.
Old Clem,
the traditional blacksmiths' chorus to their patron saint, St Clement.
GE 12, 14, 15.
Old Curiosity Shop, The,
CD's fourth novel, and the first of the two serialized in his weekly periodical,Master Humphrey's Clock , 1840–1, after an early drop in sales had convinced him that the magazine could not succeed as a miscellany.
The subject grew from an idea for a ‘little tale’ about a child, which was to have been told by Master Humphrey.
The central figure is the child, Little Nell, who deeply engaged the sympathies of contemporary readers as they followed her through the hardships of her pilgrimage, made in company with the senile grandfather whom she strives to protect, from the London curiosity shop to the sanctuary of a village where her sufferings end in a peaceful death.
Their pilgrimage is a flight from the malignant dwarf, Quilp, and the novel alternates an account of their progress with the attempts of others to trace them, for good reasons (Kit Nubbles and Nell's great-uncle) or bad (Quilp and his accomplices, the Brasses).
This permits the introduction of a variety of characters, on the road and in London, and although the central figure is pathetic, most of those surrounding her are grotesque or comic, the most appealing of the latter being the lively scapegrace, Dick Swiveller.
First published by Chapman & Hall in weekly parts (also issued as monthly numbers) of MHC , 25 Apr. 1840–6 Feb. 1841; in vols i and ii of the volume publication of MHC , 1840–1; as a separate volume, 1841, with Dedication to the poet Samuel Rogers (1763–1855) and Preface.
Illustrated by H. K. Browne and George Cattermole, with one illustration by Daniel Maclise and one by Samuel Williams; the illustrations are wood engravings dropped into the text, giving a close relationship between word and image.
Old Hundredth,
long-popular psalm melody, so called from the psalm being the 100th one in Day's psalter (1563):
All people that on earth do dwell,
Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice.’
OCS 18;PP 33.
Old lady of Threadneedle Street (coll.),
Bank of England.
Old Rustic Road,
i.e. Theobald's Road, leading from Southampton Row to Gray's Inn Road, north of Holborn, east London, so named because it led to Theobalds in Hertfordshire where King James I had a hunting lodge in the early seventeenth century.
LD i 12.
Old Square,
part of Lincoln's Inn, west London, where Kenge and Carboy have their offices.
BH 20.
Old Street Road,
Old Street, north-east of the City of London, where Mr Guppy's mother lived.
BH 9;SB 37.
Old Testament.
For references to the Old Testament in CD's work,see BIBLE.
olive branches,
cf. Ps. 28: ‘Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house: thy children like olive plants round about thy table.’
NN 14.
Oliver Twist,
or, ‘The Parish Boy's Progress’(title of the serial, and of three of the six 3-volume issues published between 1838 and 1841; others have the short title Oliver Twist ).
CD's second novel, written for serialization in Richard Bentley's monthly magazine,Bentley's Miscellany , of which CD was the first editor, the first instalment appearing in the second issue of Feb. 1837.
The serialization was begun while Pickwick Papers was only half written and later instalments overlapped with the commencement of Nicholas Nickleby .
OT , only half the length of these novels, is more sombre in tone, and elaborately, though not completely successfully, plotted.
The early chapters are an indictment of the New Poor Law in their account of Oliver's upbringing as a workhouse orphan, apprenticed to an undertaker by Bumble the beadle.
This is followed by a period during which he is trapped in London's underworld of pickpockets, burglars, safe-breakers, and prostitutes, although the fence Fagin, who exploits these lesser criminals, is unable to destroy his innocence.
The book's powerful climax is the murder of Nancy (the prostitute who pities and helps Oliver) by her lover Bill Sikes, and Bill's flight and death, chapters which, thirty years later, CD adapted for his most famous Reading, ‘Sikes and Nancy’.
In a Preface first published in the 1841 edition of the book CD defended his representation of criminals, and especially his sympathetic treatment of Nancy.
Serialized in Bentley's Miscellany in 24 monthly instalments, Feb. 1837–Apr. 1839 (except June and Oct. 1837 and Sep.
1838), with illustrations by George Cruikshank; published by Bentley in 3 vols., with Cruikshank's illustrations, in Nov. 1838, before serialization was completed.
Published by Bradbury & Evans in 10 numbers, monthly, Jan. –Oct. 1846, and in one volume, with the original illustrations and a cover for the parts by Cruikshank.
Olympic, the.
The Olympic Theatre in Wych Street, just off the Strand in London's West End.
First opened in 1806, its heyday began in 1831 when Madame Vestris (1797–1856) took it over.
It was entirely rebuilt in 1890, but closed finally 9 years later.
SYG 9.
Olympus,
the mountain in Greece on top of which, according to mythology, the gods dwelt.
BH 29.
Omer, Mr,
Yarmouth undertaker, ‘a fat, short-winded, merry-looking, little old man’.
He takes a kindly interest in David, whose father he had buried, as he recalls when he takes the boy to his shop to be measured for mourning for his mother's funeral.
Little Em'ly becomes one of his apprentices, and after the elopement he speaks of her with sympathy and understanding.
His daughter Minnie marries his assistant Joram, whom he takes into partnership, and Omer is a devoted grandfather to their children,Joe and Minnie .
DC 9, 21–2, 30–2, 51.
omnibus (Lat. = ‘for all’).
This form of public transport was first introduced into London by George Shillibeer in 1829.
Drawn by three horses abreast Shillibeer's omnibus ran from Paddington to the Bank four times a day each way.
Passengers sat on two rows of benches facing one another.
SB 23, 24, 55.
‘Omnibuses’,
one of the sketches in the ‘Scenes’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Street Sketches No. 1’ in The Morning Chronicle , 26 Sept. 1834.
Humorous account of the behaviour of omnibus ‘cads’ and passengers.
SB 23.
one-pair (coll.),
first-floor room, up one pair (flight) of stairs.
OT 37.
One-Tree Hill,
fictitious site of the shooting picnic at which Pickwick drinks too much punch and end up in the pound.
PP 19.
on liking (obs.),
on approval.
O.P. side,
in stage directions, ‘opposite prompt side’; i.e. stage right.
Open sesame!,
password that opened the door of the robbers' cave in The Arabian Nights story of the Forty Thieves.
CS 14.
Opera Colonnade,
built in 1817 by John Nash (1752–1835), it runs north from Pall Mall, parallel to the Haymarket in London's West End, giving access to Her Majesty's Theatre.
BH 14;NN 2.
See also ITALIAN OPERA.
opera hat,
see CRUSH HAT.
Ophelia,
principal female character in Shakespeare's Hamlet ; her distraction comparable with Mrs Veneering's on hearing that her husband is to stand for Parliament.
OMF ii 3.
oranges, St Michael's,
high-quality oranges imported from the island of St Michael in the Azores.
BH 6.
ordering one's self lowly…towards one's better,
see the Answer on ‘My duty towards my Neighbour’ in the Catechism,Book of Common Prayer .
DS 44.
orders (obs.),
free passes to the theatre.
ordinary, in,
said of a ship laid up or out of commission.
ordinary, the,
1 , dining-room in an inn;2 , a prison chaplain.
organ of benevolence,
a term borrowed from the Victorian pseudo-science of phrenology, the basic premiss of which was that character could be gauged from the shape of the skull, which phrenologists divided into some 40 sections or ‘organs’, each one being the seat of a mental or moral faculty.
The ‘organ of benevolence’ was located at the top of the forehead.
CC 2.
organ-men,
itinerant musicians who performed on hurdy-gurdies or barrel-organs.
Orlick, Dolge,
Joe Gargery's morose journeyman, who harbours a deep-seated but unspoken grudge against Pip.
He is also an inveterate hater of Mrs Joe, whom he attacks secretly, inflicting injuries from which she eventually dies.
He falls in with Compeyson and helps him to discover Magwitch's hiding-place.
In so doing he also rediscovers Pip, whom he lures to a disused lime-kiln with the intention of killing him, but in the nick of time is frustrated by Herbert, Startop, and Trabb's boy.
GE 15–17, 29–30, 53.
Orson,
see VALENTINE AND ORSON.
O running stream of sparkling joy…
These lines appear to be an original composition of Mr Chadband's,BH 19.
orvis (cockney dial.),
always.
Osborne's Hotel,
formerly in John Street in the Adelphi, west London; where Wardle gives his dinner-party after Pickwick's release from the Fleet.
PP 54.
Ostade, Adriaen Van (1610–84),
Dutch painter, best known for his genre scenes; his early paintings depict lively scenes of peasants carousing in crowded taverns and barns.
DC 57;PFI 4.
osteologists,
students of bones, a jocose reference back to the first  description of Mrs Podsnap (OMF i 2) as a ‘fine woman for Professor Owen, quantity of bone, neck and nostrils like a rocking horse…
‘.OMF ii 4.
O'thello,
operatic burlesque written by CD for some private family theatricals in 1833.
Those pages of the manuscript that have survived were printed in CP .
See MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS.
Othello,
tragedy by Shakespeare; Inspector Bucket advises Mrs Snagsby to see,BH 59; incompetent amateur production of,SB 53.
‘O 'tis love…that makes the world go round’,
anonymous song in Chansons Nationales et Populaires de France .
OMF iv 4.
our boat is on the shore…,
Micawber's adaptation of Byron's lines, ‘To Thomas Moore’:
‘My boat is on the shore,
And my bark is on the sea’
(1817).
DC 54.
our dear brother here departed,
cf. the Burial Service in The Book of Common Prayer : ‘Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God…to take unto himself the soul of our dear brother here departed…
‘.BH 11.
Our Mutual Friend,
CD's last complete novel.
During 1860–2 he had found his title and ideas for some of the leading incidents, including the story of a young man feigning death and living with an assumed identity, but was unable to set himself to the writing until the autumn of 1863, when he determined not to begin publication until he had 5 numbers in hand, since he was now writing so slowly, with care and with difficulty.
It is the story of the dust-heaps left by the miserly contractor Harmon (see DUST), which pass first to Boffin, ‘the golden dustman’, and at last to the heir, Harmon's son (the young man who feigns death, and ‘our mutual friend’ of the title), whose identity is one of the plot's mysteries.
The noisome dust-heaps represent enormous wealth, and the worship of wealth animates the Veneering circle with its traffic in shares, as it does Silas Wegg secretly investigating the dust-heaps, and even affects Bella Wilfer, who has to learn better before her marriage to the heir.
The story of Harmon is linked to that of the Hexams by the river Thames.
The story begins at Limehouse Reach where Gaffer Hexam, pursuing his trade of recovering dead bodies from the river, finds the drowned man supposed to be young Harmon; it is upstream near Henley that Bradley Headstone attacks and thinks that he has killed Eugene Wrayburn, his hated rival for the love of Lizzie Hexam.
First published by Bradbury & Evans in 20 numbers as 19 (the last a double number, including Dedication to CD's old friend, the politician and author Sir James Emerson Tennent (1804–69) and Preface), monthly, May 1864–Nov. 1865, with illustrations and a cover for the parts by Marcus Stone.
Volume publication, 2 vols., Feb. and Nov. 1865; 1 vol., 1865.
‘Our Next-Door Neighbour’,
three anecdotes, two comic and one pathetic (about a poor widow and her son who is dying of  consumption ) originally published as ‘Our Next-Door Neighbours’ in The Morning Chronicle 18 Mar. 1836, and collected in Sketches by Boz.
Second Series (1837).
In the final collected edn. of SB it appears as the last of the seven items grouped under the title ‘Our Parish’ to form the first section of the book.
‘Our Parish, Seven Sketches from’,
collective title given to the first section of the final collected edition of Sketches by Boz , the edition published in monthly parts 1837–9 and in volume form in May 1839.
The first six of these seven items originally appeared as ‘Sketches of London, nos. 4, 12, 14, 16, 18 and 20’ in The Evening Chronicle (see MORNING CHRONICLE) between Feb. and Aug. 1835 under a common subtitle, ‘The Parish’, and were collected in volume form in Sketches by Boz , First Series,(Feb. 1836).
See further under the various sketch-titles, viz. ‘Beadle, The (etc.)’;
‘Curate, The (etc.)’;
‘Four Sisters, The’; ‘Election for Beadle, The’; ‘Broker's Man, The’; ‘Ladies' Societies, The’.
The seventh item, ‘Our Next-door Neighbour’, first appeared in the volume,Sketches by Boz , Second Series, in Dec. 1836.
ours, of (coll.),
belonging to our/my regiment.
DS 21.
Our Young Folks,
children's (monthly) magazine published in Boston by CD's American publishers, Ticknor & Fields, to which CD contributed four short stories known collectively as ‘A Holiday Romance’ during the early part of 1868.
out, an (sl.),
outing or excursion.
outrunning the constable (sl.),
falling into debt.
outward and visible sign.
‘A out'ard and wisible sign of an in'ard and spirited grasp’ is Cuttle's version of the definition of a sacrament from the Catechism, ‘an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace’,Book of Common Prayer .
DS 23.
over one of my shoulders, and I won't say which.
According to Eric Partridge's Dictionary of Catch Phrases , the phrase ‘over the left shoulder!’ negates ‘one's own or another's statement and indicates derisive disbelief, the thumb being sometimes pointed over that shoulder…
Apparently from the centuries-old custom of throwing salt over one's left shoulder in order to avert bad luck.’
DC 22.
Overs, John.
Chapter 3 of Merryweather's Lives and Anecdotes of Misers is headed ‘Traditionary Recollections of John Overs, the Southwark Miser’; Overs, according to tradition, amassed a huge fortune by running a ferry service between Southwark and the City of London ‘before any bridge was builded’.
OMF iii 6.
overseer,
see VESTRY, THE PARISH.
overstep the modesty of nature.
‘O'erstep not the modesty of nature’, Shakespeare,Hamlet , III.
i.
CS 20.
over the hills and far away,
allusion to the nursery rhyme, ‘Tom, he was a piper's son’.
MC 36.
Over the Water to Jarley,
parody of James Hogg's ‘O'er the Water to Charlie’,Jacobite Relics of Scotland , 1819.
OCS 27.
overthrows the brain and breaks the heart,
echoes Wordsworth's ‘Michael’(1800), 450: ‘Would overset the brain, or break the heart’.
BH 1.
Overton, Joseph,
Mayor of Winglebury (fict.), a shady attorney whose muddled intervention averts a duel between Alexander Trott and Horace Hunter, but causes the former to be treated as a lunatic.
SB 52.
Ovid (43 BC–AD 18),
Latin poet.
Included in Mrs Blinker's roll-call of Roman writers,DS 11.
Owen, John,
one of Marton's pupils at his second school.
OCS 52.
Owen, Sir Richard (1804–92),
eminent naturalist and anatomist who devised the models of dinosaurs, etc., for the Great Exhibition (1851),HT i 3; Mrs Podsnap a ‘fine subject’ for him because of her large bones,OMF i 2.
owls was organs, his.
What Mrs Gamp is saying is that Mrs Harris was told, to reassure her, that the howls she could hear (which were, in fact, being emitted by her husband ‘bein' took with fits’) were the noise of barrel-organs in the street.
MC 49.
Oxford Market,
to the north of Oxford Street, west London, between Titchfield and Great Portland streets.
Erected in 1721, closed in 1876.
DS 59.
Oxford mixture,
dark grey woollen cloth.
Oxford Movement,
see RELIGION, DANDYISM IN.
Oxford Road,
the continuation of Oxford Street (now Bayswater Road, west London) was the main highway from London to the west of England in the eighteenth century.
It follows the line of a Roman military road, and there was a turnpike at Tyburn, where Marble Arch now stands.
BR 16.
Oxford Street,
west London; much less important in the nineteenth century than it is now, Oxford Street runs east-west, dividing Mayfair to the south from Marylebone to the north.
Its western end is now at Marble Arch, where Tyburn used to be.
BH 13;SB 22.
Oxford University.
Steerforth ‘bored to death’ as an undergraduate there,DC 19; the dons considered by him to be ‘a parcel of heavy-headed fellows’,DC 20; Mrs Nickleby on Oxford undergraduates' attachment to their nightcaps,NN 38.
CD satirized the University's political and religious conservatism in The Examiner (3 June 1843) in a piece entitled ‘Report of the Commissioners Appointed to Inquire into the Condition of the Persons Variously Engaged in the University of Oxford’(MP ).
oyster.
The ‘fat oyster in the American story’ probably refers to the story of a man struggling with a very large oyster in a stew, to whom the waiter says, ‘Well, sir, you are the fourth man who has tried to swallow that oyster.’
CS 7.
P
P. J. T.
These mysterious initials over one of the portals in Staple Inn stand for ‘Principal John Thompson’, Principal of the Inn in 1747.
MED 11, 20.
P.S. wing, first,
the front wing on the prompt side of the stage (i.e. stage left).
Paap, Mr.
Simon Paap (1789–1828), famous Dutch dwarf, 28 inches (70 cm.) in height, who appeared twice at Covent Garden Theatre in London.
AN 5.
Packer,
one of Snagsby's law writers.
BH 10.
Packer, Tom,
private in the Royal Marines, ‘a wild and unsteady young fellow’, who proves his worth, however, in fighting the pirates who invade Silver-store.
CS 10.
Packlemerton, Jasper,
‘of atrocious memory, who courted and married fourteen wives, and destroyed them all by tickling the soles of their feet when they was sleeping in the consciousness of innocence and virtue’.
One of Mrs Jarley's waxwork exhibits.
OCS 28.
pad the hoof (sl.),
get going, walk; Oliver Twist guesses that it must be ‘French for going out’,OT 9.
painted ground,
part of the yard of the Fleet Prison, so called because of a series of murals painted by a former prisoner.
PP 41.
painter, spotted,
i.e. a panther or cougar.
MC 33.
pair,
a flight of stairs; locations in lodging houses were often indicated by such phrases as ‘two-pair back’ or ‘one-pair front’.
Palace, an old Italian.
The Palazzo Peschiere in Genoa where CD and his family lived for eight months during 1844–5.
CS 12.
Palace, the,
i.e. the old Whitehall Palace in London, which used to stand beside the Thames, between the present Houses of Parliament and Charing Cross Bridge.
It was there as early as the thirteenth century, parts of it being from time to time rebuilt or embellished.
It burned down in 1697 — only Inigo Jones's Banqueting Hall survives.
MHC 1.
Palace Court,
alternative name for the Earl Marshal's or Marshalsea Court in which only lawyers who were members of Clifford's Inn were allowed to practise.
The Court was abolished in 1849.
LD i 7.
Palace Yard,
forecourt of the House of Commons.
SB 25.
Palladium,
statue of the goddess Pallas (Minerva) at Troy on which the city's safety was said to depend, hence, figuratively speaking, the Bar seen as a bulwark of society.
BH 19.
Pall Mall,
fashionable street in the West End of London running west from Trafalgar Square; a number of gentlemen's clubs are located in it.
Chops the dwarf takes lodgings here when he ‘goes into society’,CS 11: so does Montague Tigg when he sets up his fraudulent insurance company,MC 27; Twemlow, seated in the window of his club, is ‘respectfully contemplated by Pall Mall’,OMF ii 3.
Pall Mall Shooting Gallery,
now defunct.
The shooting gallery was open to members of the public, and was the scene of a spectacular feat of arms by Horace Hunter, who hit the target ‘in the second buttonhole of the waistcoat, five times out of every six, and when he didn't hit there, he hit him in the head’.
SB 52.
Palmer,
see DOTHEBOYS HALL.
Palmer, Mr,
actor in a private theatre who is to execute a ‘double hornpipe in fetters’ with Charley Scarton.
SB 20.
Palmer, Samuel (1805–81),
painter.
A friend and follower of William Blake in his youth, Palmer was living in great poverty when he received the commission to illustrate Pictures From Italy after Stanfield's defection; time was short, and he provided not the 12 plates originally planned but four vignettes engraved on wood.
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, Viscount (1784–1865),
British Prime Minister, despised by CD.
CS 15 (1).
Lampooned as ‘the Grand Vizier Parmastoon (or Twirling Weathercock)’ in Household Words 21 and 28 Apr. 1855 (‘The Thousand and One Humbugs’),MP .
Pan,
Greek god of shepherds and the countryside, represented with goats' feet and horns.
CS 12.
Pancks,
Casby's agent and rent-collector, who, against his better nature, extracts the last farthing from the inhabitants of Bleeding Heart Yard in order to satisfy his employer's greed.
Eventually, he turns on Casby, and humiliates him in front of his rejoicing tenants.
It is Pancks who discovers and makes known Mr Dorrit's right to his inheritance.
Hoping to make a fortune for himself, he invests his savings, and induces Clennam to do likewise, in one of Merdle's companies, the subsequent collapse of which involves the ruin of them both.
Pancks's habit of puffing and snorting, and his bustling ways around his employer are summed up in the steam-tug and barge image that CD repeatedly uses to describe them.
LD i 13.
Pancras Road,
street in Camden Town, north London, where a parish workhouse once stood.
PP 21.
pandean pipes,
Pan-pipes (see SB 27); when played by street-musicians they would often be fastened round the neck so as to leave the hands free to beat a drum or play some other percussion instrument.
The player would keep the pipes in place by settling his chin into his collar, hence CD's reference to Podsnaps's ‘setting his obstinate head in his cravat and shirt-collar’.
OMF ii 4.
Pankey, Miss,
one of Miss Pipchin's boarders, victim of a daily shampoo.
DS 8.
Panorama and Museum (dem.),
at the Colosseum at the south-eastern corner of Regent's Park, London.
This building (1824), designed by Decimus Burton (1800–81), contained a vast panoramic view of London more than an acre in extent as well as a collection of replicas of classical sculpture.
DC 20.
Pan's pipes,
a set of seven open reeds blown by the mouth and secured in front of the face by a scarf round the neck.
SB 22.
See also PANDEAN PIPES.
Pantechnicon, the,
Motcomb Street, Belgrave Square, south-west London, the great London furniture warehouse; CD bought his travelling-carriage there in 1844.
OMF i 2;PFI 2.
Paper Buildings,
part of the Temple, built in the early seventeenth century, twice destroyed by fire and last rebuilt in 1848.
Sir John Chester lives here, in ‘…a row of goodly tenements, shaded in front by ancient trees, and looking, at the back, upon the Temple Gardens’.
BR 15.
‘Paradise and the Peri’,
see ‘FIRE-WORSHIPPERS, THE’.
Paragon, Mary Anne,
the first of David and Dora's succession of incapable servants.
DC 44.
Pardiggle, Mrs,
philanthropical friend of Mrs Jellyby's, wife of O. A. Pardiggle FRS , and mother of five depressed and resentful sons,Alfred, Egbert, Felix, Francis , and Oswald .
She represents an obnoxious type of High Church Christian, often typified by adherents to the Oxford Movement, self-consciously ‘medieval’ in her choice of early English saint's names for her sons.
Her insensitivity is shown when she takes Esther and Ada to visit the family of an unemployed brickmaker and his wife Jenny.
BH 8, 30, 47.
See also RELIGION, DANDYISM IN.
parenthetical legs,
i.e. bandy ones, like the round brackets of a parenthesis.
SB 51.
Paris.
Mr and Mrs Dombey scandalize the Hon. Mrs Skewton by finding it ‘dull’ when they honeymoon there,DS 35.
Lady Dedlock staying at the Hotel Bristol, Place Vendôme, is ‘bored to death’ there (a Parisian Sunday described: people ‘playing with children among the clipped trees and the statues in the [Tuileries]Palace Garden; walking, a score abreast, in the Elysian Fields, made more Elysian by performing dogs and wooden houses; between whiles filtering (a few) through the gloomy Cathedral of our Lady, to say a word or two at the base of a pillar, within flare of a rusty little gridiron full of gusty little tapers’),BH 12.
Mr Dorrit buys jewels there,LD ii 18.
Mrs Lirriper enchanted by the city: ‘…it's town and country both in one, and carved stone and long streets of high houses and gardens and fountains and statues and trees and gold…and everybody seeming to play at everything in this world’,CS 17.
A city ‘where nothing is wasted, costly and luxurious city though it be, but where wonderful human ants creep out of holes, and pick up every scrap’,OMF i 12.
Revolutionary Paris is, of course, one of the two major settings for A Tale of Two Cities .
See BASTILLE, SAINT ANTOINE.
parish,
subdivision of a county, the smallest area so far as local government is concerned, governed until 1894 by a body known as the Vestry.
‘Parish Clerk, The’,
innocuous tale ‘edited’ by Pickwick while he was confined to bed at Dingley Dell, and read by him to Wardle and Trundle.
It concerns Nathaniel Pipkin , a parish clerk, who aspires to marry Maria , daughter of the local saddler,Old Lobbs , but whom she eschews in favour of Henry , brother of her friend Kate .
PP 17.
parished (Northern dial.),
perished.
Parisina.
Parisina, wife of Nicolo III, Marquis d'Este (d. 1441) took as her lover the bastard son of the Marquis; her husband had the lovers executed at his castle of Ferrara (1425).
The story is the subject of Byron's poem,Parisina (1816), from which CD quotes ll. 486–7.
PFI 7.
park, the,
may refer to Hyde Park, Green Park, or St James's Park.
This last is perhaps the most likely in BR 67.
It is also most probably the park referred to in SB 33.
The park in OMF i 11 is, however, Hyde Park, near which the Podsnaps lived.
Parker, Mrs Johnson,
‘the mother of seven extremely fine girls all unmarried’ who, perturbed by the bachelor curate's approval of the Miss Brown's child's examination society, hastily forms a ladies' Bible and Prayer-book Distribution Society (‘treasurer, auditors and secretary, the Misses Johnson Parker’).
SB 6.
Parkes, Phil,
Epping forest ranger and frequenter of the Maypole.
BR 1, 11, 30, 33, 54, 56, 82.
Park Lane,
a fashionable street in London's West End which runs between Marble Arch and Hyde Park Corner, bordering Hyde Park on its eastern side.
LD i 27;MC 13;NN 32.
Parks, the,
usually meaning Hyde Park, Green Park, and St James's Park, three of the Royal Parks in London.
MC 9.
Parliament.
CD's experiences as a reporter of Parliamentary debates for The Morning Chronicle left him with a profound contempt for the quality of the majority of MPs (early reflected in such satirical sketches as Cornelius Dingwall in SB 47, and Mr Gregsbury in NN 16), and for the standard of debate and general conduct in the House of Commons; in AN 8, for example, he observes that ‘farm-yard imitations’ have not as yet been imported into the American Congress from the UK Parliament, and he satirizes Parliamentary oratory and manœuvres in LD i 34.
A satirical tone pervades his ‘Parliamentary Sketch’(SB 25), and in an autobiographical passage in DC 43 he writes: ‘Night after night, I record predictions that never come to pass, professions that are never fulfilled, explanations that are only meant to mystify.
I wallow in words.
Britannia, that unfortunate female, is always before me, like a trussed fowl: skewered through and through with office pens, and bound hand and foot with red tape.
I am sufficiently behind the scenes to know the worth of political life.
I am quite an Infidel about it, and shall never be converted.’
Later, David talks of his relief at not having to listen any more to ‘the music of the Parliamentary bagpipes’, though he recognizes ‘the old drone’ in the newspapers (DC 48).
Gradgrind's becoming an MP in Hard Times gives him further opportunity for satire: Parliament figures as ‘the national cinder-heap’(HT ii 11) where the MPs, ‘the national dustmen’, get up ‘a great many noisy little fights amongst themselves’(HT ii 12), and the image recurs in Our Mutual Friend when CD apostrophizes the nation's legislators: ‘My lords and gentlemen and honourable boards, when you in the course of your dust-shovelling and cinder-raking have piled up a mountain of pretentious failure, you must off with your honourable coats for the removal of it, and fall to work…or it will come rushing down and bury us alive’(OMF iii 8).
For a more lighthearted mockery of Parliamentary conventions and procedures see HR 4.
See also COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE; POCKET-BREACHES; PRIVATE BILL; WEDNESDAY NIGHTS.
Parliament, Houses of,
described in SB 25.
The description refers to the old buildings that were burnt down in 1834 (see FIRE WHICH DESTROYED PARLIAMENT).
The present Houses of Parliament were built by Sir Charles Barry between 1840 and 1867.
Parliamentary pairs.
In order to preserve the numerical balance between government and opposition votes in the House of Commons, arrangements are usually made between the party whips (see WHIPPER IN) for an absent member on one side to be ‘paired’ with an absentee on the other.
LD ii 12.
‘Parliamentary Sketch, A’,
one of the longer sketches in the ‘Scenes’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Two original sketches published in The Evening Chronicle (see MORNING CHRONICLE), ‘The House’(7 Mar. 1835) and ‘Bellamy's’(11 Apr. 1835) were revised and merged for publication as ‘A Parliamentary Sketch, with a Few Portraits’ in SB Second Series (Dec. 1836), and the title was abbreviated to its present form in the final collected edition of SB (1839).
Drawing directly on his own recent experiences as a Parliamentary reporter for the Chronicle , CD humorously describes scenes and personalities in the House of Commons (in 1835 sitting in temporary accommodation on the site of the old Palace of Westminster which had burned down in 1834), and in Bellamy's, the MPs' coffee and chop house adjoining the Palace, including Nicholas, the imperturbable maitre d'hôtel at Bellamy's.
SB 25.
Parliamentary train.
By a special act of Parliament every railway company had to run at least one train each day for which the fare was one penny a mile.
CS 19;HT i 12.
‘Parlour Orator, The’,
fifth sketch in the ‘Characters’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Scenes and Characters No. 9.
The Parlour’ in Bell's Life in London , 13 Dec. 1835.
Satirical description of a type found at all social gatherings (in this case a group of habitués of a public-house parlour) who holds forth in an oracular manner on public affairs.
SB 37.
Parnassus,
Greek mountain, regarded as the seat of poetry and music; Paul Dombey a pilgrim to, according to Doctor Blimber.
DS 11.
parochial relief,
i.e. the workhouse (see NEW POOR LAW).
Parr, Old.
Thomas Parr (d. 1635), farmer and reputedly the most long-lived Englishman ever, born near Shrewsbury supposedly in 1483, and buried in Westminster Abbey.
DS 41;OCS 73;SYC 11.
parrot, the famous.
Fable 45 in R. Dodsley's Select Fables of Esop and Other Fabulists (1798) describes a man buying a parrot because he is so impressed by the bird's saying ‘I think the more’ when asked why it is not chattering like the other parrots in the shop.
When the man gets the bird home, however, he finds that this is the only sentence the bird can utter, and is thus punished for trusting ‘affected solemnity’.
NN 46.
Parry, John (1776–1851),
composer; ‘The Peasant Boy’,BH 31;OMF i 15.
Parsons, Gabriel,
bustling, well-to-do sugar-baker ‘who mistook rudeness for honesty’, determined to find a wife for his friend Watkins Tottle.
Parsons gives up the matter in disgust when Tottle fails to win the hand of the eminently eligible Miss Lillerton.
Fanny , his wife, whom he clandestinely marries against his parents' wishes, being compelled to spend his wedding night ‘in a back-kitchen chimney’ at her father's house.
SB 54.
Parsons, Laetitia,
musical prodigy, a pupil at Minerva House.
SB 47.
Parvis,
elderly resident in the village of Lanrean.
CS 13.
‘Passage in the Life of Mr Watkins Tottle, A’,
tenth of the stories in the ‘Tales’ section of the collected edition of Sketches by Boz ; in two chapters, originally published in The Monthly Magazine , Jan. and Feb. 1835.
Comic account of an impoverished middle-aged bachelor's attempt, initiated and organized by his prosperous friend, Gabriel Parsons, to capture the affections of a prim, well-to-do spinster, Miss Lillerton.
During the course of the story Tottle is arrested for theft and taken to a sponging-house, from which he is rescued by Parsons.
He fails, however, to win Miss Lillerton, who gives her hand to a smooth young curate instead, and Parsons gives him up in disgust.
The account of Tottle's suicide at the end of the story fits very awkwardly into the overall facetious tone of the piece.
SB 54.
passed through the ring,
see WEDDING CAKE.
Passnidge,
friend of Murdstone's whom David Copperfield meets at Lowestoft.
DC 2.
pass the bottle of smoke,
to keep up a pretence of social co-operation.
pass the hall and college,
to take one's diploma as a Member of the Royal College of Surgeons (from Surgeon's Hall) and of the College of Physicians respectively.
MC 27.
pastry, cannibalic,
allusion to the legend of Sweeney Todd, ‘the demon barber of Fleet Street’ who was supposed to cut his customer's throats, and then have them made up into meat pies.
MC 37.
patent place,
official post, often a sinecure, the nominee usually being appointed by the sovereign or the government.
DC 36, 64.
Patent Shot Manufactory (dem.
1950),
the tower of Messrs Watts's factory, 140ft (49 m.) high, was a London landmark.
It was built about 1789 and stood to the southeast of Waterloo Bridge.
SB 11.
patent theatres.
Covent Garden, Drury Lane, and Her Majesty's Theatres were independent of the Lord Chamberlain's authority, to which other theatres were subject, deriving their licence to operate from letters patent granted directly by the sovereign.
SB 40.
Paternoster Row,
City street adjacent to St Paul's Cathedral where many publishers had their offices.
CS 15.
Patience has sat upon it a long time,
allusion to Shakespeare,Twelfth Night , II.
iv:
‘She sat like patience on a monument
Smiling at grief.’
BH 65; ‘Patience on a monument’,DC 38; ‘Patience on a mantlepiece’,OMF iii 10.
patriarch,
one of the early heads of families in Biblical history, from Adam down to Abraham, Jacob, and his sons.
LD i 13.
Patrician's Daughter, The,
five-act verse tragedy by John Westland Marston (1819–90) produced in Dec. 1842 with W. C. Macready (1793–1873) in the leading role.
The prologue of 48 lines was written by CD, and is included in Miscellaneous Papers .
patriot, a certain, who had declared…that he would hang…any abolitionist,
cf. American Notes , 17: ‘hear the public opinion of the free South, as expressed by its own members in the House of Representatives at Washington…
‘I warn the abolitionists’, says South Carolina, ‘…that if chance shall throw any of them into our hands he may expect a felon's death…
’’MC 21.
patriot…who dreamed of freedom in a slave's embrace,
allusion to ‘Epistle VII.
To Thomas Hume, Esq., MD.
From the city of Washington’, in Thomas Moore's Epistles, Odes and Other Poems (1806), ll. 7–10:
The weary statesman for repose hath fled
From halls of council to his negro's shed,
Where blest he woos some black Aspasia's grace,
And dreams of freedom in a slave's embrace.
’ These lines were inspired by the belief that Thomas Jefferson had a private harem of black concubines (Aspasia was the beautiful and celebrated mistress of Pericles, ruler of Athens c. 440 BC).
MC 21.
Patrol, the Old,
night-watchmen, who were superseded in 1829 by the Metropolitan Police (see NEW POLICE).
They were usually wrapped in thick greatcoats.
MC 25.
patten,
raised wooden overshoe worn in wet or muddy weather.
Patten-Makers, Worshipful Company of,
fictitious City livery company mentioned in the ‘Introduction to the Giant Chronicles’.
MHC 1.
Paul and Virginia.
Paul et Virginie , a sentimental prose idyll, first published in 1789, by Bernardin de Saint-Pierre, a friend and disciple of Rousseau,LD i 13;SB 51.
A ballad-opera based on the book (words by J. Cobb, music by W. Reeve and J. Mazzinghi) was produced in 1800.
The opening song begins as follows: ‘
See from ocean rising
Bright flames the orbs of day
From yon grove the varied song
Shall slumber from Virginia chase away’,
SB 51.
Paul Pry to Caleb Williams.
Paul Pry is the central figure in a comedy of that name by John Poole (1825), and Caleb Williams is a novel by William Godwin (1794).
Pry was an inquisitive busybody, but Williams was a faithful servant who kept his master's guilty secret as long as possible.
SB 27.
Paul's Chain,
street in central London; name derived from a chain that used to be thrown across the roadway to prevent its use during divine service in St Paul's Cathedral.
SB 15.
paunch trade,
the sale of tripe and other offal.
LD i 6.
pause for her (a) reply,
Shakespeare,Julius Caesar , III.
ii: ‘I pause for a reply’,BH 3;SB 14.
paviour's rammer,
heavy wooden implement or ‘beetle’ used for levelling paving stones.
Pawkins, Major,
husband of the proprietress of the New York boarding-house where Martin Chuzzlewit stays on his arrival in the city, a man of Pennsylvanian origin ‘distinguished by a very large skull, and a great mass of yellow forehead…
He was a great politician; and the one whole of his creed, in reference to all public obligations involving the good faith and integrity of his country, was, to ‘run a moist pen slick through everything and start fresh.’
This made him a patriot.
In commercial affairs he was a bold speculator.
In plainer words he had a most distinguished genius for swindling.’
MC 16.
‘Pawnbroker's Shop, The’,
one of the sketches in the ‘Scenes’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Sketches of London No. 15’ in The Evening Chronicle (see MORNING CHRONICLE), 30 June 1835.
Describes the clients in a pawnbroker's shop in a squalid neighbourhood: a harridan, a drunken brute who abuses his pathetic wife, a genteel mother and daughter just becoming inured to poverty, a prostitute, and a drunken old woman (‘Who shall say how soon these women may change places?’).
SB 30.
Payne, Doctor,
‘of the Forty-third,’ military surgeon and friend of Dr Slammer's.
PP 2, 3.
Payne, John Howard (1791–1852),
librettist of the opera,Clari; or the Maid of Milan (1823), music by Henry R. Bishop.
CD wrote a Prologue (later destroyed at his request) for an amateur performance in which he took part in 1833.
‘Home Sweet Home!’
(Clari )DS 35;OMF iii 7.
pea, of once having consumed a.
CD is alluding to a story told about the prince of dandies, Beau Brummel (1778–1840), who was once asked by a lady whether he had ever tasted vegetables.
He replied, ‘Madam, I once ate a pea.’
BH 12.
pea and thimble table,
see THIMBLE-RIGGING.
peace-warrant,
warrant for arrest, issued by a justice of the peace.
BH 24.
peached (sl.),
informed against.
pea-coats,
thick duffle jackets.
‘Pea’ derives from Dutch pij meaning ‘coat of coarse woollen stuff’.
Peacock Inn, Islington (dem.),
established in 1564; starting point of the north-country mail coaches, and house of call for many other vehicles travelling out London.
CS 8;NN 5.
Peak,
Mr Chester's valet who, after Chester's death, ‘true to his master's creed, eloped with all the cash and movables he could lay his hands on, and started as a finished gentleman on his own account’.
BR 23, 24, 32, 75, 82.
Peal of Bells, the (fict.),
village alehouse from which ‘Mr Traveller’ sets out to visit Mr Mopes the Hermit.
CS 14.
peasantry, a bold.
‘A bold peasantry, their country's pride’(Goldsmith,The Deserted Village , 1770).
CS 14.
Pebbleson Nephew,
wine-merchants, predecessors of Wilding & Co.
CS 20.
Peckham,
south-eastern suburb of London where Walter Gay goes to a weekly boarding school, and Mr Feeder boards with ‘two old maiden ladies’.
DS 4, 14.
Peckham Fair,
south London fair and menagerie of ancient origin, abolished in 1827 after becoming a nuisance.
HM 1.
Pecksniff, Seth,
sleek and unctuous member of the Chuzzlewit family whom CD modelled upon the editor of the Art Union  Monthly  Samuel Carter Hall (1800–89).
Professedly an architect, though ‘of his architectural doings, nothing was clearly known, except that he had never designed or built anything’, Pecksniff
Peddle and Pool,
Edward Dorrit's solicitors.
LD i 36.
Pedlar's Acre,
formerly an area on the north bank of the Thames between Waterloo and Westminster bridges, belonging from ancient times to the borough of Lambeth; according to legend it was bequeathed to the borough by a pedlar on condition that his portrait, and that of his dog, should be preserved for ever in one of the parish church's stained glass windows.
SB 11.
Peecher, Emma,
the ‘small, shining, neat, methodical and buxom’ schoolmistress who teaches the girls at the school where Bradley Headstone teaches the boys.
‘She could write a little essay on any subject, exactly a slate long, beginning at the left-hand top of one side and ending at the right-hand bottom of the other, and the essay should be strictly according to rule.’
She nourishes a secret, unrequited love for Headstone, which is very well understood by her favourite pupil, Mary-Anne.
OMF ii 1, 11; iv 7.
Peerybingle, John,
country carrier, a ‘lumbering, slow, honest’ fellow and devoted husband of the much younger Mary (called Dot), who is very domesticated but has also a capacity for managing other people's affairs; to wit, those of Edward Plummer and May Fielding, who, but for Dot's secret intervention, would have married the disagreeable Tackleton.
Dot's part in the affair leads John to suspect her unjustly of infidelity, but in the end he learns the true explanation.
CH .
Peffer,
law stationer, deceased partner of Mr Snagsby.
BH 10.
Pegasus,
in Greek mythology, Bellerophon's winged horse, on which he tried to fly to heaven.
OMF ii 16.
Pegasus Arms, the,
inn at which Jupe and Sissy stay while appearing in Coketown.
HT i 6.
pegging,
refers to cribbage, a card game in which the score is kept by inserting pegs into a board.
Peggotty, Clara,
Mrs Copperfield's devoted servant and David's loving nurse, who marries Barkis the carrier after her dismissal by Murdstone.
Her brother Daniel , a Yarmouth fisherman, lives in a beached boat on the sands with his orphaned nephew and niece,Ham Peggotty , a boat-builder, and ‘Little Em'ly ’, and Mrs Gummidge, the widow of his late partner.
He has a deep protective love for Emily, and hopes to see her future assured by marriage to her cousin Ham, to whom she eventually becomes engaged.
But Emily's great wish from childhood, confided to her small admirer David on his first visit, is to be a lady, and when her beauty and refinement attract David's glamorous friend Steerforth, she elopes with him in the hope that he will bring her home a lady.
He deserts her in Italy some years later, and she finds her way back to London where she is reunited with her uncle, who has never ceased to search for her.
They emigrate to Australia, and do not learn till long afterwards that Ham has died in a vain attempt to save a drowning man, who turns out to be Steerforth.
DC passim .
Pegler, Mrs,
Bounderby's mother, a decent hard-working woman who managed to provide him with an education.
He pays her to remain in obscurity, fearing she may reveal the respectability of his origins.
These he is at pains to hide in order to promote the fiction of his rise from rags to riches.
But in the end Mrs Pegler is unwillingly forced to reveal the truth.
HT i 4, 12; ii 6, 8, 10; iii 5, 9.
pegtop,
game of top-spinning, a string being wound round the top, then whipped off, causing it to rotate.
Pegwell Bay,
pleasure-beach adjacent to the resort town of Ramsgate, Kent.
SB 48.
pelerine,
a woman's cape with long ends coming down in front (Fr. pelerin , a pilgrim).
pelisse,
woman's outer garment, with armholes or sleeves, reaching to the ankles.
Pell, Solomon,
shady lawyer practising in the Insolvent Court, who ‘arranges’ Sam Weller's imprisonment in the Fleet so that he may remain with Pickwick.
He also handles the grant of probate of Mrs Weller's will,PP 43, 45, 47, 55;Mrs Pell , ‘a very elegant and accomplished woman’,PP 55.
Peltirogus, Horatio,
former playmate of Kate Nickleby's.
NN 45.
Pembroke table,
one with hinged leaves or flaps which can be folded; said to have been named after an eighteenth-century Earl of Pembroke.
Peninsula, waged war in the,
i.e. fought in the Peninsular War (see next entry),OMF i 17.
Peninsular War (1808–14),
waged by Britain, Spain, and Portugal against Napoleon's army in the Iberian peninsula.
Richard Doubledick's bravery in it,CS 7.
Tigg claims that his father was associated with its ‘most remarkable events’,MC 4.
Penitentiary, the,
early name of Millbank Prison (completed 1821, dem.
1903) for convicted criminals awaiting transportation.
The prison stood on the site now occupied by the Tate Gallery.
SB 17, 24.
Penrewen,
elderly resident of Lanrean.
CS 13.
Penrith,
Cumberland town, birthplace of Captain Ravender.
CS 9.
Penton Place,
a street in Pentonville, north London, though it appears that no. 87, where Mr Guppy lodges, never actually existed.
BH 9.
Pentonville,
north London suburb, lying just to the north of Clerkenwell.
One of London's earliest planned suburbs, it began to be laid out in 1773 on the estate of Henry Penton, MP for Winchester, from whom it took its name.
It was a prosperous and fashionable area in CD's days but deteriorated into a slum in the late nineteenth century.
Mr Brownlow's residence is there (OT 12), and a number of other characters lodge there: Nicodemus Dumps (SB 55), Mr Guppy (BH 9), Pancks (LD i 25), and, briefly, Micawber (DC 17).
See also PRISONS.
Pentonwil,
i.e. Pentonville, north London.
PP 2.
See preceding entry.
People's Edition,
reprints from the stereotype plates of the double-columned Cheap Edition, with a different frontispiece and bound in pictorial green glazed boards.
Issued in volumes, monthly, from June 1865.
Published by Chapman & Hall.
Peplow, Mrs,
purchaser of hot muffins from a street-trader;Master Peplow , her son, also a muffin enthusiast.
SB 9.
Pepper,
Pip's servant at Barnard's Inn, whom he nicknames ‘the Avenger’ because ‘after I had made the monster (out of the refuse of my washerwoman's family) and had clothed him with a blue coat, canary waistcoat, white cravat, creamy breeches, and [top boots], I had to find him a little to do and a great deal to eat; and with both of those horrible requirements he haunted my existence’.
GE 27, 28, 30, 34.
Peps, Doctor Parker,
medical man with a very aristocratic practice who attends Mrs Dombey at the time of Paul's birth.
DS 1.
Pepys, Samuel (1633–1703),
the diarist; for the sermon he heard on respect for the priestly office, see The Diary of Samuel Pepys , entry for 9 Aug. 1663.
PFI 5.
Perceval, Spencer (1762–1812),
British prime minister, in whose murder by a lunatic Nupkins sees a possible augury of his own fate.
PP 25;SB 25.
Perch, Mr and Mrs,
Dombey and Son's messenger and his wife, whose constant pregnancies are a perpetual anxiety to Mr Perch, despite the cheerfulness of his disposition.
DS 13 et seq .
Percy, Lord Algernon (1750–1830),
second son of the Duke of Northumberland and commander of the Northumberland militia in London during the Gordon riots (see GORDON, LORD GEORGE).
BR 67.
Percy Street,
off Tottenham Court Road, west London, one of ‘the numerous streets which have been devoted time out of mind to professional people, dispensaries and boarding-houses’.
SB 41.
Perearers,
i.e. Prairies.
MC 34.
Peregrine Pickle,
Smollett's novel,The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle (1751); one of the ‘small collection of books’ left by David's father.
David as a child peoples his neighbourhood with its scenes and characters, including Gamaliel Pickle, Peregrine's father, Commodore Trunnion, and Tom Pipes; its story is the first of those he recounts to Steerforth at Salem House,DC 4, 7.
One of the two novels offered by the waiter at the Holly Tree to the narrator,CS 8.
perfections on her head, with all her.
Allusion to Shakespeare,Hamlet , I. v: ‘With all my imperfections on my head.’
BH 2.
‘Perils of Certain English Prisoners, The’,
Christmas number of Household Words , 1857; a story by CD and Wilkie Collins, suggested by the Indian Mutiny massacres at Cawnpore and Lucknow in 1857.
It takes place on the Caribbean island of Silver-store, where pirates murder many of the English colony and a detachment of Marines left to guard them; the rest are taken prisoner but contrive to escape.
CD wrote the first chapter, ‘The Island of Silver-store’, and the third, ‘The Rafts on the River’; the second, ‘The Prison in the Woods’, was by Collins.
CS 10.
Perker, Mr,
Wardle's solicitor, and Pickwick's, an amiable, astute little man.
He buys off Jingle after his elopement with Miss Wardle, acts as Slumkey's agent in the Eatanswill election, and after handling Pickwick's defence in Mrs Bardell's action for breach of promise, secures his release from the Fleet, and later negotiates the payment of costs with Dodson and Fogg.
PP 10 et seq .
Mrs Perker ,PP 47.
Perkins,
‘general-dealer’ in the village in which the Haunted House was situated.
CS 12.
Perkins, Mrs,
neighbour of Krook's who, with her friend,Mrs Piper , leads the gossip in the court where they all live and is occasionally at variance with Mrs Piper over the behaviour of their respective children.
Mrs Piper gives evidence at the inquest on Hawdon held at the Sol's Arms.
BH 11, 20, 32, 33, 39.
Perkins Institution and Massachusetts Asylum for the Blind (Boston),
its functions and administration.
AN 3.
Perkinsop, Mary Anne,
originally Mrs Lirriper's servant, enticed away from her by Miss Wozenham.
CS 16.
Perrault, Charles (1628–1703),
French poet and critic, celebrated chiefly for his collection of Fairy Tales pub.
1697 under the title Histoires ou contes du temps passé with the legend ‘Contes de ma mère l'Oye’(‘Mother Goose's Tales’) on the frontispiece.
‘Bluebeard’,BH 64;BR 41;CS 4, 8, 15;HT i 15;MED 13;OMF iv 11;PP 20 — see also ‘Nurse's Stories’(UT ).
‘Cinderella,’BH 21;DS 6;LD i 2.
‘Diamonds and Toads’,MC 2.
‘Red Riding Hood’,BH 4;CS 1, 12;OMF i 14.
‘The Sleeping Beauty’,BH 2;CS 16;DS 23;GE 29;OMF iv 4.
Persian lining,
thin silk used for lining gowns, petticoats, etc.
Persian tales,
The Tales of the Genii , a favourite book of CD's childhood, purporting to be a translation from the Persian by ‘Sir Charles Morell’, in fact written by the Revd James Ridley (1736–65).
MC 5.
See also ABUDAH'S BEDROOM.
perspective-glass,
opera-glass or lorgnette.
persuader (sl.),
cudgel.
Pertinax, the amiable,
virtuous elderly senator who was prevailed upon to succeed the murdered Commodus as Roman Emperor in AD 193.
Described by Gibbon in his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (1776) as ‘grave and affable’(chap.
4).
After barely three months in power he was murdered by the disaffected Praetorian Guards, who ‘regretted the licence of the former reign’.
OMF i 8.
perturbed spirit,
Shakespeare,Hamlet , I. v. PP 8.
Peruvian mines.
During the early 1820s several Spanish colonies in South America were in a state of revolt.
England supported them, and many English financiers managed to obtain concessions to mine for silver, etc., in those countries and people rushed to buy stock in these enterprises despite the considerable uncertainty surrounding them.
Just after Christmas 1824 the Republic of Peru was established, and there was a great boom in English investment in that country's mines.
Mr Pipchin was no doubt among these investors, and like many of them lost his money by gambling on a continuing rise in the value of his shares, a rise which failed to materialize.
DS 8.
‘Peter Piper’,
nursery rhyme first found in Peter Piper's Practical Principles of Plain and Perfect Pronunciation (1819).
The last two lines run:
‘If Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled pepper
Where's the peck of pickled pepper Peter Piper picked?’
HT i 3;MED 9;OMF iii 10.
Petersham great-coat,
type of heavy overcoat named after Viscount Petersham (d. 1851), who was a leader of fashion in sporting circles about 1810.
Peter the Wild Boy,
youthful protégé of George I (King of England, 1714–27), discovered in 1725 near Hamlin, Germany, living like an animal.
Though brought to England and placed under the care of Dr Arbuthnot, the foremost physician of the day, who had him christened Peter, he remained inarticulate and half savage.
He lived with a farmer at Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire, but in 1785 the farmer died and soon afterwards Peter died too.
MC 7;MED 5;OCS 28.
Petowker, Henrietta,
daughter of a theatrical fireman, a friend of Mrs Kenwigs's, and a small-part actress in the Drury Lane pantomime, which she leaves to join Mr Crummles's company.
She is pursued by Mr Lillyvick, whom she marries, but soon deserts him for a retired naval captain.
NN 14, 15, 16, 25, 30, 36, 48, 52.
Petrarch, Francesco (1304–74),
Italian poet; friend of Boccaccio.
The letter from Petrarch to Boccaccio was written on 28 May 1362, and besides casting doubt on the authenticity of the message, contained a fine defence of secular learning.
PFI 5, 6.
Pettifer, Tom,
Captain Jorgan's steward, formerly in partnership as a broker with his Brother .
Their purchase of an old desk provides Tom with a clue to the mystery surrounding Raybrick's savings.
CS 13.
pettitoes,
pigs' trotters.
petty-bag,
see MACES OR PETTY BAGS, etc.
phaeton,
light four-wheeled open two-horse carriage, named after a figure in Greek mythology, the son of Helios, the sun, who tried, disastrously, to drive his father's chariot.
Phairy,
i.e. Pharaoh.
BH 10.
Pharaoh's multitude,
see Exod. 14: 28, ‘And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, even all the host of Pharaoh that went in after them into the sea; there remained not so much as one of them’.
OMF i 3.
Pharisees,
sanctimonious self-righteous people, from the name given to an extremist religious sect among the Jews at the time of Christ who seemed more concerned with forms and outward observances prescribed by the Law of Moses than with any inward and spiritual meaning.
MC 13.
Philadelphia (Pennsylvania),
described (‘a handsome city, but distractingly regular’); its institutions.
AN 7.
Philanthropy, Haven of,
London, centre of Mr Honeythunder's sanctimonious activities.
CD clearly has in mind Exeter Hall.
MED 17.
Philips,
Mansion House constable, a feeble old man whom the Lord Mayor suggests as a Catholic's defence against the Gordon rioters (see GORDON, LORD GEORGE).
BR 61.
philosophers tell us, some,
an allusion to the Utilitarians, followers of Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832), who held that self-interest was always the prime motivating force in human nature.
DS 8.
Philosophical Transactions,
publication of the Royal Society of London.
BH 33.
See also SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION.
Phiz,
pseudonym adopted by CD's illustrator, Hablot K. Browne.
‘phoby,
Tapley's version of ‘hydrophobia’, i.e. a pathological aversion to water.
MC 17.
Phoebe,
beautiful crippled girl, daughter of Lamps, a railway worker, her angelic sweetness and goodness restores ‘Barbox Brothers’ to moral health.
CS 19.
Phoebus,
epithet of Apollo, the sun god of classical mythology, hence a welcome individual.
DC 13;LD i 25; ii 28.
Phoenix, The,
insurance company (est. 1782), the first to adopt the practice of maintaining its own fire brigade.
The first Phoenix Fire Station was built in Old Cockspur Street, near Trafalgar Square, west London, in 1794.
The Phoenix Fire Brigade merged with that of the Sun and other insurance firms in 1832 to form the London Fire Engine Establishment, transferred into public ownership in 1866.
BH 33;SB 45.
phosphorus-box,
supplied with a splinter of wood, the phosphorus-box was a forerunner of the lucifer match of 1827 in which the phosphorus was attached to the end of the stick.
Phunky, Mr,
Snubbins's junior in the case of Bardell and Pickwick .
PP 31, 34.
Phyllis,
conventional name for pastoral shepherdess (from Virgil's Eclogues ).
LD i 31.
Physician,
one of the generically-named characters who appear in the Merdle chapters of Little Dorrit (cf. BAR, BISHOP).
Unlike the others, however, he is presented as wholly admirable: ‘much irreconcilable moral contradiction did he pass his life among; yet his equality of compassion was no more disturbed than the Divine Master's of all healing was…
Where he was, something real was.’
LD i 21; ii 12, 25.
Physicians, College of (now Royal College of Physicians).
This originally stood in Warwick Lane, east London, and abutted on to the eastern side of Newgate Prison.
SB 32.
Piazza Hotel (dem.),
in Covent Garden, west London, near the Royal Opera House; later known as the Tavistock Hotel DC 24.
Pickford's,
the famous removals firm still in operation, which had its origins in the reign of Charles I (1625–49) when a certain Thomas Pickford owned teams of pack-horses for goods traffic.
His heirs developed the business to adapt to changing modes of transport.
OMF iv 12.
Pickles, Mr,
King Watkins's fishmonger.
HR 2.
Pickleson,
fairground giant with whom Doctor Marigold becomes friendly and who draws his attention to the deaf-mute whom Sophy eventually marries.
CS 18.
Pickwick, Moses,
the real name of the proprietor of coaches running between London and Bath.
PP 35.
Pickwick, Samuel,
founder and general chairman of the Pickwick Club; a retired businessman and confirmed bachelor, with bald head and circular spectacles, dressed in old-fashioned tights and gaiters.
He sets out with three members of the Club, Tupman, Snodgrass, and Winkle, to observe the world and record their adventures.
These begin as pure comedy, but later Pickwick's innocence and high sense of honour have to survive a breach of promise suit brought by the landlady of his Goswell Street lodgings, and imprisonment in the Fleet debtors' prison.
In these vicissitudes he is supported by the cockney humour and sharpness of Sam Weller, ‘boots’ of the White Hart inn, whom he takes on as his servant.
His adventures concluded he retires to Dulwich saying that he will never regret those two years, with their ‘scenes of which I had no previous conception’ leading to ‘the enlargement of my mind’,PP passim .
CD reintroduces Pickwick, not very happily, in Master Humphrey's Clock , where he is represented as joining Master Humphrey's circle and supplying the story of Will Marks.
MHC 3 et seq .
Pickwick Papers, The.
The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club, containing a Faithful Record of the Perambulations, Perils, Travels, Adventures and Sporting Transactions of the Corresponding Members, edited by Boz (long title on cover of monthly numbers).
CD's first novel.
Commissioned by Chapman & Hall, not as a novel but as the letterpress for a series of comic designs by Robert Seymour, 4 of which were to appear each month, about a club of sporting characters; at that date novels were not published in monthly parts, a form commonly used for illustrated works.
Before CD ‘thought of Mr Pickwick’ and wrote the first number, he had already gained for himself more freedom in the conduct of his story than Seymour and his publishers had originally intended, but the sudden death of Seymour when he had completed only 3 of the 4 illustrations for No. ii, and his replacement by the young artist Hablot K. Browne (who soon adopted the signature ‘Phiz’to parallel CD's ‘Boz’), contributed to the dominance of text over illustrations: from No. iii on the plates were reduced to 2 per number and the pages of text increased from 26 to 32.
From No. v on it was an enormous success, and inaugurated monthly shilling numbers as a method of publishing new fiction.
Its beginnings partly account for the novel's loose picaresque form, recounting a series of adventures of Mr Pickwick and his friends (Snodgrass, Winkle, and Tupman), although the initiation of Mrs Bardell's breach-of-promise action provides a continuing plot-interest, and Mr Pickwick is transformed from the conventional comic figure of the early chapters by his connection with Sam Weller.
The novel includes several inset tales: ‘The Stroller's Tale’; ‘The Convict's Return’; ‘A Madman's Manuscript’; ‘The Tale of the Queer Client’; ‘The Story of the Goblins who Stole the Sexton’; ‘The True Legend of Prince Bladud’; and ‘The Story of the Bagman's Uncle’.
First published by Chapman and Hall in 20 numbers as 19, the last a double number including Dedication to the MP and later judge, T. N. Talfourd (1795–1854) and Preface, monthly, Apr. 1836-Nov. 1837, except June 1837; illustrated by Robert Seymour (Nos. i, ii), R. W. Buss (No. iii), and H. K. Browne the remainder.
Volume publication, 1 vol., 1837.
This first edition has two chapters 28 owing to a mistake which occurred in the printing of the monthly numbers and remained uncorrected until the appearance of PP in the Cheap Edition.
Pic-Nic Papers, The,
three-volume collection of short stories, poems, etc., by various hands, edited and introduced by CD, who also contributed a story, ‘The Lamplighter’.
Published by Henry Colburn for the benefit of the widow and children of John Macrone, CD's first publisher, 1841.
Picts and Scots,
early, probably pre-Celtic, inhabitants of Scotland.
HM 20.
Pictures from Italy,
CD's second travel-book, describing the year he spent in Italy, July 1844-July 1845, based on letters written to his friend John Forster.
CD and his family lived at Genoa, first in the Villa Bagnerello at Albaro (outside the city walls on the coast), then in the Palazzo Peschiere in the city.
He travelled in northern Italy after completing The Chimes in Nov. 1844, and in Jan. -Apr. 1845 journeyed south, staying in Rome and Naples.
The book gives his first impressions of Italy: art and antiquities, landscape, the Roman Catholic Church and its ceremonies, and the way of life of the people.
Places on the route through France described in the book are Châlons, Lyons, Avignon, and Marseilles; it also includes a visit to Nice, and the return to Genoa by the Corniche route.
In his exploration of northern Italy he visited Piacenza, Parma, Modena, Bologna, Ferrara, Verona, Mantua, Milan, Camoglia, Carrara, Pisa, and Leghorn.
One chapter is devoted to the overwhelming impression made by Venice.
The account of his stay in Naples includes a visit to Pompeii and the ascent of Vesuvius; Florence is included in his return journey from Rome to Genoa.
CD began writing up his travels for the Daily News , of which he was the first editor, and 8 ‘Travelling Letters’ appeared there between 21 Jan. and 11 Mar. 1846, ending with the section entitled ‘Piacenza to Bologna’in the book; the ‘Travelling Letters’were revised, and the remaining sections written for its publication as Pictures from Italy in May 1846 (Bradbury & Evans, 1 vol.).
The volume was originally to have been illustrated by Stanfield; after his withdrawal from fear of anti-Catholic bias in the book, Samuel Palmer was commissioned, and provided 4 vignettes engraved on wood.
Pidger, Mr,
referred to by Lavinia Spenlow as a girlhood suitor who never declared his love.
DC 43.
pieman, after the manner of a.
‘To ‘toss the pieman'’ is a favourite pastime…
If the pieman win the toss, he receives a penny without giving a pie; if he lose, he hands it over for nothing' (Mayhew,London Labour and the London Poor , vol. i, 1861).
MC 13.
Rob the Grinder ‘ran sniggering off to get change and tossed it away with a pieman’,DS 38.
See also KIDNEY ONES.
Piff, Miss,
attendant in the Mugby Junction Refreshment Room.
CS 19.
pig, the learned.
‘Learned pigs’ were often exhibited at fairs; they answered questions by pointing to cards, letters, and members of the audience,PFI 9.
See also Mr Blunderum's paper on ‘the last moments of the learned pig’ in the ‘Full Report of the First Meeting of the Mudfog Association’(MUDFOG PAPERS).
pig-faced lady,
a legendary monster said to have been born to a wealthy lady who had referred to a beggar's child as a nasty pig.
The ‘pig-faced lady’ was often exhibited at fairs, represented by a bear wearing bonnet and gown, with its head shaved, and pinioned upright in a chair.
NN 49.
pigs, please the,
phrase originally meaning ‘If the Virgin permits’(Anglo-Saxon piga , a maiden).
CS 17;HR 4.
pig with a straw in its mouth,
alluding to an old proverb about foretelling the weather: ‘When pigs carry sticks, the clouds will play tricks; when they lie in the mud, no fears of a flood.’
OCS 2.
pike.
Tony Weller's threat to ‘keep a pike’ implied his intention of becoming a turnpike keeper, i.e. a collector of tolls.
PP 56.
pilferer, a wretched,
CD takes this detail from the Annual Register for 1775 where it appears in the ‘Chronicle’ under the date of 16 Jan.
Sentence of death was passed on 8 convicts at the Old Bailey, 4 of whom were executed on 15 Feb.: ‘One of those who suffered was for robbing a farmer's boy of sixpence.’
TTC i 1.
pilgrims' suppers,
held at the Trinità de' Pellegrini, Rome, in Holy Week.
PFI 11.
piljian's projiss of a mortal wale, this,
Mrs Gamp's way of alluding to the sorrows of our earthly life.
The translation into standard English is: ‘this pilgrim's progress through the vale of mortality.’
MC 25.
Pilkins, Mr,
the Dombeys' ‘family practitioner’.
DS 1.
pilot coat,
another term for pea-coat.
pilot…to weather the storm, no.
‘The Pilot that Weathered the Storm’ was the title of a verse-tribute to the Prime Minister William Pitt written by George Canning in 1802.
BH 40;DS 61.
Pimkin and Thomas's clerk,
see SIMPKIN AND GREEN.
Pinch, Tom,
‘an ungainly, awkward-looking man, extremely short-sighted and prematurely bald’ who was ‘perhaps about thirty, but…might have been almost any age between sixteen and sixty: being one of those strange creatures who never decline into ancient appearance, but look their oldest when they are very young, and get over it at once’.
He is a shy, gentle innocent untouched by any selfish thoughts or feelings, who has long been a pupil of Mr Pecksniff
pinking and eyelet-holing,
ornamenting material by cutting small holes and shapes in it, usually to display a rich lining or under-garment of contrasting colour.
C 2.
Pinnock, William (1782–1843),
scholastic author well known for his ‘Catechisms’ on a variety of subjects.
CS 14.
Pinwell, G. J.
(1842–75), painter who provided one illustration for the Cheap  Edition of The Uncommercial Traveller (1865), and four woodcut illustrations for the Library Edition of the same book, in one of which, ‘Leaving the Morgue’, he portrays CD.
Piombo, Sebastian del,
Venetian painter (c .1485–1547) now usually known as Sebastiano.
LD i 16.
Pip,
see PIRRIP, PHILIP.
Pip, Mr,
one of the two flashy men-about-town, professing intimate acquaintance with all sorts of illustrious personages (‘even the Blood Royal ran in the muddy channel of their personal recollections’), whom Tigg introduces to Jonas Chuzzlewit to impress the latter with the power and glory of the fraudulent insurance company he is seeking to involve Jonas in.
MC 28.
Pipchin, Mrs,
widow whose husband had ‘broken his heart of the Peruvian mines’ some forty years ago.
She ‘takes in’ children in her house at Brighton, and is known as ‘a great manager’of children; the secret of that management was ‘to give them everything they didn't like, and nothing that they did’.
Little Paul spends a short time at Mrs Pipchin's (on the recommendation of Miss Tox, a former child-boarder), where he is not quelled as the others are, but thoroughly discomfits her with his sharp questions and grave stare.
Dombey employs her as a housekeeper during his marriage to Edith; after his ruin she returns to Brighton and child-quelling.
Dickens based the character upon a ‘reduced old lady’, Mrs Elizabeth Roylance, with whom he was sent to board as a child while his family were in the Marshalsea Prison,DS 8 et seq .
Mrs Pipchin's niece,Berinthia (Berry), a middle-aged spinster whose exploitation as a drudge by her aunt does nothing to diminish her dog-like devotion to Mrs Pipchin.
DS 8.
pipe-claying their weekly accounts.
Fudging the amounts spent, by analogy with the use of pipe clay, a fine white powder, for disguising marks on uniform trousers, accoutrements, etc.
BH 17.
Piper, Mrs Anastasia,
neighbour of Krook's in Bleak House .
See PERKINS, MRS.
Piper, Professor,
see BUFFUM, OSCAR.
pipes, German.
Possibly the reference is to German flutes, those of the now universal variety blown through a hole at the side instead of through the upper end.
NN 2.
Pipes, Tom,
retired boatswain's mate who keeps Commodore Trunnion's servants in order in Smollett's novel,The Adventures of Peregrine Pickle .
DC 4.
pipes in faggots,
possibly churchwarden pipes (clay pipes with very long stems) tied in bundles like faggots.
LD ii 32.
pipkin,
a small saucepan.
Pipkin, Nathaniel,
see PARISH CLERK, THE.
Pipson, Miss,
Miss Bule's best friend at Miss Griffin's establishment, designated ‘a Fair Circassian’ by Master B. in his Arabian Nights fantasy.
CS 12.
pirates had swung in chains, where.
The Execution Dock, Wapping, east London, where, until the eighteenth century, pirates were hanged at low-water mark and their bodies left dangling in chains until three tides had flowed over them.
OCS 67.
Pirrip, Philip,
hero-narrator of Great Expectations , known as ‘Pip’ because, as he explains, ‘my father's family name being Pirrip, and my Christian name Philip, my infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit than Pip’.
Orphaned at a very early age, he is brought up ‘by hand’ by his shrewish sister, Mrs Joe, the wife of the village blacksmith, Joe Gargery, who loves him and protects him as far as possible from his sister's tyranny.
The novel opens with the child's terrifying encounter with Magwitch, an escaped convict, in a lonely country churchyard, and his being forced to steal from his home food and a file for the man whose recapture he subsequently witnesses.
Pip is sent by his sister and Uncle Pumblechook to ‘play’ at Miss Havisham's, where he falls in love with the haughty young Estella.
He is bound apprentice to Joe, but suddenly finds himself being promised ‘great expectations’ from a mysterious benefactor by Mr Jaggers.
He goes to live in London with Herbert Pocket, and is turned into a gentleman, living an expensive but futile sort of existence, and becoming ashamed of Joe and his village origins.
Believing his benefactor to be Miss Havisham, he nourishes a fantasy that she intends him to marry Estella, whom he continues to love passionately, ‘against reason, against promise, against peace, against hope, against happiness, against all discouragement there could be’.
This fantasy is shattered when Magwitch suddenly re-enters his life and announces himself as the mysterious benefactor.
Pip is initially horrified and recoils from the man but gradually comes to understand, and respond to, Magwitch's love for him, and tries, with Herbert's assistance, to smuggle the ex-convict abroad again to save him from the death-sentence he would face as an illegally returned transported criminal.
The plan is foiled but Magwitch escapes the gallows by dying in hospital, with Pip tending him to the last.
All the money is forfeit to the Crown, so Pip is once again poor.
He falls into a fever, and is nursed back to health by the devoted Joe.
He has a final interview with Miss Havisham, and forgives her the wrong she has done him in leading him on to believe that she was his benefactor.
He goes to work abroad for Herbert, in the firm in which he had earlier secretly bought his friend a partnership, and returns after many years, meeting Estella, who had been wretchedly married to Bentley Drummle and who is now widowed, in the ruins of Miss Havisham's house.
This final scene of the novel leaves the reader free to believe, if he so wishes, that Pip and Estella will eventually marry, but it seems clear that CD's intention was that we should understand that Pip's renewed hopes were not to be fulfilled.
Pisa,
city in northern Italy visited by CD.
The ‘ancient frescoes’ in the cloisters of its Campo Santo are a cycle of fourteenth- and fifteenth-century frescos, whose subjects include ‘The Triumph of Death’,PFI 10; its Leaning Tower,LD ii 11.
pitch-and-toss,
a street gambling game in which pennies are pitched at a target, the player whose coin lands nearest to it having the right to then toss all the coins in the air and claim all those that fall face upwards.
Pitcher,
see DOTHEBOYS HALL.
pitchers, the adage about little,
allusion to the saying ‘Little pitchers have big ears’, meaning that children have very sharp hearing.
BH 37.
Pitchlynn,
Red Indian, ‘Chief of the Choctaw tribe’, an educated man with whom CD had a conversation aboard a steamboat en route for Louisville (Kentucky).
AN 12.
Pitt, Jane,
‘wardrobe-woman’ at the school where Old Cheeseman, whom she marries, is a master.
CS 5.
Pitt, William (1759–1806),
English statesman and twice Prime Minister (1784–1801 and 1804–6): ‘the pilot who had weathered the storm’,DS 61; increased the tax on windows,OCS 28; sought to adopt a neutral attitude towards the French Revolution, but on France's declaring war on England put Britain at the head of a powerful anti-French alliance,TTC iii 8.
Pitts.
Johnny Pitts of 6 Great Andrews Street, Seven Dials, west London, was a printer of street literature and a rival to Catnach.
SB 12.
Pittsburg,
manufacturing city in Pennsylvania, ‘like Birmingham in England; at least, its townspeople say so’.
AN 11.
pity the sorrows,
opening words of Thomas Moss's ‘The Beggar's Petition’.
OMF iii 1.
Plague, the.
The Great Plague of London (1664–5).
The carts to carry away the corpses went round the streets announced by the drivers' bells and the cry, ‘Bring out your dead’.
DS 29;LD i 3.
So many people were dying that normal burial was not possible and large pits were dug outside the city for mass disposal of the bodies.
DC 47.
plague, pestilence and famine.
The prayer that Grandfather Smallweed is remembering occurs in the Litany in The Book of Common Prayer : ‘from plague, pestilence and famine; from battle, and murder, and from sudden death, Good Lord, deliver us.’
BH 26.
plant, the (sl.),
trick, a situation set up to entrap someone.
plate warmer,
large screen for the fire, often on wheels, containing small cupboards for holding plates, etc.
Plato, Zeno, Epicurus, Pythagoras,
‘all founders of clubs’, or more precisely, schools of philosophy.
PP 15.
Plautus (c .254–184 BC),
Roman comic dramatist.
DS 11.
plays.
The following dramatic pieces were written wholly by CD:The Strange Gentleman (1836),The Village Coquettes (1836),Is She His Wife?(1837), and The Lamplighter (1838)— see under individual titles.
He extensively revised two other plays,Mr Nightingale ' s Diary by Mark Lemon (1851), and The Frozen Deep (1857) by Wilkie Collins, and collaborated also with Collins on a dramatization of No Throughfare (1867).
plea in bar, a.
In law to enter a plea in bar has several meanings; the relevant one here is to prevent the advancement of a claim by a litigating party by showing cause why it should be set aside.
DS 23.
Pliny.
Pliny the Elder (AD 23–79), Roman writer and encyclopaedist.
CD's reference to his succeeding the experimental philosophical pig who had died from ‘taking a bath at too high a temperature’, and thus falling a victim ‘to his thirst for knowledge’ is a jocose allusion to Pliny's death during the eruption of Vesuvius, which he was trying to study at close quarters.
PP 36.
Plornish, Thomas,
simple, good-natured plasterer, living in Bleeding Heart Yard, always seeking work but seldom finding it.
During a brief spell in the Marshalsea he is modestly attentive to the Dorrits, and afterwards helps Little Dorrit to find work at Mrs Clennam's.
He acts as Clennam's intermediary in securing Edward Dorrit's release from prison as a debtor, as Clennam wishes to remain anonymous in the matter.
Through Clennam, Cavaletto goes to lodge at the Plornishes, enabling Mrs Plornish (Sally, except in chap.
27 where she is referred to as as Mary) to develop her own peculiar brand of pidgin Italian, of which she is very proud.
After the Dorrits come into their fortune Mr Plornish is found ‘a small share in a small builder's business’, and Mrs Plornish is established ‘in the small grocery and general trade in a snug little shop at the crack end of the Yard’, where she is joined by her poor father, Old Nandy, to whom she is devoted, and assisted by Maggy.
The Plornishes have two small children .
LD i 12 et seq .
Pluck, Mr,
parasitic friend of Sir Mulberry Hawk's who, with his constant companion,Pyke , assists in the fleecing of Lord Frederick Verisopht, and operates on Mrs Nickleby's vanity to get access to her daughter Kate.
NN 19, 27, 28, 32, 34–5, 38, 50.
Plummer, Caleb,
toymaker employed by Tackleton, ‘a little, meagre, thoughtful-faced man’, devoted to the interests of his blind daughter Bertha , a paragon of fortitude and cheerfulness, and friend of Dot Peerybingle's, and also to the memory of his son Edward , who is wrongly believed to have died in South America.
Edward returns incognito, however, and after various complications is reunited with his sweetheart, Mary Fielding.
CH 2, 3.
plummy and slam (sl.),
plummy = something good; slam = quickly.
plumpers,
a vote given solely to one candidate at an election when the voter has the right to split his vote between two or more candidates (hence the phrase ‘to plump for’).
OMF ii 3.
Plutarch,
Greek biographer and philosopher of first century AD; author of Parallel Lives of the Greeks and Romans ,OMF iii 6.
Alexander weeping (Lives ),BH 2.
Caesar's wife (Lives ),BH 61.
Plymouth Brother/Sister,
member of an Evangelical sect, the Plymouth Brethren, founded in Plymouth c .1830.
CS 17.
pochayses (cockney sl.),
post-chaises.
Pocket, Herbert,
the ‘pale young gentleman’ whom Pip as a boy meets in the grounds of Miss Havisham's house, and who challenges Pip to fight him.
Later Pip meets him again when Jaggers arranges for him to share rooms with Herbert in Barnard's Inn.
The two become fast friends and Herbert gently and tactfully instructs Pip in social behaviour appropriate for a gentleman.
He ‘had a frank and easy way with him that was very taking…
There was something wonderfully hopeful about his general air…
He had not a handsome face, but it was better than handsome: being extremely amiable and cheerful.’
He proposes to become a capitalist and a ship-insurer, but seems not to be meeting with much success.
Pip secretly arranges for him to be taken into partnership by Clarriker, a rising young merchant, and he prospers, working for the firm in the East and is eventually able to marry his sweetheart Clara Barley.
His father,Matthew , is appointed Pip's tutor.
He is ‘a gentleman with a rather perplexed expression of face, and with very grey hair disordered on his head, as if he didn't quite see his way to putting anything straight’, but kind and honest.
Unlike other members of his family, who are all related to Miss Havisham, he refuses to flatter her or dance attendance on her in the hopes of a legacy.
His wife,Belinda , Herbert's mother, is the ‘only daughter of a certain quite accidental deceased Knight’, who has been brought up to consider herself a deprived aristocrat: ‘she had grown up highly ornamental, but perfectly helpless and useless’, and spends her time studying Court guides, leaving her household and seven younger children to the haphazard care of the servants.
These children,Alick, Jane, Charlotte, Fanny, Joe , one unnamed, and a baby, pass their lives in ‘alternately tumbling up and lying down’, and Jane, ‘a mere mite’, has ‘prematurely taken upon herself some charge of the others’.
Another member of the Pocket family,Sarah , ‘a little dry brown corrugated old woman, with a small face that might have been made of walnut shells, and a large mouth like a cat's without the whiskers’, toadies to Miss Havisham in the hope of a legacy, but is eventually left, according to Joe Gargery, only ‘twenty-five pound per annium for to buy pills, on account of being bilious’.
GE 11 et seq .
Pocket-Breaches,
Veneering's bought parliamentary constituency.
CD is playing with the term ‘pocket-borough’, used for a constituency where the electors' votes were all corruptly controlled by some wealthy individual (see BOROUGH, CLOSE).
OMF ii 3.
Pocock, Isaac (1782–1835),
dramatist.
‘The Miller and his Men’(1813),CS 1.
Rob Roy Macgregor (1818),NN 25.
Podder,
see DUMKINS.
Podgers, John,
credulous old burgher of Windsor in Mr Pickwick's tale contributed to Master Humphrey's Clock , pompous and slow-witted, ‘one of those people who, being plunged into the Thames, would make no vain efforts to set it afire, but would straightway flop down to the bottom with a deal of gravity, and be highly respected in consequence by all good men’.
MHC 3.
Podsnap, Mr,
a well-to-do marine insurance broker, a ‘too, too smiling large man, with a fatal freshness on him’.
He is pompously self-satisfied and dogmatically opinionated, and ‘could never make out why everybody was not quite satisfied’.
He settled that ‘whatever he put behind him he put out of existence…
‘I don't want to know about it; I don't choose to discuss it; I don't admit it!'’
'He had ‘even acquired a peculiar flourish of his right arm in often clearing the world of its most difficult problems by sweeping them behind him…
For they affronted him’.
His consuming anxiety about everything is ‘would it bring a blush into the cheek of the young person?’ and he vetoes all discussion of controversial matters on these grounds.
Convinced that England and the English way of doing things is always right, he considers other countries ‘a mistake’.
His wife is a large impressive woman (‘quantity of bone, neck and nostrils like a rocking-horse, hard features, majestic head-dress in which Podsnap has hung golden offerings’).
Their daughter,Georgiana , is a pathetic creature, utterly crushed by the magnificence of her parents; she falls an easy prey to the Lammles' schemes to marry her off to Fledgeby, but is saved at the last moment by a change of heart on Mrs Lammle's part.
CD's original for certain aspects of the character of Podsnap is generally agreed to have been his dogmatic friend, John Forster.
OMF i 2 et seq .
poem on Shakespeare,
satirical allusion to the outburst of poetical celebrations of Shakespeare in his tercentenary year of 1864.
OMF i 2.
poems and verses.
In his youth CD wrote a number of doggerel verses, usually of a satirical nature, for the amusement of friends, such as‘The Bill of Fare’(1831) describing the Beadnells and their guests at a family dinner-party, and four poems contributed to Maria Beadnell's album.
These private verses were first collected up in the Nonesuch Collected Papers vol. 2 (see MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS).
He wrote three poems for inclusion in Pickwick Papers : ‘The Ivy Green’, ‘A Christmas Carol’, and ‘Gabriel Grub's Song’; and in Aug. 1841 contributed three anti-Tory ‘squibs’ to The Examiner (‘The Fine Old English Gentleman’, ‘The Quack Doctor's Proclamation’, and ‘Subjects for Painters’).
In 1842 he wrote a prologue for Westland Marston's play,The Patrician's Daughter , and in 1844 contributed a poem on religious intolerance, ‘A Word in Season’, to an annual,The Keepsake , edited by Lady Blessington.
Two more political verse satires appeared in the Daily News early in 1846 (‘The British Lion’, 24 Jan. and ‘The Hymn of the Wiltshire Labourers’, 14 Feb.).
He wrote a Prologue and ‘The Song of the Wreck’ for Wilkie Collins's The Lighthouse , 1855, and a Prologue for the same author's The Frozen Deep , 1856.
All these, with some other stray pieces of verse, were first collected by F. G. Kitton in a small volume published 1903, and subsequently included in MP .
poet of that name, there once was a.
Allusion to Edmund Waller (1606–87).
DS 18.
poet sat upon a stool in a public place, a,
see DANTE.
Pogram, the honourable Elijah,
member of the US Congress whom Martin Chuzzlewit meets on board the steamboat returning from Eden, a chauvinistic windbag celebrated for a speech called ‘the Pogram Defiance’ which, Martin is informed by another passenger, ‘defied the world in general to  com-pete with our country upon any hook; and develop'd our internal resources for making war upon the universal airth’.
For this he is considered by his admirers ‘one of the master-minds of our country’.
MC 34.
Polcinello,
character in a puppet-show of Italian origin; the prototype of Punch.
PFI 9, 11. pole, with the, i.e., that belonging to a two-horse hackney coach.
SB 14.
polenta,
Italian porridge made from meal of chestnuts, maize, etc.
political economy,
science concerned with the production, distribution and consumption of wealth, first fully formulated in Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations (1776).
CD generally uses the term to embrace Utilitarianism and Malthusianism (see MALTHUS), which sought to discourage marriage among the poorer classes, an attitude lampooned by CD in The Chimes ,DS 57.
His chief assault on Political Economy is in Hard Times where Mr Gradgrind is its champion and representative.
pollard (adj.),
bald.
poll-pry, to,
to ask inquisitive and impertinent questions like Paul Pry, the title character in a comedy by John Poole (1825).
BH 8.
polonies,
sausages of partly cooked pork.
Polreath, David,
elderly resident of Lanrean.
CS 13.
Polybius,
Greek historian (c .200–120 BC) of the rise of Rome, referred to by Gibbon in the first chapter of his Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire .
Pronounced ‘Polly Beeious’ by Silas Wegg, and ‘supposed by Mr Boffin to be a Roman Virgin'.
OMF i 5.
Polygon, the,
see SOMERS TOWN.
Polyphemus , the,
West Indian trading ship whose unhappy fate is recalled by Walter Gay.
DS 4.
pomatums,
pomades, scented ointments for the skin and hair.
Pompeii,
Roman city buried by the eruption of Vesuvius, AD 79.
CD visits,PFI 12; Mr Meagles's souvenirs from (‘morsels of tessellated pavement…like petrified minced veal’),LD i 16.
Ponto,
Jingle's sagacious gun-dog.
PP 12.
See also JESSE, EDWARD.
Pooder Plot,
the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 when Guy Fawkes and others plotted to blow up the Houses of Parliament.
NN 64.
Poodle,
see BOODLE, LORD.
Pool, the,
stretch of the River Thames in London between Tower Bridge and Limehouse Reach to the east.
GE 45.
Poole, John (1786? –1872),
dramatist.
Intrigue (1814)NN 23.
Paul Pry ,SB 27.
Poor Law,
see NEW POOR LAW.
‘Poor Relation's Story, The’,
the first of CD's two contributions to ‘A Round of Stories by the Christmas Fire’, the Christmas number of Household Words , 1852.
The narrator Michael, an elderly bachelor living in genteel poverty, describes his ‘castle in the air’; in it he has married Christiana, the girl who gave him up when he was disinherited, while John Spatter, who cheated him out of his business, remains his friend and partner.
CS 3.
Pope, Alexander (1688–1744),
poet.
‘Drags its slow length’(Essay on Criticism ),BH 1.
‘The feast of reason and the flow of soul’(Imitations of Horace, Satire I ),PP 15.
‘Guide, philosopher and friend’(Essay on Man ),DC 17;LD i 19.
‘An honest man's the noblest work of God’(Essay on Man ),MC 12;OCS 14.
‘A little learning’(Essay on Criticism ),SB 6.
‘Lo, the poor Indian’(Essay on Man ),LD i 20.
‘Whatever is, is right’(Essay on Man ),PP 51.
‘When doctors disagree’(Moral Essays, iii ),LD ii 12.
His lines on Shylock as performed in 1741 by Charles Macklin (1697? -1797),MED 9.
Pope, the.
In 1845, during CD's stay in Rome, the Pope was Gregory XVI (1765–1846), who had become Pope in 1831.
PFI 11.
Pope Joan,
a legendary figure supposed to have reigned as John VIII in the ninth century who gives her name to a card game for 3 or more players, played on a circular painted tray (or specially marked table), and with ‘fish’(counters of bone or ivory often shaped like fish).
The stakes are placed on the board, one for each honour and the game, two for ‘Matrimony’(King and Queen of trumps), two for ‘Intrigue’(Queen and Knave), and six for ‘Pope Joan’(the nine of diamonds).
PP 6.
Pope's couplet,
an inscription on the Monument which was not finally removed until 1831 imputed the blame for the Great Fire of London (1666) to treacherous Roman Catholics, and Pope indignantly alludes to it in the third of his Moral Essays (ll. 339–40): ‘Where London's column, pointing at the skies, /Like a tall bully, lifts its head and lies.’
MC 37.
Poplar,
dockland borough in east London, where Captain Ravender lived when ashore.
CS 9.
Poplar Walk,
street in Stamford Hill, now a north London suburb, where Mr Budden ‘having a great predilection for the country, had purchased a cottage’.
SB 46.
popular prejudice runs in favour of two.
‘Tho' one eye may be very agreeable, yet…the prejudice has always run in favour of two .’
Sheridan,The Rivals (1775), IV.
i.
NN 4.
Pordage, Mr Commissioner,
British consul at Silver-store, a self-important man who becomes governor of the island and a KCB: ‘a stiff-jointed, high-nosed old gentleman, without an ounce of fat on him, of a very angry temper and a very yellow complexion’, whose wife ‘making allowances for differences of sex, was much the same’.
CS 10.
Porkenham,
a family friendly with the Nupkinses, consisting of Sidney, Mrs Porkenham , and the Miss Porkenhams .
PP 25.
Porkin and Snob,
see SNIGGLE AND BLINK.
Porpus.
‘In the arms o' Porpus’, i.e. Morpheus, in classical mythology son of Sleep and god of dreams.
PP 36.
Porson, Richard (1759–1808),
classical scholar and Professor of Greek at Cambridge University, renowned for his unprepossessing appearance.
NN 4.
Porter, Mrs Joseph,
neighbour of the  Gattleton's in Clapham, south-west London, whose formidable talent for ‘scandal and sarcasm’ causes her to be ‘courted, and flattered, and caressed, and invited’by all her neighbours.
Her spite is aroused by the Gattletons' ostentatious amateur theatricals, and she successfully sets herself to sabotage the proceedings; her daughter Emma .
SB 53.
Porters, Mr,
former suitor of Miss Twinkleton's at Tunbridge Wells.
MED 3.
porter's chair,
leather-covered armchair, the back of which is extended to form a hood over the occupant's head, thus protecting him from draughts in the hallway of a mansion, where the chair would be situated.
porter's knot,
shoulder-pad used by market-porters when carrying burdens.portico, Roman name of the Painted Porch (or Stoa) in the agora or forum of ancient Athens, which was where the ‘Stoic’ philosopher Zeno (335–263 BC) held his school.
DS 11.
Portingale,
i.e., Portugal.
CS 15.
Portland Place,
in west London, to the north of Oxford Circus, a fashionable residential street for rich merchants in the 1830s.
Mr Dombey's house was between Portland Place and Bryanstone Square, ‘on the shady side of a tall, dark, dreadfully genteel street’.
DS 3.
Portman Square,
in west London, off Baker Street and to the north of Oxford Street.
It was the area in which many of the nobility owned property.
The Podsnaps live ‘in a shady angle adjoining Portman Square’.
OMF i 11.
Port Middlebay (fict.),
Mr Peggotty's and the Micawbers' Australian home.
DC 63.
Portsmouth (Hampshire),
CD's birthplace; a seaport and naval dockyard.
The theatre where Nicholas appeared with Crummles's company; St Thomas's Street on the Common Hard where Nicholas lodged; Lombard Street, where Miss Snevellicci lodged.
NN 23–4, 29–30, 36, 48.
post-captain,
full captain of the British navy commanding a ship of 20 guns or more; so called in contradistinction to a commander because his name was ‘posted’ in the seniority list.
DS 9.
post-chaise,
carriage hired for a journey from one ‘stage’ to another.
post-obits,
debts liable for collection by the lender after the death of a person specified by the borrower as someone from whom he had an expectation.
Post Office (London),
see GENERAL POST OFFICE.
pothooks and hangers,
up-and-down strokes of Victorian copperplate handwriting.
Potiphar's wife.
Having failed to seduce Joseph, she persuaded her husband, captain of Pharaoh's guard, to imprison him (Gen. 39).
DS 33.
Potkins, William,
waiter at the Blue Boar, Rochester, invited by Pumblechook to witness Pip's ‘ingratitude’.
GE 58.
Potomac River,
United States, flowing between Maryland and Virginia to Washington, DC; picturesque heights above it.
AN 8.
Pott, Mr,
contentious editor of the Tory Eatanswill Gazette , married to the domineering Mrs Pott , with whom Pickwick and Winkle stay during the Eatanswill election; he and Slurk of the Independent are obsessed by their rivalry in print, and on one occasion come to blows, afterwards resolving that their ‘deadly hostilities’ shall be fought out only in their papers.
PP 13–15, 18.
Potter, Thomas,
young city clerk who affects the dress of a coachman, and has an ‘offhand, dashing, amateur-pickpocket-sort-of-manner’.
With his friend, Robert Smithers, he determines to ‘make a night of it’ after receipt of his quarter's wages; their riotous behaviour leads to their arrest and appearance before a magistrate the following morning.
SB 43.
Potterson, Abigail (‘Abbey’),
landlady of the Six Jolly Fellowship Porters, a ‘tall, upright, well-favoured woman, though severe of countenance’.
She is a strict disciplinarian treated with great respect by her customers, but she is kind-hearted and a good friend to Lizzie Hexam.
Her brother,Job , is a steward aboard the ship in which John Harmon returns to England, and is later able to identify him in John Rokesmith.
OMF i 6 et seq .
potter's wessel,
Miggs's phrase comes from Ps. 2: 9, ‘Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel’.
BR 71.
pot-valiant,
made brave by liquor.
Pouch's widow, Joe,
friend of Mrs Bagnet's, whom she wishes Mr George to marry.
BH 27.
Poultry, the,
street in London, eastward continuation of Cheapside from Old Jewry.
Once the special quarter of the London poulterers.
BR 67.
pounce,
pulverized cuttle-shell contained in a pounce-box, shaped like a pepper-caster, from which it was shaken over parchment and rubbed in to prepare the surface for writing.
pound (sl.),
to bet a pound on, to guarantee.
pound,
brick or stone enclosure, usually on the outskirts of a village, for stray animals.
OCS 15;PP 19.
pound-cake,
so called because the weight of each of its ingredients — flour, butter, sugar, etc. — is 1 lb.
poussette,
a dance figure in which a couple or couples join hands and dance round and round; found in country dances such as the ‘Sir Roger de Coverley’.
powder, the untaxed,
i.e. snow.
The powder footmen used in their wigs was, unlike snow, subject to a tax.
BH 58.
power, a certain barbaric,
Tsarist Russia.
LD ii 22.
Powler,
name of an ancient family of which Mr Sparsit is a descendant.
HT i 7; ii 1, 8, 9.
prad (sl.),
horse.
praecipe book,
one in which the particulars of writs are entered.
PP 20.
praise from Sir Hubert Stanley.
‘Approbation from Sir Hubert Stanley is praise indeed’, from Thomas Morton's popular comedy A Cure for the Heartache (1797).
DS 1.
Pratchett, Mrs,
chambermaid at the hotel where Somebody's Luggage is found.
CS 15.
‘Prentice Knights (fict.),
secret society of disaffected apprentices, presided over by Sim Tappertit.
At the time of the Gordon Riots (see GORDON, LORD GEORGE), in which the ‘Knights’ supported the Protestants, their name was changed to United Bulldogs.
BR 8, 49, 82.
Prerogative Office,
ecclesiastical court in which wills were proved and probate granted.
In 1857 its functions were transferred to the Court of Probate.
SB 15.
President, the.
The President of the United States whom CD describes in American Notes (8) was John Tyler.
President , the poor.
The steamship President sank in mid-Atlantic in 1840.
There were no survivors.
AN 1.
Preston,
textile-manufacturing town in Lancashire where George Silverman's infancy is spent in the miserable cellar inhabited by his desperately poor parents.
GSE 3.
The model for Coketown in Hard Times , which reflects the bitter strike for higher wages of the Preston mill-workers.
This lasted from the autumn of 1853 until late Apr. 1854 when the strike collapsed.
CD visited Preston in Jan. 1854, and his article ‘On Strike’ appeared in Household Words on 11 Feb. (reprinted in MP ).
Pretty Polly say,
beginning of one of Macheath's songs in John Gay's The Beggar's Opera (1728), I. xiii.
OCS 64.
preventive (coll.),
coastguard.
Priam, King…on a certain incendiary occasion, alluding to the description of the burning of Priam's Troy in Book II of Virgil's Aeneid (‘a neat point from the classics’).
It has been noted that CD must here be loosely recalling Dryden's translation of the poem (1697), because in that version Aeneas is made to say, after telling how he saw his father Priam slain, ‘My hair with horror stood’, but there is no corresponding expression in the original Latin.
OMF ii 3.
Price, Matilda ('Tilda),
Yorkshire miller's pretty daughter and friend of Fanny Squeers; a pert mischief-maker, though essentially good-hearted, who encourages Fanny to delude herself that she loves Nicholas Nickleby.
She marries John Browdie, and allows Fanny to accompany them on their honeymoon.
NN 9, 12, 39, 42–3, 45, 63–4.
Price, Mr,
debtor detained at Namby's sponging-house in company with Mr Pickwick; a frequenter of ‘public-house parlours’ and ‘low billiard-tables’.
PP 40.
pride and vainglory, a certain passage…about.
See the Litany in The Book of Common Prayer : ‘From blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory…and all uncharitableness: Good Lord, deliver us.’
BH 12.
prig (sl.),
thief.
Prig, Mrs Betsey,
nurse at St Bartholomew's Hospital, and friend of Mrs Gamp's, whom she closely resembles in her slatternly ways, brutal behaviour towards patients, and ignorance of elementary nursing procedure.
Her memorable quarrel with Mrs Gamp takes place after she has expressed disbelief in the existence of Mrs Gamp's elusive crony Mrs Harris.
MC 25, 29, 46, 49.
Primrose, Mrs,
wife of the vicar in Goldsmith's The Vicar of Wakefield ; ‘my warm heart’ quoted from her ‘Miss Carolina Skeggs…has my warm heart’(chap.
12).
PFI 9.
Primrose family, the painter of the.
For the account of the family portrait painter who ‘did not spare his colours’, see Goldsmith's The Vicar of Wakefield , chap.
16.
PFI 9.
Prince Regent, the,
see GEORGE IV.
Princes and Lords may flourish…,
see Oliver Goldsmith's The Deserted Village (1770), ll. 53–4.
Princess's Palace.
This has been very plausibly identified as Devonshire Place Mews, west London.
DS 7.
princes tied up to pegs by the hair of their heads,
allusion to an episode in ‘Jack the Giant-Killer’.
OCS 22.
prisoners…fought battles with their turnkeys.
CD takes this incident from the Annual Register for 1775 where it appears in the ‘Chronicle’ under the date of 14 Mar.
Prisoners in the New Gaol, Southwark, who had sawed through their leg-irons, were besieged by turnkeys and constables in the ‘strong-room’: ‘the prisoners fired several pistols loaded with powder and ball at two of the constables: when, the balls going through their hats, and the outrages continuing, one of the constables who had a blunderbuss loaded with shot, fired through the iron gates at the window, and dangerously wounded one fellow…
‘.TTC i 1.
prisoners and captives, all,
a reference to the Litany in The Book of Common Prayer .
LD i 19.
prisoner's base,
an ancient catching-game played by children (also known as ‘Chevy Chase’).
CS 4.
‘Prisoners' Van, The’,
twelfth and last of the sketches in the ‘Characters’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Scenes and Characters No. 9’ in Bell's Life in London , 13 Dec. 1835.
Describes prisoners about to be transported to prison from a police station, in particular two younger sisters, the elder hardened to it all but the younger one bitterly distressed.
SB 44.
prisons.
Partly, no doubt, as a result of his boyhood experiences, CD was fascinated by prisons and imprisonment throughout his career.
In American Notes he records his impressions of several US prisons including the Boston House of Correction, The Tombs (New York), the Eastern Penitentiary (Philadelphia), and the Maryland State Penitentiary (AN 3, 6, 9).
In Sketches by Boz (32) he gives a detailed account of a visit to Newgate; this gaol also features prominently in Barnaby Rudge , and appears in both Oliver Twist (16) and Great Expectations (32).
Other prisons featured in his work are four French ones, the Bastille (TTC and CS ), the Conciergerie and the Abbaye (TTC ), and Marseilles (LD i 1), and three London debtors' prisons, the Fleet (PP ), the King's Bench (DC ), and the Marshalsea (LD ).
See under names of individual prisons.
CD participated vigorously in the fierce contemporary debate over types of prison systems.
He strongly favoured the so-called ‘Silent Systems’ as practised, for example, at the Middlesex House of Correction, Coldbath Fields.
Under this system prisoners could work together and use the same dormitories, but they were forbidden to speak to one another or communicate in any other way; they were, therefore, under constant close surveillance day and night.
CD bitterly opposed the rival ‘Separate System’ as practised most notably at Pentonville ‘Model’Prison, London.
Under this system prisoners were kept in perpetual solitary confinement, emerging from their cells only for brief periods of exercise, or for religious or secular instruction.
They had to wear masks or veils on such occasions to prevent their recognizing each other.
They were encouraged to profess repentance and contrition which in the view of CD and others simply promoted hypocrisy, hence his satire on ‘Model Prisoners’ in DC 61.
See MIDDLESEX MAGISTRATE.
Private Bill,
Act of Parliament designed to grant relief to or to confer some form of privilege on a private individual or corporation (‘of all kinds and classes of bill…without exception the most unreasonable in its charges’,MC 27).
privateer, clipping,
fast, armed merchant vessel, used, under government authority, to harry or capture ships of hostile nations.
BH 9.
‘Private Theatres’,
thirteenth of the sketches in the ‘Scenes’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Sketches of London No. 19’ in The Evening Chronicle (see MORNING CHRONICLE), 11 Aug. 1835.
Satirical account of the foolishly vain and incompetent amateurs who pay to act major roles in small neighbourhood theatres in London; takes the reader behind the scenes before a performance of Macbeth in such a theatre.
SB 20.
Privy Council,
originally the council chosen by the King of England to administer public affairs, but in modern times never summoned as a whole except to proclaim the successor to the Crown on the death of a sovereign.
The Cabinet is, technically, a committee of the Privy Council.
Its ‘Schedule B’ was a syllabus drawn up in 1846 for teachers in training by a subcommittee of the Council.
HT i 2.
privy-purses,
see MACES, OR PETTY BAGS, etc.
Procter, B. W.,
see CORNWALL, BARRY.
proctor,
see DOCTORS' COMMONS.
proctor,
term once used for a person who collected alms for lepers and other beggars; the term came to have a bad meaning because of the abuse of the system.
Richard Watts excluded ‘rogues and proctors’ from his Rochester Charity for the relief of travellers.
CS 7.
The term is also used for one who manages the causes of others in courts of civil or canon law such as Doctors' Commons was: described by Steerforth as ‘a sort of monkish attorney’,DC 23.
prodigal son,
subject of parable cited in Luke 15: 11–32,GE 4;MC 13; ‘prodigy son’,PP 43.
profeel macheen.
Sam Weller's allusion is to a mechanical device for producing outline portraits by tracing the features with one end of a wire which has a pencil attached to the other end.
PP 33.
professed but plain, not (coll.),
a cook able to produce basic dishes but not professionally trained.
MED 21.
Prometheus,
one of the Titans in Greek mythology, who angered Zeus by stealing fire from Heaven for man's benefit.
He was chained to a rock and his liver, though continually devoured by an eagle, never diminished.
BR 4.
Prometheus,(The Men of),
the ballet by Salvatore Viganò (1769–1821) for which he commissioned Beethoven (1770–1827) to write the music; first produced in 1801.
PFI 9;SB 53.
prompt.
In stage-directions ‘prompt’ indicates stage-right; O.P. or ‘opposite prompt’, stage-left.
Prooshan blue.
Prussian blue, a dark rich blue discovered in Berlin in 1704, alluding to the colour of Tony Weller's face.
PP 33.
prophet's rod.
That of Aaron which, transformed into a serpent, swallowed the rods, similarly transformed, of Pharaoh's wise men and sorcerers.
Exod. 7: 12.
CC 1.
prophet's rod of old.
‘And Moses lifted his hand and struck the rock with his rod twice; and water came forth abundantly.’
Num. 20: 11.
DS 30.
prose, a (sl.),
dull person.
Prosee, Mr,
friend of Perker's.
PP 47.
Prospero.
His ‘so potent art’, i.e. magic.
See Shakespeare,The Tempest , V. i.
LD i 34.
Pross, Miss,
Lucie Manette's devoted nurse and protectress, rather brusque in manner but with a heart of gold.
She accompanies Lucie and her child to Paris during the Reign of Terror, when Darnay has been imprisoned, and forcibly prevents Madame Defarge from discovering their escape but at the cost of her own hearing (she is permanently deafened by the accidental firing off of Mme Defarge's pistol during their struggle),TTC i 4 et seq .
Her brother,Solomon , a spy operating under the alias Barsad.
Protestant Association,
a body with branches in various parts of Britain which agitated strongly for the repeal of the Catholic Relief Act of 1778.
Lord George Gordon, as President of the London Branch, convened in 1780 the great public meeting that led to the Gordon Riots.
BR 36, 39, 43, 48.
Protestant Manual, The,
devotional work popular in the mid-eighteenth century which Mrs Varden is prone to turn to when bent on making life difficult for her husband: ‘like some other ladies…
Mrs Varden was most devout when most ill-tempered.
Whenever she and her husband were at unusual variance, then the Protestant Manual was in high feather.’
BR 4, 19. proverb, something else which the…says must not be told of afterwards, i.e. a kiss, a reference to the traditional proverb about the reprehensibility of kissing and telling.
MC 43.
Proverbs, Book of,
one of the books of the Old Testament, the authorship of which was traditionally ascribed to King Solomon.
providing yourself,
i.e. with a new situation.
Mrs Varden is hinting at possibly dismissing Miggs.
BR 13.
Provis,
Magwitch's alias on returning illegally to England.
Pruffle,
common-sensical servant of a credulous scientific gentleman at Clifton.
PP 39.
Ptolemy the Great (c .367–282 BC),
Macedonian soldier who became King of Egypt (305–282) and founder of the dynasty that ruled until 31 BC.
DS 24.
‘Public Dinners’,
one of the sketches in the ‘Scenes’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Sketches of London No. 7’ in The Evening Chronicle (see MORNING CHRONICLE), 7 Apr. 1835.
Humorous account of a charity dinner on behalf of the ‘Indigent Orphans’ Friends Benevolent Institution' (CD parodies in this made-up name the pompous titles of many public charities).
SB 26.
publishers.
CD's main publishers were Chapman & Hall (1836–70) and Bradbury & Evans (1844–61).
Chapman & Hall became his sole publishers in 1840, after buying out Macrone (publisher of Sketches by Boz ) and Bentley (publisher of Oliver Twist ).
CD's early agreements with Macrone, Bentley, and Chapman & Hall were unsatisfactory because they did not take into account the rapidly increasing value of his writings.
Chapman & Hall made him some compensation through extra payments for Pickwick Papers and Nicholas Nickleby , and by making loans and advances.
Their agreement was the first based on profit-sharing as well as retention of copyright, which gave him a large measure of control over publication and future working of the copyrights.
But the profits in which he shared during 1840–44 did not come up to expectations, and after the disappointment of the low profits on A Christmas Carol , published on commission, he broke temporarily with Chapman & Hall, and turned to their printers, Bradbury & Evans, as his new publishers.
Dombey and Son , published by them, was the first of his novels to yield a high profit to author as well as publisher.
Both firms were associated with him in the pioneering venture of issuing cheap reprint series of his works: the Cheap, Library, People's, and Charles Dickens Editions.
These helped to assure him an income while no story was appearing, as did his editorship and share in the profits of his cheap periodicals,Household Words (1850–9) and All the Year Round (1859–70).
Bradbury & Evans published and had a share in HW ; this caused complications when CD quarrelled with them in 1858, and for AYR he became proprietor and his own publisher, making use of Chapman & Hall as paid agents.
See also entries for AYR , Richard Bentley, Bradbury & Evans, Chapman & Hall, Charles Dickens Edition, Cheap Edition, Henry Colburn, Diamond Edition,HW , Library Edition, John Macrone, People's Edition, Ticknor and Fields.
Pubsey and Co.,
Fledgeby's moneylending business managed by Riah.
OMF i 5.
Puffer, Princess,
an old hag to whose London East End den Jasper resorts to smoke opium.
For reasons undisclosed she follows him to Cloisterham, where she unwittingly reveals her hatred of him to Datchery.
MED 1, 14, 22.
Puffy,
see BUFFY, RT.
HON. WILLIAM.
Pugstyles, Mr,
leader of a constituency deputation sent away with a flea in its ear by Mr Gregsbury, MP.
NN 16.
pull you up (coll.),
have you arrested and taken in front of a magistrate.
SB 23.
Pumblechook, Mr,
Joe Gargery's uncle ‘(…but Mrs Joe appropriated him)’, a ‘well-to-do corn-chandler’.
He is ‘a large, hard-breathing, middle-aged slow man, with a mouth like a fish, dull staring eyes, and sandy hair standing upright on his head, so that he looked as if he had just been all but choked, and had that moment come to’.
He is revered locally, and especially by Mrs Joe, as a man of great sagacity and judiciousness but is, in fact, a pompous, self-satisfied fool, who bullies Pip as a child but fawns upon him when he becomes a young man of fortune, and postures as the ‘founder of his fortunes’ since he had been the means of introducing Pip to Miss Havisham's.
When Pip's fortunes fall Pumblechook changes his attitude for one of spurious pity, condemning Pip for his ‘want of gratitoode’.
GE 4 et seq .
pumped,
shod with pumps.
pumps,
light shoes worn for dancing or on formal occasions.
Punch,
hero of the puppet play introduced into England from France in the late seventeenth century, and performed in the streets by itinerant showmen.
There have been various forms of the play but Punch himself is always a violent, pugnacious but droll and high-spirited rascal, hunchbacked, hook-nosed, and gaily dressed, who with the help of his cudgel overcomes all his enemies in succession.
Stock characters are his wife Judy and Punch's dog, Toby.
Codlin and Short in The Old Curiosity Shop are Punch showmen, and Mrs Jarley despises their entertainment as vulgar ‘low beatings and knockings about’.
Other references include:DC 23;MC 31;NN 2;PFI 11;PP 48;SB 45.
See also POLCINELLO.
punkin'-sarse,
i.e. pumpkin sauce.
MC 33.
Pupford, Miss Euphemia,
proprietress of an ‘establishment for six young ladies of tender years’, one being Kitty Kimmeens.
CS 14.
Pupker, Sir Matthew,
chairman of the United Metropolitan Improved Hot Muffin and Crumpet Baking and Punctual Delivery Company.
NN 2.
Purday, Captain,
naval half-pay veteran, whose well-meant interference in the domestic life of the ‘old lady’ of Our Parish causes her simultaneous embarrassment and gratitude.
He is also active in parochial affairs, and is regarded by his vestry opponents as a ‘turbulent parishioner’.
SB 2, 3, 4.
purl,
beer heated to nearly boiling point and flavoured with gin, sugar, and ginger.
pursuit of knowledge under difficulties,
title of a work by George Lillie Craik.
PP 33.
puss in the corner,
game in which the players stand by themselves at different distances (e.g. one at each corner of a room) and one other player is placed in the middle.
He or she must try to occupy one of the positions of the other players when they are changing places which they must constantly do; any player who has been so displaced must then go into the middle and try to recapture one of the positions.
DC 59.
Putnam, George Washington,
see SECRETARY, MY FAITHFUL.
Putney,
home of the Misses Spenlow, then a village (now a suburb of London) south of the Thames.
DC 38, 41, 43, 48.
Pyegrave, Charley,
one of Miss Mowcher's clients.
DC 22.
Pyke, Mr,
see PLUCK, MR.
Pythagoras,
Greek philosopher and mathematician of the sixth century BC.
CS 12.
Q
Quadrant, the (dem.),
elegant architectural feature of the curve at the southern end of Regent Street in west London, consisting of arcades on both sides of the street.
SB 39.
quadrille,
both a card game for four players and a square dance for four couples.
Quale, Mr,
ardent philanthropist, ‘a loquacious young man…with large shining knobs for temples’, and a devotee of Mrs Jellyby's, whose daughter, Caddy, he wishes to marry.
BH 4, 23, 30.
Quanko Samba,
see BLAZO, SIR THOMAS.
Quarll, Philip,
hero of a novel called The Hermit , written in imitation of Robinson Crusoe and published in 1727; attributed to Edward Dorrington.
MC 5.
quartern,
a quarter of a pound, four ounces.
quarters, to beat up these (sl.),
to visit this house informally.
DS 26.
Quatre Bras,
one of the concluding battles of the Napoleonic Wars, fought in Belgium in June 1815.
CS 7.
Quebec (Canada).
‘This Gibraltar of America’ described.
AN 15.
Queen Charlotte's royal married females,
an allusion to Queen Charlotte's Lying-in (maternity) Hospital, formerly in Lisson Grove, Marylebone, north-west London.
The hospital was originally founded in 1739 and came under the patronage of Queen Charlotte in 1804.
The present Queen Charlotte's Maternity Hospital is in Shepherds Bush.
DS 2.
Queen's Square,
small Bloomsbury (west London) square, near which Richard Carstone lodges ‘in a quiet old house’.
BH 18.
Queenston (Ontario),
‘extremely beautiful and picturesque’.
AN 15.
‘Queer Client, Tale about the’,
story told by Jack Bamber to the company at the Magpie and Stump.
It is a tale of revenge involving George Heyling , a debtor in the Marshalsea; his infant son ; his wife Mary ; her heartless father ; his son; and an unscrupulous attorney.
PP 21.
Queer Street, in (sl.),
in financial straits, from quaere (Lat.) meaning ‘inquire’, a mark made by tradesmen in their ledgers against the names of customers whose solvency they doubted.
Quilp, Daniel,
diabolically malevolent dwarf, the chief villain of the Old Curiosity Shop ‘…his head and face were large enough for the body of a giant.
His black eyes were restless, sly, and cunning; his mouth and chin bristly with the stubble of a coarse hard beard…
But what added most to the grotesque expression of his face, was a ghastly smile, which…constantly revealed the few discoloured fangs that were yet scattered in his mouth, and gave him the aspect of a panting dog.’
He combines the occupations of rent collector, moneylender, and shipbreaker, and gets Nell's grandfather into his power by advancing him money at exorbitant interest.
When Nell and the old man flee after Quilp has taken possession of their home, the Old Curiosity Shop, he determines to track them down, being convinced that the grandfather has some secret hoard of wealth.
Quilp is addicted to fiendish practical jokes, the chief victims of which are his servile legal adviser, Sampson Brass, his mother-in-law, Mrs Jiniwin, and his docile, pretty wife,Betsy , who is totally fascinated by him and under his power.
A vindictive hatred of Kit Nubbles for saying that he was ‘an uglier dwarf than could be seen anywhere for a penny’ causes Quilp to set on Sampson Brass and his sister falsely to incriminate the boy.
The Marchioness's disclosure of this plot leads to Brass's betrayal of Quilp, and the dwarf meets his death by drowning when trying to escape arrest at his wharf on a dark and foggy night.
OCS 3 et seq .
Quinbus Flestrin Junior.
Gulliver was called Quinbus Flestrin (i.e. ‘Man Mountain') by the little people of Lilliput in Swift's Gulliver's Travels (1726).
LD ii 25.
Quinion,
friend of Murdstone's and manager of Murdstone and Grinby, who employs the 10-year-old David Copperfield in their London warehouse.
DC 2, 10–12.
Quixote, Don,
eponymous hero of the great novel by Cervantes.
His ‘ardour…for his books of chivalry’(OMF iii 5) is described in Cervantes' first chapter: ‘so great was his curiosity and infatuation in this regard that he even sold many acres of tillable land in order to be able to buy and read the books that he loved, and he would carry home with him as many of them as he could obtain.’
(trans.
S. Putnam, 1953).
quiz (sl.),
a teasing wit or joker.
quod (sl.),
prison.
Quoodle,
see BOODLE, LORD.
Quotem, Caleb,
a character in George Colman the Younger's play,The Review (1800), a chattering jack-of-all-trades.
AN 10.
R
Rachael,
Coketown factory worker, a good woman and faithful friend to Stephen Blackpool, whose inability to afford a divorce prevents their marrying.
But such is Rachael's devotion to Stephen that when his wife, an alcoholic from whom he has parted company, appears at his lodgings, ill and incapable, Rachael looks after her to spare Blackpool the task of doing so.
Presently, without warning, he disappears, and Rachael joins in the search for him, defending him against allegations of theft which are believed to have caused him to vanish.
With Sissy she eventually discovers him lying in a disused mine shaft, and is with him when he dies.
HT i 10 et seq .
Rachael, Mrs,
Miss Barbary's servant, a harsh, unsympathetic woman who acted as Esther Summerson's nurse when she was a child.
She eventually marries Chadband.
BH 13, 19, 24, 25, 44, 54.
Radcliffe, Mrs.
Ann Radcliffe (1764–1823), novelist, the leading exponent of Gothic (sensationalist) fiction,SB 31;OMF ii 15; ‘…as carefully boxed up behind two glazed calico curtains as any mysterious picture in any one of Mrs Radcliffe's castles’: there is, in fact, only one ‘mysterious picture’ in Ann Radcliffe's Gothic novels, the one concealed behind ‘a veil of black silk’in the castle of Udolpho that so frightens the heroine, Emily, in chap.
5 of vol. 2 of The Mysteries of Udolpho (1794).
It turns out to be no picture after all, but the image of a worm-eaten corpse.
SB 55.
Raddle, Mrs Mary Ann,
sister of Mrs Cluppins.
She and her timorous husband,Mr Raddle , keep a lodging-house in Lant Street, Borough, and she is a friend of Mrs Bardell's.
Bob Sawyer is one of her lodgers; he owes her rent, which this ‘little fierce woman’ bounces in to demand just before his guests arrive for a bachelor party.
PP 32, 46.
Radfoot, George,
third mate aboard the ship in which John Harmon travels to England.
On arrival, Radfoot drugs and robs him, then is himself murdered.
Later, Hexam finds Radfoot's body, which owing to his likeness to Harmon and the fact that he is dressed in Harmon's clothes is identified as his.
OMF ii 13.
Radley, Mr,
‘faultless’ manager of the Adelphi Hotel, Liverpool,(opened 1826), where CD stayed on the eve of his departure for America in 1842.
AN 1.
Rag Fair,
old clothes market in Rosemary Lane (now Royal Mint Street) to the east of the Tower of London.
LD i 9.
railways.
The description of Jemmy Lirriper's model railway is a humorous epitome of the early history of the railways, with their accidents, the way in which the public was treated by the various interests, parliamentary and private, early experiments in signalling, ‘mushroom’ railway undertakings, worthless railway shares during the mania of the 1840s, starting trains behind time, and surveying for new lines; summarized as ‘everything upside down by Act of Parliament’.
The difficulty of communication with the guard concerned many people, including CD; coaches were built of separate compartments without corridors.
It was not until 1868 that every train travelling more than 20 miles (32 km.) without stopping had to have an efficient means of communication with the guard and driver.
CS 17.
Tony Weller denounces the railway as ‘unconstitootional and an inwaser o'priwileges’(MHC 3).
It features prominently in Dombey and Son , notably with reference to the upheaval its coming causes in neighbourhoods like Staggs's Gardens in London (DS 6, 15) where Mr Toodle the engine-stoker lives; to Mr Dombey's rail journey to Leamington (DS 20) in which the railway engine seems ‘a type of the triumphant monster, Death’; and to Carker's horrible death by falling under a train (DS 55).
The All the Year Round Christmas Number for 1865, ‘Mugby Junction’(CS 19), which includes the ghost story of ‘The Signalman’, has for its setting a great railway junction in the Midlands (Rugby), and CD's journalism contains many references to railways, e.g. ‘A Flight’(RP ), which vividly evokes the journey from London to Paris by train and boat.
railway…shutting a green eye and opening a red one.
In CD's day railway signal-lights were normally kept at green, but changed to red when a train was actually in a station or about to enter it.
Thus Bella and John Harmon, seeing the signal change from green to red, realize they must hurry to catch their train.
OMF iii 9.
Rainbird, Alice,
‘aged seven’, one of the four children who are the supposed authors of the stories in ‘A Holiday Romance’.
Her story concerns the Princess Alicia, daughter of King Watkins the First, who is hard pressed to maintain his ever-growing family.
The fairy Grandmarina appears, and gives Alicia a magic fishbone that will bring her whatever she wishes for ‘provided she wishes for it at the right time’.
Alicia uses it only when the family has come to the end of its own resources and then it brings happiness and prosperity to them all.
HR 1, 2.
Rainbow Tavern, the (dem.),
situated in Fleet Street it was the second house in London to sell coffee, and by c .
1780 was known as the Rainbow Coffee-House.
SB 39.
rain falls upon the just and unjust alike.
Allusion to Matt. 5: 45, ‘for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust’.
OCS 16;LD ii 25.
Rairyganoo, Sally,
former servant of Mrs Lirriper.
CS 17.
Rames, William,
second mate in the Golden Mary .
CS 9.
Rampart, Sir Charles,
commanding officer of Mr Tibbs when he was a volunteer soldier in 1806.
SB 45.
Ramsey,
see BULLMAN AND RAMSEY.
Ramsgate,
seaside resort on the north-east coast of Kent to which the Tuggs family went on holiday.
SB 48.
See also DC 10.
Ranelagh,
place of public entertainment in London, lying to the east of Chelsea Hospital, and comprising extensive gardens and a magnificent rotunda, erected in 1742, where concerts, etc., were held, and food and drink provided.
It was considered rather more fashionable than Vauxhall Gardens, but its popularity did not last as long.
The rotunda was demolished in 1804.
TTC ii 12.
rantipole (sl.),
a madcap.
Raphael.
Raffaello Sanzio (1483–1520), Italian artist.
CD regarded as his ‘masterpiece’ the Transfiguration , the great altar-piece on which he was working at the time of his death; but found his Incendo del Borgo , one of the frescos (designed by Raphael but painted by collaborators) in the Stanze of the Vatican, an ‘incredible caricature’.
PFI 11.
rappee,
type of snuff.
rapper,
spiritualist, devoted to spirit-rapping, table-turning, and similar manifestations.
CS 12.
Rarx, Mr,
a ‘sordid and selfish character’ who ‘had warped further and further out the straight with time’; a passenger aboard the Golden Mary who, after the ship is wrecked, thinks only of himself.
CS 9.
Ratcliff,
dockland region in London's East End near Limehouse, where Captain Bunsby's vessel, the Cautious Clara , lay.
DS 23.
Nancy is described as having recently moved from this ‘remote but genteel suburb’ to Field Lane,OT 13.
Ratcliff Highway,
east London thoroughfare which in CD's day was ‘a reservoir of dirt, drunkenness, and drabs: thieves, oysters, baked potatoes, and pickled salmon’.
SB 28.
rats and mice, and such small gear,
variant of ‘Mice and rats and such small deer’, Shakespeare,King Lear , III.
iv.
NN 19.
Ravender, William George,
captain of the Golden Mary .
After she sinks, his bravery and seamanship ensure the safety of most of the passengers and crew, though he himself dies of exposure.
CS 9.
Raybrock, Mrs,
postmistress of Steepways;Hugh , her eldest son, at first believed to have been lost at sea but who later reappears;Margaret , his wife; their daughter ;Alfred , Hugh's younger brother, who helps Captain Jorgan to solve the mystery about his late father's life-savings;Jorgan , his infant son by his wife Kitty .
CS 13.
Raymond,
see CAMILLA.
Raymond and Agnes.
Raymond and Agnes, or the Castle of Lindenberg , play adapted by M. G. Lewis from his novel Ambrosio, or the Monk ; first produced in 1809, and in other versions later; the introduction of the character of the Bleeding Nun gave it its popular title.
CS 8.
Reading (Berkshire).
The Misses Donny's school, attended by Esther Summerson as a child, was near to this town.
BH 3, 4, 6.
reading for orders,
studying at university to become a clergyman.
Readings.
Between 1853 and 1870 CD gave upwards of 500 public readings from his own works, mostly after 1858 when he began to give them for his own profit.
The repertoire was as follows, in chronological order of being devised:A Christmas Carol ;The Cricket on the Hearth ;The Chimes ;The Story of Little Dombey ;The Poor Traveller ;Boots at the Holly-Tree Inn ;Mrs Gamp ;Bardell and Pickwick ;David Copperfield ;Nicholas Nickleby at the Yorkshire School ;Mr Chops ;the Dwarf ;Bob Sawyer's Party ;Doctor Marigold ;Barbox Brothers ;The Boy at Mugby ;Sikes and Nancy .
Five other items were prepared but never performed (The Haunted Man ;The Bastille Prisoner ;Great Expectations ;Mrs Lirriper's Lodgings ;The Signalman ).
See Charles Dickens: the Public Readings , edited by Philip Collins (1975).
receiver, exhausted,
vessel emptied of air.
reckoning without his host,
adding up his bill without reference to the innkeeper; in other words, leaving vital factors out of account.
BL 2.
Recorder's Report,
appraisal of circumstances possibly leading to a mitigation of sentence made by the Recorder, principal residing judge at the old Sessions House (now the Central Criminal Court) after the Lord Chief Justice.
SB 32.
Red Book,
popular name for one or other of the various court guides which are Mrs Pocket's favourite reading, e.g. Debrett's Peerage (first published 1784) and Baronetage (1808).
GE 55.
Redburn, Jack,
member of Master Humphrey's circle, who resides with him and acts as his secretary and steward: ‘something of a musician, something of an author, something of an actor, something of a painter, very much of a carpenter, and an extraordinary gardener, having had all his life a wonderful aptitude for learning everything that was of no use to him.
‘MHC 2 et seq .
Redforth, Robin,
‘aged nine’, one of the four children who are the supposed authors of the stories in ‘A Holiday Romance’.
His story is about Captain Boldheart.
HR 1, 3.
Red House,
see RED-US.
Redlaw, Mr,
a lecturer in chemistry who is haunted, in the shape of a phantom alter ego , by bitter memories of past sorrows and wrongs.
Yielding to the phantom's temptation to remove all power of memory from him, Redlaw finds that he has also lost all compassion and humanity, and infects all those with whom he comes into contact with a like insensibility.
His influence is counteracted and he himself eventually redeemed by the simple loving goodness of Milly Swidger, wife of the lodge-keeper at his college.
HM .
Redmayne's (dem.),
Bond Street (west London) milliner patronized by Mrs Malderton.
SB 49.
red poll (Acanthis flammea ),
a species of small finch resembling a linnet.
MC 49.
Red Riding-Hood, Little,
fairy-tale in which the wolf kills and eats the grandmother of a little girl called Little Red Riding Hood, then gets into her bed and disguises himself in her clothes to trap the child.
BH 4;CS 1, 12.
OMF i 14, iii 13.
See WOLF, THE DREADFULLY FACETIOUS.
‘Red Ruffian, Retire!’,
‘tragic duet’ sung by Mr and Mrs Jennings Rodolph.
SB 41.
Red Sea, the.
Martin Chuzzlewit returning from across the Atlantic Ocean is like one returning from the dead, a ghost (the allusion is to the drowning of Pharaoh's host in the Red Sea as described in Exod. 14.
MC 43.
Red-us (dem.),
i.e. The Red House tavern and tea gardens in Battersea on the south bank of the Thames.
It was famous as the winning post of boat races from Westminster Bridge.
SB 17.
red velveteens and a bell.
Corduroy trousers, a bell, and a ‘fantail’ hat with a flap covering the shoulders, were the distinguishing marks of the refuse collector.
OMF i 2.
reel, the magic…rolling on before.
CD is comparing himself as narrator to someone following a reel which unwinds the thread of the story from itself as it rolls along in front of him.
Cf. phrases like ‘to spin a yarn’, ‘to reel off a tale’.
OCS 73.
Reform, a friend to,
i.e. a supporter of the electoral Reform Bill passed in 1832.
SB 38.
refugees, poor Spanish.
Following the French invasion of Spain in 1823, to support the newly reestablished Spanish monarchy, many Spanish liberals fled to London where they settled in the neighbourhood of St Pancras.
Under the leadership of General Torrijos they attempted a landing in Spain in 1831, but were crushed by government forces.
BH 43.
Refuge for the Destitute,
originally established in Lambeth, east London, in 1805 by a group of well-known philanthropists.
In 1811 it was transferred to Hackney Road in north London.
In c .
1849 the women were moved to the manor house at Dalston, a few miles to the north, but the institution's functions were subsumed in those of other bodies.
NN 20.
Regency Park,
Tony Weller's variant of Regent's Park, north-west London, begun in 1812 from designs by John Nash (1752–1835), but not completed until 1838.
PP 45.
Regent's Canal,
commenced in 1812 and opened in 1820, it ran between Paddington, west London, and Limehouse where it joined the River Thames.
It is the scene of Watkins Tottle's presumed suicide.
SB 54.
Regent Street,
in the West End of London running between Piccadilly and Oxford Circus.
The street was originally commenced in 1813 following designs by John Nash.
NN 10, 26.
register stove,
a stove with a movable flap in the hole leading to the chimney-flue by which to regulate the draught as a means of controlling the temperature of the room.
Registrar-General,
keeper of the national register of births, deaths, and marriages.
OMF ii 8.
registration,
of births, marriages, and deaths was made compulsory by the Act of 1836.
NN 1.
Reid, General John,
one of the misers whose lives were studied by Boffin.
He features in Kirby's Wonderful Museum (p. 34, vol. 4, 1820 edition) where he is described as having been ‘tall and very slender’ and ‘as he was never seen in company, or speaking with any person, his real name and character remained enveloped in profound mystery, so that he was generally known by no other appellation than the ‘Walking Rushlight '’'.
OMF iii 6.
Reid's Theory of the Law of Storms,
published by Sir William Reid in 1838; postulated a rotatory movement for hurricanes.
AN 10.
religion, dandyism in,
satirical allusion to the Oxford, or High Church Movement in the Church of England which originated in Oxford in 1833 under the leadership of Pusey, Keble, and Newman.
It sought to reinvigorate the Church and enhance its spiritual life by bringing back into its service much of the ritual and many of the vestments, ornaments, etc., that had been dispensed with at the time of the Reformation,BH 12.
CD had already satirized the Movement some years earlier in a piece for The Examiner (3 June 1843), ‘Report of the Commissioners appointed to inquire into the Condition of the Persons variously engaged in the University of Oxford’(collected in MP ).
Rembrandt.
Rembrandt van Rijn (1606–69), Dutch painter.
PFI 11.
remote…unfriended, melancholy…slow.
Micawber is quoting the opening line of Oliver Goldsmith's poem The Traveller (1764).
DC 63.
Reni, Guido,
see GUIDO.
Reprinted Pieces,
title given to a collection of 31 sketches, stories, and essays by CD first published in Household Words and gathered together in vol. 8 of the Library Edition of his works in 1858.
Five items from the Christmas Numbers that properly belong with Christmas Stories were included: ‘The Poor Relation's Story’, ‘The Child's Story’, ‘The Schoolboy's Story’, ‘Nobody's Story’, and ‘A Christmas Tree’— see under their respective titles for these pieces.
The titles of the other pieces are: ‘The Long Voyage’(stories of shipwrecks), ‘The Begging-Letter Writer’, ‘A Child's Dream of a Star’, ‘Our English Watering-place’(i.e. Broadstairs), ‘Our French Watering-place’(i.e. Boulogne), ‘Bill-sticking’, ‘‘Births.
Mrs Meek, of a Son'’ ', ‘Lying Awake’, ‘The Ghost of Art’(clichés in painting), ‘Out of Town’(about ‘Pavilionstone’[Folkestone]), ‘Out of Season’, ‘A Poor Man's Tale of a Patent’, ‘The Noble Savage’, ‘A Flight’(describing the journey from London to Paris), ‘The Detective Police’, ‘Three ‘Detective'’Anecdotes', ‘On Duty with Inspector Field’, ‘Down with the Tide’, ‘A Walk in a Workhouse’, ‘Prince Bull.
A Fairy Tale’(political satire), ‘A Plated Article’(a visit to a Staffordshire pottery), ‘Our Honourable Friend’(satire on MPs), ‘Our School’, ‘Our Vestry’, ‘Our Bore’, ‘A Monument of French Folly’(on the superiority of French  abattoirs to London's Smithfield).
repudiation,
see UNITED STATES SECURITY.
Requests, Court of,
est. 1390 for the hearing of poor people's petitions for the recovery of debts, etc.
In 1847 its functions were assumed by the new County Courts.
MC 7.
rest, no.
‘Unable to find any resting-place for the soles of their feet’; ‘roaming about the watery world, compasses in hand, and discovering no rest for them’; references to ‘The dove found no rest for the sole of her foot’, Gen. 6: 4.
DS 23.
resurrection.
‘I am the resurrection, and the life’, John 11: 25.
CS 9;TTC iii 15.
resurrection man,
one who steals bodies from cemeteries to sell them for dissection, like Jerry Cruncher in TTC .
Revelations, the,
see GREAT SEAL, THE.
revisit the pale glimpses of Cook's Court.
Allusion to Shakespeare,Hamlet , I. iv:
‘What may this mean
That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon’
.
BH 10.
Revolution of July,
Paris revolt of 1830 which led to the flight of Charles X (1757–1836), foreseen by Jingle, whose reference to it occurred in 1827,PP 2.
CD added a jocular footnote about this accidental anachronism to the Cheap Edition of Pickwick in 1847.
Reynolds, Miss,
‘unlady-like’ pupil of Miss Twinkleton.
MED 9.
Reynolds, Sir Joshua (1723–92),
painter, first President of the Royal Academy.
His Fifteen Discourses on the history of painting were delivered to students of the Royal Academy between 1769 and 1790.
PFI 9.
Rhadamanthus,
stern judge; in classical mythology, one of those in the infernal regions.
CS 12.
Riah,
venerable old Jew whose noble nature and gratitude to Fledgeby for releasing him from debts owed to Fledgeby's father cause him to serve the young man devotedly as agent for Pubsey & Co.
, Fledgeby's moneylending business.
The grasping young usurer forces him to bear very hard on the firm's debtors and to carry all the odium that this entails.
The chief solace of Riah's hard life is his quaint friendship with Jenny Wren, who calls him her ‘fairy godmother’.
When Lizzie Hexam wishes to hide herself to escape from Headstone and also Wrayburn, Riah assists her to find employment among the kindly people of his race in a retired spot.
Eventually deciding that he is bringing discredit on all Jews by serving Fledgeby as he does, Riah quits his service, and takes up his abode with Jenny Wren.
CD deliberately created this character as an atonement for Fagin after a Jewish lady had expressed to him her regret that the earlier character had helped to feed anti-Jewish prejudices.
OMF ii 5.
ribbon, bits of blue,
a blue ribbon tied tightly round the upper arm to impede the circulation and distend the veins was a sign that its wearer was about to be ‘cupped’ or bled (see CUPPER), an operation usually performed by barbers in the early nineteenth century.
SB 51.
Ribstone pippin,
a kind of dessert apple; often ‘Ribston’, from the Ribston Park, Yorkshire, where it was bred.
Richard III,
king of England 1483–5, and a favourite villain of the Victorian theatre in Shakespeare's version of him.
Mr Pecksniff makes a pathetic allusion to the murder of the Princes in the Tower (MC 9), and Sam Weller refers to both this and to Richard's stabbing ‘the t'other king in the Tower’, i.e. Henry VI, in PP 25;SB 20.
Richard's fight with Richmond and his death played in a private theatre,PP 49;SB 20.
Richard,
a young blacksmith, fiancé of Trotty Veck's daughter Meg.
C .
Richard, the tent scene in,
i.e. Shakespeare's Richard III , V. iii.
SB 45.
Richards,
name by which Mr Dombey preferred to call Polly Toodle, considering her own to be too odd.
DS 2.
Richardsonian Principle, the,
allusion to the fact that Samuel Richardson's novels are all epistolary in form.
SB 54.
Richardson's,
fairground booth belonging to the showman John Richardson who was born in a workhouse in 1761 and died worth £20,000 in 1837.
Bartholomew and Greenwich Fairs were the chief scenes of his activities.
His troupe would perform severely abbreviated melodramas (a favourite was Dr Faustus, or the Devil Will Have His Own ) and pantomimes, as described here by CD.
SB 19.
Richardson's novels.
Those of Samuel Richardson (1689–1761).
The eponymous hero of his Sir Charles Grandison (1753) is an ideal eighteenth-century gentleman.
SB 54.
Richmond,
pretty Surrey town on the Thames near London where Estella is sent by Miss Havisham to stay with Mrs Brandley to launch her into society.
Mrs Brandley's house overlooks Richmond Green, and is ‘a staid old house, where hoops and powder and patches, embroidered coats, rolled stockings, ruffles and swords, had had their court days many a time.
Some ancient trees before the house were still cut into fashions as formal and unnatural as the hoops and wigs and stiff skirts.
’GE 33.
Here Tupman settles after the demise of the Pickwick Club,PP 57.
Richmond, Legh (1772–1827),
evangelical divine, author of many popular tracts.
The Dairyman's Daughter (1809),CS 18.
Rickits, Miss,
pupil at Miss Twinkleton's school.
MED 13.
Riderhood, Rogue,
a shady waterside character with a ‘squinting leer’.
He is a former partner of Gaffer Hexam's, but Hexam repudiates him when he finds that Riderhood has been robbing live bodies as well as dead ones.
Owing him a grudge for this, Riderhood tries to fix the blame for the Harmon murder on Hexam, hoping to claim the reward money offered by Mr Boffin; he is foiled, however, by Hexam's death.
Riderhood becomes a lock-keeper at Plashwater Weir and discovers Headstone's attempt to murder Wrayburn.
He seeks to blackmail Headstone but succeeds only in driving the man to desperation.
Turning on him, Headstone drags him into the weir where they both drown (OMF passim ).
Riderhood's daughter,Pleasant , is an unlicensed pawnbroker in a very small way of business: ‘possessed of what is colloquially termed a swivel eye…
She was not otherwise positively ill-looking, though anxious, meagre, of a muddy complexion, and looking as old again as she really was.
’ She tries to show daughterly affection to her surly father but is bullied and repulsed by him.
She is courted by Mr Venus but has an objection to his trade.
Finally, however, she overcomes this and marries him.
OMF ii 12 et seq .
ride the whirlwind,
cf. Addison's poem,The Campaign (1704), l. 291: ‘Rides in the whirlwind and directs the storm.
’BR 2.
ridicules,
Claypole's pronunciation of ‘reticules’, ladies' small handbags.
OT 42.
Rienzi.
Cola di Rienzi (1313–54), tribune of the people at Rome, where he established a short-lived republic in 1347 before being forced into exile; he returned as a senator in 1354, but was assassinated shortly afterwards.
His career was the subject of Bulwer Lytton's novel,Rienzi, or the Last of the Tribunes (1835).
CD saw the tower of the Papal Palace at Avignon where Rienzi was imprisoned by Pope Clement VI in 1352, when he was tried by the Inquisition.
PFI 3.
Rifle Regiment.
No such regiment exists in the British army.
The Rifle Corps (est. 1802) became in 1816 the Rifle Brigade, now known as the 3rd Green Jackets.
BH 27.
Rigaud,
French criminal (who also calls himself Blandois and Lagnier) who prides himself on always living and being treated like a gentleman.
At the opening of the novel he is a cell-mate of Cavaletto's in Marseilles prison awaiting trial for the murder of his wife.
Acquitted, he makes his way to England and becomes a friend of Henry Gowan's.
Evidence comes into his hand of nefarious dealings by Mrs Clennam, and he tries to blackmail her but is killed in the sudden collapse of her house.
LD passim .
right little Island.
‘A right little, tight little Island!’ from ‘The Snug Little Island’by Charles Dibdin (1745–1814).
CS 15;LD i 6.
ring-dropper,
one who pretends to have picked up an apparently valuable (but actually worthless) ring which he palms off on an unwary buyer.
MC 37.
ring-tailed roarer,
zoological figment of Mr Scadder's imagination.
MC 21.
ring the bull,
game in which a ring on a string has to be thrown on to a hook.
Riot Act,
Act dating from 1715 which specifies offences constituting a riot.
Failure to disperse after it has been read publicly by a magistrate or other official may render an offender liable to imprisonment.
BR 49;PP 23.
Rip Van Winkle,
character in Washington Irving's story of that name, who slept for 20 years.
The story was included in The Sketch Book (1819–20).
BH 2.
‘River, The’,
tenth of the sketches in the ‘Scenes’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Sketches of London No. 13’ in The Evening Chronicle (see MORNING CHRONICLE), 6 June 1835.
Describes amateur rowing-parties on the Thames and the passengers on the Gravesend boat from St Katharine's Wharf (below Tower Bridge)‘on a Saturday morning in summer when…the steamers are usually crowded to excess’.
SB 17.
roaring lion,
cf. 1 Peter 5: 8, ‘your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour’.
BR 48.
robin redbreasts in the wood, the story of,
the old ballad of the Children in the Wood who, when they lay down to sleep after wandering about, abandoned by the man who tried to murder them, were covered with leaves by friendly robins,HM 3; ‘them as was kivered by robin redbreasts’.
MHC 3.
Robins, Mr.
George Henry Robins (1778–1847), a London auctioneer famous for his hyperbolical descriptions of properties he was selling.
AN 1;SB 45.
Robinson,
member of Dombey and Son's counting-house staff.
DS 51.
Robinson,
one of Mrs Tibbs's servants whose verbal indiscretion leads to her dismissal.
SB 45.
Robinson Crusoe,
short-title of Defoe's masterpiece,The Life and Strange Adventures of Robinson Crusoe of York, Mariner (1719), based on the experiences of Alexander Selkirk.
One of CD's favourite books, which, like David Copperfield, he devoured eagerly as a child.
Quoted or referred to:AN 2;BH 8;CC 2;CH 2;DC 4, 5, 24, 26, 34;DS 4, 39;MC 5, 21;HT i 8 and ii 11;LD i 13, 25;PFI 5;PP 7, 44, 30;OMF iv 17;OCS 50;SB 2.
Robinson, Mr,
gentleman in a public office, with a good salary and a little property of his own, who marries the youngest of the four Miss Willises.
SB 3.
Rochester (Kent),
one of the Medway Towns, adjacent to Chatham where CD passed the happiest years of his boyhood, 1817–22.
It is a major setting for three of his novels (PP ,GE ,MED ) being called ‘Cloisterham’ in the last of these, and for one of his shorter fictions, ‘The Seven Poor Travellers’(CS 7).
It is also the subject of a notable essay, ‘Dullborough Town’ in The Uncommercial Traveller .
The following streets and buildings are mentioned or described under their real names or under fictitious ones: the Castle (PP 2;CS 7); the Cathedral (PP 2;MED passim ) and its Gatehouse (Jasper's residence,MED 2 et seq .
); Eastgate House (Miss Twinkleton's ‘Nun's House’,MED 3); the Bull Inn (PP 2; the ‘Blue Boar’ of GE 13); the Guildhall (GE 13); the High Street (CS 7;GE 8;MED 3, 4); Minor Canon Row (CS 7;MED 6); Restoration House (Miss Havisham's ‘Satis House’,GE 8 et seq .
); Rochester Bridge and the view therefrom (PP 5); The Vines (CS 7); Watts's Charity (CS 7).
Rockingham, Lord.
Charles Watson-Wentworth, second Marquis of Rockingham (1730–82), Whig politician and Prime Minister 1765–6 and 1782.
Special precautions were taken to protect his house during the Gordon Riots (see GORDON, LORD GEORGE), since he had supported the Catholic Relief Bill of 1778.
BR 67.
Rocky Mountains,
mountain-range in North America; referred to by Lightwood as ‘that gigantic range of geographical bores’.
OMF i 8.
roc's egg.
A roc was a bird of stupendous size that appears several times in The Arabian Nights .
In the story of Aladdin, his beloved is told that the wonderful palace he has got the genie of the lamp to build for her will only be complete if a roc's egg is suspended from the dome,DC 3.
‘Great ladies’ assemblies' are only complete if Merdle, their ‘roc's egg’, attends.
LD ii 25.
Roderick Random.
Smollett's novel,The Adventures of Roderick Random (1748), a childhood favourite of CD's; one of the ‘small collection of books’ left by David's father.
David as a child ‘sustained my own idea’ of Roderick Random, the scapegrace selfish hero of this picaresque novel, ‘for a month at a stretch’, could see Roderick's faithful servant Strap at the wicket of Blunderstone church, and when Micawber went to the King's Bench, remembered Roderick's imprisonment for debt (chap.
61).
DC 4, 5, 11, 31.
Rodolph, Mr and Mrs Jennings,
celebrated vocalists at the White Conduit Tavern in Islington whose ‘tragic duet of ‘Red Ruffian, retire!'’ ' was their pièce de résistance .
Their praise encourages Miss Amelia Martin to make her disastrous debut as a singer at the White Conduit.
SB 40.
Roeshus, Young,
i.e. Young Roscius, a prodigy.
Quintus Roscius (d. c .
62 BC) was the famous Roman comic actor, and Master Betty, the child-actor (b. 1791), was dubbed the Young Roscius for his precocious talent exhibited in major Shakespearean roles in London in 1804 and 1805.
DC 10.
Rogers, Mr,
the red-faced ‘Parlour Orator’ who complacently pontificates on public affairs to the admiration of his little coterie: ‘there is not a parlour [i.e. in an inn or tavern], or club-room, or benefit society, or humble party of any kind without its red-faced man’.
SB 37.
Rogers, Mrs,
Pickwick's successor as Mrs Bardell's lodger.
PP 46.
Rogers, Samuel (1763–1855),
poet to whom CD dedicated The Old Curiosity Shop .
‘Ginevra’ from Italy (1821),OCS 73.
Roker, Tom,
turnkey who greets Pickwick on his arrival at the Fleet, and finds him accommodation.
PP 41–5.
Rokesmith, John,
John Harmon's alias as Boffin's secretary.
OMF passim .
Rolland,
partner in Dufresnier et Cie.
CS 20.
Rollin's Ancient History,
monumental work by the French historian Charles Rollin (1661–1741) first published 1730–8 and translated into English soon afterwards.
Soporific effect of this work on Mr Boffin.
OMF iii 6.
Rolls, of ‘best fresh’, cloudy,
cylinders of butter wrapped in butter-muslin which gives them a ‘cloudy’ appearance .
SB 9.
Rolls Yard,
probably confused with Rolls Court, Chancery Lane, west London, where the Rolls Chapel was built by Inigo Jones in 1617.
This took its name from the office of Master of the Rolls, established in the fourteenth century for the keeper of the Chancery records.
BH 10.
Roman,
‘the wildest Roman of them all’; cf. Shakespeare,Julius Caesar , V. v: ‘the noblest Roman of them all.
’PFI 11.
Roman Bath,
situated between Strand Lane and Surrey Street to the south of the Strand, west London, it is now the property of the National Trust.
Used for ‘many a cold plunge’ by David Copperfield,DC 35, 36.
Roman emperors.
Their ‘gorgeous and profuse entertainments’ animadverted upon by Dr Blimber,DS 12.
Romano, Giulio (1499–1546),
Italian architect and painter.
He designed the Palazzo del Tè, Mantua, in 1525, and decorated it with frescos; in the Sala de' Giganti the room is painted from floor to ceiling, so that the spectator feels overwhelmed by the rocks and thunderbolts hurled down by the rebellious Titans.
PFI 9.
Roman part, Mr Bounderby…might play a,
i.e. deliver up to justice a member of his own family like the celebrated Roman consul Brutus.
HT iii 7.
Roman style, in quite the…as depicted formerly at Covent Garden Theatre,
i.e. wearing a blanket which might suggest a toga.
CS 17.
Rome.
CD describes his experience of Rome in Pictures from Italy (11): the ruins of Ancient Rome —see also  COLISSEUM ; the pope celebrating Mass in St Peter's; the Carnival; the ceremonies of Holy Week; ‘the great dream of Roman Churches’; the catacombs; and the execution by beheading of a murderer.
The Dorrit family in Rome,LD ii 11, 14, 15; Mr Dorrit's breakdown at a Roman dinner party and subsequent death,LD ii 19.
Rome…originated in twins and a wolf,
allusion to the legendary founders of Rome, Romulus and Remus.
OMF iii 6.
Romeo and Juliet,
the opera by Niccolò Antonio Zingarelli (1752–1837),Giulietta e Romeo , first performed at La Scala, Milan, in 1796, and which remained popular all over the continent for almost a century.
PFI 9.
Romulus, city of.
Rome, founded, according to legend, by Romulus and his twin brother Remus, sons of the Roman war-god Mars and Sylvia, a vestal virgin, upon whose death they were suckled by a she-wolf.
LD ii 15; Romulus and Remus,DS 12;HT ii 10.
ropes, on the high (sl.),
haughty.
Rosa,
village maiden employed by Mrs Rouncewell to show visitors over Chesney Wold.
She is later employed as a maid by Lady Dedlock, who, when threatened with exposure by Tulkinghorn, seeks to shield her protégée from involvement in her disgrace.
Mrs Rouncewell's son, Watt, who has long been in love with Rosa, eventually marries her.
BH 7, 12, 16, 18, 28, 40–1, 48, 63.
Rosa, Salvator (1615–73),
Italian painter of wild landscapes which had a special appeal to the Romantic taste in nineteenth-century England.
PFI 11.
Rosamond, Fair.
The legend of Rosamond Clifford (d. 1176?),
Henry II's mistress, is told by CD in A Child's History of England : ‘It relates how the King doted on fair Rosamond…and how he had a beautiful Bower built for her in a Park at Woodstock; and how it was erected in a labyrinth, and could only be found by a clue of silk.
How the bad Queen Eleanor, becoming jealous…found out the secret of the clue, and one day appeared before her with a dagger and a cup of poison, and left her the choice between these deaths.
’OMF i 5.
Roscian renown, of,
i.e. famous as an actor (from the name of the celebrated Roman actor Quintus Roscius, who died c .
62 BC).
GE 27.
See also ROESHUS, YOUNG.
rose, she's like the red, red.
Swiveller is quoting Robert Burns's poem,
‘O, my Luve's like a red red rose
That's newly sprung in June’
.
OCS 8.
Ross, Captain.
Sir John Ross (1777–1856), arctic explorer and popular hero, who twice endeavoured to navigate the north-west passage from the Atlantic to the Pacific,SB 49.
His ‘set-out’(SB 45) was a dramatic spectacle entitled ‘The Polar Regions’ staged at Vauxhall Gardens in 1834.
Ross, Frank,
friend of Gabriel Parsons's.
SB 54.
Rossini, Gioacchino Antonio (1792–1865),
Italian operatic composer.
William Tell (1829),CS 20.
Rotherhithe,
area to the south of the River Thames within the dockland district of London, ‘where the accumulated scum of humanity seemed to be washed from higher grounds’.
OMF i 3.
Rottingdean,
coastal town in Sussex where Miss Pankey's aunt lived.
DS 8.
Rouget de Lisle, Claude Joseph (1760–1836),
French soldier and poet; ‘La Marseillaise ’,LD i 2;MC 15;MED 2.
rough made smooth.
‘And all that was so dark, made clear and plain', cf. ‘the crooked shall be made straight and the rough places plain', Isa. 11: 2.
DS 12.
rouleau,
cylindrical packet of coins.
Rouncewell, Mrs,
a dignified old lady, the widowed housekeeper of Chesney Wold, a loyal family servant of the Dedlocks whom CD may have modelled on his paternal grandmother, Elizabeth Ball Dickens (1745–1824), who was housekeeper at Crewe Hall in Cheshire.
Mrs Rouncewell has two sons, the elder of whom, always referred to by CD as Mr Rouncewell , is a successful ironmaster in the North Country; he has three daughters and a son,Watt , who falls in love with Lady Dedlock's maid Rosa, and eventually marries her.
Mrs Rouncewell's younger son,George , runs away as a boy to enlist in the army.
A decent, upright man, he is an epitome of all the military virtues.
After leaving the army he becomes the proprietor of George's Shooting Gallery in the West End of London.
Tulkinghorn, having discovered that George has a document written by his old commanding officer, Captain Hawdon, former lover of Lady Dedlock's, finds a means of forcing George to hand the document over.
Soon afterwards Tulkinghorn is murdered and George is arrested on suspicion of having been his killer.
He is reunited with his mother whilst in prison and after his release and a visit to his brother at the latter's foundry settles down at Chesney Wold to care for the stricken Sir Leicester Dedlock.
BH 7 et seq .
round game, a,
a game, generally of cards, involving any number of players, each playing on his or her own account.
‘Round my hat’, to feel (Cockney sl.),
to feel ill, indisposed.
rout,
evening party or reception; rout-furniture: cane chairs, potted plants, etc., hired for such occasions.
Rover.
Jack Rover, the hero of John O'Keeffe's immensely popular comedy Wild Oats; or the Strolling Gentleman , first produced in 1791.
NN 23;SB 20.
Rovingham's,
commission merchants associated with Clennam's business.
LD i 5.
Rowdy Journal, The New York,
newspaper edited by Colonel Diver.
Probably an amalgam of two mass-circulation papers The New York Herald and The Morning Courier and New-York Enquirer (edited by James Gordon Bennett and Colonel Watson Webb respectively): both papers attacked CD in the most scurrilous fashion after his speeches calling for an International Copyright Agreement.
MC 16.
Rowland, Mrs,
see KALYDOR.
Rowland's (Macassar) Oil.
The use of Macassar oil (derived from the fruit of trees found in the Macassar district of the Celebes Islands) for dressing men's hair was popularized by A. Rowland, of Hatton Garden, London, who advertised his product very extensively, and succeeded in driving bear's-grease preparations off the market.
PP 33;SB 48.
Royal Academy.
The Royal Academy of Arts in London was founded 1768, and holds an annual exhibition of work by contemporary painters where ‘some evil old ruffian of a Dog-stealer will annually be found embodying all the cardinal virtues, on account of his eyelashes, or his chin, or his legs’.
LD i 13; see also NN 10.
Royal Antiquarian Society.
CD is poking fun, under this name, at the Society of Antiquaries, which had been reconstituted in 1717 and received its Royal Charter in 1751.
PP 11.
Royal Artillery,
premier regiment of artillery in the British army, est. 1716.
BH 34.
Royal Coburg Theatre,
see COBURG.
Royal East London Volunteers,
militia to which Varden belongs.
BR 41–2.
Royal Exchange, the ('Change),
City stock market in Cornhill.
Founded 1566 by Sir Thomas Gresham, it was destroyed in the Great Fire of 1666, rebuilt, and burned down again in 1838.
The present building dates from 1844.
CC 4;GE 22, 34;OCS 4;SB 42, 52.
Royal George , the,
flagship of Rear-Admiral Kempenfelt (1718–82), which sank in Portsmouth Harbour on 29 Aug. 1782 with the loss of 800 lives,SB 17.
Repeated attempts to salvage her had been made up to 1840,CH 1.
Royal George Hotel,
Dover inn in which Mr Lorry meets Lucy Manette,TTC i 4.
Traditionally identified with the Ship Hotel (dem.) where Dickens himself had stayed.
Royal Highlanders.
Royal Highland Regiment (the 42nd), known as the Black Watch, senior Highland regiment of the British army, raised in 1739.
BH 30.
Royal Humane Society,
founded in 1774 for the rescue of persons from drowning, and the recovery of dead bodies.
NN 1.
Royal hunting-seats.
The ‘old rustic road’ is Theobalds Road, west London, which ran to Theobalds, Hertfordshire, where James I had a hunting lodge.
LD i 12.
Royal Marines,
British naval regiment of infantry in which David Copperfield believed Micawber to have been an officer.
DS 11.
Heroic defenders of the island of Silver-store.
CS 10.
Royal Society,
one of the foremost and oldest scientific societies in the world (est. 1660).
Its premises are in Burlington House, Piccadilly, London.
OCS 2.
rubber,
best of three games at whist.
There are ten points to a game and ‘double’ means making ten points while the opponents score under five, ‘single’making ten points while they score over five; ‘the rub’means winning the rubber.
PP 6.
Ruddle.
His mortgage is among Ralph Nickleby's transactions.
NN 2.
Rudge,
Reuben Haredale's steward, who murders his master for money, and also the latter's gardener in circumstances that shall make it seem that the body, when discovered, is that of Rudge himself.
Thus he is forced to lead a clandestine existence, abandoned only when he occasionally reappears to demand money from his wife.
Eventually, after being unmasked by Reuben's brother Geoffrey, he is caught and hanged.
Barnaby , Rudge's feeble-minded son, a good-natured half-wit, becomes the dupe of leaders of the Gordon rioters (see GORDON, LORD GEORGE), and as a result is arrested and sentenced to death, but through Varden's intervention is reprieved and released.
Mary , his mother, pretending to be a widow, lives in constant dread of Rudge's menacing demands, and, helped by Varden, tries to hide from him.
After the riots, secure from his molestations, she settles with Barnaby at the Maypole Inn's farm.
BR passim .
ruffler (obs.),
swaggering vagabond.
rufus (Lat.),
red head.
Rugg,
accountant and debt collector, a sanguine character who looks like ‘an elderly Phoebus’.
He helps Pancks, whose landlord he is, to establish Mr Dorrit's claim to his inheritance, and while Clennam is imprisoned in the Marshalsea he keeps an eye on his affairs;Anastasia , his unprepossessing, middle-aged daughter, who cherishes the recollection of once having won an action for breach of promise.
LD i 25.
‘Rule Britannia’,
patriotic song (1740), words by James Thomson and music by Thomas Arne.
It includes the line ‘Britons never, never, never will be slaves.
‘DC 8;DS 4, 39;GE 31;MC 11;OMF i 13.
rule of three, the.
Rule of simple proportion by which, given the relationship of two entities, the proportional relationship of a third can be discovered.
CS 1.
Rules, the,
area ‘comprising some dozen streets adjacent to the King's Bench debtors’ prison' where prisoners ‘who can raise large fees from which their creditors do not derive any benefit, are permitted to reside’.
NN 46;PP 43.
Rumble,
external rear seat of a carriage.
rumour…painted full of tongues,
the stage direction at the beginning of the Introduction to Shakespeare's 2 Henry IV reads, ‘Enter Rumour painted full of tongues’.
MED 9.
run of his teeth, the (coll.),
free board.
rushlight shades,
cylindrical pierced metal candle shades which, placed in a shallow dish of water, steadied the flame and prevented the candle from setting light to what it was standing on.
Russell Place,
fashionable street in Bloomsbury, west London, near Russell Square, built in 1804.
NN 16.
Russell Square,
in the Bloomsbury district of London; it is about 10 acres in area,NN 1.
Inhabited by prosperous men of business,SB 33.
Russia (‘a certain barbaric power’),
Doyce's services required in,LD ii 22.
See also ST PETERSBURG.
Ryde (Isle of Wight),
here the Lillyvicks spend their brief honeymoon.
NN 25, 29.
S
Sackville Street,
west London; originally built 1679, the present street runs between Burlington Street and Piccadilly.
OMF i 10.
sacred fire,
‘rested on the head of the assembled twelve’, a reference to the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Apostles, Acts 2: 2.
DS 18.
sacred tread…upon the water,
see Matt. 14: 25.
CS 2.
sadder and wiser man.
‘A sadder and a wiser man’, Coleridge,The Rime of the Ancient Mariner (1798), pt. vii.
DS 4.
Saffron Hill,
east London street north of Holborn, between Leather Lane and Farringdon Road, which became notorious as a criminal area during the late eighteenth/early nineteenth century.
OT 15, 26, 42. sailor's wife of yore.
‘A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap, /And munch'd and munch'd and munch'd. /‘Give me'’ quoth I. /‘‘Aroint thee, witch! '’the rump-fed ronyon cries.’
Shakespeare,Macbeth , I. iii.
DS 27.
St Albans,
town in Hertfordshire near which Bleak House is situated; it is the home town of the bricklayers' wives interviewed by Bucket at Tom-all-Alone's,BH 22, 31.
Sikes passes through this town when returning to London.
OT 48.
St Andrew's Church,
near Holborn Viaduct, on the edge of the City of London, the church by Sir Christopher Wren of 1686 is on the site of an earlier church dating from c .1297,DC 25;OT 21.
Mr Snagsby's partner Peffer was buried in St Andrew's Churchyard,BH 10.
St Anne's Church, Limehouse,
see LIMEHOUSE HOLE.
St Anthony's fire,
erysipelas, an inflammatory disease, generally in the face, and marked by a bright redness of the skin.
Saint Antoine,
south-eastern suburb of Paris, a desperately poor area in the eighteenth century, with many starving unemployed.
Its populace formed the nucleus of the mob that attacked the Bastille (July 1789), and thus began the French Revolution.
TTC i 5.
St Bartholomew's Hospital,see BARTHOLOMEW'S.
St Clement Danes,
church in the Strand, so named because various Danish Kings are said to be buried there.
Rebuilt 1682.
Mrs Lirriper married here,CS 16.
St Dunstan's.
St Dunstan-in-the West, Fleet Street, east London.
The medieval church, to which Will Marks carries the corpse of a hanged man for burial (MHC 3), featured a clock with moving figures of giants that struck the hours and the quarters,BR 40;DC 23.
This church was pulled down in 1830 and the present edifice was built, the architect being John Shaw (1776–1832).
The church of The Chimes is not named but the original illustrations to that book show the belfry of Shaw's building.
St Evremonde, Marquis de,
father of Charles Darnay and a brutal oppressor of the peasants on his estate.
He helps his twin brother to carry off a young peasant girl from among his tenantry, her husband having first been killed by being deliberately overworked in unhealthy conditions.
The girl's brother attempts to save her but is fatally wounded by the Marquis' brother's sword.
The St Evremondes then fetch Dr Manette to attend the now delirious girl and her brother, and Manette witnesses the death of both and the contemptuous indifference of the guilty aristocrats.
Two days later the Marquis' wife, a good woman, who has learned with horror something of what has happened, comes to Manette, hoping to be able to contact through him the sister she knows to survive from the murdered family, and to help her by way of making some atonement for her husband's and her brother-in-law's evil behaviour; Manette can give her no information, however.
He then seeks to make an official protest about the crimes of the St Evremondes but finds himself incarcerated, by their machinations, in the Bastille.
All this has taken place before the story of A Tale of Two Cities opens, and is learned only towards the end when Manette's Bastille-written document is made public by Mme Defarge, sister of the murdered peasants (TTC iii 10).
When the story opens the Marquis, Darnay's father, and his wife are both dead, and the twin brother, Darnay's uncle, has succeeded to the title and estate; he proves himself to be even more callous and brutal, beneath a polished surface of ‘civilization’(his face is ‘like a fine mask’), than his brother, and hates his nephew for his liberal principles and determination not to accept the inheritance of the estate whilst the state of French society is still so cruelly inequitable.
He is murdered by a peasant, Gaspard, whose child has been killed by the furious driving of his coachman.
TTC ii 7, 8; iii 10.
St George's Church,
in Southwark, south-east London; the first church on this site was built about 1122, and the present edifice dates from 1736.
LD i 6;PP 21, 30.
St George's Church,
church in Hanover Square, west London, between Bond Street and Regent Street, built in 1722.
Many fashionable weddings were held here between 1800 and 1850.
NN 21, 27.
St George's Church,
used to stand in Hart Street, Bloomsbury, west London.
It was designed by a pupil of Wren and completed in 1731.
Here the Kitterbells' baby is christened.
SB 55.
St George's Fields and obelisk,
area to the south of the Thames in London, which, until the beginning of the nineteenth century, comprised broad open meadows, frequently flooded.
The obelisk, erected in 1771 in honour of Brass Crosby, Lord Mayor of London, used to stand in St George's Circus,DC 12;PP 43.
The Fields were the scene of the mass meeting of the Protestant Association on 2 July 1780, which led to the Gordon Riots (see GORDON, LORD GEORGE),BR 48.
St Germain Quarter,
on the left bank of the Seine, traditionally a student quarter of Paris.
Here Tellson's Bank is located.
TTC iii 2.
St Giles,
a notorious slum or ‘rookery’ in west London, comprising the area of Seven Dials and what is now New Oxford Street.
Most of St Giles was demolished and rebuilt 1844–7,SB 12.
Sally and Sampson Brass were rumoured to have gone to live there after his release from prison,OCS 88.
In 1775 ‘musketeers went into St Giles's, to search for contraband goods, and the mob fired on the musketeers, and the musketeers fired on the mob’,TTC i 1.
The incident referred to here is fully described in the ‘Chronicle’ section of the Annual Register for 1775 under the date of 27 Sept.
St Giles's Church.
Bloomsbury (west London) church designed by Henry Flitcroft (1697–1769) and opened in 1734,BR 44.
Bounderby claims to have learned to tell the time from studying its steeple clock ‘under the direction of a drunken cripple, who was a convicted thief, and an incorrigible vagrant’, i.e. a typical denizen of the St Giles district,HT i 4.
St Helena, or The Death of Napoleon ,
the play CD saw performed by puppets in the Marionette Theatre in Genoa.
The piece, which has not been traced, told the story of Napoleon's exile and death on St Helena; its butt and villain was the English governor of the island, Sir Hudson Lowe (1769–1844), and the characters included Napoleon's physician, Dr Francesco Antommarchi (1780–1838).
PFI 5.
St James's, Court of.
From the time when the sovereign lived at St James's Palace, first occupied by Henry VIII and abandoned in favour of Buckingham House (now Palace) by George III, the court has traditionally been known as that of St James.
St James's Palace stands on the north side of the Mall, central London,MC 16.
Chops was here presented to George IV,CS 11.
St James's Church,
in Piccadilly, central London; built by Sir Christopher' Wren.
Here Sophronia and Alfred Lammle are married.
OMF i 10.
St James's Parish,
fashionable area of central London encompassing Piccadilly to the north and St James's Park to the south.
Aristocratic hooligans preferred to remove door knockers from houses in this area rather than from those in the City.
NN 4.
St James's Park,
south of the Mall and one of the royal parks in London.
It was originally a swampy meadow belonging to the Hospital for Lepers, but the land was drained and enclosed as a deer park in the reign of Henry VIII,MC 14;NN 44.
Sally Brass was rumoured to have been seen here as a Foot Guards private on sentry-go after her brother's imprisonment,OCS 88.
St James's Square,
situated to the north of Pall Mall near St James's Palace, central London, and built in the seventeenth century on the site of the old St James's Fields.
CD describes a ‘piece of water in the midst’ but although there was originally a fountain there, by 1780 it had been displaced by the plinth of the present statue of William III added in 1808,BR 70.
Its ‘cold gloom, favourable to meditation’,OMF i 2.
St John's, New Brunswick (Canada).
Edmund Sparkler born there during a ‘mighty frost’ in which, his companions say, ‘his brain had been frozen up…and had never thawed from that hour’.
LD ii 21.
St John's Church, Smith Square,
see SMITH SQUARE.
St John's Wood,
smart new suburb of north London.
AN 8.
St Julian, Horatio,
stage name of Jem Larkins, an actor at a private theatre, the son of a coal and potato merchant.
SB 20.
St Katharine's Dock Company.
Its wharf near Tower Bridge, London, was a terminus for steam-boats to or from towns situated in the Thames estuary.
SB 17.
St Lawrence River (Canada),
its great beauties described.
AN 15.
St Louis (Missouri),
‘the old French portion of the town’ described, and the ‘excellent’Planter's House Hotel,AN 12; its dwelling-ground, ‘Bloody Island’,AN 13.
St Luke's Workhouse (dem.),
a workhouse for orphans and the destitute, situated in the Parish of St Luke's in Finsbury, north London, in City Road.
DC 11, 12.
St Magnus' Church,
Lower Thames Street, east London; originally built in the thirteenth century, destroyed in the Great Fire of 1666, and rebuilt by Sir Christopher Wren with a square tower crowned by a cupola and a short spire.
OT 46.
St Margaret's Church,
in Westminster and by tradition the church of the House of Commons.
It was founded by King Edward the Confessor (d. 1066) but has subsequently been rebuilt and restored.
SB 25.
St Martin's Church (dem.),
situated in Ludgate in the City of London near Blackfriars, the church had been rebuilt by Wren in the seventeenth century.
DC 11.
St Martin's Church,
i.e. ST MARTIN'S-IN-THE-FIELDS.
St Martin's Court,
alley between Charing Cross Road and St Martin's Lane, west London.
OCS 1.
St Martin's-in-the-Fields,
in Trafalgar Square, central London; a church has stood on this site since at least the thirteenth century.
The present one, designed by James  Gibb , dates from 1721–6.
BR 44;DC 40;SB 22, 33.
St Martins-Le-Grand,
a street in the City of London to the north of St Paul's Cathedral.
The name commemorates the church of St Martin's (750–1548).
PP 2.
Saint Mary Axe,
a street in the City of London, originally so called after a shop bearing the sign of an axe, and the Church of St Mary, demolished prior to 1880.
OMF ii 5.
St Mary's Abbey (York), Benedictine foundation (1078), the ruins of which stand in York Museum's gardens.
NN 6.
St Mildred's Church,
in Poultry, City of London: it was burned down in the Great Fire of 1666, and subsequently rebuilt.
It was used as a mortuary for victims of the Gordon riots (see GORDON, LORD GEORGE).
BR 67.
St Omer,
Catholic seminary near Calais where John Chester and Geoffrey Haredale were fellow-students.
BR 43.
St Pancras Church.
St Pancras Old Church (in the London Borough of Camden, north London), formerly called St Pancras-in-the-Fields, dates from c .1350 (it was drastically restored in 1847–8).
Several notable criminals, e.g. Jonathan Wild (1682? -1725), and many refugees from the French Revolution were buried in its graveyard, which perhaps prompted CD's choice of it for Cly's mock-funeral in Tale of Two Cities (ii 14; iii 8).
New St Pancras , built nearby (1819–22) is a fine Greek Revival building, the most expensive church to have been built in London since St Paul's.
SB 45.
St Paul's Cathedral.
Built by Sir Christopher Wren and consecrated in 1697 the present edifice replaces an even larger one which was destroyed in the Great Fire of London 31 years earlier.
Jo contemplates the great cross on its summit, ‘the crowning confusion of the great, confused city;— so golden, so high up, so far out of reach’,BH 19; its picture, ‘with a pink dome’, on the lid of Peggotty's work-box,DC 2; David and Peggotty visit it,DC 33; its ‘deep bell’,DC 47; Master Humphrey inspects the cathedral clock, ‘the great Heart of London’,MHC 6; John Browdie marvels at the building's size,NN 39; statues of the apostles on its exterior,NN 45; Oliver in Fagin's den as lonely as if he were in the ball on top of the cathedral,OT 18.
St Petersburg (Leningrad).
The inventive engineer, Daniel Doyce, rebuffed at home by the Circumlocution Office, accepts an invitation to go to St Petersburg and ‘there had done very well indeed — never better’.
LD i 16.
Saint-Pierre, J.-H.
Bernardin de,
see BERNARDIN.
St Polge's Fontin.
Mrs Gamp means the font in St Paul's Cathedral.
MC 29.
St Saviour's Church,
in Southwark, south-east London; large impressive church of great antiquity, originally dedicated to St Mary Overy (i.e. over the water).
The scene of many public ceremonies and processions prior to the Reformation, the church underwent many alterations.
The nave was reconstructed in 1838–41, and again in 1890–7 when the church became Southwark Cathedral.
OT 46.
St Sepulchre's,
church at the junction of Holborn and Shaw Hill, east London.
BR 77;NN 4.
Saint Simon Without, Saint Walker Within,
a hypocrite.
‘Without’ and ‘Within' refer to the City boundaries, and are found as parts of names of streets and churches.
Stiggins is Simon (St Simon the Zealot or perhaps Simon Pure) to all appearance, but Walker (cockney slang for ‘humbug’) in reality.
PP 45.
Saint Stephen,
the first Christian martyr, stoned to death outside the gates of Jerusalem (Acts 7).
MED 5.
St Vincent,
West Indies island.
CS 10.
salamander (sl.),
a fiery fellow (the salamander was popularly supposed to be able to live in fire); also, a circular iron plate which is heated and placed over a pudding or other dish to brown it (OED ).
Salem House,
Creakle's boarding school near Blackheath, where David Copperfield is a pupil, and ignorance and cruelty flourish,DC 5–9.
Mell's school in Port Middlebay, Australia, is called Colonial Salem House,DC 63.
Salisbury,
quiet cathedral city, the county town of Wiltshire near to which is the village in which Mr Pecksniff lives.
Visited by Tom Pinch on market day and fondly imagined by him to be ‘a very desperate sort of place; an exceedingly wild and dissipated city’,MC 5.
CD credits the cathedral with ‘towers’(MC 12), whereas it has one single (and world-famous) spire.
Salisbury, plain as (sl.),
clear, obvious, a punning reference to Salisbury Plain.
Sally, old,
pauper who steals from Agnes Fleming on her deathbed a ring and a locket, the only evidence of the identity of Agnes's son, Oliver Twist.
OT 1, 23, 27, 37, 38, 49, 51.
Sally Lunns,
a light sweet teacake containing sultanas or currants, served hot and eaten with butter.
Apparently named after the woman who first made them, in Bath, towards the end of the eighteenth century.
C 4.
Samaritan, the Good,
see Luke 10: 33.
HT ii 12;MC 21;OMF iii 8.
Sambo,
nineteenth-century term for any negro; said to be used in the West Indies for those who are ‘half-negro and half-Indian’.
CS 10.
Samkin and Green, Smithers and Price, Pimkin and Thomas,
legal firms whose clerks are at the harmonic meeting at the Magpie and Stump to which Lowton introduces Pickwick.
PP 20.
Sampson, George,
foolish but amiable young man courting Bella Wilfer, who transfers his affections to her younger sister Lavinia, to whom he eventually becomes engaged, after Bella goes to live with the Boffins.
He is kept under a wholesome course of discipline by Lavinia and her august mamma.
OMF i 9; iii 4; iv 5, 16.
Sampson, Mr,
manager of a City assurance office and the narrator of ‘Hunted Down’, who helps Meltham to entrap Julius Slinkton after discovering him to be a murderer.
HD .
sandals.
Now applied to a form of footwear, this term originally referred to the tapes or straps used to fasten a shoe over the foot or round the ankle.
Sanders, Mrs Elizabeth,
friend of Mrs Bardell's, on whose behalf she gives evidence at Pickwick's trial.
PP 26, 34, 46.
Sandford and Merton,
book for boys.
The History of Sandford and Merton , by Thomas Day (1748–89) first published 1783–9 and constantly reprinted.
The sententious Mr Barlow, the local clergyman, teaches Harry Sandford and Tommy Merton through a series of instructional and moral tales.
CD comically recalls Mr Barlow as a blighting influence on the enjoyments of his childhood in an essay in The Uncommercial Traveller .
CS 1.
Sandhurst,
the Royal Military College at Sandhurst, Berkshire.
DS 9.
sangaree (i.e. sangria),
a mixture of red wine, lemon juice, sugar, and cinnamon, sometimes garnished with fresh fruit.
AN 3.
Sangrado, Doctor,
a quack doctor who appears in the second book of Le Sage's novel Gil Blas (1715).
He urges his patients to ‘drink water by pails full, it is a universal dissolvent’.
AN 14.
Sangreal,
the ‘Holy Grail’, the cup or chalice used by Christ at the Last Supper, which is the subject of many medieval legends and romances.
PFI 9.
Sanson,
Charles-Henri (1740–93), chief public executioner under the ancien régime , who continued in office during the Revolution, and who carried out the guillotining of Louis XVI.
Remorse over this made him fall ill, and he died within a matter of months to be succeeded in his office by his son Henri (1767–1840).
TTC iii 5.
Saône, River,
one of the great rivers of eastern central France.
LD i 11.
Sapsea, Thomas,
auctioneer and eventually Mayor of Cloisterham, a pompous idiot who gives himself ecclesiastical airs.
A monument he has erected to his wife (née Brobity) is more of an encomium upon his own virtues than upon hers; his father .
MED 4, 12, 15, 18.
Saracen's Head, the,
(dem.
1868), tavern in Snow Hill, Holborn, east London, dating back to the twelfth century.
It was used as a starting place by 7 regular long-distance coaches, one of them being the ‘Post’ which left every morning for Carlisle, Cumberland.
Squeers stayed here when in London.
NN 3–5, 34, 39, 43, 45, 56, 64.
Sardanapalus,
legendary king of Assyria represented by ancient writers as having been an effeminate voluptuary who reigned in the ninth century BC.
His name became a byword for extreme luxury.
TTC ii 24.
satin, Denmark,
a coarse worsted stuff with a smooth surface giving a silken finish, made in many shades of colour.
Satis House,
the desolate home of Miss Havisham for which CD's original was the picturesque old Elizabethan mansion in Rochester known as Restoration House in honour of the Restoration of Charles II in 1660, the king having lodged there for one night en route for London.
The name ‘Satis House’, however, CD took from that of another Rochester residence which stands on the site of the mansion of Richard Watts.
When Elizabeth I visited Rochester in 1573 she was entertained by Watts, and when he expressed regret that he had not better accommodation to offer her she replied, ‘Satis ’(Lat. ‘enough, satisfactory’), by which name the house was ever afterwards known.
Estella gives a different account of the name's origin to Pip: ‘Its other name was Satis; which is Greek, or Latin, or Hebrew, or all three — or all one to me — for enough…
It meant, when it was given, that whoever had this house, could want nothing else.
They must have been easily satisfied in those days, I should think.’
GE 8.
Saugur Point,
on Sagar Island in the Bay of Bengal near the delta of the River Hooghly.
PP 25.
Saul, dead march in,
famous passage in Handel's oratorio Saul (1739).
BH 21;DS 5;OMF ii 8.
Saunders, Mr,
embarrassed guest of the ‘couple who dote upon their children’.
SYC 5.
Sauteuse, Madame,
Georgiana Podsnap's dancing-teacher.
OMF i 9.
savage, the noble.
The phrase comes from Dryden's The Conquest of Granada, Part One , I. i: ‘When wild in woods the noble savage ran’(CS 14).
It is invariably used ironically by CD, cf. his essay ‘The Noble Savage’(RP ): ‘I have not the least belief in the Noble Savage.
I consider him a prodigious nuisance, and an enormous superstition.’
Savannah, defence of.
During the American War of Independence (1775–82) British troops were  besieged for three weeks in the autumn of 1779 in Savannah, Georgia, by French and American troops, but successfully repulsed the attack.
BR 72.
Saville.
Sir George Savile (sic )(1726–84), politician who introduced the Catholic Relief Bill in the House of Commons in May 1778.
BR 40, 56.
Sawyer, Bob,
medical student at Guy's Hospital, London, and friend of Ben Allen; lodges at Mrs Raddle's, Lant St, Borough, where Pickwick attends a boisterous party.
Later he and Ben Allen set up in practice in Bristol as ‘Sawyer, late Nockemorf’, and after going bankrupt are given appointments as surgeons in the East India Company.
PP 30, 32, 38–9, 47–8, 50–2, 57.
Scadder, Zephaniah,
fraudulent land agent who sells Martin Chuzzlewit a worthless plot in Eden: ‘Two grey eyes lurked deep within this agent's head, but one of them had no sight in it, and stood stock still.
With that side of his face he seemed to listen to what the other side was doing.
Thus each profile had a distinct expression; and when the movable side was most in action, the rigid one was in its coldest state of watchfulness.
It was like turning the man inside out, to pass to that view of his features in his liveliest mood, and see how calculating and intent they were.’
MC 21.
Scadgers, Lady,
Mrs Sparsit's great-aunt, ‘an immensely fat old woman, with an inordinate appetite for butcher's meat, and a mysterious leg which had now refused to get out of bed for fourteen years’.
HT i 7; iii 9.
scales and scoop,
bank cashier's apparatus for estimating the value of an amount of coin by its weight.
LD i 16.
Scaley, Mr,
bailiff ‘sent in’ by Ralph Nickleby to make an inventory of the Mantalinis' possessions.
Accompanying him is Tom Tix.
NN 21.
Scarborough,
seaside resort in Yorkshire, patronized by Mrs Skewton,DS 21.
Here Mr Sampson, the narrator of ‘Hunted Down’, re-encounters Julius Slinkton with his second niece.
Slinkton is planning to murder her for the insurance money, and Sampson contrives to warn her of her danger during an interview on the sands.
HD .
Scarton, Charley,
performer in a private theatre.
SB 20.
Scheherezade,
the narrator of The Arabian Nights .
She is brought to King Shahriyar who has a reputation for killing virgins after he has slept with them.
But Scheherezade arranges for her younger sister, Dinarzade, to come on the pretext of bidding her farewell, and ask her to ‘relate to us a story to beguile the waking hours of our night’.
Scheherezade begins the long series of tales that constitute The Arabian Nights , so successfully stimulating the King's curiosity to hear more that he constantly defers the order for her execution.
CS 1;DC 7;HT i 9.
Schiedam,
type of Dutch gin.
‘Schoolboy's Story, The’,
the first of CD's contributions to ‘Another Round of Stories by the Christmas Fire’, the Christmas number of Household Words , 1853.
The story of a former pupil who becomes a master at the school; his affection for the place survives ill-treatment, for after inheriting money, retiring, and marrying the ‘wardrobe-woman’, he continues to take a kindly interest in the boys.
CS 5.
score, at,
at full speed.
scot and…lot, paid,
i.e. paid in full whatever was owed.
OMF i 16.
Scotland,
reminiscence of inns in the Scottish Highlands visited by CD during his Scottish journey in 1841.
CS 8.
Scotland, post-chaises…all the way to,
allusion to Gretna Green where runaway marriages were solemnized between 1770, when a new Act made hasty marriages difficult in England, and 1856, when Scottish law was brought more into line with English law in this matter.
LD i 13.
‘Scotland Yard’,
fourth of the sketches in the ‘Scenes’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Sketches by Boz.
New Series No. 2’ in The Morning Chronicle , 4 Oct. 1836.
Describes the great changes that have come over this locality in the course of a few years.
SB 11.
Scotland Yard,
area beside the Thames in London, ‘abutting on one end on the bottom of Northumberland Street’, originally the site of the residence of Scottish kings and ambassadors when in London, it was a coal-wharf in the early nineteenth century.
The Metropolitan Police established their offices in the adjacent Whitehall Place in 1829.
Its ‘original settlers were found to be a tailor, a publican, two eating-house keepers, and a fruit-pie maker’,SB 11.
It was here that young David Copperfield sat to watch the coal-heavers dancing,DC 11.
Scott, Tom,
‘an amphibious boy’, eccentric and insubordinate, whom Quilp employs at his wharf.
OCS 5 et seq .
Scott, Sir Walter (1771–1832),
novelist and poet.
Balfour of Burley (Old Mortality , 1816),AN 3.
Madge Wildfire (Heart of Midlothian , 1818),AN 3.
‘My foot is on my native heath…
’(Rob Roy , 1817),DC 36.
His poems,The Lady of the Lake (1810) and Marmion (1808),AN 7, 12.
Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft (1830),SB 42.
Scott…in his Demonology,
a reference to the first of Sir Walter Scott's Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft contributed to the first number of Murray's Family Library (1830).
Scott quotes the case of a man who was persecuted by visions during a period of sickness and depression; one of these visions was ‘the apparition of a gentleman-usher, dressed as if to wait on a Lord Lieutenant of Ireland…arrayed in court dress, with bag and sword, tamboured waistcoat and chapeaubras’ who ‘glided beside me like the ghost of Beau Nash…
I alone [among the assembled company]was sensible of the visionary honour which this imaginary being seemed desirous to render me.’
SB 42.
Scott's poetry.
The opening of The Lady of the Lake (1810) by Sir Walter Scott is about a hunt (‘The Stag at eve had drunk his fill…‘) and Marmion (1809) culminates in a great description of the Battle of Flodden (1513).
AN 12.
scrag (sl.),
hang.
scratch, coming up to the.
The ‘scratch’ was the line drawn across the centre of the ring in prize-fighting, and a match would begin when the two contestants stepped up to this line.
When one of them could no longer come up to the scratch line at the beginning of a round he was held to have lost the match.
HT i 2.
See also MARK, UP TO THE.
Scratch, Old (sl.),
the Devil.
From the Old Norse Skratta, a goblin.
CC 4.
scratcher (sl.),
toy that imitates the sound of tearing cloth.
screw,
a corkscrew, or (sl.) a niggardly person.
Screw , the,
‘that noble and fast-sailing line-of-packet ship’ on which Martin Chuzzlewit and Mark Tapley travel to America.
CD modelled it on the SS Britannia on which he and his wife made the crossing in 1842.
MC 15.
screwed (sl.),
drunk.
Scrip Church, fathers of the,
facetious reference to three high priests of finance, friends of the Veneerings (a scrip is a certificate of holding stocks or shares).
OMF iii 17.
scrivener,
notary.
Scroggins, Giles,
ghost in an old ballad, who, in reply to his former sweetheart's protest against going to him, she being still alive, answers ‘that's no rule’.
HM 7.
Scroggins and Payne, Messrs,
debt collectors and employers of Captain Helves, who abscond with part of their funds.
SB 51.
Scrooge, Ebenezer,
usurer and miser, ‘a squeezing, wrenching, grasping, scraping, clutching, covetous old sinner!
Hard and sharp as a flint, from which no steel had ever struck out generous fire; secret, and self-contained, and solitary as an oyster.’
He undergoes a complete change of heart and character after a series of ghostly visitations in a dream and ends up ‘as good a friend, as good a master, and as good a man, as the good old city knew’.
CC passim .
Scrubb's,
horse-dealers patronized by Mantalini.
NN 17.
scrubs (sl.),
shabby individuals.
Scuttlewig, Duke of,
see GLOGWOG.
sealing wax.
On the stem of Crummles's pipe wax was applied, as on the mouthpiece of all clay pipes, to prevent the dry china-clay from adhering to the lips.
NN 22.
Seamen's Hospital, the,
est. 1821 in Greenwich, south-east London, aboard HMS Grampus , and moved to HMS Dreadnought ten years later.
Transferred to the shore in 1870.
DS 23.
sea porkypine,
i.e. sea porcupine, fish having its skin covered with spines, e.g. sun-fish.
DC 21, 31.
sear and yellow leaf, the,
i.e. old age.
The phrase is from Shakespeare,Macbeth , V. iii.
BH 23.
Searle's Yard,
a celebrated London boat-building centre which disappeared when the Albert Embankment was built between 1866 and 1869.
The Royal State Barge was kept there.
SB 17.
second gentleman in Europe.
The ‘First Gentleman of Europe’ was a phrase used of George IV when Prince Regent.
BH 23.
secretary, my faithful.
George Washington Putnam (1812–96) from Salem, Mass., whom CD engaged as his secretary during his tour of America in 1842.
CD met him in Boston very soon after arriving there; Putnam was at that time a student of portrait-painting in the studio of Francis Alexander (1800- c .1881).
AN 9.
Secretary of State, the.
In 1780 the Secretary of State for the Southern Division was Lord Stormont (1727–96).
BR 66.
secrets of the prison house,
Shakespeare,Hamlet , I. v:
‘But that I am forbid
to tell the secrets of my prison-house…’
MED 18;PP 31.
see the conquering Podsnap comes…,
variant of
See, the conquering hero comes!
Sound the trumpets, beat the drums,’
from Handel's Judas Maccabaeus (1747; words by Thomas Morell 1703–84).
OMF ii 4.
Seidlitz powder,
a well-known aperient named after the town in Czechoslovakia.
Selkirk, Alexander,
a Scottish sailor marooned on the island of Juan Fernandez from 1704 until he was picked up by Captain Woodes Rogers 52 months later; Woodes's account of him gave Defoe the idea of Robinson Crusoe , and Cowper wrote a poem entitled ‘Verses supposed to be written by Alexander Selkirk’, beginning ‘I am monarch of all I survey’.
PP 2.
seltzer water,
originally mineral water from Selters, Germany; later, soda water in general.
Sen George's Channel.
St George's Channel lies between the Welsh and Irish coasts so, unless Captain Bunsby is even more confused than he appears, he must be referring to some smaller channel off the eastern coast of Kent in DS 23, since the Goodwins and the Downs are both in that region.
se'nnight (coll.),
a week (7 nights).
Sens (France).
Much approved of by Mrs Lirriper: ‘a pretty little town with a great two-towered cathedral…and another tower atop of one of the towers like a sort of stone pulpit…and a market outside in front of the cathedral, and all so quaint and like a picture.’
CS 17.
sentencing a youth to have his hands cut off,
a reference to the execution of the Chevalier de la Barre who was accused of sacrilege at Abbéville in 1766, having passed within 30 yards of a procession in which a crucifix was being carried without removing his hat.
He was condemned to have his tongue cut out, his right hand chopped off and then to be burned.
His sentence was commuted to beheading and he was executed at Amiens in 1766.
CD probably knew of the case from his reading of Voltaire (1694–1778) who had protested strongly in his Relation de la Mort du Chevalier de la Barre (1766) against the trial and the verdict.
TTC i 1.
‘Sentiment’,
third of the stories in the ‘Tales’ section of the collected edition of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published in Bell's Weekly Magazine , 7 June 1834.
Comic anecdote about the elopement of the daughter of a fatuous MP from a ‘finishing establishment for young ladies’.
SB 47.
Sentimental Journey, The.
A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy, by Mr Yorick .
A whimsical narrative of his own travels by Laurence Sterne (1768).
CS 8.
seraphim,
one of the highest orders of the angels, cf. Isa. 6: 2.
serial pirates and footpads.
CD was infuriated by the impunity with which, owing to inadequate copyright laws, his works could be plagiarized in cheap serial publications.
His attempt to get legal redress in a particularly flagrant case (in which the Christmas Carol was pirated virtually wholesale) proved totally frustrating.
HM 2.
serjeant.
Serjeants-at-law were members of a superior order of barristers who until 1845 had the exclusive right to present cases in the Court of Common Pleas.
No new serjeants were created after 1873.
Serjeant-at-Arms,
Speaker's aide in the House of Commons, who is responsible for maintaining discipline in the Chamber.
SB 25.
Serjeants' Inn (dem.),
an Inn of Chancery in Chancery Lane, west London.
It was used until 1877 by the Serjeants.
Like the other inns it resembled ‘tidal harbours at low water’ during the long vacation,BH 19.
The Serjeants' Inn Coffee House was opposite the Insolvent Debtors' Court, off Fleet Street, and ceased business in 1838.
PP 40, 43.
Serpentine,
artificial lake partly in Hyde Park, London, partly in Kensington Gardens.
Here Augustus Cooper tries, but fails, to drown himself,SB 41.
Amateur skaters on,SB 55.
serpent of old Nile,
Shakespeare,Antony and Cleopatra , I. v. DS 37.
serpent's tooth, sharper than a,
Shakespeare,King Lear , I. iv.
OMF iii 10;SB 55.
servant, that good and faithful,
allusion to Matt. 25: 21.
DC 9.
sessions, the (coll.),
Petty Sessions or Quarter Sessions: a criminal court, as opposed to a magistrate's court where only short sentences could be imposed.
Sessions House (dem.),
former court house forming part of Newgate prison.
SB 32.
See OLD BAILEY.
set,
in dancing, to face one's partner.
set of shoes all four round, a,
i.e. a set of horseshoes.
GE 15.
set-out (sl.),
theatrical performance.
settens,
i.e. sessions.
‘Seven Dials’,
fifth of the sketches in the ‘Scenes’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Scenes and Characters No. 1’ in Bell's Life in London , 27 Sept. 1835.
Humorous description of the appearance and the denizens of this slum area of London.
SB 12.
Seven Dials,
part of the slum area of St Giles's, west London, between Bloomsbury and Covent Garden, so named because it is the point of convergence of seven streets.
A column, with a dial facing each street, was removed c .1774.
Seven Dials is compared with New York's Five Points in AN 5, and described in SB 12.
‘Seven Poor Travellers, The’,
Christmas number of Household Words , 1854, in which an introductory chapter by CD about Watts's Charity in Rochester provides a framework for stories by its narrator and six other travellers.
CD also wrote the narrator's ‘The Story of Richard Doubledick’, about a soldier during the Napoleonic Wars (1803–15), and a final chapter, ‘The Road’, describing the narrator's departure from Rochester.
CS 7.
seventh day, to close these places on the,
see SUNDAY UNDER THREE HEADS.
Seven Wonders of the World,
seven works of art or architecture which were each held by the ancient world to be supreme in their own way: 1.
The Egyptian pyramids; 2.
The hanging gardens of Babylon; 3.
The statue of Zeus at Olympia; 4.
The temple of Diana at Ephesus; 5.
The Mausoleum at Halicarnassus; 6.
The Colossus of Rhodes; 7.
The Pharos or lighthouse at Alexandria.
MC 30.
Seymour, Robert (1798? –1836),
popular and prolific illustrator, especially of humorous sporting subjects, whose work appeared in books, annuals, and periodicals.
He first illustrated CD when he reprinted an extract from ‘The Bloomsbury Christening’ in Seymour's Comic Album (1834); also furnished two designs for ‘The Tuggs's at Ramsgate’on its first appearance in the Library of Fiction for Apr. 1836.
The Pickwick Papers originated in an idea of Seymour's for a series of plates featuring a club of cockney sportsmen, for which Chapman & Hall commissioned CD to provide the letterpress.
Seymour committed suicide on 20 Apr. 1836; his illustrations appear only in the first two parts of PP (Apr., May 1836).
‘Shabby-Genteel People’,
tenth of the sketches in the ‘Characters’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Street Sketches No. 4’ in The Morning Chronicle , 5 Nov. 1834.
Describes, among others, an impoverished frequenter of the Reading Room of the British Museum who pathetically tries to keep up some sort of genteel appearance.
SB 42.
shadow.
‘The shadow in which man walketh and disquieteth himself in vain': see the Order for the Burial of the Dead in The Book of Common Prayer (‘For man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain').
HT ii 9.
shadow of a dream, like the,
Cousin Feenix is alluding to Shakespeare,Hamlet , II.
i.
DS 61.
Shakers,
puritanical, isolationist, and communistic religious sect, originally an eighteenth-century offshoot of the Quakers.
In 1842 CD visited one of their settlements at (New) Lebanon, NY, from which he emerged with ‘a hearty dislike of the old Shakers and a hearty pity for the young ones’.
AN 15.
Shakespeare!,
interjection apparently meaning ‘Be quiet!’
Origin unknown.
BH 20;PP 41.
Shakespeare, William (1564–1616),
patronized by Mr Chester as ‘very fine in his way’,BR 23; considered a ‘terrible fellow’ by Dora,DC 48; referred to as ‘the illustrious ornament of the Elizabethan Era’by Mr Micawber,DC 52; Mrs Wititterly inspired by a visit to his birthplace,NN 27; dreamed of by Mrs Nickleby (‘…a black gentleman at full-length, in plaster-of-Paris, with a lay-down collar tied with two tassels, leaning against a post and thinking’),NN 27; his borrowings of plots defended by Nicholas Nickleby,NN 48; criticized by a Viscount (‘There's a lot of feet in Shakespeare's verse, but there ain't legs worth mentioning in Shakespeare's plays’),MC 28; if played entirely by wooden legs ‘wouldn't draw a sixpence’,OCS 19; referred to as ‘Swan of Avon’, ‘Bard of Avon’,MED 9;SB 53.
‘A poem on Shakespeare’,OMF i 2.
All's Well that Ends Well , I. i, ‘a bright particular star’,BH 40;DC 61;DS 51.
Antony and Cleopatra .
Cleopatra: ‘on the Rampage’,GE 13.
Mrs Skewton known as,DS 21 et seq .
On her barge,OMF ii 8.
I. v, ‘my serpent of old Nile’,DS 37.
II.
ii,
‘Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety’,
BH 6;DS 21.
As You Like It , II.
i, ‘uses of adversity’,LD ii 27.
‘A good in every thing’,MC 19.
Coriolanus , Mrs Sparsit's ‘Coriolanian style of nose’,HT i 7.
Coriolanus: Wopsle imitates,GE 18.
III.
i ‘…this Triton of the minnows’,DS 46.
V. iii, referred to in error as ‘last scene’,MC 34.
Hamlet .
The Ghost,CC 1;DC 1;GE 4;OCS 49;SB 45.
Hamlet: acted by Mr. Wopsle,GE 27, 31.
Mrs Curdle on,NN 24.
Pancks ‘like a journeyman Hamlet in conversation with his father's spirit’,LD ii 13.
‘Hamlet's Aunt’,DC 25.
Ophelia: Mrs. Veneering compared to,OMF ii 3.
I. i, ‘most high and palmy state’,NN 24.
I. ii, ‘A countenance more in sorrow than in anger’,DS 29.
‘Funeral bak'd meats’,DS 58.
‘Take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again’,
DC 12;OCS 49.
I. iv, ‘Revisits thus the glimpses of the moon’,BH 10.
I. v, ‘freeze thy young blood’,DS 7.
‘Like quills upon the fretful porpentine’,DC 41.
‘Perturbed spirit’,PP 8.
‘The secrets of my prison-house’,MED 18;PP 8.
‘Whiles memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe’,
OMF ii, 16.
‘With all my imperfections on my head’,BH 2.
II.
i, Hamlet in Ophelia's closet,PFI 6.
II.
ii, ‘Into my grave’,DS 5.
‘Nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so’,CS 1.
‘A shadow of a dream’,DS 61.
III.
i,
‘The undiscover'd country, from whose bourn
No traveller returns’
,MC 4;NN 30.
‘The observed of all observers’,LD ii 16.
‘Thus conscience does make cowards of us all’,DC 25.
III.
ii,
‘'TIS now the very witching time of night
When churchyards yawn’,OCS 56.
III.
ii, ‘o'erstep not the modesty of nature’,CS 20.
III.
iv, ‘…amazement on thy mother sits’,OMF iii 17.
‘My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time’,OMF iv, 16.
‘Worse remains behind’,DC 52.
IV.
vii, ‘One woe doth tread upon another's heel’,DS 61.
V. i, Yorick's skull,AN 17;PFI 9.
‘Alas, poor Yorick!’
HT ii 8.
Yorick ‘wont to set the table on a roar’,BH 32.
‘Let Hercules himself do what he may,
The cat will mew and dog will have his day’,
MC 4.
V. ii, fencing bout between Hamlet and Laertes,CS 17.
‘This fell sergeant, Death’,BH 21.
1 Henry IV , II.
iv, ‘eleven buckram men grown out of two’,DS 8.
‘Lime in this sack too’,PFI 11.
III.
i, ‘I can call spirits from the vasty deep’,SB 54.
‘As tedious as a railing wife
Worse than a smokey house’,
OMF i 12.
2 Henry IV .
Induction (stage-direction): ‘Enter RUMOUR, painted full of tongues’,MED 9.
Henry V , IV.
Prologue ‘give dreadful note of preparation’,BH 22;DS 12;SB 26.
2 Henry VI , III.
iii, ‘He dies, and makes no sign’,DS 54.
3 Henry VI , III.
ii, ‘golden time I look for’,OCS 51.
Julius Caesar .
Performance seen by David at Covent Garden Theatre,DC 19.
II.
ii, ‘mantle muffling up his face’,CS 19.
III.
ii, Mark Antony's oration,GE 7.
‘I pause for a reply’,BH 3;SB 14.
‘The evil that men do lives after them’,OMF i 9.
IV.
iii,
‘coin my heart,
And drop my blood for drachmas’,
CS 5.
‘It is not meet that every nice offence should bear its comment’,DC 57.
‘There is a tide in the affairs of men
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune’,
MC 10.
‘The noblest Roman of them all’,PFI 11.
King Lear.
Sampson Brass compares Mr Garland to,OCS 67.
I. iv,
‘How sharper than a serpent's tooth it is
To have a thankless child’,OMF iii 10;SB 55.
‘Marble-hearted fiend’,OMF iv 12.
II.
iv, ‘Mice and rats and such small deer’,CH 2;NN 19.
III.
iv, ‘the foul fiend’,MED 3.
Macbeth .
Performed in a private theatre,SB 20.
I. i, ‘When shall we three meet again',MED 14 (chapter-title).
I. iii, ‘A sailor's wife had  chestnuts in her lap’,DS 27.
‘Dwindle, peak and pine’,DC 52.
‘Each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips’,
PFI 3.
I. v,
‘Thy letters have transported me beyond
This ignorant present’,
DC 33;DS 55.
I. vii,
‘Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice
To our own lips’
,DC 28.
‘Even-handed justice’,DC 18.
‘Letting ‘I dare not'’ wait upon ‘‘I would'’',CS 6.
‘Plead like angels, trumpet-tong'd’,BH 29.
‘Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going’,LD i 18.
II.
i, Macbeth's exit to murder Duncan,MED 11.
II.
ii,
‘Amen’
Stuck in my throat’,DS 57.
‘Macbeth does murder sleep’,BH 11;OCS 56.
‘Sleep…balm of hurt minds’,DS 48;LD i 34.
‘Sleep…the death of each day's life’,OCS 20.
II.
iii,
‘Who can be wise, amaz'd, temp'rate, and furious,
Loyal, and neutral, in a moment?’
BR 7.
III.
iv,
‘Now good digestion wait on appetite,
And health on both’,
PP 51.
Banquo's Ghost,LD ii 25.
‘Broke the good meeting,
With most admir'd disorder’,
DC 22.
‘Can such things be…?’
PP 13.
‘Thou hast no speculation in those eyes’,DS 1;OMF iii 10.
‘Why, being gone, I am a man again’,DC 22;OMF iii 10.
IV.
i, the cauldron scene,GE 26.
Apparition of an armed head,DC 18.
‘Show his eyes and grieve his heart’,CS 14.
V. i, Lady Macbeth's sleep-walking scene,BH 48;MED 10;OMF iii 16.
‘So much blood in him’,PFI 10.
V. iii, ‘the sear, the yellow leaf
Measure for Measure , II.
ii,
‘…proud man,
Dress'd in a little brief authority’,CC 3.
Merchant of Venice .
Shylock and Venice,PFI 8.
III.
ii, ‘Fancy's knell’,OCS 21.
IV.
i, ‘To do a great right, do a little wrong’,OT 12.
‘A Daniel come to judgement’,C 3.
Merry Wives of Windsor,I. iii, ‘Convey’ the wise it call’,MED 11.
V. v, ‘Let the sky rain potatoes’,BH 1.
Midsummer Night's Dream,I. ii, ‘a proper man as one shall see in a summer's day’,DS 18.
II.
i, ‘the wat'ry moon’,OMF ii 4.
‘I'll put a girdle round about the earth
In forty minutes’,BH 12.
V. i, ‘airy nothings’,MED 9;NN 8.
‘Local habitation’,OMF i 2.
Othello .
In Crummles's repertory,NN 23, 48.
Amateur production of,SB 53.
Bucket advises Mrs Snagsby to see,BH 59.
Desdemona,PFI 8;SB 55.
Othello: gas-fitter's ambition to play,CS 15.
I. i,
‘…wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to pluck at’,CC 3.
I. iii, ‘of moving accidents by flood and field’,DS 6.
II.
i, ‘that men should put an enemy in their mouths’,DC 25.
III.
iii, ‘yet that's not much’,LD i 13.
‘Confirmation strong’,CS 15.
‘Othello's occupation's gone’,PP 34.
V. ii, ‘the melting mood’,BH 2.
Richard III .
Performed in a private theatre,SB 20.
I. i, ‘all the clouds that low'r'd upon our house’,OCS 67.
The drowning of Clarence,AN 3.
V. iii, Bosworth field,GE 15.
Tent scene,SB 45.
‘Jockey of Norfolk’,DC 22.
V. iv, death of Richard as performed in a private theatre,PP 49.
Romeo and Juliet .
Performed by Crummles's company,NN 23, 25.
Mr Curdle's pamphlet on the Nurse's deceased husband,NN 24.
Recalled by CD at Verona,PFI 9.
Montagues and Capulets,SB 51.
I. i, shouts of Montagues and Capulets,PFI 9.
III.
iii, Romeo's banishment to Mantua,PFI 9.
V. i, the Apothecary,PFI 9.
‘Bosom's lord’,MC 41.
The Taming of the Shrew , IV.
i, Grumio's story ‘which now shall die in oblivion’,PFI 9.
The Tempest .
Ariel,BH 12 (error for Puck).
V. i, Prospero's ‘so potent art’,LD i 34.
Timon of Athens .
Timon imitated by Wopsle,GE 18.
Twelfth Night , II.
iv, ‘like Patience on a monument’,BH 65;DC 38;OMF iii 10.
Shakespeare and the musical glasses.
In chap.
9 of Goldsmith's The Vicar of Wakefield (1766) some elegant young ladies appear who ‘would talk of nothing but high life, and high-lived company; with other fashionable topics, such as pictures, taste, Shakespeare, and the musical glasses’.
AN 7.
Shanklin,
resort town on the Isle of Wight, scene of the Lammles' honeymoon.
OMF i 10.
shark-headed screws,
round as distinct from flat-headed.
Sharp, Mr,
assistant master at Salem House, ‘a limp, delicate-looking gentleman…with a good deal of nose, and a way of carrying his head on one side, as if it were a little too heavy for him’.
DC 6, 7, 9.
shaving-pot,
china mug divided into separate compartments for hot water and soap.
Shaw, Old, the Life Guardsman.
Lance-Corporal John Shaw (1789–1815), a prize-fighter whose magnificent physique caused him to be much in demand as an artist's model.
He enlisted in the Life Guards in 1807, and won renown for his exploits at the battle of Waterloo where he reputedly killed ten French soldiers before succumbing to his own many wounds.
BH 24, 58.
shay (coll.),
a chaise.
Sheen and Gloss,
mercers patronized by Lady Dedlock.
BH 2.
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797–1851),
writer.
Frankenstein (1817),GE 40.
Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792–1822),
poet.
His ashes are in the Protestant cemetery in Rome.
PFI 11.
shell-jacket,
short, tailless jacket.
shepherd, cut-throat.
‘Shepherd’ was a slang term for a spy, someone who is always on the watch.
OMF i 12.
Shepherd, Miss,
pupil at the Misses Nettingall's establishment with whom David, while a pupil at Dr Strong's, falls in love.
DC 18, 60.
shepherd, the.
Dissenting preacher, head of the Emmanuel Chapel of Dorking of which Stiggins is ‘deputy-shepherd’.
PP 22, 27.
shepherds,
‘heard the Angels sing, ‘On earth, peace.
Good-will towards men!'’ ' at the time of the Nativity; see Luke 2: 14.
CS 7.
shepherd's plaid,
black and white tartan.
Sheppard, Jack (1702–24),
housebreaker and highway robber, famous as the only prisoner who ever escaped twice from Newgate gaol.
He was hanged at the age of 22.
SB 32.
Shepperton,
village formerly in Middlesex, now in Surrey, through which Sikes and Oliver pass on their way to Chertsey.
OT 21.
Sheridan, Richard Brinsley (1751–1816),
dramatist,SB 46.
Burleigh's nod (The Critic ),AN 1.
‘Finches of the grove’(The Critic ),GE 34, 38.
‘Had I a heart for falsehood framed’(The Duenna ),DS 14.
‘The soft impeachment’(The Rivals ),BH 39;PP 51;SB 54.
The School for Scandal (1777),SB 20.
The Stranger (1798),CS 15;DC 26.
‘Sheridan's Parliamentary carouses ’: Sheridan was an MP 1780–1812, a great bon viveur, a boon companion of the Prince Regent (see GEORGE IV), and an inveterate gambler,SB 25.
Sheriff.
Unidentified actress, perhaps the ‘Miss Shirreff’ mentioned once or twice in the Diaries of the actor William Macready (1793–1873).
SYG 9.
sheriff's poundage (obs.),
fee based on the value (calculated at 1 s. in the pound up to 100 and 6 d. thereafter) on goods distrained by a broker, payable to a sheriff's officer for his services in court.
SB 5.
sherry cobbler,
sherry and dissolved sugar added to ice and garnished with slices of orange.
AN 3, 8.
She's all my fancy painted her,
the opening lines of ‘Alice Gray’, a ballad by the early nineteenth-century song-writer William Mee.
OCS 7.
she shall walk in silk attire,
from ‘The Siller [i.e. Silver]Crown’ by Susanna Blamire (1747–94):
‘And ye shall walk in silk attire,
And siller ha'e to spare.’
OCS 68.
she-wolf,
see ROMULUS, CITY OF.
shield and trident, her sister of,
i.e. Britannia, a female figure allegorically representative of Great Britain.
She is represented as accoutred with a shield and a trident, the traditional attributes of the Sea-god Neptune, to symbolize the fact that Britain's strength depends on her sea-power as ‘ruler of the waves’.
TTC i 1.
shilling, King George's.
A recruiting sergeant wore as a badge of office a plume of coloured ribbons in his shako; when a young man had been persuaded to enlist he was handed a shilling to bind the contract.
CS 7.
shiner (sl.),
guinea or sovereign.
shining hours, was improving the.
An allusion to Isaac Watts's ‘Against Idleness and Mischief’ in his Divine Songs for Children (1715):
‘how doth the little busy bee,
Improve each shining hour.’
LD ii 25.
Ship, the,
riverside pub where Pip and Magwitch stay the night during their journey down the Thames, ‘a dirty place enough, and I dare say not unknown to smuggling adventures’.
GE 54.
Shipton, Mrs,
one of Esther's nicknames at Bleak House.
Mother Shipton was a Welsh prophetess whose predictions were popular in the early nineteenth century.
BH 8.
shivery shakey.
‘Shivery Shakey, Ain't it cold’ was a popular song.
The chorus runs:
‘Shivery, shakey, O!
O!
O!
Criminy crikey, ain't it cold?
Woo, woo, woo, oo, oo,
Pity that man couldn't get warm.’
CS 18.
shoal-lighthouse, a little squat,
the Mucking Flat lighthouse, a beacon on iron piles placed to warn ships of shallow water.
GE 54.
shoe-binding,
a shoe-binder is one who attaches the sole of a shoe to the upper.
Shoe Lane,
street in east London partially demolished when Holborn Viaduct was constructed.
The area, to the east of Holborn Circus, has been considerably redeveloped.
SB 23.
shoe-vamper,
one who renovates old shoes.
Shooter's Hill,
south London district between Greenwich Park and Blackheath.
Master Harry Walmer's father lives there,CS 8.
Tony Weller, on his retirement as a coachman, sets up ‘an excellent public-house’ there,PP 57.
The Dover mail ‘lumbered up Shooter's Hill’,TTC i 2.
‘shoot’ the bridge,
i.e. choose the moment when the current would safely sweep a small boat through one of the narrow arches of old London Bridge.
GE 46.
shopped (sl.),
betrayed to the police.
‘Shops and their Tenants’,
third of the sketches in the ‘Scenes’ section of Sketches by Boz .
Originally published as ‘Street Sketches No. 2’ in The Morning Chronicle , 10 Oct. 1834.
Describes with mingled humour and pathos the successive tenants, who are in various lines of business, of a shop ‘on the Surrey side of the water’.
SB 10.
Shore, Jane,
wife of a London goldsmith who became mistress to King Edward IV about 1470.
She was charged with sorcery by his successor, Richard III, and made to do public penance before being imprisoned.
CD is referring to the penitence scene in Nicholas Rowe's play,Jane Shore (first produced in 1714).
CS 1.
Short,
see HARRIS.
Short,
seaman look-out aboard the raft on which the English prisoners escape from their pirate captors.
CS 10.
shorts,
knee-breeches.
short-sixes,
short candles weighing six to the pound.
MC 2.
show his eyes and grieve his heart,
Shakespeare,Macbeth , IV.
i.
CS 14.
Shrewsbury,
English public school, founded 1552, in the county of Shropshire.
Carton and Stryver were both pupils there.
TTC ii 5.
Shropshire, man from,
see GRIDLEY.
shrub,
drink made from the juice of lemons, currants, and raspberries mixed with spirits, e.g. rum.
Shylock,
associated with the Rialto Bridge in Venice; see Shakespeare,The Merchant of Venice .
PFI 8.
Siamese twins,
two Chinese boys born in Siam (Thailand) in 1811, joined together at the breast bone.
They were exhibited all over the world, and appeared in London at the Egyptian Hall in 1829.
They died in 1871.
MC 16;NN 21.
Siddons, Mrs.
Sarah Siddons (1755–1831), English actress, the greatest tragedienne of her day, whose career lasted from 1774 to 1812.
MC 22;SB 20.
Sidmouth, Viscount.
Henry Addington (1757–1844), English statesman, Speaker of the House of Commons and later Prime Minister (1801–4).
DC 38.
Sierra Leone,
former British protectorate in West Africa.
PP 25.
‘Signalman, The’,
story written by CD for ‘Mugby Junction’, the 1866 Christmas Number of All the Year Round where it appears as ‘No. 1 Branch Line.
The Signalman’.
The signalman in his isolated box tells the narrator of an apparition he has now seen three times.
On the first two occasions it preceded some terrible event, so he is in a state of great apprehension.
The narrator, returning to the box shortly afterwards, finds that the signalman has been run over by a train.
CS 19.
Sikes, Bill,
housebreaker, dependent on Fagin as the ‘fence’ who disposes of the proceeds of his robberies.
This ‘stoutly built fellow of about five-and-thirty’, accompanied everywhere by Bull's-Eye, a dog as fierce and ill-tempered as himself, is no match for Fagin.
The Jew makes use of him in an unsuccessful attempt to turn Oliver into a criminal, and is able to convince him that Nancy, whom he trusts, has betrayed them all and must die.
In what follows the reader is made to identify with Bill as murderer, and as haunted and hunted man, dying finally by accidental hanging in sight of a vengeful crowd on Jacob's Island.
OT 13 et seq .
silent system,
see PRISONS.
silk gown (coll.),
Queen's Counsel, one who wears a silk gown as distinct from the stuff gown of an ordinary barrister.
BH 1;SB 49.
Silverman, George,
narrator and protagonist of ‘George Silverman's Explanation’.
Born in a Preston slum, and upbraided as ‘a worldly little devil’ by his harridan mother because he longs for food and warmth, his acute fear of being thought worldly dominates his subsequent life, causing him to be misunderstood and exploited.
He pens his ‘Explanation’ in his old age in an attempt to explain to himself what went wrong in his life, and how his always acting from the highest, most unselfish motives brought him no happiness but only pain and alienation.
GSE passim .
Silver-store,
fictitious Caribbean island, scene of a pirate attack and staunch defence by Royal Marines.
CS 10.
Simmery, Frank,
swell young friend of Wilkins Flasher.
PP 55.
Simmonds, Miss,
one of Madame Mantalini's assistants.
NN 17.
Simmons,
the pompous self-satisfied beadle described in the first and fourth of the ‘Seven Sketches from Our Parish’.
SB 1, 4, 5.
Simmons, Henrietta,
one of Mrs Jiniwin's termagant cronies.
OCS 4.
Simmons, William (Bill),
van driver who gives young Martin Chuzzlewit a lift to Hounslow after his departure from Pecksniff
Simond, Louis (1767–1831),
travel-writer; his ‘charming book on Italy’ was the Tour in Italy and Sicily (1828).
PFI 5, 10.
simoom,
a hot dry wind that blows from the Arabian desert.
Simpkin and Green,
solicitors, whose managing clerk, together with Smithers and Price's clerk and Pimkin and Thomas's ‘out o' doors’ frequent harmonic meetings at the Magpie and Stump.
PP 20.
Simplon, the,
Alpine pass leading from Switzerland into Italy through which a road was built by Napoleon, 1800–7.
The ‘enormous depths and thundering waterfalls’ of its gorges.
LD ii 3.
Simpson,
horse-dealer imprisoned in the Fleet with Pickwick.
PP 42.
Simpson, Mr,
one of Mrs Tibbs's boarders, a young man of no apparent occupation and ‘as empty-headed as the great bell of St Paul's’.
He marries Julia Maplesone, whose extravagance lands him in the Fleet Prison, and who deserts him whilst he is there.
Having been disinherited by his father he finds employment at a fashionable hairdresser's which gives him materials for composing ‘those brilliant efforts of genius, his fashionable novels’.
SB 45.
Simpson, the late Mr.
C. H. Simpson, for 37 years the popular Master of Ceremonies at Vauxhall Gardens, celebrated for his extraordinarily obsequious manner.
SB 21.
Simson, Mr,
guest invited to Percy Noakes's ‘water-party’.
SB 51.
Sinbad,
sailor-hero of a sequence of stories, full of wonders, in The Arabian Nights ,CS 12;DC 16.
On his second voyage he sees the valley of the Diamonds (CS 1;PFI 10), and is carried through the air by a roc, a gigantic bird to whose feet he has tied himself while it is sleeping (CS 15;PFI 10).
On his third voyage he encounters a black one-eyed giant who eats some of his companions before Sinbad succeeds in blinding him,AN 9.
‘Since laws were made for every degree’,
song from John Gay's Beggar's Opera (1728), III.
xiii:
‘Since laws were made, for every degree,
To curb vice in others, as well as in me,
I wonder we han't better company
Upon Tyburn tree’.
LD ii 12;OCS 66.
singer, the comic.
This was Paul Bedford (c .1792–1871), a popular actor who excelled in low comedy and whom CD mentions by name in Sketches of Young Gentlemen .
There were a number of lengthy songs on the subject of the Seven Ages of Man, and it is not possible to be certain which one CD is referring to here.
SB 21.
singlestick,
sport in which a rounded stick with a basket-work hilt is used like a fencing foil.
sinner, one repentant.
‘Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no repentance’.
Luke 15: 7.
DS 58.
sins of the fathers, visited on the children,
an allusion to Exod. 20: 4 (cf. Num. 14: 18).
BH 17.
Sirens,
in classical mythology sea-nymphs who by their singing lured sailors to destruction on hidden rocks.
Mr Pecksniff refers to them as ‘those fabulous animals (pagan, I regret to say) who used to sing in the water’.
MC 4.
‘Sir Roger de Coverley’,
old English country dance named after the character in Addison's The Spectator (1711); often performed as the concluding theme of a ball.
Sister Rosa, Sister Rosa, what do you see from the turret?
Allusion to the story of Bluebeard.
Bluebeard's wife, about to be killed by her ferocious husband for disobeying his instructions, desperately plays for time as she knows her brothers are on their way to visit her.
She begs her sister to go up to the top of the tower of the castle and look out for them, and keeps calling out to her, ‘Anne, sister Anne, dost thou see nothing coming?’
MED 13.
Sisyphus,
in Greek legend, the wicked King of Corinth who was compelled in Hades to push uphill a stone which perpetually rolled down again.
DS 21.
sitting,
a reserved pew, for which a fee was payable, in church.
Six Clerks Office,
administrative department of the old Court of Chancery.
Originally, the Six Clerks were supposed to be the  attorneys in court of the parties to a Chancery suit.
During the eighteenth century this duty devolved on their deputies, the Sixty Clerks, and by around 1800 suitors were employing their own solicitors.
They were still compelled, however, to appoint a clerk in the court, and pay him a fee; only from him, via the Six Clerks Office, could the suitor's own solicitors get copies of the depositions in the case.
The office was abolished in 1843.
BH 1.
Six Jolly Fellowship Porters, the,
name of Abbey Potterson's Thames-side tavern.
CD's original was the Grapes in Narrow Street, Limehouse.
A Fellowship Porter was one licensed to carry coal, corn, fish, fruit, or salt.
OMF i 6. et seq .
sixpence, robbing a farmer's boy of,
see PILFERER.
sizar,
a student at Cambridge University paying reduced fees and formerly having to carry out some menial work to compensate for this.
LD ii 7.
Sketches by Boz.
Illustrative of every-day life and everyday people.
CD's first book, a collection, with some additions, of the sketches and tales he had published between 1833 and 1836 in The Monthly Magazine, The Morning Chronicle, Bell's Life in London , and other periodicals.
What became known as the First Series was published by Macrone in two volumes in Feb. 1836 with 16 illustrations by Cruikshank.
A second edition was published in Aug. 1836, and a third and fourth in 1837.
Each edition was reset, but the contents remained the same, as follows: Vol. i: ‘Our Parish’(in 6 chaps.),
‘Miss Evans and ‘The Eagle'’ ', ‘Shops and their Tenants’, ‘Thoughts about People’, ‘A Visit to Newgate’, ‘London Recreations’, ‘The Boarding-House’(in 2 chaps.),
‘Hackney-Coach Stands’, ‘Brokers’ and Marine-Store Shops', ‘The Bloomsbury Christening’, ‘Gin Shops’, ‘Public Dinners’, ‘Astley's’, ‘Greenwich Fair’, ‘The Prisoner's Van’, ‘A Christmas Dinner’; Vol. ii: ‘A Passage in the Life of Mr. Watkins Tottle’(in 2 chaps.),
‘The Black Veil’, ‘Shabby-Genteel People’, ‘Horatio Sparkins’, ‘The Pawnbroker's Shop’, ‘The Dancing Academy’, ‘Early Coaches’, ‘The River’, ‘Private Theatres’, ‘The Great Winglebury Duel’, ‘Omnibuses’, ‘Mrs Joseph Porter’, ‘The Steam Excursion’, ‘Sentiment’.
Of these, three items, ‘A Visit to Newgate’, ‘The Black Veil’, and ‘The Great Winglebury Duel’ appeared for the first time in this collection.
Encouraged by the success of the publication, CD collected together other pieces previously published in periodicals but not included in the First Series and Sketches by Boz Second Series was published in one volume by Macrone in 1837 (but bearing the date 1836), uniform with the previous 2 volumes, and including 10 illustrations (12 in the second edition) by Cruikshank.
The contents were as follows: ‘The Streets by Morning’, ‘The Streets by Night’, ‘Making a Night of it’, ‘Criminal Courts’, ‘Scotland Yard’, ‘The New Year’, ‘Meditations in Monmouth Street’, ‘Our Next-door Neighbours’, ‘The Hospital Patient’, ‘Seven Dials’, ‘The Mistaken Milliner’, ‘Doctor's Commons’, ‘Misplaced Attachment of Mr. John Dounce’, ‘Vauxhall Gardens by Day’, ‘A Parliamentary Sketch, with a Few Portraits’, ‘Mr. Minns and his Cousin', ‘The Last Cabdriver, and the First Omnibus Cad’, ‘The Parlour Orator’, ‘The First of May’, and ‘The Drunkard's Death’.
Of these only the last item appeared for the first time in this volume.
Many of the tales and sketches included in the First and Second Series were extensively revised, and sometimes retitled, from their first periodical appearance.
Further revision took place before the first combined edition was published, by Chapman & Hall, in 20 monthly parts, price one shilling, between Nov. 1837 and June 1839.
The alteration in page-size (from duodecimo to demy octavo) from the Macrone volumes necessitated the re-etching of the illustrations by Cruikshank.
One of the original designs, ‘The Free and Easy’, was omitted and 13 new ones were added.
This edition included all the sketches and tales in the First and Second Series plus one more, ‘The Tuggses at Ramsgate’ previously published in The Library of Fiction .
The entire collection of 56 items was arranged in its now familiar four sections: ‘Seven Sketches from Our Parish’, ‘Scenes’, ‘Characters’, and ‘Tales’.
It was published in volume form in May 1839.
For details concerning the publication history and contents of particular sketches or tales see under individual titles.
Sketches of Young Couples,
series of facetious sketches of contemporary types written anonymously by CD and published, with illustrations by H. K. Browne (‘Phiz’), by Chapman & Hall in 1840.
Prefaced by an ‘urgent remonstrance’ to the gentlemen of England, warning them that the young Queen Victoria's announcement of her intention to marry Prince Albert may lead to great numbers of her female subjects taking a similar nuptial initiative owing to Leap Year of 1840 (traditionally a woman could make a proposal of marriage only in a leap year).
These sketches were not collected in any lifetime edition of CD's works.
The titles of the sketches are as follows: ‘The Young Couple’; ‘The Formal Couple’; ‘The Loving Couple’; ‘The Contradictory Couple’; ‘The Couple Who Dote Upon Their Children’; ‘The Cool Couple’; ‘The Egotistical Couple’; ‘The Couple Who Coddle Themselves’; ‘The Old Couple’; ‘Conclusion’.
Sketches of Young Gentlemen,
series of facetious descriptions of contemporary types written anonymously by CD as a humorous riposte to Sketches of Young Ladies by ‘Quiz’(?
Edward Caswell) and published, with 6 illustrations by H. K. Browne (Phiz), by Chapman & Hall in 1838.
These sketches were not collected in any lifetime edition of CD's works.
The titles of the sketches are as follows: ‘The Bashful Young Gentleman’; ‘The Out-and-out Young Gentleman’; ‘The Very Friendly Young Gentleman’; ‘The Military Young Gentleman’; ‘The Political Young Gentleman’; ‘The Domestic Young Gentleman’; ‘The Censorious Young Gentleman’; ‘The Funny Young Gentleman’; ‘The Theatrical Young Gentleman’; ‘The Poetical Young Gentleman’; ‘The ‘Throwing-off
Skettles, Sir Barnet, Lady, and Master,
pompous MP, his wife, and son, a pupil of Doctor Blimber's, who attends the latter's party and with whom Florence goes to stay.
DS 14, 18, 23–4, 28, 58.
Skewton, the Hon. Mrs,
Edith Granger's mother; she lives upon ‘the reputation of some diamonds and her family connexions’, the chief of whom is her nephew, Lord Feenix.
A beauty in her youth, her ‘false curls and false eyebrows…her false teeth, set off by her false complexion’, and her juvenile dress cannot disguise her 70 years, any more than can her talk of ‘Nature’ and ‘Heart’obscure the heartlessness that makes her see her beautiful daughter as a saleable commodity.
Her triumph in securing Dombey as a husband for Edith is dashed by Edith's unconcealed contempt and resentment after the marriage, and she dies in confusion of mind and physical incapacity brought on by a stroke.
DS 21 et seq .
Skiffins, Miss,
lady ‘of a wooden appearance’ who becomes Wemmick's bride,GE 37, 55.
Skiffins , her brother, an accountant, whom Wemmick undertakes to consult about Pip's plan to help Herbert financially.
GE 37.
Skimpin, Mr,
junior counsel to Serjeant Buzfuz in the case of Bardell and Pickwick .
PP 34.
Skimpole, Harold,
a dilettante artist, a protégé of John Jarndyce's who affects a childlike gaiety and simplicity but is really a shameless sponger; his apparent innocence of worldly concerns is sedulously fostered to relieve him of any common responsibilities.
He has several children including three daughters,Laura ,Kitty , and Arethusa , also grandchildren.
When Jo is hiding at Bleak House Skimpole accepts a bribe from Inspector Bucket to reveal the boy's presence.
CD modelled the character on his friend, the poet and essayist, Leigh Hunt (1784–1859), but sought to tone down the resemblances between the character and its original in the MS and proofs of the novel, changing his name, for example, from Leonard Horner to Harold Skimpole.
He did not, however, avoid later public controversy with Hunt's son, Thornton, on this matter.
BH 6 et seq .
skinny finger.
‘Lays, not her skinny finger, but the handle of a key, upon her lip’ is a reminiscence of
‘each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips’
.
Shakespeare,Macbeth , I. iii.
PFI 3.
slack-baked,
insufficiently baked.
Slackbridge,
demagogic official of the United Aggregate Tribunal, who publicly deplores Blackpool's refusal to become a member.
HT ii 4, 5; iii 4.
Sladdery,
fashionable librarian (bookseller) patronized by Lady Dedlock.
BH 2, 58.
Slammer, Doctor,
irascible military surgeon, who challenges Jingle to a duel, but later, through a confusion of identities, finds himself confronting Winkle.
PP 2, 3.
Slang, Lord,
see GLOGWOG.
slap-bang (sl.).
Cheap eating-houses were sometimes called ‘Slap-bangs’ from the off-hand way in which food was served up to their customers.
BH 20.
Slasher,
St Bartholomew's surgeon, pronounced by Jack Hopkins to be the ‘best alive’.
PP 32.
Slaughter, Lieutenant,
Captain Waters's accomplice in swindling the Tuggses.
SB 48. slave, public opinion has burned a…alive,see JUDGE, A CERTAIN CONSTITUTIONAL.
slavey (sl.),
a maid-of-all-work, usually in a household of modest income where no other servants were kept.
Sleary,
circus proprietor, a fat, kind-hearted, wheezy, lisping man, who for a while takes Sissy Jupe under his wing after her father absconds from the company.
He also gives sanctuary to Tom Gradgrind, and arranges for Childers to see him safely aboard the ship that is to take him to foreign parts.
Through the marriage of his daughter Josephine , Sleary eventually becomes Childers's father-in-law.
He makes Gradgrind understand that: ‘People mutht be amuthed.
They can't be alwayth a learning, nor yet they can't be alwayth a working, they an't made for it’.
HT i 3, 6, 9; iii 7, 8.
Sleepers, the Seven,
the legendary Seven Sleepers of Ephesus, whose story is related in chap.
33 of Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , were Christian youths who were immured in a cave by the persecuting Emperor Decius (250 AD).
They fell into a miraculous sleep which lasted until they were accidentally rediscovered 187 years later.
CH 1;MC 24.
Sleepy Hollow.
‘The Legend of Sleepy Hollow’ is one of the tales in Washington Irving's Sketchbook (1819–29).
AN 15.
Sliderskew, Peg,
Gride's housekeeper, a palsied hag, who steals from him a document relating to Madeline Bray's inheritance.
This is stolen from her in turn by Squeers, who has been bribed by Ralph Nickleby, for reasons of his own, to recover the document.
Peg is convicted of its theft and transported.
NN 53–4, 56–7, 59–60, 65.
Slinkton, Julius,
poisoner who kills one of his nieces for profit after effecting an insurance on her life, and is planning to do the same to her sister, but is foiled by the cunning of the dead girl's lover, Meltham, assisted by Mr Sampson, the manager of a City insurance office.
Sampson feels ‘a very great aversion’ to Slinkton as soon as he sees him: ‘His hair, which was elaborately brushed and oiled, was parted straight up the middle; and he presented this parting to the clerk, exactly…as if he had said, in so many words: ‘You must take me, if you please, my friend, just as I show myself.
Come straight up here, follow the gravel path, keep off the grass, I allow no trespassing.'’
'When he is eventually unmasked he commits suicide.
CD modelled the character on the art critic and poisoner, Thomas Griffiths Wainewright (1794–1852), whom he had met.
HD .
slipper, glass,
symbol of Cinderella's good fortune in the fairy tale by Charles Perrault.
LD i 2.
slips,
the ends or rear-stage extremities of gallery seats in a theatre.
Slithers, Mr,
Master Humphrey's barber, ‘a very brisk, bustling, active little man’, who forms part of ‘Mr Weller's Watch’.
MHC 3, 5.
Sliverstone, Mr and Mrs,
a clergyman and his wife, typical of a certain kind of ‘egotistical couple’.
SYC 9.
Sloppy,
‘a very long boy, with a very little head, and an open mouth of disproportionate capacity’, devotedly attached to Betty Higden who has rescued him from the workhouse in which he has been brought up, having been a foundling child.
He turns the mangle for her and reads her the newspapers, ‘doing the police in different voices’.
The Boffins take care of him when Betty goes away, and disguised as a dustman, he keeps an eye on Wegg whilst Boffin's mounds are cleared to see that nothing is stolen.
Boffin pays for him to be trained as a cabinet-maker, and he is last seen visiting Jenny Wren and promising to make her several things as examples as his new-found skill.
OMF i 16 et seq .
slopseller,
dealer in ‘slops’, i.e. cheap ready-made or secondhand clothing.
slop-shop,
a shop selling cheap ready-made clothing for sailors.
slop-work,
cheap, ready-made clothing.
Slough of Despond,
in Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1678), an extensive bog in which Christian nearly founders at the outset of his journey.
HT iii 5;LD ii 15.
Slout, Mr,
workhouse master, to whose position Bumble succeeds.
OT 27.
Slowboy, Tilly,
Mrs Peerybingle's teenage maid-of-all-work-cum-nursemaid, a foundling ‘of spare and straight shape’.
Though of limited intellect, she responds with fanatical devotion to the Peerybingles' kindness.
CH .
Sludberry, Thomas,
‘a little, red-faced, sly-looking ginger-beer seller’, the defendant in a ‘brawling’ case heard before the Arches Court in Doctor's Commons.
SB 15.
Sluffen, Mr,
eloquent cockney master-sweep.
SB 27.
sluggard, 'tis the voice of the.
Cuttle is quoting from one of Isaac Watts's ‘Moral Songs’ added to later editions of Divine Songs for Children :
‘'TIS the voice of the sluggard; I hear him complain,
‘You have wak'd me too soon, I must slumber again.’’
DS 54.
Slum, Mr,
friend of Mrs Jarley, a penurious rhymester who makes up advertising jingles.
OCS 28.
Slumkey, the Hon. Samuel,
of Slumkey Hall, successful Blue (Tory) candidate in the Eatanswill election.
PP 13, 51.
Slummery,
painter friend of the Bobtail Widgers, forestalled in his own branch of art by Fithers.
SYC 7.
Slummintowkens,
a family friendly with the Nupkinses.
PP 25.
Slurk, Mr,
editor of the Eatanswill Independent , a fire-eater and a Buff (Whig), whose opinions so inflame his rival Pott, editor of the Blue (Tory)Eatanswill Gazette , that they eventually come to blows.
PP 51.
Sly, Mr,
proprietor of the King's Arms and Royal Hotel, Lancaster.
CD and Wilkie Collins stayed there during ‘The Lazy Tour of Two Idle Apprentices’ in 1857, and Joseph Sly was proud of his friendship with CD.
CS 18.
Slyme, Chevy,
down-at-heel nephew of old Martin Chuzzlewit, who sullenly nurses a conviction of his own superior merits and a sense of injury that these are not appreciated and rewarded by society.
He uses another shabby character, Tigg, to do his scrounging for him, he himself being ‘of too haughty a stomach to work, to beg, to borrow, or steal; yet mean enough to be worked or borrowed, begged or stolen for, by any catspaw that would serve his turn; too insolent to lick the hand that fed him in his need, yet cur enough to bite and tear it in the dark’.
Tigg deserts him to start trading in fraud on his own account, and Slyme disappears from the story until he reappears as a police officer (having taken to working for his living in the hope of shaming his rich uncle), to arrest Jonas Chuzzlewit for murder.
Jonas bribes Slyme to let him kill himself to cheat the gallows.
MC 4, 7, 51.