

PART TWO The Debt Crisis, Politics and Educational Policy
International economic and political forces place severe constraints on individual governments' decision-making, particularly if that nation is economically under-developed.
None the less, neither governments nor peoples are simply passive victims.
Choices are still made, though external circumstances may limit the initial range of options and may also affect the outcome of the policy chosen.
In this section, we examine how these forces affect governments' role in the provision of education.
Profile of the case-study regions: the international and regional context
All the countries of the South cannot be lumped together if the processes which affect education are to be understood.
Historical experiences and cultural assumptions differ and there are great variations in wealth, population size and ideology.
However, there are certain common themes.
These include the legacies of previous regimes, whether colonial, semi-colonial or indigenous, and the strong influence of Western ideas and technologies on concepts of ‘modernity’ and ‘progress’espoused by many political elites in the South.
Education is often used as an ideological tool by regimes of very different political persuasions, and sometimes itself becomes a site of political conflict.
Sharp inequalities between different classes and ethnic groups and between men and women are often exacerbated by debt and economic crisis.
To assess the impact on education, we turn to some specific cases.
The examples in the following sections draw primarily on case studies in Central America, Southern Africa and Sudan.
In recent decades, these three regions have been the focus of political, economic and military interventions by the great powers.
In Southern Africa, the major regional power, South Africa, has also played a highly interventionist role in neighbouring countries.
For the most part, with the exception of South Africa, these are relatively poor states, with economies that are still largely tied to the export of primary commodities and are particularly vulnerable to external economic pressures and fluctuations in the world economy.
With the exception of Costa Rica, these countries have recent histories of domination by authoritarian or colonial regimes, and of insurgency and resistance or even outright civil war.
While each nation has its own culture and history, in recent years each has been affected by events in the surrounding region.
South Africa stands in apparent contrast to the rest of the states considered here: a regional military superpower with a relatively strong and diversified economy, built on its mineral wealth and on the exploitation of the cheap labour of its black majority.
None the less, its heavy dependence on exports of minerals, especially gold and diamonds (which make up about 80 per cent of export earnings), make it vulnerable to fluctuations in the world market, and to sanctions imposed by some members of the international community.
In the 1980s, the economy was affected by recession and the government   was forced to negotiate the rescheduling of its external debts.
It has also resorted to austerity policies which have affected prices, employment and real wages.
Despite the relative strength of the economy, apartheid ideology and economic policies have kept the majority of the population living in poverty, at a level more comparable to the countries of Central America than to that of the affluent South African whites.
Overall illiteracy rates among the black population are still thought to stand above 50 per cent, and schooling is not accessible to many black children.
The segregated education system is geared to keeping the majority of black people in subordination, while health and housing conditions are poor and, most importantly, black people have been deprived of political and human rights.
In the ‘front-line’ states bordering on South Africa, the apartheid regime and the organized resistance to it have had serious repercussions.
South Africa has pursued a policy of violent destabilization in Mozambique, and, to a lesser extent, in Zimbabwe.
It has invaded Angola on several occasions, and has launched punitive raids on alleged African National Congress (ANC) bases in a number of neighbouring countries.
These actions have created large numbers of refugees and displaced people, who have been spread through most of the countries in the region.
The costs of these conflicts, in terms of the damage to their economies and social welfare, as well as of lives lost, has been considerable.
The states most severely affected have been Mozambique, Angola and Namibia, but even countries not centrally involved in the fighting — Zambia, Zimbabwe and the two states most immediately dependent on South Africa, Botswana and Lesotho — have felt its effects.
Furthermore, most of the front-line states are dependent on transport routes through South Africa, which has imposed substantial increases in transit costs, tightening its hold on their economies and raising the cost of imports.
Losses associated directly and indirectly with regional conflict between 1980 and 1988 are estimated at US$16 to 17 billion.
This figure covers losses to GDP in Malawi, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Zambia, Tanzania, Swaziland and Lesotho.
It does not include the countries directly involved in the war: Angola, Mozambique and Namibia.
Zambia's losses alone were put at US$4.75 to 5 billion and Zimbabwe's at US$7.5 to 8 billion.
Central America, meanwhile, is regarded by the United States as its ‘backyard’, and successive US governments since the nineteenth century have intervened in its internal political struggles.
Since the late 1970s, regional conflict has intensified, and so has the role of the United States, which provides large amounts of both military and civil aid to governments which it supports.
The main sources of regional tension in the 1980s have been the civil war in El Salvador, where the United States has provided ever-increasing amounts of military aid to a succession of right-wing governments, and the role of the United  States and the US-backed Contras in undermining the Sandinista government in Nicaragua.
From May 1985 this included a trade embargo and an economic blockade, mining Nicaraguan ports, large-scale support for the Contras and various undercover operations to disrupt the economy.
By the end of the 1980s the Nicaraguan economy was on the verge of collapse.
The Sandinistas lost the 1990 elections to UNO, a loose coalition of opposition groups of both right and left.
These conflicts have had repercussions throughout the region.
For example, there are large refugee populations in the surrounding states, while Honduras has seen a greatly increased US presence and the growing militarization of its society.
These conflicts, combined with the debt crisis, have also contributed to a sharp decline in intra-regional trade which had been built up through the Central American Common Market.
Sudan has, meanwhile, suffered a series of calamities during the 1980s: drought has caused severe economic problems, loss of life and massive movements of people, exacerbated by the rekindling of the civil war between the north and the south.
It is surrounded by states with internal conflicts and has received successive waves of refugees.
In the late 1970s, people streamed north from the civil war in Uganda.
During the whole of the 1980s, refugees fled from the wars in Chad and in Ethiopia.
A particular problem in dealing with regions in turmoil is the difficulty of making even short-term predictions.
This is not simply a problem which affects writers and journalists, but more importantly it plagues the lives of people in those regions, and those in government who try to plan for the future.
In both Central America and Southern Africa today, and in the Horn of Africa, there are prospects for change, yet the future is filled with imponderables.
These are necessarily reflected in this book, not least through the voices of people from the region: beyond a certain point second-guessing is not possible.
Both the book, and the peoples, governments and liberation movements of the regions are forced to live with these uncertainties.
In order to examine in more detail the interaction between socio-political context, economic problems and educational policies pursued by governments, the case-study countries are grouped according to key problems and the variety of ways in which governments have attempted to deal with them.
Each section emphasizes some of the themes dealt with in Part One: the impact of economic constraints on educational policy and practice; the role of political factors in access to education, its content and outcomes; the relationship between state and community in financing education; the effects of government policies on social inequalities.
In terms of educational provision and state policies, the case-study countries represent a wide spectrum, from variably successful attempts to universalize basic education (Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Zambia, Nicaragua, Costa Rica); to widespread neglect of large sections of the population (El Salvador, Honduras, Sudan); to a history of active discrimination against particular sections of it (Guatemala, South Africa, Namibia).
In most cases, education has been viewed as politically significant by both governments and oppositions, whether as a major force for change, or as a way of bolstering the existing regime.
Within each region, there are:
Countries where educational difficulties over the last decade have been caused mainly by economic problems related to the burden of debt service and the effects of stabilization and adjustment policies designed to cope with them.
The cases to be discussed here are Zambia, Zimbabwe and Costa Rica.
Countries where existing economic problems affecting education have been compounded by war and insurgency.
The examples used here are Nicaragua, Mozambique and Sudan.
States where internal political conflict has permeated the education system itself: South Africa and Namibia, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala.
Planning under pressure: debt, adjustment and education policy in Zambia, Zimbabwe and Costa Rica
At a meeting in Harare of African finance officials in July 1989, it was argued that development is being held up by the tendency for government policy-makers to be involved in short-term crisis management for structural adjustment programmes, and responding to the demands of large numbers of foreign advisers.
(Radio Zimbabwe , 6 July 1989)
A senior official in the Zambian Ministry of Planning was recently quoted as saying that development aid has to be spent more on sustaining than developing.
There are no new secondary schools, no expansion in education and health facilities, only lost opportunities.
‘How can we place a value, in any real terms, on the lack of growth and development when we are always running to catch up?’
(Quoted in Apartheid Terrorism )
Zambia, Zimbabwe and Costa Rica have invested heavily in education, which has played an important role in legitimizing political parties and governments.
Their rhetoric has emphasized national unity and social cohesion, as well as the development of skills for the economy.
However, their historical development as nations has differed considerably.
Zambia and Zimbabwe have a somewhat similar background of colonial rule, while Costa Rica has just celebrated 100 years as an independent state.
Since the late 1970s, all have experienced economic crises of varying severity in which international factors have played a significant part.
Zambia and Costa Rica have experienced very serious debt crises.
Costa Rica has partially recovered, though without solving its underlying economic problems.
It has done so at the expense of sharp cuts in living standards and in expenditure on its long-established system of social services and free education.
Zambia's economic problems, despite a number of stabilization and structural adjustment packages negotiated with the IMF and the World Bank, show little sign of diminishing.
Zimbabwe, now independent for a decade after a prolonged war of liberation against a white minority regime, has been primarily concerned to throw off its colonial legacy.
Considerable strides have been made, especially in priority areas such as education, and its debt position is much less severe than either Zambia's or Costa Rica's.
None the less, while it has managed to avoid the dramatic slashing of budgets, the government is operating in an economic straitjacket and development on all fronts is dogged by a stagnant economy with  inadequate investment levels, lack of foreign exchange and high defence expenditure.
Zambia and Zimbabwe: reforming the colonial legacy
British colonial rule took different forms in Zimbabwe and Zambia.
White settler governments in Zimbabwe had full internal self-government from 1923, while Zambia was ruled by a conventional colonial administration answerable to the Colonial Office in London.
None the less, as far as education was concerned, the policies followed were not dissimilar.
In both cases, educational provision for the black majority was largely left in the hands of missionaries.
Towards the end of the colonial period, missionary schools increasingly received government grants, and some government schools for blacks were established in urban areas.
Mass education for black people, particularly beyond primary school, was not encouraged.
While white settlers and colonial civil servants were provided with both government schools and a number of fee-paying private schools, many of them regarded the expansion of educational provision for the black population as politically dangerous.
As a result, educational structures were weak at independence, with very limited coverage above primary level for the majority of the population.
For example, in Zambia in 1964, the year of independence, only 961 African pupils were known to have passed the School Certificate, the secondary school leaving exam.
During seventy years of colonial rule, no university had been established.
High illiteracy rates and a chronic lack of skilled manpower meant that the new government regarded educational provision as politically and economically important and popular demand for it at all levels was considerable.
In Zimbabwe, the political significance of education was even greater.
Zambia achieved political independence without a prolonged conflict, but in Zimbabwe it took more than a decade of military and political struggle to overthrow white minority rule.
At independence in 1980, the country was suffering from the limited coverage of the education system under the white minority regime.
Schools and other infrastructure had been destroyed and society disrupted during the armed struggle.
The white supremacist Rhodesian Front government (1962–79) had actually reduced the proportion of expenditure on black education from 8 per cent of GNP in 1965 to 2 per cent thereafter, largely handing financial responsibility over to African local councils which did not have the funds or capacity to run a school system.
In 1980, the illiteracy rate was estimated to be 40 per cent of the population over the age of fifteen, with a further 15 per cent semi-literate.
Only a small percentage of black children were able to remain at school beyond primary level.
During the liberation struggle, the two liberation movements, the Zimbabwe African Peoples' Union (ZAPU) and the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), had set up some education programmes for fighters and for refugees.
The ZANU government, which came to power in 1980, had two major educational goals: to expand access to education and to end the racist bias of the previous system.
In 1981, Prime Minister Robert Mugabe made this comment on the goals of education:
In Zimbabwe today, education must fundamentally orient itself towards the revolutionary transformation now taking place in many spheres of our society.
Education must, at all costs, eschew all tendencies or even appearances of a commitment to the maintenance and reproduction of the unjust social order and undemocratic value system to the overthrow of which we sacrificed so much in the struggle.
It must be designed to constitute an essential component of those forces making for positive change in our country.
In both countries, therefore, the priority given to education was reflected in high levels of expenditure.
But over the years both internal difficulties and external economic and regional pressures have put these policies under strain.
They have also revealed weaknesses within the current education systems.
Zambia came to independence in 1964 with one major economic asset, on which the colonial economy had been based: copper.
In the decade after independence, the relatively high price of copper allowed the government to finance a very substantial expansion of education and other social services.
Zambia's first development plan set the ambitious goal of providing primary school places for all children by 1970.
There was also an emphasis on getting all urban and 75 per cent of rural children through seven grades of primary school.
This rapid expansion, combined with a large teacher training programme, was a mammoth task.
Many communities contributed by building schools, often makeshift buildings with even more makeshift accommodation for teachers, if any at all.
The government began by taking on much of the financial responsibility for education, with the exception of some school building.
The rapid expansion of enrolments, teacher numbers and the volume of materials and support services meant that budgets grew very rapidly.
Until 1975, while copper prices were high, this burden was bearable.
But as the price plunged, the government saw its sources of funding evaporating.
In 1982 the price of copper was the lowest in real terms for forty years, falling even further by 1986.
The overall index of terms of trade fell from 100 in 1970 to 24 in 1982.
The recent price recovery cannot make up for that much lost ground.
Zambia became caught in a vicious circle because the mining industry is also heavily dependent on increasingly expensive imports, so that over time, output, investment and productivity fell.
Moreover, Zambia's copper deposits are running down so that the industry is threatened with extinction early in the next century.
With a very limited manufacturing base and agricultural production of foodstuffs  insufficient to feed the country, Zambia became highly exposed to the vagaries of international markets.
The government has been criticized for not making enough effort during the period of high copper prices to diversify Zambia's economic base, and especially to encourage agricultural development.
If this diversification had been achieved, it is argued, the worst effects of the fall in copper prices might have been avoided.
Subsequent attempts to diversify the economy have foundered not only on corruption and inefficiency, though these have played a part, but because Zambia could not mobilize the funds for new investment, since the growing debt burden took a larger and larger share of the national cake.
An added burden throughout this period has been the additional costs of routing the bulk of Zambian exports and imports through South Africa.
Zambia has also suffered economically from destabilization and economic sabotage first by the white Rhodesian regime and then by South Africa, and from the knock-on effects of the wars in neighbouring Angola and Mozambique.
M.J. Kelly has observed:
The current deteriorating standards of living and acute social problems that owe so much of their origin to the decline in the economy suggest that the inheritance at the time of Independence of a highly developed mining sector was a very mixed blessing: the lack of balance it occasioned in the economic base has resulted in serious economic and social disequilibrium with the locus of control resting as much with decisions made in the London Metal Market as with policies established in Lusaka.
Zambia's balance of payments situation steadily worsened after 1975, and by 1978 the IMF was arranging the first of a series of standby facilities, and one extended fund facility (1981–83).
The World Bank, in addition, lent large sums for the rehabilitation of the mining industry.
These were accompanied by a succession of stabilization and adjustment measures.
There were sharp cuts in government expenditure which, although they eased the deficit in the short term, also led to further slowing down of the economy as a whole.
This impasse was made worse by continued falls in copper prices until the mid-1980s.
Furthermore, these economic policies have put severe political pressure on an erratically authoritarian regime whose remaining credibility depends mainly on provision of services.
This led to the decision to withdraw from IMF agreements in May 1987.
Zambia returned to the IMF fold in early 1990 on the basis of an agreed economic restructuring programme and debt rescheduling, which has also released new aid flows.
However, the question of its approximately US$1 billion debt to the IMF and the World Bank remained to be resolved.
An immediate outcome of the government's efforts to implement this programme and raise basic consumer prices was the outbreak of riots in June 1990 which further highlighted the government's unpopularity.
Like most of its neighbours, including Zimbabwe and Mozambique, Zambia's economic plans were also  jeopardized by sharp rises in oil prices at the beginning of the Gulf crisis in August 1990.
Zimbabwe, achieving independence in the 1980s, faced leaner economic times than had Zambia in the 1960s.
However, it embarked on an even larger programme of educational expansion, with the result that education has consistently been one of the largest budget items.
Zimbabwe's economy is not based on a single commodity like Zambia's and it did not experience the mass exodus of whites and ‘scorched earth’ policies of the Portuguese in Mozambique and Angola.
After independence, the ZANU government opted for a policy of reconciliation rather than confrontation with its white settler population, and by association with its direct southern neighbour, South Africa.
Zimbabwe inherited severe social and economic inequalities, with a limited social infrastructure for the black community.
None the less, its economy had in some ways benefited from the diversification and protection from external competition which resulted from international sanctions imposed after the unilateral declaration of independence by the white minority government in 1965.
The Zimbabweans inherited a relatively strong economy compared with Zambia.
Zimbabwe has both a more developed industrial base and a more extensive commercial farming sector.
This sector continues to be dominated by a largely white farming community, with the addition of members of the new black elite.
No large-scale land reform or redistribution has taken place, in part because of restrictions placed on the government by the pre-independence Lancaster House agreement.
Now that period of restriction has ended, there is political pressure on the government to embark on a more comprehensive and equitable policy of land distribution.
Zimbabwe's rulers are not entirely masters in their own house.
They have to take account not only of local white vested interests, but, more importantly, of foreign and multinational capital which controls a substantial proportion of its industries, though the government has been buying out some foreign, especially South African, firms.
Over the years, the economic pressures have grown, partly as a result of government policies which committed it to high levels of spending, and partly because of external factors such as declining terms of trade and smaller than anticipated flows of aid after independence.
Total aid in 1987 was US$295 million, compared with US$212 million in 1981.
The 1987 figure amounted to US$32.6 per capita, compared, for example with Botswana's US$135.6 per capita .
Zimbabwe's traditional agricultural and mining sectors still make up the major portion of exports and are vulnerable to price changes.
Drought has caused further problems in the agricultural sector, both for domestic consumption and exports.
By 1983, Zimbabwe had approached the IMF and was presented with the standard package of reform measures, but by 1984 had reached a parting of the ways with the Fund.
The government deviated  from its prescriptions in several ways.
For example, although they raised prices as the IMF wished, they insisted on minimum wage requirements.
Despite the 1984 break with the IMF, economic stringency measures remained in force though they were gradually reduced in the following years.
However, in 1990 the government launched a full-scale economic restructuring package for which it sought World Bank support.
It included trade and financial liberalization, and the ending of price controls on all but a handful of basic goods and services.
There have also been proposals for cuts in public spending.
Spending on education remained high in spite of the earlier crisis.
Expenditure rose substantially from 13 per cent of total expenditure in 1978/9, to 24 per cent in the early and mid-1980s, with a slight decline in 1983/84 when financial difficulties were at their height, levelling off at 22 per cent in the late 1980s.
The government has not, however, taken responsibility for all the expenses of education expansion, emphasizing from the outset the role of the community in financing education.
In the decade from 1979 the number of primary schools almost doubled from 2,401 to 4,504, while pupil numbers increased by 178 per cent.
At secondary level, where provision in the colonial period was extremely limited, the expansion has been even more spectacular, with the number of schools increasing from 177 to 1,502 and the number of pupils by 950 per cent.
This has undoubtedly been a welcome and popular policy.
In order to finance expansion on this scale, the government has relied heavily on payments and other inputs from the community.
Primary education was made free and compulsory in 1980, but all secondary schools are fee-paying.
Furthermore, the government only directly controls and finances 5.8 per cent of primary schools and 12.8 per cent of secondary schools.
For these schools, the government pays for maintenance, teachers' salaries and equipment.
At secondary level, tuition fees are paid by families.
At all levels, there is a general-purpose fee payable by families for extra-curricular and additional facilities.
This is set on a sliding scale, depending on whether the school is primary or secondary, day or boarding.
The vast majority of schools are ‘government-aided’ and are run by district councils or missions.
There are also a few ‘elite’ schools mainly former white boarding schools.
The government pays teachers' salaries in district council schools, and a grant to cover primary tuition costs.
There are also grants available to cover about a quarter of the cost of putting up new school buildings.
It is estimated by Fay Chung, the Minister of Education and Culture, that parental input since independence into school capital expenditure is in the region of Z$50 million for primary schools (about Z$10 per family per year) and Z$126 million (Z$30 per pupil per year) at secondary level.
Contributions to recurrent costs were about Z$420 million (about Z$100 per pupil per year) .7 This parental involvement is theoretically voluntary, but parents are presented with the option of participating or not having the schools they want.
Zambia: tightening the belt
Zambia is one of the most urbanized countries in sub-Saharan Africa, with over 50 per cent of the population in towns.
This rapid growth is especially evident in the capital, Lusaka, and in smaller towns in the mining areas of the Copperbelt.
Historically, government policy has favoured urban dwellers, both in terms of subsidies on food and other commodities, and the availability of social services.
But during the 1980s, subsidies have been progressively removed, and the IMF-sponsored auction of the local currency (the kwacha) meant that by 1987 its purchasing power was only one-third what it had been in 1983.
In a development which can also be seen in Zimbabwe, inflationary pressures have been greater for low-income urban households than for those with high incomes.
For low-income families, the urban consumer price index rose from 203 in 1980 to 733 in 1986; for the high-income group the figures were respectively 189 and 644.
At the same time, formal sector employment, never very large, has fallen some 10 per cent since the mid-1970s because of economic stagnation, and the informal sector is now overcrowded and income therefore low.
One  outcome of this is that those on low incomes either reduce the amount they eat, or eat food of lower nutritional value, which particularly affects growing children.
Among the most vulnerable households are those headed by women — at the last census in 1980 approximately one-third of rural households were female-headed, and less than one-fifth in town.
Inflation hits the urban poor
Jessy lives in a low income area of a town in Zambia.
Her husband was recently laid off from his construction job and is now employed part-time as a night watchman.
Jessy works in the home and grows vegetables, selling what she can and keeping the rest for the family.
Her earnings are minute.
They have two daughters in school and two much younger children....
Since 1983, prices of food and clothing have risen markedly and her husband's income has failed to keep pace.
His recent change of job meant a further drop in income…
One item that has become much more expensive recently is education.
There have been increases in school charges, books and uniforms.
Jessy and her husband feel it is a priority that their children go through school, but are already worried that they will not be able to afford to send the eldest to secondary school.
They may send the middle children to Jessy's parents in an attempt to get the eldest through secondary school.
Figures on poverty levels are not easy to come by.
According to data from the Prices and Incomes Commission, the proportion of urban households living below the Poverty Datum Line rose from 35 per cent in 1985 to 55 per cent in 1987.
One study summed up the overall situation as follows:
Altogether, the 1980s have seen reduced inequality in income distribution between urban and rural activities.
While the urban groups have experienced substantial reductions in real income, their rural cousins have maintained and maybe improved their incomes.
However, the income distribution within the rural sector seems to have deteriorated.
Zambia is one of the countries in which the government has made an effort to sustain expenditure on education and its share in GDP has not actually fallen.
None the less, considerable cuts have been made in real terms, with per capita expenditure in education falling 10 per cent between 1975 and 1985.
Within these constraints the government has also chosen to put relatively high levels of finance into the secondary and tertiary sectors, and a relatively low percentage into primary education.
Capital expenditure on primary education has declined dramatically in real terms — from 288 million kwacha in 1977 to 30 million kwacha in 1985.
Recurrent budgets at primary and secondary   levels have been particularly hard hit, while spending on universities has been sustained.
This contradicts the rhetorical commitment of the government to give priority to primary education and reflects strong political pressure to retain higher levels of funding for tertiary education.
The political clout of the primary education sector in the struggle for resources is clearly limited.
Another problem is that the Ministry of Education itself cannot retain highly qualified and experienced staff because of low pay and poor conditions.
Teachers' salaries make up an increasingly large proportion of recurrent budgets, especially at primary level, with other expenditures pared down to almost nothing.
In these circumstances, one can scarcely talk about planning, but rather a response to ‘inescapable commitments’.
Teachers are unionized and a powerful enough group to prevent the decoupling of their salary levels from those of other public-sector employees, but none the less by 1985 they had seen the real value of their salaries fall to half their value a decade earlier.
At the same time there are administrative distortions, such as poor distribution of teaching staff.
In some schools, particularly in urban areas, there are teachers who are not teaching or are teaching very few hours, while in others teachers are coping with very large classes.
There has also been a decline throughout the decade in spending on teacher training, though the recently initiated Self Help Action Programme in Education (SHAPE) project may increase the effectiveness of in-service training.
This situation has not led to a decline in enrolments: except for a brief period at the beginning of the crisis, the demand for education has been sustained.
Despite the difficulties, people still regard access to education for their children as a ‘passport out of poverty’.
In contrast to some other low-income countries in Africa, most children do eventually get to primary school and stay there for a few years.
Parents continue to send children to school, even where physical conditions are very poor because of lack of maintenance.
The question is whether they are likely to learn anything.
The major difficulties are overcrowding, lack of books and materials, and low teacher morale.
There are substantial bottlenecks in the primary system — at first grade in urban schools (causing large numbers of children to start school late), and at fifth grade in rural schools.
The major hurdle, however, is entry into secondary school.
While gross primary enrolment ratios in 1986 were 102 for males and 92 for females, for secondary school the ratios were respectively 23 and 13.
Furthermore, one way of saving money has been to allow larger classes, with severe overcrowding in some urban primary classrooms.
More than 100 children have been reported in a class, though the national average was forty-one, for Lusaka fifty-one and for Kitwe fifty-four.
The running of multiple sessions has been another means of saving which, though not always a problem, has led to truncated teaching sessions, late-coming and absenteeism on the part of teachers and pupils.
Teacher absenteeism is also exacerbated by general shortages of goods and services: teachers, like other employees, can spend half their days  chasing scarce consumer goods for their families, instead of being in the classroom.
Many also have second or third jobs to make ends meet.
The SHAPE education reform project
The SHAPE project, launched in 1985, grew out of the educational reforms proposed in the late 1970s but never systematically carried through because of the economic crisis.
These reforms had envisaged reorienting the ten-year basic education programme away from its highly academic content, towards more practical and vocational aspects.
It also envisaged strengthening education with production, that is, treating the school as a productive and income-generating unit where students learn through practical application of their knowledge.
SHAPE, under the auspices of the Ministry of General Education, Youth and Sport and the Ministry of Higher Education, aims to strengthen teacher competence at local level by encouraging teachers, head teachers and local administrators to initiate their own productive work linked to teaching, and to evolve their own techniques and materials.
SHAPE has also been introduced in pre-service training in teacher training colleges.
It is still at an experimental stage and has not yet been implemented country-wide.
It has evidently met with considerable enthusiasm, but there has been initial resistance from some staff and parents who still favour a more academic approach to teaching and learning.
It has also suffered from insufficient links in the school between production and learning and from shortages of space in some schools to accommodate productive activities.
There are signs in some schools that the most successful activities have been those which mainly involve boys, and that home economics and other subjects taken mainly by girls have fared less well.
On the other hand, girls have not participated strongly in male-dominated subjects.
However, further research is needed to confirm these impressions.
Finally, the liaison and back-up from the regional and national levels of the SHAPE administration are not strong enough, partly because the size of the country, and shortages of fuel and transport, hamper regular communication and visits to schools by school inspectors and SHAPE co-ordinators.
The acute shortages of public funds for basic education in Zambia over the past decade have led to an increasing reliance on external aid to finance educational initiatives.
SHAPE is a prime example of this, with much of its funding coming from Scandinavian national aid agencies as well as the British Council.
Observers have pointed to the potential contradictions of a self-help project which is heavily reliant for its continuation on external funding.
The government no longer provides funds for textbooks and materials in schools.
Parents have to buy them — that is, if they are available.
The supply problem is such that it is difficult to tell whether parents cannot afford to buy the books, or whether no copies are available.
A research survey in 1986/87 in a random sample of schools country-wide showed that, whereas most teachers had the prescribed handbooks, pupils frequently had no textbooks.
For example, 127 out of 196 schools did not have a single English textbook in grade one and 80 per cent had no maths books.
At grade four (the level at which basic literacy is supposed to be achieved), in forty-one out of 189 schools, there was not a single English reader.
Most head teachers questioned thought the position was worse than it had been five years earlier.
This, combined with declining real salaries, has a severe effect on teacher morale.
It is clear that people are still eager to send their children to school.
They are also willing, within reason, to pay towards this schooling.
In the survey already mentioned, more than half the parents questioned appeared willing to provide funds for school needs, materials and maintenance.
Only 20 per cent, however, were willing to assume any responsibility for payment of teachers' salaries.
In the sphere of parental contributions, regional inequalities are marked: in 1985 in Lusaka annual parental expenditure per child was 206 kwacha a year, while in the poorest regions, for example Western, Luapula and North-western, the amounts were 67, 87 and 51 kwacha respectively.
With government, central or regional, unable to make up the difference between parents' ability to pay and the needs of schools, sharp differences in quality of education are inevitable.
Community demand for education is still strong, and puts further pressures on government resources.
For example, communities are still building schools, but the government cannot afford to pay the salaries of teachers to staff these schools.
Ministers and other politicians continue to tell the public that education will continue to grow, in order to retain political credibility — since education is considered an important issue — while at the same time telling administrators to cut budgets.
Of course, for the wealthiest strata there is always the option of sending their children to elite private schools, while other urban parents make sacrifices to send their children to the fee-paying schools which have sprung up since 1977 especially to meet the unfulfilled demand for secondary education.
However, these are for the most part of very low quality and certainly cannot meet the needs of the poorest sectors.
Zimbabwe: the pressures of growth
Generally speaking, Zimbabwe's economic situation is a good deal healthier than that of many other African countries.
However, by no means all groups in the population have benefited equally from prosperity or from generous expenditure on social services.
The Zimbabwean government has sustained its high level of educational spending in the face of a growing debt burden, the economic burden of the war in Mozambique and the cost of trade routes through South Africa.
There are indications, however, that the government is now trying to put the brakes on further expansion.
Where parent-teacher associations are initiating new building projects, according to Minister of Education Fay Chung, the Ministry is no longer encouraging them.
There have also been complaints from some members of parliament about the high levels of educational expenditure in comparison with other services.
In 1990, during discussions about economic restructuring, the Minister of Finance, Economic Planning and Development, Bernard Chidzero, hinted that primary school fees might be re-introduced as part of cuts in public sector spending.
None the less, demand for education is still high, at primary and secondary levels, and with an annual population growth rate of 3.5 per cent , shows no sign of slackening.
The very rapid expansion of the education system has left support systems running to catch up.
The picture is very uneven.
There are flourishing schools which reflect the growing affluence and improved living conditions of a portion of the population, but there are other schools which are little more than shells, with few materials and facilities.
In these schools, double shifts, known as ‘hot-seating’, are the norm.
As far as the provision of books, materials, tools and other educational facilities are concerned, a good deal of the cost of provision falls on families.
But some of the country's economic difficulties have direct and indirect effects on provision.
While these problems are not on the scale found in Zambia, they are becoming more acute.
There are major bottlenecks in the transport system, mainly because of foreign exchange problems.
Shortages of fuel and vehicles affect delivery of materials and cause problems for supervisory staff visiting rural areas.
A long-standing cement shortage often leaves buildings started by the community unfinished.
Creating a teaching force which is adequate to the rapidly growing system has been another problem.
In Zimbabwe, black teachers' pay was increased at independence to the levels paid to white teachers.
Certainly they are much better off compared with teachers in, for example, Malawi or Zambia.
The problem now is that with expenditure levelling off, pay cannot rise further, especially as more teachers are employed.
Spending can be limited by controlling the  speed of promotions but this discourages those contemplating going into the profession.
The poorest schools, especially in rural areas, have great difficulties in attracting and retaining staff.
There are many complaints about the poor quality of housing for teachers.
Also, whereas teaching was one of the main professional careers open to black Zimbabweans in the colonial period, other more attractive options are now (at least theoretically) open to school and university graduates.
R.J. Zvobgo highlights these points:
We seem to be failing in producing the kind of teacher who is committed to national service today.
Like his [sic]colleagues in most developing countries, he is, to say the least, unprepared and unwilling to serve in rural areas and has to be forced to do so although he is fully aware that rural areas and people are most undeveloped and disadvantaged because of lack of human, material and financial resources....
There is also much more mobility from the teaching profession to other professions....
The teaching profession is, for most people, only a stepping stone to a more lucrative profession.
Teaching is still an important option for less privileged groups: for example, for school graduates in rural areas where there are few opportunities for professional employment and for both urban and rural women, whose range of job opportunities is still far more limited than men's.
Despite relatively high levels of pay, there remains a shortage of trained teachers.
A large percentage of the untrained teachers are in the non-government sector.
In non-government schools (that is, mainly district council schools) in 1987, untrained teachers made up 50 per cent of the total at primary level and 45 per cent at secondary level; for government schools the figures were much lower — 7 and 19 per cent respectively.
The government has resorted to a variety of expedients to deal with teacher shortages.
University students taught in schools in the long vacations, and expatriate teachers were hired, especially in rural areas.
In addition, some primary school teachers who held ‘O’ level certificates were upgraded to teach in secondary schools.
The continuing shortage of science teachers led to an agreement with Cuba to train several hundred secondary science teachers.
This is despite considerable efforts to create innovative ways of developing teacher training in the post-independence period.
There has been considerable discontent among teachers over pay and conditions.
In June 1990 during a strike of non-graduate teachers over their pay award, the government brought emergency regulations into force.
After end of the strike a number of striking teachers were not reinstated and many of these were said to have left the country to seek work in Botswana.
An academic at the University of Zimbabwe in the department of Educational Administration, K.P.
Dzvimbo, pointed to another, broader problem.
He noted that teachers as a group were supposed to be agents of change, ‘but the environment within which the teacher operates has not changed’.
Teachers are not trained   as innovators and much of the content of teacher training colleges' curricula is not relevant to this approach.
Once in the classroom the teacher is restricted by the core curriculum and general workload and lack of equipment.
New teacher training initiatives in Zimbabwe
The government's response to the problem of teacher shortages was to launch new kinds of teacher training programmes.
The idea was to provide a large proportion of the teacher's training on the job.
This saves on training facilities and teacher trainers and also helps fill the gaps in the ranks of the existing teaching force.
The first of these, for primary teachers, was the Zintec programme (National Teacher Education Course) which started in 1981.
The training lasted four years, and had only two terms of formal instruction in college -the first and the last.
The rest of the time the students, who were paid a salary, were deployed to teach in schools throughout the country, with the back-up of distance learning materials and periodic supervisory visits from National Centre staff.
On graduation they received a university-accredited certificate.
By the mid-1980s, the rapid growth of secondary education induced the government to introduce a modified version of the Zintec programme for non-university secondary school teacher training, based in teacher training colleges round the country.
This programme involves two years (the first and last) at college, and two years' teaching in schools.
The individual colleges bear the responsibility for preparing materials and supervising students.
Undoubtedly, these schemes have allowed more teachers to be trained in a short period, without a very large expansion in the institutional teacher training facilities.
However, although it is too soon to assess the overall pedagogical value and cost effectiveness of the secondary programme, some difficulties have emerged.
The first relates to the capacity of the teacher training colleges adequately to supervise their scattered students.
Effective distance education depends on good communications and support for the learners.
The distance education materials are prepared by each of the training colleges involved, and seem to have been much less effective than in the Zintec programme, with its central distance learning unit.
The main difficulty has been that teachers allocated to rural schools, especially local district council schools, found themselves virtually without back-up.
Many of these schools exist on a shoe-string and lack a library, books and all kinds of teaching aids, especially for practical subjects.
Many such schools are headed by ‘teachers in charge’ who only have primary teacher qualifications.
The distance learning materials do not always reach the students when needed, and a survey indicated that they rarely received more than one visit a year from their supervisor because of the shortage of transport.
Thus students living in poor accommodation, often isolated and without external support, become disillusioned with the experience of teaching, and put off the idea of teaching in a rural area where qualified teachers are needed most.
Social inequalities
Although Zimbabwe has had some success in redressing racial inequalities, there have been limits on how far social inequalities have been checked.
Whereas the domination of the white population, now only about 1 per cent of the total, has faded, new class structures have been developing.
Education has not been immune from this process, and some would argue that it has helped to create new social divisions.
The quality of schools still varies widely.
For example, children going to former white schools in Harare, now known as ‘Group A’ schools, are likely to get a far better education and have much better facilities than children going to most of the schools, known as ‘Group B’schools, in the ‘high density suburbs’(formerly segregated black townships).
Although children are bussed into the ‘A’ schools from poorer neighbourhoods, their location in the richer suburbs means that the majority of pupils are from either black or white middle-class families.
There are even wider discrepancies between urban and rural schools.
This was in part the outcome of a deliberate government policy to avoid losing professionals and industrialists.
Government policy was not to reduce the privileges of those who enjoyed privileges, but rather to make them pay.
However, the slow development of the economy acts as a limiting factor on how far ‘levelling up’ takes place for those in less privileged positions.
In terms of social equity, Fay Chung admits that the major disadvantage of this educational policy is
that of class differentiation, with wealthier parents paying substantially more than poorer parents, resulting in lavish provision on the one hand and very meagre provision on the other.
Government has attempted to overcome severe discrepancies by establishing a Disadvantaged Schools Programme which seeks to provide capital development for communities which are extremely poor.
This is, however, a small programme of only Z$5 million per annum.
Apart from differences in educational opportunities, a combination of economic and social factors over the past few years has sharpened stratification within the black population.
A new urban middle class has emerged, but at the other end of the social scale there are many people unemployed, especially young people, in the urban high density suburbs.
In the rural areas, lack of access to land, drought (which has not only destroyed crops but has meant that impoverished people have had to sell their livestock and have even been forced off the land by hardship), and rising prices have further marginalized poor rural  dwellers.
It is estimated that about 15 per cent of the population, mostly in the rural areas, earn less than Z$100 a year, and it is this group which is facing the most difficulties in keeping their children at school.
The modest resettlement programme in rural areas which aimed to improve the grossly inequitable distribution of land prevailing during the colonial period was less effective than had been hoped, and was cut back by the stabilization measures taken in 1982–84.
The government has provided substantial help for the communal areas and resettlement schemes, in terms of agricultural extension services, greater access to credit and health care facilities.
However, prolonged drought, and in  Matebeleland armed conflict, have limited its effectiveness.
Many of the poorest households are headed by women farmers who do not have cattle, an important source of wealth.
Many are dependent on remittances from migrant relatives.
Inflationary pressures on the standard of living are now substantial.
Those who work in the formal sector are partly protected by the continued existence of a minimum wage requirement, but for the majority of those in the informal sector or in peasant agriculture, there is no such security.
Regional differences in educational provision are substantial.
In Matabeleland, the conflict between the government and dissidents between 1982 and 1987 effectively condemned the region to years of not only destruction and deaths, but also to general neglect.
As Fay Chung remarked, Matabeleland, though not the poorest region of the country, is ten years behind in development terms.
Since the unity pact, which healed the rift between ZANU and ZAPU (with its political base predominantly in Matabeleland), development funds have been flowing in, but education and all other aspects of services and development have still to recover, especially in sparsely populated rural districts.
Another region which suffered badly both during the liberation struggle and in recent years is the North-eastern region in the Zambezi valley.
Long isolated and under-developed, it still has very few secondary schools.
These only cover the first two years, so that most secondary schoolchildren have to leave the region to complete their education.
In recent years, killings and abductions by the South African-backed movement fighting the Mozambican government Renamo, have increased the difficulties.
Army protection is needed to keep schools open and teachers in place.
Similar problems have occurred in the Eastern Highlands, although educational provision is generally better.
Children of employees on the large commercial farms — still mainly run by whites — suffer problems left from the colonial past.
If distances to local rural district council schools are too great, they have to rely on whatever education is provided by the farmer.
Though this problem is not as widespread or invidious as in South Africa, it still  affects a significant number of children.
Many of these farm workers originally migrated from Zambia or Mozambique, but some have been in Zimbabwe for a generation or more though they have no regularized status.
Some of their children never get to school.
A 1988 Ministry of Health survey of immunization and maternity services examined education and other social services available on a sample of commercial farms.
On 67 per cent of the farms there was no primary school, and only 5 per cent had adult literacy classes, of which only one-third were judged to be satisfactory.
The authors warn that the data need to be treated with caution because it was not clear how many of the farms surveyed had substantial numbers of permanent workers for whom schools or adult education should be provided.
But in general, they say that ‘there are gross inadequacies in educational facilities.
The quality of the existing facilities is also very questionable’.
These differences are reflected in the ways in which community contributions to education have worked out.
The formation of parent-teacher associations (PTAs) was instigated by the government.
Though it is clear that some PTAs have become highly organized and participate actively in the life of their schools, there are considerable variations across the country.
On the whole the poorest communities have had most difficulties, where parents are illiterate or semi-literate and have little money or time to spare.
Problems have also arisen where there are sharp social or political rifts in the community, and where a school catchment area includes a wide disparity of income levels.
If more than half the parents are fairly well off and eager to expand facilities in their school, they can set levels for school charges which are beyond the means of the poorer parents (fee levels are set by the government).
It has also been noted that influential local people use the provision of school facilities, extra classrooms, libraries, more teachers and lower teacher/pupil ratios as a way of enhancing their own status and prestige.
Drop-outs
Drop-outs from the school system are still substantial.
At primary level, the drop-out rate rose to 30 per cent in the cohort which finished seven years of school in 1987 and then fell to 16.4 per cent for those finishing in 1989.
A government study of primary school drop-outs listed the following reasons:
lack of encouragement from illiterate parents;
religious beliefs;
drought or famine;
financial problems;
early marriages;
broken families.
The vast majority of children do attend school for all or part of the primary school cycle.
Some 24 per cent of children drop out at the transition from primary to secondary school, while at secondary level there has recently been a significant rise in the drop-out rate.
This rate has risen significantly for the cohorts reaching Form Four from 1987 onwards (see Table 8.1).
This seems to reflect primarily the increasing cost of school fees, combined with rises in the cost of living.
The poor prospects for employment, and the well-known fact that many people fail ‘O’ levels, undoubtedly also play their part.
A study of gender and enrolment patterns since 1980 reveals that, although there has been an enormous increase in the absolute numbers of both girls and boys attending school, at secondary level the drop-out rate for girls is not only high, but in proportional terms fewer girls reach fourth to sixth form ('O' and ‘A’ level grades) than was the case in the 1970s, when for the most part only privileged whites reached these levels.
Table 8.1 Zimbabwe: average drop-out rate from secondary education
School-leavers — where to?
In the last few years, academics, the press and even government reports in Zimbabwe have noted a dramatic and frightening rise in school-leaver unemployment.
In rural areas, employment opportunities  are almost nil, while in the towns the numbers working in the informal sector have increased markedly.
By 1986 there were estimated to be about half as many people in informal work as are employed in the formal sector.
Employment in the formal sector has stagnated, and where opportunities are available, school-leavers often do not have the specific skills required.
Another option is migration, whether to the urban areas where work is thought to be available — though this is often an illusion — or to South Africa and Botswana.
In formal sector employment, women still represent no more than 8 per cent of workers (up from 5 per cent in 1980).
This is a legacy from the colonial period, when the majority of formal sector workers were male migrants from the rural areas.
The majority of women remained in the ‘tribal trustlands’ as subsistence farmers, relying on remittances to supplement their meagre income from farming.
In the industrial sector, for example, in textiles, there are still relatively few women on the shop-floor.
They are employed mainly in clerical and administrative work.
Large numbers of women still work in the non-formal sector and in agriculture, but this does not show up in statistics.
Slow growth in the economy and in employment opportunities is also putting pressure on the credibility of the examination system, which is still modelled on the old British ‘O’ and ‘A’level system.
After independence, a curriculum reform committee was established.
Some significant advances have been made in removing the colonial view of history and society which virtually blotted out all history and culture, apart from that of Europe and European settlers in Africa.
Innovations have been introduced to the science curriculum and the ‘O’ level syllabus has been made somewhat more relevant.
The Zimbabwe Scientific Programme (ZIMSCI) project is designed to support teachers not trained in science and to provide a complete science package with low-cost kits for the first years of secondary school.
The scheme is generally considered successful in making science more enjoyable and accessible for students, though the goal of independent practical work by students has for the most part not been achieved.
The distribution of the special ZIMSCI materials has been a major headache.
The curriculum is still, for the most part, geared to a very academic style of learning.
Both upper primary and secondary school are conducted in English, a second language.
The examinations, tailored to be selective, make no concession to this, nor do they make allowance for the wide range of academic ability and preparedness among the candidates.
Thus, especially among rural pupils, ‘O’ level failure rates are very high — up to 90 per cent.
This represents a great deal of frustration, a sense of failure and a lot of parental income felt to be wasted.
This is made worse by the fact that five ‘O’ levels are the necessary qualification for a wide range of white-collar jobs, and therefore are regarded as a talisman for success.
But with the shortage  of such jobs, the system is turning out too many school graduates not well qualified for any other kind of work.
The question often raised is whether this education system is relevant to Zimbabwe's needs.
There is now a trend away from an exclusively academic curriculum towards teaching more practical subjects in schools.
The first moves in this direction began soon after independence, with the ‘Education with Production’ programme.
One major consideration in its introduction was an attempt to generate income from schools.
The experiment seems to have worked to some extent in rural schools with farms attached.
However, in most urban schools, such manual tasks as tending school gardens or technical work are generally regarded both by pupils and teachers as a form of punishment.
A further unforeseen difficulty for schools doing any kind of agricultural work has been the widespread drought of the mid-1980s, which is still affecting some parts of the country.
In the latter part of the 1980s, the government has initiated a more wide-ranging change in the curriculum so that all secondary school pupils should do one or more ‘practical’ subjects.
The main difficulty is the expense of proper equipment for practical teaching in all schools.
Given that many rural schools do not even have properly equipped science laboratories, it is hard to see how they will be able to afford equipment for carpentry, metalwork and building.
Teacher training colleges which are to train teachers in these subjects will also require funds for equipment.
Advocating the value of vocational skills in a society where social status and financial rewards are generally concentrated in white collar occupations is not easy.
This is a problem in many countries, but in ex-colonial countries in this region prejudice against vocational skills is particularly strong because it formed part of the discriminatory policy of white regimes.
These quite explicitly linked vocational education with the low status black people were expected to occupy in the social hierarchy.
These reactions may fade over time, but at the moment they are still quite a strong influence in Zimbabwean society.
Costa Rica: eroded gains?
Costa Rica presents a contrast in many ways both to its neighbours in Central America and to the southern African countries discussed above.
A small, mountainous country with a population of under three million people, it has long been free from colonial domination.
Compared with the rest of Central America, it has not experienced severe political or military conflict since a brief and limited civil war in 1948.
Costa Rica has established a reputation as a liberal democracy in which education plays an important part in giving its citizens access both to individual social mobility and to democratic rights.
These liberal ideas date back to the 1880s, but it was the thirty 
Though the economic situation has now somewhat improved, it has affected both government expenditure and living standards over the entire decade.
Furthermore, the debt problem is far from resolved.
The government of President Arias paid only a portion of the interest due on its commercial loans in 1986, arguing that the debt service burden was excessive and beyond the ability of the country to pay.
Agreements were finally ratified in late 1989 with commercial banks for debt buy-backs, with the Paris Club (representing the main official creditors) to reschedule about one-third of its US$930 million debt, and with the World Bank for a structural adjustment loan.
This will lessen the debt burden, but these arrangements remain conditional on IMF-dictated austerity measures including cuts in public spending and domestic credit.
The effects on public expenditure have not been as drastic as might have been expected.
There seem to be two major reasons for this.
The first is that the impact of the debt crisis has been considerably cushioned by injections of aid from the United States which rose from US$14 million in 1980 to over US$160 million in 1987.
However, this aid comes with conditions.
USAID, the main US donor, will not disburse payments if the country is in dispute with the IMF over the terms of its rescheduling or loan agreements.
At the same time, in political terms, Costa Rica has been drawn much more closely into the US sphere of influence during the 1980s, moving away from the neutral stance it previously took, so that for a time it was one of the host countries for the US-backed Nicaraguan Contras.
The second consideration is the internal significance of maintaining public services, at least for those political parties committed to this type of welfare state.
In the first years of ‘stabilization’, the government put in place various measures, including feeding programmes, to assist the most vulnerable groups in society.
The Arias government did not reduce public expenditure, especially on social sectors and education, as much as the opposition proposed nor as much as the IMF advocated.
Despite this resistance, however, there have been marked declines in the proportion of expenditure on both health and education.
This contrasts with, for example, policy in Zambia, where the proportion of educational expenditure has been sustained, though at a much lower absolute level.
The centre-right government of Rafael Angel Calderón, elected in February 1990, may continue to impose public spending cuts, encouraged by the IMF.
It is likely to face stiff opposition from trade unions, including the teachers' union, if it does so.
The impact on education
The pressures of the debt crisis in Costa Rica since the beginning of the 1980s have led to cuts in social expenditure in both proportional and absolute terms.
Levels of government expenditure on education  dropped from over 30 per cent of national expenditure and 6 to 7 per cent of GNP in the mid-1970s to 22 per cent and 4 per cent respectively in 1985.
Health spending fell from 5 to 7 per cent of GNP in the late 1970s to 2.6 per cent in 1985.
These restrictions on funding over the decade have begun to put pressure on the relatively well-developed education system.
They have accentuated the inequalities of provision, with rural areas in the remoter mountains feeling the most strain.
Table 8.2 Costa Rica: educational indicators through the period of the economic crisis, 1975–88
In 1986, a Ministry of Public Education document highlighted the difficulties caused by lack of funds.
It suggested that the system was not just marking time but actually losing ground in some areas:
Falling budget allocations are beginning to cause near paralysis in the activities of the Ministry of Education, both at central level and in the regional directorates and schools and colleges.
In recent months, the physical condition of equipment and buildings has deteriorated alarmingly, due to lack of maintenance, and due also to the lack of basic expenditure on light, water, security guards, chalk, stationery, publications and books…
In both central and regional offices staff members who provide technical and administrative support to educational centres are semi-paralysed in their work by lack of transport, of travel allowances, petrol and educational materials.
These pressures on budgets show no signs of letting up.
In 1989, a government decree banned the creation of any new posts in public sector institutions and companies.
In 1979, the education system was reorganized into regional directorates, and those in the poorer regions are now finding difficulties in responding to local needs.
Liliana Carvajál, of the regional directorate of education in San Carlos, described in 1989 how shortages affect the work of the directorate itself:
In this regional centre we have 15 schools and two colleges, but we have very limited supplies of paper and carbons for the year and there are no stencils.
This limits the activities of the educational institutions in the region and makes it difficult for the administrative centres to do their job, which includes developing technical training projects and teacher training.
As a result, she adds, teachers have to pay towards their own training because the Ministry cannot provide materials and documents.
Schools in the poorest areas, already short of resources, are certainly feeling the pinch.
Carvajál pointed out that in rural areas such as those around San Carlos there were schools without functioning water pumps or sanitary services.
‘It's rather illogical’, she points out, ‘to have a school with no water.’
In 1985, 45 per cent of primary level schools, mainly in rural areas, were run by a single teacher (teaching all grades).
Combined with shortages of books and equipment and the poor state of maintenance of many schools, the situation for teachers, especially those posted to rural areas, can be discouraging.
Teachers' salaries are relatively low compared with those for other professions requiring the same duration of training, so that there is no great incentive to become a teacher.
A teacher from an urban school, discussing the reasons for a recent teachers' strike, said that not only were salaries low when the amount of time worked outside classroom hours was taken into account, but also teachers often had to pay for classroom materials out of their own pockets, if they wanted to have any.
Despite a long tradition of education, there is still a lack of qualified teachers: in 1986 almost 400 teaching posts were not filled for lack of trained applicants.
A fifteen-day teachers' strike in September 1989, supported by other workers, reflected some of these economic and professional concerns, though the Costa Rican teachers' union is not considered militant.
Apart from direct demands relating to pay and conditions for teachers, demands included: recognition of the professional status of teachers; establishment of a technical commission on the financial needs of the Ministry of Public Education; policies to defend the social welfare system; elimination of taxes on books and educational materials; and funding for student transport and school meals.
Although most Costa Ricans do try to send their children to school, the system still suffers from substantial drop-out and repetition rates.
Nation-wide, the 1980s have seen downward trends in enrolments, and increases in drop-out and repetition rates.
In the primary levels (two cycles of three years from age six to eleven), numbers enrolled showed a decline in the years after 1975 and did not return to the 1975 level until ten years later.
Drop-out levels at this level improved after the early years of the 1980s but repetition rates have increased from about 6 per cent in 1975 to almost 11 per cent in 1985 and 1988.
At secondary level, enrolments have declined steadily since the beginning of the 1980s, while drop-outs rose from a low of 9.5 per cent in 1976 to 16.3 per cent in 1987 and repetition from 5.3 per cent in 1975 to a  high of 13.5 per cent in 1985.
However, the pattern varies considerably according to region and social class.
In rural areas the levels of drop-out, repetition and absenteeism are much higher.
For example, in the San Carlos district, of the children who begin first grade, 95 per cent do not finish secondary school.
Many children are taken from school after about five years because of economic or family problems.
In Costa Rica, the common pattern of rapidly declining female enrolment after the primary level is reversed.
It is girls who tend to stay at school longer and in the secondary cycle outnumber boys (making up 52 per cent of total enrolment in 1985).
The reason for this seems to be that the opportunity cost of keeping boys at school when they could go out to work is greater than for girls, especially for poor rural families.
On the other hand, in urban areas there are now more opportunities for women with high school education to find jobs.
The economic crisis of the early 1980s played a part in this decline in take-up of education, and hit the poorest sectors of society hardest, sharpening social differentiation and the concentration of wealth.
According to Villasuso,
In 1977, 25 per cent of all Costa Rican families were unable to meet their basic needs to some extent and 13 per cent lived in extreme poverty.
The rural areas contained 34 per cent of poor families and 19 per cent of extremely poor families.
No great change occurred in this situation until the outbreak of the crisis and the introduction of the adjustment policies.
A comparison of 1970 and 1983 shows that the share of the poor sections of the population declined in favour of the higher income groups: this was mainly an urban phenomenon.
Furthermore, according to a MIDEPLAN [state planning]study, 41.7 per cent of wage earners were poor (i.e. not able to meet basic needs to some extent) in 1980, and this proportion rose to 56.4 per cent in 1981 and 70.7 per cent in 1982, indicating the impoverishment of wage earners as a result of the crisis and the adjustment.
The causes must be sought in the drop in real wages and employment, the higher public tariffs and the cutback in government assistance programmes.
According to the same official report, the rural areas fared no better, with the proportion of families classified as poor rising from 58 per cent in 1980 to 82 per cent in 1982.
Although education is theoretically free in Costa Rica, parents still have to pay the increasingly high costs, relative to income, of school clothing, books, materials and transport costs.
For a family with several school-age children, even the minimum as outlined by the Ministry of Public Education in 1986 (notebooks, pencils and crayons) would cost about 200 colones a child.
According to Carvajál, for secondary school children the costs could go as high as 3,000 to 4,000 colones a month to provide materials, books and other necessities (equivalent to US$33 to 44).
Since the height of the crisis in the early 1980s, living standards have risen again but many of those living on the margins have not  made up lost ground.
As an inhabitant of Chacarita, a marginal barrio (district) in Puntarénas, put it:
The world has an image of this country as democratic, the Switzerland of Central America, and when the tourists come, they only go to the beautiful parts, but they don't go to other parts like Batan, Limón, Los Chiles, the peasant [communities]in the southern zone, where people live in difficult situations.
The crisis of resources in public education has also brought to a head questions about the relevance of the present curriculum, which has been criticized as too academic and élitist, and the rigidity of the education system generally.
Tito Quiros, specialist in adult education at the University of Costa Rica, argues that the curriculum is adapted to the culture and needs of the middle class, which is the minority.
‘It does not address the daily needs of the majority, or help them to have the resources to survive.’
While the education system is deemed to be ‘successful’ by the outside world, there are limits on the possibilities for change and innovation.
Some efforts are now being made to confront these problems.
The Ministry of Education has launched regional upgrading campaigns in four areas regarded as having the most serious problems: San Carlos, Limón, Los Santos and Santa Cruz.
These projects include curriculum development, educational philosophy and goals, teacher upgrading and in-service training.
They also endeavour to increase the participation of local organizations in educational planning.
However, as an official in San Carlos admitted, their work is constrained by shortage of resources.
This has led to a departure from the generally accepted principle of state funding for educational projects.
In the four areas in which this upgrading is taking place, foundations have been established to raise private funds for educational projects, though they are still in the early stages of development.
This goes well beyond the past practice of small-scale fundraising through ‘raffles or fairs’.
‘The aim is that the foundation will go and talk with the people of this region who have big farms, or business people and explain to them special projects and ask for funds.’
The official admitted that more prestigious types of education projects might seem more attractive than other, more mundane ones, but they have not yet had sufficient experience in ‘selling’ projects to be sure.
There are already numerous private schools, especially in San Jose, and private foundations funding education already exist — for example, the Omar Dengo foundation which funds computer resources in schools.
But this latest initiative is to raise funds for specific projects, initiated from the state sector, and which before the crisis would automatically have been funded by the state.
It is not yet clear whether this signals a more general change in the government's approach to the funding of education.
Battling for survival: war, debt and education in Mozambique, Nicaragua and Sudan
In countries facing military attack and destabilization, as well as external economic pressures, education becomes a battle, both for governments and participants.
Two such countries are Mozambique and Nicaragua, where revolutionary governments embarked on campaigns of social and economic transformation in which education played a key role.
Sudan has suffered many years of intermittent internal strife between governments dominated by northerners and separatist movements in the south.
It has also been severely affected by debt and regional conflicts.
Like Mozambique and Nicaragua, it is struggling to survive, with its education system in chaos.
However, in contrast, successive Sudanese governments have made little attempt to initiate radical social transformation.
Transforming society: education and revolution in Mozambique and Nicaragua
The histories of Nicaragua and Mozambique over the past two decades have similarities.
Both the Sandinistas and Frelimo came to power after a liberation struggle against highly repressive regimes.
As governments, both have faced hostility from a powerful neighbour.
Both came to power with a goal of mobilizing the population for social and economic change, based on the idea that people's political and social consciousness could be changed, along with material conditions.
As part of this process, education was expected to play a crucial role in changing attitudes, not simply in creating national unity and skills to improve the national economy.
In this they went beyond the goals set by Zambia or Zimbabwe.
Education became part of an act of political will.
In both cases, an early priority was a nation-wide literacy campaign to ‘catch up’ the lost years of education.
Major changes were undertaken in basic school education, in terms of access, curricula and the running of schools.
In both countries these and other social policies have been short-circuited by war and destabilization, and by the slide into a major debt crisis.
Yet there were also differences, not only in educational policies and responses to economic and military crisis, but also in the legacy with which they had to deal.
Despite the repression practised by the  Somoza regime in Nicaragua, its legacy of under-development was not on the same scale as that left by some 400 years of Portuguese colonial rule in Mozambique.
As far as education was concerned, for example, Frelimo's point of departure was an illiteracy rate of 93 per cent , compared with about 50 per cent in Nicaragua.
Mozambique
‘After independence, we had to start everything new,’ recalls one Mozambican education official.
In 1975 there were only about forty university graduates in the country and the departure of the Portuguese settlers who had monopolized skilled and white-collar jobs left the economy in a state of collapse.
Education and health, as well as land, were immediately nationalized.
Frelimo already had some experience of developing schools in the liberated zones before independence, when education was intended to contribute to the liberation struggle, to change people's consciousness and attitudes and to promote production and combat.
Initially, the newly nationalized school system expanded very rapidly, with enrolments doubling in the course of a few years.
There were efforts to democratize school management structures, encouraged by the establishment of communal villages and co-operatives.
The first phases of a mass literacy campaign were launched.
Both the need and the demand for basic education were evident.
However, education policy has embodied a constant tension between the pursuit of more democratic forms of education, and a more technocratic approach which emphasized uniformity, discipline and the development of standardized skills to meet economic needs.
This problem, also experienced to some extent in Nicaragua, has been particularly acute in Mozambique because of the high levels of illiteracy and shortages of skilled people at all levels, and the legacy of a highly authoritarian colonial school system.
By the beginning of the 1980s, there was a trend towards more centralization, and away from the sometimes rather anarchic experiments in local school democracy of the 1970s.
In 1981, President Samora Machel stressed not democratic participation in school management but the responsibility of pupils to achieve good marks to justify the money and effort expended by the community.
With their work, with their daily effort…paying taxes and building schools, the people invest money in the education of the pupil…
Thus the pupil must know how to correspond to these sacrifices of the people by obtaining good marks and being exemplary.
…We invest in pupils who have good marks…
Those are heads where the soil is fertile…
The mediocre pupil will only be an agent for the diffusion of mediocrity.
By 1980, after the first two out of a total of four literacy campaigns, the illiteracy rate for the population over fifteen years old had been  brought down to 72.2 per cent from 93 per cent at independence.
Though this was a major achievement, the 1980 census still revealed marked differences by gender and region.
There were similar inequalities based on gender and region among those who had completed primary and secondary school cycles.
Table 9.1 Mozambique: illiteracy in 1980 — percentage of the population aged 15 and over
Table 9.2 Mozambique: levels of education completed, 1980
The figures for Maputo City highlight the imbalance in education levels between the capital and the rest of the country.
Illiteracy rates were 36.3 per cent for men and 57.5 per cent for women (all age groups).
However, in the fifteen to twenty-four age group, many of whom had probably benefited from education since 1975, the figures were 7.7 and 24.7 per cent respectively.
Some 30 per cent of the population had attended or were attending literacy courses, almost 16 per cent had primary education and 4.5 per cent secondary education.
However, the majority of these had only finished the first level of secondary education — the fifth and sixth years following four years of primary school.
Since 1980, the proportion of girls enrolled nationally at primary level has risen slightly — from 42.5 per cent to 44 per cent in 1986.
By this time, all provinces except Zambezia had at least 40 per cent female enrolment.
However, total enrolment fell between 1980 and 1986, suggesting that girls have had more opportunity to go to school under war conditions than boys.
At secondary level, the proportion of female enrolments has remained constant at 30 per cent, though total enrolments have more than doubled.
In 1983, a major reform programme was launched: the National Education System.
This was designed before the onset of  destabilization, and aimed to restructure the formal school system.
A further year was to be added to bring the total length of education to twelve years by having a seven-year primary cycle.
Another goal was to raise the intake level and lengthen the training period for new teachers.
However, 1983 also marked the beginning of severe destabilization.
Although these reforms have been pursued, their implementation has been hampered by economic problems and the war.
After independence, the curriculum was altered by changing the content of some subjects — for example, history and geography — and by introducing new subjects such as political education and ‘social areas’.
Before the overhaul of the whole system from 1983 the Institute for the Development of National Education was established to provide materials for schools, guidelines for training personnel in different areas including adult education, and a unified system of national education.
This work has been hampered by economic problems, work pressure on staff, often doing more than one job, and logistical problems with supply and distribution of books and materials.
The assistance of several external donors including Sweden, Norway and Canada, with publishing educational materials has relieved some of the pressure, but shortages of books have continued.
There has also been a tendency to impose new curricula and policies without sufficient preparation of teachers and administrators.
Often, centrally initiated changes were superseded by others without proper assessment or follow-up.
This also led to some popular dissatisfaction with the quality and results of the education which the state has provided.
According to Manuel Golias, an Education Ministry official working in teacher training, there are also difficulties with the image of society presented in the material.
Although we know it is important to teach children that the roots of their culture are in the village, and in the preservation of values and the importance of agriculture, if you look at the primary and secondary level, we find that these aspects are not much stressed.
The curriculum is designed by teachers who unconsciously reflect the view that city life is best, even if they come from the rural areas.
Nicaragua
In Nicaragua after the 1979 revolution, the goal was radical educational transformation.
In 1983, the Minister of Education defined the role of education in the new Nicaragua as ‘developing the new person…to contribute to the transformation of the new society’.
This process had already begun with a mass mobilization in a literacy campaign which brought the illiteracy rate down from 50.2 per cent to 12.9 per cent by 1981 (see page 245).
The goal for the formal system  of education was to provide a system from pre-school through to adult education which would give everyone access.
As a 1987 document summed it up, ‘more education, better education and a new [kind of]education’.
The base from which this system grew was limited, especially in rural areas, though nothing like as deprived as that which faced Frelimo in Mozambique at independence.
During the Somoza period, most educational facilities and investment were concentrated in the urban areas, where the rate of illiteracy was given as 28 per cent compared with about 76 per cent in rural areas.
The agricultural export economy was not regarded as needing a skilled workforce and little priority was given to schooling for the majority of the population.
In rural areas only about 6 per cent of the children who entered the first grade completed the primary cycle, and half these entrants dropped out after the first grade.
Private schools in the towns served the needs of the elite.
On the Atlantic coast, state provision of education was limited, with teaching exclusively in Spanish (see page 120).
Much secondary level education was in the hands of foreign missionaries.
Corruption and repression were rife, not only in education but throughout society.
Perhaps one of the most symbolic images of the Somoza regime is still to be seen in the capital, Managua, today.
The town, sprawling along the side of Lake Managua, has only a handful of buildings over one storey and is without any identifiable centre.
This is because much of the central district in Somoza's time collapsed in the massive 1972 earthquake: Somoza and his clique embezzled most of the international aid given to rebuild the city and so its central area remained in ruins.
The anger this sparked in the population and the community organizations which sprang up to help those without homes were crucial in the build-up to insurrection.
The best known educational policy of the Sandinista government was its literacy crusade, launched almost immediately after the seizure of power.
There was also a massive expansion in the formal schooling system, with an emphasis on building rural schools.
From 1979 to 1983, 2,000 new primary schools were built, mainly in rural areas, with 4,020 new teaching posts, in addition to 800 new communal schools, created in co-operation with rural communities.
Eight escuelas normales (for teacher training at primary level) were created, twenty-one secondary schools were constructed with international help, along with two technical agricultural institutes.
Primary enrolment rose from 369,640 in 1978 to 534,996 in 1982, and secondary enrolments from 98,874 to 139,959.
In contrast to Mozambique, the Sandinistas did not nationalize education: in fact the Ministry of Education (MED) subsidised 126 private educational institutions, as well as the Jesuit Central American University (UCA) and the Baptist Universidad Politécnica de Nicaragua (UPOLI).
The most original feature was the harnessing of the enthusiasm generated by the literacy campaign to create over 18,000 popular  teachers in adult education.
Many of these teachers had been learners in the original literacy campaign.
After short training courses, they continued literacy work and adult education, mostly in the communities where they lived.
Some of the original brigadistas, the young literacy teachers, who mostly came from the urban areas, also continued to work in adult education, and others became teachers in the formal school system.
Another aspect of adult education, operating mostly in urban areas, was an ‘accelerated primary’ programme which gave those who were newly literate access to formal education in night classes.
These usually covered two primary grades in one stage.
This system aimed to give those who achieved literacy access to further training courses.
In the school system, curricular changes were introduced gradually, but the goal was to make education not only more relevant to everyday life but much more closely tied to the world of work.
A production or service component was included in courses throughout the school programme.
This included some fruitful experiments at secondary level in applying scientific knowledge to practical problems.
As Isabel Benavides, dean of the education faculty at UNAN, the National University, explained it:
Before the revolution, we had a very mechanical, learning-by-rote type of educational model.
But now the struggle is for methodology to really be geared towards stimulating intellectual development and problem solving.
Above all, I think the methodology is aimed at making the pupil an active element in the classroom.
But we don't always manage this 100 per cent.
It will depend on how well-trained the teacher is.
With the inspiration of the literacy crusade, one of the goals was to make classroom relations less authoritarian.
This proved to be one of the most difficult tasks.
It was exacerbated by lack of materials and books, so that the temptation to fall back on ‘chalk and talk’ remained, except that there wasn't always any chalk.
There were also criticisms from teachers, parents and students that the revised curriculum content was much too dense and demanding, with the result that teachers were pressured to rush through it.
The government made strenuous efforts to upgrade the quality of the teaching profession.
Large numbers of teachers were ‘empiricals’ that is, without formal training.
They were offered Saturday courses, combined with distance learning materials, to upgrade their skills.
Teacher training also tried to provide a methodology and techniques to deal with rural multi-grade schools, which require different skills from those in single grade teaching.
Education in rural areas faced substantial problems, but the programmes of land reform, the development of co-operatives and higher levels of community organization, along with the provision of more educational opportunities, made learning seem more useful and attractive.
An important factor in the advances achieved in education  was the ability to mobilize people through organizations under the Sandinista umbrella: trade unions, including the teachers' union, ANDEN; women's organizations; co-operatives; and peasants' organizations.
These involved more people at a local and regional level in educational issues and also provided forums for discussion.
However, people who were not part of any organized structures, particularly in rural areas, found fewer opportunities for participation.
Language dilemmas
In both Nicaragua and Mozambique, the governments have come up against the question of choosing which language or languages to teach in.
This problem appears in a more or less acute form in many countries whose borders were arbitrarily set by colonial rulers or as the outcome of wars.
In Mozambique, there is a wide diversity of languages and in some provinces no one language is dominant.
This led to a reluctant acceptance of the colonial language, Portuguese, as the official language.
A similar decision was made by a revolutionary government in another former Portuguese colony, Guinea-Bissau.
Other ex-colonial countries in the region, including Zambia and Zimbabwe and now Namibia, have chosen English as the main language of instruction.
There are educational drawbacks to this policy.
The majority of illiterates, especially women in rural areas, know little or no Portuguese.
This adds difficulties to literacy work.
In the school system, many teachers do not have a strong enough grasp of the language to teach in it effectively.
Furthermore, teaching Portuguese in primary school to children who do not speak it at home further isolates school experience from that of the home.
There is now some research being done on local languages in the university, but given the complex pattern of languages, especially with widespread population movement, and the cost, it seems unlikely that the government's policy on the official medium of instruction will be changed.
In Nicaragua, the language problem relates specifically to the Atlantic coast region.
Historically isolated from the Spanish-speaking central and western areas, the area has been physically cut off and economically little developed.
This region played a relatively small part in the struggles which led up to the Sandinista revolution.
The gulf between the Atlantic and Pacific coasts became a major political problem in the early 1980s.
Although the population groups are quite small, the linguistic map is complex.
There are four language groups: Creole-speakers, and three Indian language groups: Miskitu, mainly in the north, and two much smaller groups, Rama and Sumu.
By the 1970s, many people, particularly in the Creole and Miskitu communities, were at least bilingual, speaking their ethnic language and either Spanish (the language of education) or standard English, promoted particularly  through Moravian missionary education.
In rural areas, however, literacy in any language was estimated to be only 20 per cent.
The Sandinistas quickly conceded the principle of bilingual education, and incorporated local languages into the 1980 literacy crusade.
However, the need to translate literacy materials and transport them, and to find teachers in each language, slowed up the campaign and lessened its impact.
The Sandinista leadership was made up of Pacific coast Spanish-speakers.
They were mainly concerned to cement national unity and did not at first grasp the complexities of the problem and its interaction with political opposition, particularly among the Miskitu.
As relationships with the United States worsened, and some of the Miskitu became involved with the Contras, there was a tendency to regard English, and Miskitu, as politically suspect.
Since the mid-1980s, when autonomy was conceded to the Atlantic coast and the principle of bilingual, bi-cultural education was established, the question of language became an educational more than a political problem.
Aside from the limiting effects of the economic crisis, there were considerable difficulties in deciding exactly which combinations of language should be taught in school.
For example, among the Creole population, many people wanted to learn English, but others wanted Creole to become the language of instruction in schools, along with Spanish.
Among the Miskitu, while there was a strong emphasis on the status of their own language, some members of the community preferred their children to learn English.
Destabilization
Neither the Sandinistas nor Frelimo were allowed many years of peace and continuity to see the fruits of these new initiatives, or to discover their flaws, before external forces intervened.
South Africa opposed Mozambique's radical regime, fearing its potential influence in the region, and Frelimo's support for both the Zimbabwean liberation struggle and the African National Congress (ANC) of South Africa.
It gave military and financial support to Renamo, also known as the MNR,(identified by the Mozambican government as ‘armed bandits’) as a proxy in operations within Mozambique.
Renamo was first formed by the Rhodesian special services during the Zimbabwean liberation war and was revitalized by the South Africans in the early 1980s to destabilize the Mozambican regime.
Renamo, leaning heavily on support and ‘advisers’ from South Africa, and latterly from Kenya, has no apparent ideological goal.
It seeks to disrupt all aspects of life, from supply lines to social services, using extremely violent methods.
The aim is to discredit the Frelimo government as being unable to protect or serve its own people.
Its activities have continued since the Nkomati accord of 1984.
This was  supposed to end South African funding of Renamo in return for the termination of Mozambican support for the ANC.
In Nicaragua, the United States similarly regarded the Sandinista government as a threat and a radical example for other Central American states.
It trained, armed and gave financial support to the Contras, a motley group of opponents of the Sandinistas, led by former Somocista National Guards.
This military campaign was combined with a US economic blockade and trade embargo against Nicaragua from 1985, as well as openly hostile acts such as mining Nicaraguan ports.
These destabilization campaigns put tremendous pressure on the economies and social services of both countries.
Transformation gave way to a grim fight for survival.
The human costs both of the wars themselves and the economic crises they have caused have been enormous, and the setbacks to programmes of educational and social development severe.
Mozambique: disruption and deprivation
For Mozambique, the economic statistics tell a grim story.
A 1989 report for Unicef estimates that Mozambique's total GDP losses from 1980 to 1988 were US$13.5 billion at 1988 prices.
GNP per capita fell from US$210 in 1984 to US$150 to 175 in 1988.3 South Africa put pressure on the Mozambican economy by reducing its use of Mozambique's ports and railways by 90 per cent.
About 70,000 Mozambican migrant workers in South Africa have been made redundant and returned home, causing local unemployment and loss of remittances to state and families.
The resulting unemployment is particularly marked in the southern provinces of Inhambane, Gaza and Maputo (province, not city) from where the majority of the migrants came.
Mozambique has one of the highest infant mortality rates in the world, approximately 200 per 1,000 live births.4 Those who depend on emergency support because of war and drought number about 1,690,000 and about half the population is wholly or partially dependent on food aid.
From 1985 onwards, there was a considerable drop in the resources allocated to education, which, by 1987, amounted to 2.8 per cent of GDP, down from over 4 per cent in 1983.
As the 1989 Frelimo Fifth Party Congress Central Committee report noted, with continuing increase in demand for educational services, this meant ‘a decline in the quality of services and a decrease in the already precarious living and working conditions of teachers’.
Access to schooling has been in decline because of the war and financial cuts.
The government estimates that 250,000 children have been deprived of education.
School attendance for the age group seven to eleven years is estimated to be 40 per cent.
According to the 1989 Unicef report,
After an initial post-independence surge, primary school enrolment has been held at around 46 per cent by the destruction of rural schools and the resulting lack of access for many nominally enrolled pupils.
Educational quality has also suffered because war costs and related economic decline have forced cuts in books– equipment, furniture, writing materials and maintenance of buildings.
Frelimo's Central Committee reported that by 1989, 45 per cent of all primary schools had either been closed or wrecked.
The provinces of Tete and Zambezia, particularly affected by Renamo actions, have been deprived of 80 per cent of their schools.
Even in 1984 these provinces had the lowest enrolment levels and female attendance rates, and the highest drop-out rates in the whole country.
Only the higher levels of secondary education, from the ninth grade onwards, have continued to expand, though they have been growing from a very low base.
This may be because the majority of secondary schools are in urban areas and have been less affected by the war.
However, technical secondary schools have shown very large drops in enrolment, mainly because of unemployment among their graduates due to the virtual collapse of the productive sectors of the economy.
Literacy and adult education work has suffered even more.
Between 1984 and 1987, there was a 55 per cent decline in enrolment in literacy classes and a 35 per cent fall for post-literacy classes.
Now it is estimated that some 38 per cent of people are literate — but the figure for women is only 22 per cent.
It may well be that the rate will slip further with so many children failing to receive regular schooling.
The Fifth Congress document comments: ‘We are still far from achieving the desired compulsory schooling as envisaged in the National Education System’, conceived in a period of relative peace.
A SIDA report sums up the crisis:
Behind the figures…lie, first and foremost, the bandit disruptions of the system and the society.
Mass movement of the population creates instability and demoralization, even for those not directly affected.
Starvation and poverty bring hungry participants to school, and irregularly at that.
Thousands of schools serving hundreds of thousands of pupils have been destroyed or closed.
However, numerous other factors contribute to the situation: the falling real value of teacher salaries, poor working conditions for teachers, the breakdown of teacher upgrading activities, the fall in state expenditure on materials, delays and calamities in the distribution of available materials, and a rigid formal system of time-tabling and examinations, to name but a few.
The war has seriously affected the morale of teachers and the conditions in which they have to work.
In the first place, by 1986, teachers and other educational staff had seen the purchasing power of their salaries slip to a half or a third of their 1980 value.
Enrolments for teacher training have dropped off sharply (see Fig. 9.1) and, despite government incentives, there has been increasing difficulty in  providing teachers for rural areas where security is poor.
Attacks may be sporadic but they are disruptive and frequently very brutal.
Apart from the destruction of schools, teachers are regarded as important community members and are often more than usually politicized.
As a result, they are particular targets of Renamo.
Manuel Golias recalls an instance when a village was attacked.
The people fled, only to realize that the teacher had been left behind, so they went back to try and save him.
Figure 9.1 Mozambique: teacher training, primary teachers (one year course)
By 1986, Mozambique's external debt had reached an estimated US$3.2 billion.
GNP had dropped in real terms by 35 per cent from 1981 to 1986, overall state expenditure by 58 per cent and education expenditure by 48 per cent.
At this point, the Mozambican government finally turned to the IMF.
In 1987, the Economic Rehabilitation Programme (PRE) was agreed under IMF and World Bank auspices.
This entailed the usual range of stabilization measures — currency devaluation and price rises — though wages were also raised, especially in the higher echelons of the state sector.
But there were also staff cuts in the public service and some privatization of production and distribution.
People had to flee into the bush, seeking to hide from the bandits as best they could, coming into the village only by day.
They were very isolated, each one making a shack under the trees for minimum protection from the rain and sun and from the bandits who continued to appear.
The parents preferred to keep their children with them, just in case of another attack, but we made efforts to keep the school going.
Everything changed.
We started later and ended earlier.
If anybody got wind of strangers about the area, we sent the children back to their parents immediately.
But the numbers of children fell off.
Many fled with their parents to Nampula.
My class of fifty children dwindled to ten or fifteen.
Our salaries were not paid, month after month.
We didn't get school books or school materials.
Finally we stopped trying to teach and also fled to Nampula.
End of a school Many teachers were displaced in the fighting.
One primary school teacher from Gile describes the problems of keeping a school going once the villagers knew they were likely to be attacked by the forces of Renamo:
In the education sector, the government has entered into agreements with the World Bank, and this is already having a marked influence in shifting priorities and goals.
One of the main changes has been to allow the establishment or revival of private schools, previously not permitted to operate.
The new policies envisage that although the state remains the ‘fundamental instrument’ in applying educational policy, responsibility for provision should be devolved to non-governmental bodies — including firms, co-operatives, citizens' associations and social or humanitarian organizations which would subsidize community schools on a non-profit basis.
Such schools would follow Ministry of Education curricula and, in terms of overall management, would be controlled by the Ministry, but teachers would be recruited by the provider or the community, though approved by the Ministry.
The mechanisms of control and the latitude which such schools would have are still unclear and are being studied by the Ministry of Education.
However, the new proposals represent a clear departure from previous ideological and educational ideas, under pressure of economic scarcity and war and from the World Bank.
The effects of these changes have been emerging gradually.
The PRE measures probably gave some relief to qualified secondary teachers, by linking pay with qualifications.
However, especially at primary level, salaries remain low, and pay rises have not kept up with inflation.
In 1990 teachers in five provinces went on strike for a 100 per cent rise.
This demand was rejected by the government and resulted in considerable bitterness among teachers.
The dire economic situation has also led to corruption, with some teachers selling examination papers and answers.
Many others have set themselves up as private tutors, which is now permitted.
However, this  promises to do little for educational standards; sometimes these tutors have neither materials nor premises to work from, and hold classes under trees.
Teachers' union officials admit that many teachers earn more from private tutoring than from their official jobs.
Another consequence of the new policies has been the decision to charge user fees for state education, so that an increasing financial burden falls on families.
This has already been done in health and appears to be markedly reducing the take-up of services.
More of the costs of educational materials have been transferred from the Ministry of Education on to consumers.
By 1987, although the cost of producing school books was still subsidized, the distribution costs were passed on to parents.
At primary level this meant costs of up to 2,000 MT (US$7) a year for each pupil, compared with 40 MT in 1984 (US$1).
This system of payment extends to the whole education system including adult education, where numbers of books sold are reportedly very small — either because of low enrolments or because people are going to classes without books.
There have also been reports of piles of school books gathering dust in shops, because people cannot afford to buy them.
At secondary level, school fees are now being charged.
These developments are most likely to affect urban dwellers and those displaced people and migrants in the urban areas who cannot afford even small charges for their children's education.
In rural areas, especially where education has been hardest hit, they will be very hard to implement.
Reports suggest that in many areas, textbooks and materials are anyway not available, since provincial traders are not interested in distributing them.
The effects of these policies on access to schooling have to be considered in the wider context of family income and availability of education.
The greatest burdens of the war — destruction, disruption of life and economic deprivation — have fallen on the rural population.
But the displacement of large numbers of people from the rural to urban areas has put great pressure on the previously more privileged urban education sector.
For example, in Maputo City total primary enrolment rose 26 per cent between 1984 and 1986, whereas country-wide it fell 4 per cent .
Even in 1986, a small household survey conducted in two suburbs of Maputo — Machava (quite close to the centre) and Xipamanine (at a considerable distance from the centre) found that 10 to 14 per cent of households questioned mentioned difficulties in letting their children attend school.
The reasons were the lack of available places and the long distances between home and school.
These were mainly long-standing residents of Maputo, not recent immigrants.
Furthermore, the PRE has hit urban populations hardest, mainly because of rising prices due to devaluation and removal of subsidies.
the food basket (i.e. rationed food) is no longer taken advantage of in full by the poorer segments of the urban population simply because they cannot afford it any more.
Estimates say that as much as half of available rationed goods are left unsold;
The effects of ‘stabilization’
The impact of the PRE's ‘stabilization’ measures on households on or near the minimum wage was measured in mid-1988:
The average wage in Maputo was 20,000 to 30,000 MT per month, which only just covers these items, and does not allow for clothes or any other basic items.
enrolment rates for primary education are decreasing further from the already low level of 47 per cent in 1986/7 as parents keep their children out of school for lack of money to pay for school books, etc; and
people in rural as well as urban areas stay away from clinics and hospitals where reductions in normal attendance of 50 to 80 per cent are frequent (because of the charges introduced).
Already as a consequence of the war, half the children up to five years are short for their age due to malnutrition.
Even if changes in South Africa bring the war to an end in the near future, the costs of simply returning to the situation before the war are enormous, both in terms of the capital cost of replacing destroyed and damaged schools, and the running costs of the system.
The hard facts of the situation are outlined in the 1989 Central Committee report:
We should note that over the next decade about half the children aged from 7–11 years will not have adequate conditions to attend primary school normally in terms of the law on the National System of Education and that many other older children will be likewise unable to attend school.
During the same period only about 70 per cent of the pupils who complete fifth grade every year will be able to continue their schooling in the regular education system.
In these conditions, the government has had little option but to accept the kinds of changes which the international financial agencies want.
The last few years have also seen the re-emergence of political elements within Mozambique who favour these developments and as of 1990, Frelimo ceased to be the sole political party.
While the PRE has halted Mozambique's rapid economic decline since the early 1980s, there have been doubts about how appropriate its policies are for a country still at war.
At the same time, its high social and human costs quickly became evident.
In June 1990, a new IMF ‘enhanced structural adjustment facility’ was approved, accompanied by a major rescheduling of bilateral debts.
The new package did contain some measures to alleviate the economic cost of adjustment for the poor.
However, at the same time, drought and war were threatening the country with renewed famine.
Another consequence of the war and economic crisis has been an increasing dependence on external aid.
The level of aid increased rapidly after the signing of the Nkomati accord of 1984 and the publicity given to the famine in the mid-1980s.
Before this, the regime was not regarded with favour by many of the major donor agencies in the West.
Aid trebled to US$649 million in 1987 but it has largely been directed towards relief rather than development.
By the end of the 1980s, drought had again intensified the need for emergency relief.
In addition, the political changes in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe have diminished the amounts of aid which are forthcoming for socialist countries in the developing world, including Mozambique.
A further outcome of this very brutal war is the long-term effects on children who have been terrorized or brutalized by Renamo tactics or physically mutilated (see page 238).
There are large numbers of such children whom the government acknowledges will be likely to suffer learning difficulties and emotional or psychological disturbances.
This is something for which teachers need preparation.
Unicef is implementing a programme to help prepare teachers to cope with these added problems in the classroom, and the government itself is to include ‘rehabilitation’ as an aspect of the training of teachers.
Nicaragua: progress undermined
In February 1990, elections ended ten and a half years in which the Sandinistas dominated politics in Nicaragua.
Their education and social policies are undoubtedly their most important legacy, and have attracted much attention and some emulation in other countries of the South.
These efforts for change have been constantly undermined by economic crisis and war.
By the end of the 1980s Nicaraguan teachers were talking of ‘working with our fingernails’ and ‘teaching with bare hands’.
The economic embargo and blockade by the United States and the Contra war had left Nicaragua's economy on its knees, and its  population concentrating on day-to-day survival with terrifying levels of inflation, which by the beginning of 1988 had reached a staggering 30,000 per cent a year.
By that time, some 50 per cent of the budget went on defence.
Although by 1989 the height of the economic crisis had passed, the structural effects of the war and the US embargo left Nicaragua with severe internal shortages, drastically reduced production levels and exports which only covered a quarter of the import bill.
Government deficits were also increased by a number of internal and regional factors.
After the fall of Somoza, Nicaragua suffered a substantial flight of capital.
It also suffered badly from the decline in trade within the Central American Common Market.
Finally, the cutting of trade with the United States from 1985 was a severe blow.
At the same time, it implemented a second, more radical phase of land reform, which redistributed more land to previously landless peasants.
This helped to boost domestic food production, but, added to the disruption caused by the war, reduced the volume of crops for export.
Some of the deficit thus created was made up by external aid, largely from Eastern bloc countries, though the European Community and Scandinavian countries also provided assistance.
However, aid from the United States ceased soon after President Reagan came to office in 1981 and the US administration began to use its influence in the IMF and the World Bank to end any assistance to the Sandinistas.
The external assistance received was still far below the levels needed not only to implement the Sandinistas' social policies but also to sustain the costs of destabilization and war.
According to government calculations, the total economic damage, direct and indirect, of the US destabilization policy between 1980 and 1988 was some US$9 billion.
The war and economic problems brought to a halt and in some areas even reversed the major advances made in educational provision in the early 1980s, and like crises elsewhere, often sharpened inequalities and exacerbated existing difficulties.
Until 1986, education budgets were sustained at over 10 per cent of government expenditure, but hyper-inflation, currency devaluation and overall budget cutbacks have eaten into the real amounts of money involved.
The 12.9 per cent illiteracy rate in 1981 was admitted to have risen to over 20 per cent by the late 1980s.
The schools building programme ceased in 1985, and at that time too teachers' real salaries began to decline rapidly.
The general economic crisis has also brought the usual gamut of problems external to education, but which none the less limit its effectiveness: transport difficulties, especially for rural areas; cuts in electricity supplies; more hungry children coming to school; more urban children selling chewing gum and newspapers in the streets.
The war has accentuated the disparities both in educational level and general economic status between different regions of the country.
The war particularly affected parts of the Atlantic coast and the remote  frontier areas, especially in regions I, V and VI (see map 1), already under-developed, with higher than average levels of illiteracy.
On the Atlantic coast, many teachers left and some schools in rural areas were still closed in 1989.
A further trial for this region was the destruction wrought by Hurricane Joan in October 1988.
Figure 9.2 Nicaragua: percentage of GDP spent on education
The dangers for teachers in war zones of being identified with the government were exemplified by the fate of numbers of ‘popular teachers’ who were killed or kidnapped by the Contras.
In 1984, when the war was intensifying, 300 popular teachers were killed in the war zone and the popular education network which had been established was ‘perforated’, according to a Ministry of Education official.
‘This worked against us in many areas of the country and we had a lot of losses.
Many people feared involvement in popular education because it made them immediate targets of the Contras.’
Even in 1989, school teachers in areas where Contras were still operating were threatened with violence if they continued to work.
In Managua, there was some in-migration from rural war zones, particularly in the mid-1980s, straining infrastructure and social services, including education.
This trend was discouraged by the government, but the capital's population rose from 24 per cent of the total population in 1980 to 33 per cent in 1986.
Some of the recent migrants have returned to their home regions as the fighting diminished, but it is unlikely that all will return to the countryside.
One effect, according to Guillermo Martinez of the teachers' union ANDEN, was to overburden classes,
with 60 kids sitting on the floor in the first grade.
The situation of some schools is quite precarious.
They work three shifts — morning, afternoon and evening.
The night shift is supposed to be for working youth and adults.
The truth is that many children also work, so 12-,13- and 14-year-olds also attend the accelerated primary schools at night.
This is the reality.
There are children  who don't go to school — the national figures are that roughly 150,000 children do not attend school in the primary school age group.
And a good percentage of these are in Managua.
Figure 9.3 Nicaragua: student numbers
Adult education, and thus the sustaining of literacy, a key to the Sandinistas' policy, was particularly badly hit in all regions by logistical problems, and by lack of money and materials.
Some kinds of adult education through the trade union movement were given in the workplace, but a Central Sandinista de Trabajadores (CST) representative said that educational classes in workplaces had sometimes been suspended because of economic difficulties within the enterprise.
The personnel to run literacy and adult education programmes have also been in short supply.
For the accelerated basic education programme teachers received an extra payment in kind (afa — see page 133) but popular teachers doing literacy work were unpaid and relied heavily on the commitment of young people.
Education officials readily admitted that a decade of Sandinista rule had not yet resolved ‘the cultural problem we have inherited of women being relegated to second place’.
Social reality, they conceded, cannot be changed overnight.
While more women have had access to education, the economic crisis has combined with prevailing social attitudes to limit women's opportunities to improve their economic position.
However, as is often the case in wartime, women have stepped into some positions previously held by men.
In the education system, the war has accentuated the preponderance of women, particularly amongst paid and volunteer teachers in literacy and adult education.
As Douglas Guerero, in charge of the literacy campaign pointed out, this ‘has not been induced by the institutions themselves.
In part it's due to the war, but it's also an expression of the spirit of women to improve their situation’.
Adult Education — for children
In a dilapidated classroom of a Managua school in mid-1989, an evening class of about forty students settled down to elementary Spanish.
Their ages ranged from about fourteen to fifty, but the majority were youngsters out at work all day who were losing out on regular schooling.
Just as the teacher was getting into her stride, the whole school was plunged into darkness.
This had become a common occurrence.
Absenteeism and drop-outs among adults were increasingly common because, as teachers in this school pointed out, either they were too busy working to earn enough to live on, or they couldn't afford to buy paper and other materials.
Sometimes the teachers didn't turn up because they had no materials to give the students.
Observations from Batahola Norte in Managua revealed another side effect of the crisis.
Adults were dropping out of evening classes because they did not like learning with the children who were ‘catching up’ on their schooling, feeling embarrassed or ashamed.
Thus the children were being taught with materials intended for adults, and in some cases by teachers trained only in adult education.
In Ciudad Sandino, a small ‘new town’ close to Managua, they were celebrating ten years of literacy work (1979–89) with an exhibition.
One of the handful of paid staff, a young woman of about seventeen, was full of energy and enthusiasm, but she said that it was very difficult to keep enough volunteers to teach.
So many young men, who in the Nicaraguan context are an important component not only of the student population but also of popular teachers and literacy workers, were away on military service.
Almost all the teachers at their centre were women, as were the majority of the learners.
The other major cause for concern during the second half of the 1980s has been the situation of teachers in the formal education system.
By 1989, teachers' salaries were the equivalent of about US$12 per month (300,000 cordobas in June 1989) for a primary school teacher and US$16 for a secondary school teacher.
While teachers command social respect in Nicaragua they are not near the top of the salary league — for example, at the same period a surgeon would receive about US$40 a month and a miner about US$80.
One of the consequences of the difficult situation in schools and the low pay was that many teachers left the profession, even to work in the informal labour sector, and some moved to other countries.
Their places had to be taken by ‘empirical’(untrained) teachers, reaching 60 per cent of total teachers in some regions.
In the late 1980s, teacher drop-out was around 20 per cent a year, higher than the drop-out rate among pupils.
This was a backward step, since one of the goals of the Ministry had been to increase the proportion of trained teachers through in-service training to upgrade ‘empirical’ teachers, as well as by initial teacher training.
This drop-out rate from teaching was not only depriving the system of experienced teachers but also wasting resources spent on their training.
Furthermore, new teachers were not being trained fast enough to replace the trained teachers who were leaving the profession.
There was, for example, a downturn of 20 per cent in total enrolment of teacher trainees for secondary school and above at the National University's Faculty of Education between 1982 and 1987.
This is hardly a climate in which educational innovation could flourish.
By the end of the 1980s, most of the Ministry of Education's ingenuity was focused on how to make cuts which would do the least damage.
In the mid-1980s the government had already begun to implement austerity measures which cut spending and led to price rises.
In 1988 and 1989, a series of measures with many of the characteristics of a ‘stabilization’ package forced more drastic cuts in government spending.
This compactación became an unwelcome household word.
The education budget was cut by 19 per cent overall in January 1989 and a further 25 per cent in June.
This cut was smaller  than that imposed in some other sectors, but it none the less entailed over 7,000 job losses, including 2,400 teaching posts.
Some cuts involved not filling posts left vacant by teachers discouraged by the rock-bottom pay and difficult conditions.
Most of the other job losses were in support and supervisory staff.
It also meant a 29 per cent cut in textbooks, and severe cuts in materials, supplies and maintenance as well as a reduction of training workshops for teachers.
No classrooms or schools were closed, but the reality at the level of one village school was that eleven out of twenty-five teachers were ‘empiricals’ though nine were attending Saturday classes to upgrade their status.
In 1988, according to the 25-year-old headmistress, textbooks had to be rented by the students, and in 1989 the students, or their families, had to buy them.
These cuts triggered protests among teachers and a brief strike in some urban centres.
President Daniel Ortega met the teachers but said there just was not enough money to pay them more.
However, an effort was made to give them some kind of compensation, by extending the provision of the afa (beans, rice and sugar rations) beyond the initial emergency period, and offering them free transport and free spectacles.
Teachers also received a great deal of support and help from both popular organizations and from communities to ease their situation.
One trade-union official in León, Nicaragua's second city, in 1989 described the education system as ‘at a standstill’.
Some might argue that it was running backwards.
Within the Ministry of Education this  brought shifts of emphasis, and some lowering of sights because of the set-backs and acknowledged mistakes of the past years.
For example, there was a move to decentralize educational administration, because of growing concern at the gap between the pronouncements at the top in the Ministry and the practice at the level of the school, as well as disparities between educational levels in different areas.
This decentralization was partly to ease administrative problems such as salary payments, but it also was intended to encourage more local involvement in education.
The autonomy granted to the Atlantic coast was only in its early stages, but that too was an acknowledgement that everything could not be run directly from Managua.
The war and economic crisis has also brought a recognition of the need to consolidate the gains of the early years of the revolution, particularly to reinforce literacy.
This was approached from two angles: first, what was known as the ‘battle for the fourth grade’, an acknowledgement that substantial numbers of children either did not go to school or did not stay long enough to consolidate literacy.
This strategy included implementing a revised and ‘thinned down’ curriculum and trying to ensure supplies of school materials for these grades.
The literacy campaign was relaunched, though on a much more decentralized and piecemeal basis (see Chapter 15).
When the economic crisis became severe, community mobilization became not so much a question of participation in decision-making as practical support to keep schools and education projects going.
However, this type of economic support, though acknowledged as necessary, was not regarded as ideal: Guillermo Martinez of ANDEN commented in 1989:
We've seen community participation in trying to come up with immediate solutions to the problems resulting from the war — we're talking particularly about materials and infrastructure.
We also think that the support and integration of the community is important as an ongoing, permanent and stable factor.
The school should go out to the community and the community should also support and be part of the school.
[However], the prospects for the short term are such that we will continue to need the economic support [of the community].
When economic stability improves and we are able to deal with these problems, the support and participation of the community continues to be important, but perhaps dealing with other kinds of problems.
The state should not only ensure the conditions for teaching and learning but should also be supporting the community.
But the community should care for the school because it is a social good and the property of the community.
Jacqueline Sanchez, of the Ministry of Education, also points out that; ‘Over the years, since the revolution, many people have become much more demanding as far as education is concerned, and despite all the difficulties, are more critical and expect more of their schools.’
It is very difficult in the circumstances of either Mozambique or Nicaragua to evaluate conclusively the effectiveness of policies which  promote education as a means of transforming society, although in the case of Nicaragua, despite the problems, government-sponsored initiatives clearly scored successes, both in educational terms and in terms of social change.
However, any such strategy requires far more time and continuity of action and work to bear fruit.
In both countries, undoubtedly one of the goals of what the United States euphemistically called ‘low-intensity conflict’ was to hamper and discredit the revolutionary movements' ability to deliver services to their peoples, and to involve them in changing their lives.
Certainly in the case of Nicaragua, this strategy played an important part in undermining the undoubted popular support which the Sandinistas had enjoyed in the first part of the 1980s.
The new UNO coalition government has clearly distanced itself from the Sandinista view of education.
First, it has dismissed a number of head teachers appointed by the Sandinistas, and teachers who have objected to changes being made by the government have been transferred to other schools.
The new government has also moved to scrap school textbooks developed under the Sandinistas and has imported textbooks from Costa Rica which had been produced with USAID assistance.
Only in the National University (UNAN) do the Sandinistas still have overall control.
Solidarity support
In response to the economic crisis provoked by the war and the US boycott, WUS(UK) organized the sending of a container of basic education materials to the Nicaraguan education sector.
The money was raised primarily by members of the British teaching unions, AUT, NUT and NATFHE, and the students' union, NUS.
The campaign to fill the container was aimed not just at assisting Nicaraguan educators, but also at raising the problems they faced with their UK counterparts.
Since the elections of 1990, WUS(UK) has examined ways of assisting innovative educational projects to continue.
One such project is the integrated popular and formal education project in Jalapa near the Honduran border (see page 247).
The project aims to eradicate illiteracy in the Jalapa valley with a combination of adult popular education, literacy classes, and work and education courses.
The success of the Jalapa project, described by Sandinista education officials as exemplary, depends on the active participation of local grassroots organizations and unions.
Even the bank manager takes participation in the project into account when considering loans to co-operatives.
The Ministry of Education, now headed by rightwingers in the coalition, has indicated its intention to concentrate on formal sector  education, marginalizing the literacy and popular adult education work which had been so important under the Sandinistas by starving them of funds.
Government statements have also made a point of denigrating the achievements of the 1980 Literacy Crusade.
Future economic restructuring is likely to include public spending cuts which may also limit further educational expansion.
Debt and the destruction of war have brought major economic setbacks, aside from damage to social services and human suffering.
Neither of these countries, poor as they are, can hope to recoup these losses and develop in the future without external assistance.
A major question is, will sufficient aid be forthcoming — given the changes in the international political climate — and on what terms?
Sudan: the breakdown of a system
By 1990, Sudan had become enmeshed in almost every kind of economic and political crisis.
It falls in the category of a low-income, highly indebted country with its economy practically at a standstill; it is divided by a long-standing struggle between the north and south of the country — the north dominated by Arabic-speaking Muslims; the south, by several tribal groupings, most of whose poeple  people are either animists or Christians.
Since Sudan came into existence as a separate state under British colonial control at the end of the nineteenth century, the north has tended to dominate, to be the seat of government and to take economic and political precedence over the south.
This state of affairs has resulted in long periods of civil war beginning soon after independence.
A settlement was reached in 1972, but in the 1980s, as the devolution of power to the south became little more than a façade and the economic situation deteriorated, the separatist movement re-emerged.
Throughout the 1980s, Sudan has suffered not only from the disruption caused by its own civil conflict but has also experienced influxes of refugees from surrounding countries — Uganda, Ethiopia and Chad — driven by drought and war.
Many of its own people have been displaced by civil war or uprooted by drought or flood.
The origins of Sudan's severe debt crisis go back to the policies pursued from the early 1970s onwards.
The government was attracted by the idea of changing Sudan from an exporter of cotton, groundnuts and gum arabic into what was dubbed at the time ‘the breadbasket of the Middle East’.
It was encouraged in this strategy by the oil-rich Gulf states which were concerned about their dependence on food sources outside the Middle Eastern region.
With their financial backing, and some Western aid, Sudan embarked on an ambitious public investment programme focused on large-scale agriculture.
However, after the 1973 Arab-Israeli war and the steep rise in oil prices, inflation as well as private consumption began to soar, and from 1976 foreign aid began to fall.
While imports increased, exports did not flourish sufficiently to fill the growing gap.
By 1977, Sudan  had a severe foreign exchange crisis, and by the beginning of 1978 was experiencing shortages of imported goods.
At this point the Gulf states and other creditors insisted that Sudan turn to the IMF, and the first of many standby arrangements was signed, with the standard range of measures.
The impact on popular living standards was severe, and street riots and strikes ensued.
Since then, IMF loans and rescheduling arrangements have become a regular feature of economic life.
These measures have failed to reverse Sudan's economic decline, and problems related to the adjustment policies, the war and drought have intensified.
The ratio of per capita debt to per capita income rose from 19.7 in 1973 to a record high of 162.7 in 1985/86.
Although Sudan's debt burden eased slightly in the second half of the 1980s, no real turn-around in the economic situation was in sight at the end of the decade.
Furthermore, like Zambia, the country is now heavily in arrears with the IMF which in 1990 declared Sudan ‘non-cooperative’ for failing to repay its debts to the Fund.
Government expenditure has been caught in a squeeze.
While revenues stagnate, expenditure has soared — in 1988/89, there was a budget deficit of £  57 billion, fuelling inflation, which reached 80 per cent a year in 1988/89.
One of the greatest drains on the exchequer has been the war in the south.
Defence and security activities were estimated to be costing more than S 11 million a day.
A further drain is the central government subsidy to regional and local governments, which are increasingly in no position to generate revenues from local taxes and production.
The government also subsidizes basic goods, including sugar, petroleum and wheat.
Since the crisis began in the late 1970s, spending on education below tertiary level has been at rock bottom and health little better.
Only the tertiary sector has maintained a larger share of the cake, an average of over 4 per cent during the period from 1978/79 and 1986/87, compared with 1.04 per cent for general education in the decade from 1978 to 1989 (see Figure 9.4).
These allocations are dwarfed by the expenditure on defence and debt service.
Education in Sudan since independence has witnessed a substantial expansion in the total number of schools, pupils and teachers at primary, intermediate and secondary levels.
The highest rates of growth were at intermediary and secondary levels (thirteen to eighteen years) though, as in many other African countries, this growth was from a very low baseline.
There was an increased awareness of the need for education at all levels, rising levels of literacy — though they are still relatively low -and, while the economy was expanding, a demand for skills.
In the 1950s and 1960s education expansion was encouraged by the Sudanization of government jobs as well as growth in economic activity.
Since the late 1970s Sudan, like its northern neighbour Egypt, has suffered a brain-drain of professionals to other parts of the Middle East, particularly to the southern Gulf states.
Figure 9.4 Sudan: government spending, selected sectors
Despite this expansion, the low levels of education expenditure mean that many schools, especially in rural areas, are little more than shells.
There are still many children of school age who are not in the education system at any level, due to lack of enrolment opportunities, lack of schools, rising educational costs for poor families, high drop-out rates and inadequate government expenditure.
Regional disparities
Although the educational statistics available may be of questionable accuracy, particularly for the war-torn south, they do indicate patterns of difference.
In Khartoum and the Northern region, the vast majority of children get to primary school, and over 40 per cent of sixteen-to eighteen-year-olds are at secondary school.
However, at the other end of the scale, the southern provinces of Upper Nile and Bahr al-Ghazal have very low enrolment rates, even at primary level.
This is partly due to the effects of the war, which has caused massive damage to schools and displaced large sections of the population out of the southern provinces.
In Equatoria, which had not, at that point (198–87), been much affected by the war, enrolments were higher.
However, even before the war erupted again in the early 1980s, education provision in the south was inadequate.
Education was very  limited during the colonial period, and mainly in the hands of missionaries.
During the first period after independence, development was hampered by the first civil war, during which many schools were taken over by the army.
After 1972 the semi-autonomous administration made efforts to rehabilitate and expand the system.
Table 9.3 Sudan: school enrolment ratios, 1986 87 (percentages)
Demand continued to outstrip supply.
Many schools were established by communities on a self-help basis, with the intention of handing them over to the government.
However, the regional government could not afford to take them over, so many of these community schools were overcrowded, under-funded, with too few, and untrained teachers.
Discontent with the system, and with the perceived discrimination against the south compared with the north, led to considerable politicization of secondary and tertiary education in the southern regions from the late 1970s onwards.
Students protested at the lack of facilities, and teachers at not being paid regularly.
Especially in the south, teachers are very badly paid and generally held in low esteem.
Since the civil war began again in the early 1980s, the education system has virtually collapsed in regions like Bahr al-Ghazal, where the fighting has been most intense.
Many schools have been destroyed or the students have fled, and these areas suffer from severe shortages of funds, bureaucratic inefficiencies and the difficulties of transport and communications caused by the war.
The low enrolments in the western provinces of Darfur and Kordofan probably reflect the effects of the drought which has caused millions of people to leave their homes.
These disparities in regional enrolment levels reflect deeper inequalities in the distribution of income, wealth and essential services.
The persistent pattern of inequality in economic, social and educational services has contributed to the widening gaps between  regions.
It has also encouraged rural-urban migration as rural areas suffered severely from worsening economic conditions during the 1980s.
There are also significant differences in levels of enrolment between male and female students.
In predominantly rural areas these discrepancies are most marked, reflecting a low social valuation of education for girls.
Although enrolment levels for both sexes have increased, girls' enrolments at all grades remain significantly below those of boys.
In the Northern region the discrepancies are not so wide, and overall enrolments are much higher at all levels.
In the Khartoum region, female enrolment outstripped that of males at secondary school level, though women make up only a small proportion of students in the technical secondary schools.
The general picture, however, is that girls, especially outside the main towns, have limited opportunities to pursue their education.
Furthermore, most schools are segregated by sex, and the building of boys' schools has historically taken precedence over building girls' schools.
It is not just discrepancies in enrolments which are significant, but the ability of children to remain at school and profit from their education.
The figures for wastage rates between levels of education reproduce much the same patterns between different regions and between the sexes.
Even by the conventional measure of success in education — pass rates in final examination results at each level — these differences are clear.
In the Khartoum and Northern regions, in 1986/87 pass rates at both primary and intermediate levels were around 70 per cent for both boys and girls.
In the west (Kordofan and Darfur) and the parts of the south for which any figures were available in 1986/87 (for some areas no figures were available because of the war) the average pass rate was below 50 per cent.
Girls' results were consistently poorer than those of boys.
While examination results alone do not tell us much about the nature of the educational crisis, they are useful indicators of the extent of the problem: undoubtedly school conditions and the situation of teachers have affected their outcomes.
Relatively few students reach secondary school, with a substantial proportion of these being in the Khartoum and Northern regions.
During the 1980s, there has been a marked decline in the proportion of secondary students who gain the Sudan School Certificate which enables them to go on to higher education or enter the civil service.
Between 1982/83 and 1986/87, in government schools the success rate dropped from almost 80 per cent to 70 per cent; in private and community schools from 40 to 30 per cent ; and in technical education from 60 to 55 per cent .
Only 5 to 10 per cent of successful candidates get university places, and in the present economic climate employment in the civil service is not particularly attractive.
Only for the wealthy is there the option of paying to send their children abroad for university education.
Another major problem for graduates at all levels is the lack of job opportunities: for example, there are now 20,000 university graduates unemployed in Sudan, and for school graduates too there are few opportunities in the formal sector.
As in other countries with severe economic problems, there are large numbers of people trying to make a living through informal work.
Unequal educational gains have further increased social and economic inequalities between regions and classes and have contributed to ethnic and political tensions.
The costs of war, and the displacement of some 3.5 million people inside the country's borders, have disrupted the social and institutional structures of education.
Education as the arena of conflict: El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, South Africa and Namibia
Finally, we come to a group of countries in which state policy on education is not only constrained by external economic and political pressures but also starkly reflects the priorities of a small and exclusive élite.
Debt and economic difficulties are less significant than political priorities in determining access to education.
In El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, education is simply not available to substantial portions of the population, particularly the rural poor and those who are not part of the majority Spanish-speaking culture.
In South Africa under apartheid, education has been designed specifically to socialize the mass of the population into accepting an inferiority based on race and class.
In the political and military conflicts which have arisen as a result of these inequalities, education is not merely a casualty of war but is part of the battlefield.
Education and repression in Central America
In Guatemala and El Salvador, education cannot be separated from political struggles for a number of reasons.
First, the inequalities of the system lead to demands for more and better education for the majority of their peoples; second, the authorities often regard education as a direct threat to their domination so that teachers, academics and indeed books are targets of repression and censorship.
All parties in the conflict regard education in its broadest sense as part of an ideological battleground.
In Honduras, the levels of conflict are not as high, but the society as a whole suffers a similar pattern of inequality.
It is the poorest of the three countries and suffers from inadequate social services, political repression and an economy heavily dependent on the export of one crop — bananas — controlled mainly by foreign companies.
In all three countries, the root of the problem is a highly unequal system of land distribution.
This has persisted despite limited land reform programmes in El Salvador and Honduras.
One outcome of these severe inequalities, sustained over many years by a small privileged élite, has been that opponents of these regimes have resorted to armed struggle.
El Salvador
In El Salvador, land hunger has been exacerbated by the tiny size of the country in relation to its population.
Despite a land reform initiative in the early 1980s, rural society remains polarized.
There is also a long tradition of migration, mostly to the United States, as people seek a better life and an escape from poverty and land hunger.
Money sent home has become an important source of income for the country — especially from those who live in the United States and send remittances to their families in dollars.
Poverty in El Salvador The majority of Salvadoreans, 68.1 per cent in 1980, were estimated to live in a state of poverty, unable to meet their basic needs.
Social services have now diminished even further because of the war and the crisis since 1979.
Since that time, the main economic indicators show an economy in decline.
The growth of GDP, which had averaged 5.4 per cent annual growth in the first half of the 1970s and 0.8 per cent between 1975 and 1980, went into reverse, dropping on average 5.7 per cent a year over the period from 1981 to 1988.
Per capita GDP fell, on average, 3.8 per cent annually from 1981 to 1984 and scarcely reached zero growth in the latter part of the 1980s.
At the same time, inflation began to climb after 1984 and the average minimum wage fell more than 25 per cent in the first half of the 1980s.
The last ten years have brought into the open the struggle between the oligarchy, supported by the United States, and a substantial section of the population, represented not only by the armed opposition FMLN but by trade unions, popular organizations, women's groups, Christian base communities and the liberal intelligentsia.
In this brutal war, it is estimated that some 60,000 civilians were killed up to 1989, before the 1989 to 1990 round of fighting which is thought to have claimed over a thousand lives.
An estimated 7,000 people have ‘disappeared’ after being seized by the army and right-wing death squads.
Torture has been widely used by both security forces and death squads.
Up to a quarter of the population has either been displaced or has left the country since 1980.
Although death-squad activities became less widespread during the period of President Duarte's government in the mid-1980s, they did not cease entirely.
After the elections of 1988 brought the ultra right-wing Arena party to power, a new wave of kidnappings and murders began.
The most widely publicized was the murder of six Jesuit academics from the University of Central America in November 1989.
Both the security forces and the death squads have renewed  their campaign of intimidation against trade unions and popular organizations which had begun to regroup and regain influence during the Duarte period.
Another major target has been the National University of El Salvador (UES), long regarded by the right wing as a ‘subversive’ institution.
It was closed for four years from 1980 to 1984, with the army occupying the campus, and since then has struggled to continue its academic work.
During 1988 and 1989, according to Amnesty International, the pattern of unacknowledged arrests, abductions and murders of students, academics and other staff has been renewed.
An evident aim of the right wing is not merely the intimidation of individuals but also the discrediting of the two major independent universities as educational institutions.
Given that the UES mainly caters for the most impecunious students who reach university level, the interruption of its work also affects those who have no alternative access to higher education.
Guatemala: the lowest ‘quality of life’ According to a 1982 Unicef study, no other central American country is poorer than Guatemala in terms of the combined indicators of the infant mortality rate, life expectancy and literacy rates.
It concluded that Guatemala had the lowest ‘physical quality of life index in Central America and the third lowest in the whole of Latin America after Haiti and Bolivia’.
In 1985, according to the State Planning Council (SEGEPLAN), 86 per cent of families were living below the official poverty line and 55 per cent were extremely poor.
Despite the development of industry in the 1960s and 1970s, the country is still highly dependent on export crops grown on latifundia (large estates) run by a small élite.
Ninety per cent of farms are seven hectares or less and 54 per cent are plots of less than 1.4 hectares, described by one writer as ‘the size of a grave’.
It is impossible for families living on such plots to make a living.
They sell their labour to the latifundia at harvest time, usually for very low wages.
Guatemala
In Guatemala too, the 1980s marked a high point of repression in a political conflict which has been going on for the best part of thirty years.
The government's policy of counter-insurgency against the guerrilla movement in the early 1980s led to large-scale killings of sections of the indigenous Indian population (indígenas ) and Spanish-speaking (ladino ) peasants who sympathized with them.
The result of this unequal and little-publicized war was estimated at 50,000 dead, the displacement of 300,000 into ‘model villages’ in ‘development poles’(another version of ‘strategic hamlets’) and some 300,000 refugees outside the country.
Death squads, in which the army and security forces have been implicated, reappeared in the late 1980s, despite the election of a civilian government in 1986.
According to Amnesty International, human rights abuses have intensified since a series of abortive coup attempts by the army starting in May 1988.
The targets of these attacks, beatings, kidnappings and murders have been trade unionists, peasants (especially those involved in campaigns for land redistribution and resistance to recruitment into civil defence patrols) and Indians who have given themselves up to the army and been taken to resettlement areas after years of living in hiding in the mountains.
Academics and students have also been victims.
The University of San Carlos has long been regarded as a hotbed of opposition, and the list of those imprisoned, tortured and murdered is long, even since 1986.
Members of the School of Agronomy who have been accused of being too sympathetic with the problems and plight of the campesinos (peasant farmers) have been particularly targeted.
The Archbishop of Guatemala, Prospero Penados del Barrio, declared that the assassination of seven students by death squads in 1988 showed that the country was living by the ‘law of the jungle’ despite the supposed democratization of political life.
On 6 July 1988, Buadilio Aguilar Dardón, an 18-year-old secondary school student in Guatemala City was detained on his way to school.
He then ‘disappeared’.
His ‘disappearance’ occurred in the context of several days of school strikes called by the co-ordinating committee of secondary school students.
The students were calling for the restoration of school buildings damaged during the 1976 earthquake in Guatemala and a subsequent tremor in May 1988.
The co-ordinating committee reported that students participating in the strikes had been receiving death threats.
Because of this, Buadilio Aguilar's family believe that the security forces were responsible for his disappearance.
During the same series of school strikes, the Guatemalan newspaper El Gráfico reported that students at the Instituto Normal Central para Varones (Central Boys' School) had been taken into their school by security agents and severely beaten.
In interviews with foreign journalists, students at the Institute confirmed this version of events.
Teachers supporting their local community's campaigns have also been subject to death threats.
Amilcar Méndez Urizar, a school teacher from El Quiché, a predominantly Indian area, had helped local peasants to file petitions against serving in the ostensibly voluntary civil defence patrols.
In 1988, he received a death threat at his home with a skull and cross-bones reading, ‘It's just a question of time and opportunity, but we'll get you.’
He received numerous other threats and was often followed by men he could identify as members of the local Treasury Police (part of the security police).
Indigenous communities in Guatemala, which make up between 60 and 75 per cent of the total population, form an underclass.
They live predominantly in the mountains, in conditions even worse than those of Spanish-speaking peasants.
The brutal suppression of the insurrection of the early 1980s was not an isolated incident.
During this century, Indians have had their communal lands broken up, forcing the majority to become migrant labourers in the coastal areas for at least part of the year, in conditions often approaching serfdom.
Forced labour was not abolished until the 1940s.
Their access to education is even more limited than that of the rural population generally.
There are some twenty-two indigenous Indian languages spoken in these communities, and the government has made little effort to support education in these mother tongues.
It has, for the most part, imposed Spanish language and culture and discouraged expressions of indigenous cultures.
Even where communities have got together to build a school themselves, under an agreement with the government, they have sometimes had to wait years before the government sends teachers to staff it.
When teachers are sent, most of them are ladinos , as relatively few teachers from the indigenous communities are trained.
The ladinos teach mostly in Spanish and have little or no grasp of the languages or culture of their pupils.
This is not to say that mother-tongue teaching in these circumstances, where there are a number of different languages, is necessarily the solution at all levels of education.
But the underlying issue is the overall lack of respect for indigenous concerns and culture manifested by the government and the ladino élite.
Among some indigenous groups there is also resistance to any kind of integration with ladino society which means denying their own culture and becoming ‘Spanish’.
In the meantime, the vast majority of Indian children either do not go to school or do not reach the end of primary school.
The indigenous peoples have ‘always been the instruments of labour and of production, but not the recipients of social benefits from the government’.
Some efforts at literacy work have been made by church groups and by the government, but they only deal with a tiny fraction of the problem.
As far as the government is concerned, such efforts seem to be too little, too late: the traumas of many years have created strong suspicion and resistance to any state interventions.
According to the 1981 census, 46.5 per cent of the population over the age of seventeen was illiterate.
In the rural departments with predominantly Indian populations — for example, Quiché and Alta Verapaz — illiteracy rose to 78 per cent .
These percentages are not based on functional literacy but on the most rudimentary writing skills.
Since the counter-insurgency campaigns of the early 1980s, the country has become highly militarized, and those indigenous groups which have returned from hiding or exile after the destruction of their homes and villages have been strictly controlled.
The new ‘model  villages’, into which substantial numbers of Indians have been resettled, are closely supervised by the army.
Facilities such as schools and health posts have been built in most such villages, but are said to be poorly stocked and staffed.
Some families are reluctant to send children to these schools and other children are obliged to work in order to help support their families.
Most of these villages have little access to land, are not self-sufficient and rely heavily on food aid and food-for-work programmes.
Both Catholic and evangelical churches (particularly those based in the United States) have given economic aid to villages, particularly in the Ixil ‘development pole’.
It seems that those who become active evangelicals stand a better chance of obtaining housing materials and educational opportunities for their children.
In the Ixcán region of Quiché province, the army has permitted the re-establishment of co-operatives first set up in the 1970s.
It intervenes in and supervises every aspect of the co-operatives' running and organization.
As Manz observed:
It is not up to the villagers what programs will be organized.
The education delegate, for example, cannot promote an adult education programme similar to a late 1970s programme that included subjects such as the political and social history of Guatemala; Indian movements, leadership training; human rights, legal rights; agrarian structure, etc.
In the rural areas, the ‘civil patrols’ have the job of hunting insurgents and controlling the new settlements.
There are severe penalties, especially for indígenas , for avoiding this service.
Ironically, one requirement to become a civil patrol commander, directly accountable to the army for keeping the community in line, is literacy.
Honduras
Honduras has not experienced levels of upheaval and violence comparable to Guatemala and El Salvador in the 1980s.
However, its involvement in the conflict in Nicaragua, acting as the main host country to the Contras, has attracted a good deal of US aid and military personnel and has led to the increasing militarization of society.
The education sector has not been isolated from these trends.
The authorities have increasingly interfered in school curricula, repressed student and teacher organizations, and promoted new organizations favourable to the Nicaraguan Contras.
The teachers unions, the largest and most influential of which is COLPROSUMAH, were among the most combative trade unions in the country until the early 1980s.
Since that time, it has suffered repression from the government and military authorities.
In 1982 the Honduran government effectively took control of COLPROSUMAH by giving official recognition to a small splinter group.
The move, condemned by the International Labour Organization, led to a dispute which lasted  through the decade.
The genuine elected leadership of COLPROSUMAH was denied access to the union's headquarters and to the union's funds and dues, which the government passed to its puppet union.
Students' organizations were legalized in 1979 but banned again in 1987 after the murder of student leader Marion Adalberto Rosales.
The conflict within the student body has reflected the growing political importance of the Contras and their supporters, who have formed their own student organization, Nicaragua Democratic Youth-Democratic Students Front (JDN-FED).
It was a member of this group who was alleged to have shot Rosales.
Despite the ban on student activity, in 1989 there were strikes and demonstrations against the government's new educational measures, which included raising the minimum pass mark and the elimination of courses in sociology, economics and political economy from the curriculum.
Economic crisis, conflict and schooling
The political repression and discrimination in access to education based on class, region and ethnic origin which characterizes these countries has been sharpened by economic recession.
All three countries have at one time or another during the 1980s had recourse to the IMF for standby loans.
In El Salvador and Guatemala, the disruptions of war have added to the problems.
El Salvador
The cycle of repression, political violence and civil war in El Salvador has had complex outcomes in economic terms.
The war, and the relative success of the FMLN in hitting economic targets, has led to marked reductions in both agricultural and industrial production.
These problems of themselves have increased inflation and indebtedness.
For example, the country has not only suffered from unstable coffee prices, but also from a decline in production.
Many factories are working at only a fraction of capacity.
However, in contrast to Nicaragua, where the economy has come close to collapse, in El Salvador both the additional costs of the war and increasing indebtedness have been counterbalanced by very large injections of aid from the United States.
Since 1980, the economy, which has always been dependent on exports of a small range of agricultural products, especially coffee, has become highly dependent on US aid.
This has equipped the army and paid much of the direct cost of the war.
The combination of aid and money sent home from workers abroad has buffered the economy against world market pressures and prevented its collapse.
Aid has also allowed the government to maintain a minimum of  services and infrastructure.
For the United States, this has been part of its purpose as an aspect of counter-insurgency policy: to prevent the mass of the population defecting to the FMLN and its allies, and to deal with the social and economic costs of about half a million displaced persons.
El Salvador: aid feeds war effort In El Salvador, official aid receipts almost trebled between 1981 and 1987, when the total reached US$426 million (US$86.4 per capita).
Three-quarters of this aid came from the United States.
From 1981 to 1985, US aid to El Salvador totalled US$1.7 billion, of which some 30 per cent was direct military aid; 44.1 per cent was economic assistance to prop up El Salvador's ailing economy, hard hit by the war; 10.5 per cent was food aid; and only 15.4 per cent went to development and governmental reform.
By 1988, total US aid since 1981 had risen to some US$3 billion, with the pattern of allocations remaining much the same.
Education made up 22.5 per cent of development aid in 1985 and 17.5 per cent in 1987.
From 1989, the changing international political climate and the bad press following the murder by elements in the army of six Jesuit priests in December 1989 has led the US Congress to question more closely the level of support being given to the government of El Salvador.
Despite this assistance, and a temporary improvement in coffee prices, by 1989 the economy had not revived significantly and the country still had a substantial debt problem.
In 1986, the Duarte government introduced the Programa de Estabilización y Reactivación Económica (PERE), which included devaluation, price hikes and temporary restrictions on imports.
Soon after coming to power, the Arena government instituted a new round of ‘stabilization’ measures in 1989, including privatizations, currency devaluation and price hikes, particularly for public transport, which provoked a wave of popular discontent.
The education system reflects the polarization of society.
Despite an expansion in access to education in the 1970s and reforms carried out in the 1960s and again in the late 1970s, the fundamental patterns of inequality have remained and have been accentuated by the war.
Since 1980, education has been severely affected by the war, at times almost paralysed by it.
School closures have seriously affected educational provision.
In 1979, 444 schools were closed; in 1981, 877; in 1983, 763; and in 1984, 653.
The displacement of large numbers of rural dwellers to urban areas has increased overcrowding in urban schools.
According to government figures, almost 60 per cent of all displaced persons in  1987 were concentrated in four departments: San Salvador, Morazán, Usulután and San Miguel.
Almost 60 per cent of those displaced were reported to be under the age of eighteen.
Of some 200,000 children displaced by the war, it is estimated that about 80,000 are not in school.
The situation was made worse by the 1986 earthquake, which exacerbated the housing shortage and destroyed or damaged numerous schools.
For some schools in San Salvador, the government's subsequent ‘repairs’ consisted of simply knocking down walls which were damaged, leaving the school a mere shell.
El Salvador has a school population aged four to twelve of two million, but only 600,000 of these are served by public sector schools.
Enrolments at both primary and secondary levels fell sharply in the early 1980s before beginning to rise steadily from 1984 onwards.
Drop-out rates in rural areas are high, due to poverty and war.
During the period of massive repression in 1980, rural drop-out rates were 40 to 50 per cent in each of the first six grades and 20 to 30 per cent in urban schools.
By 1986, when the repression was more selective in character, urban retention levels were much higher, though 10 per cent or more of students were still dropping out in first, fifth and sixth grades.
Rural drop-outs remained on average around 20 per cent, and 45 per cent at sixth grade.
Although government figures show adult illiteracy rates continuing to fall to below 30 per cent, the real rates are thought to be far higher than this.
If functional illiteracy is taken into account, the total could be as high as 60 to 70 per cent.
In the years since the present conflict began, resources devoted to the eradication of illiteracy have been grossly insufficient.
During the period from 1980 to 1984, literacy programmes were reaching between 1.1 and 1.9 per cent of the illiterate population aged ten and above.
The very limited results of these programmes have been ascribed to the lack of security for teaching personnel, especially in rural areas, and the suspicion and fear of potential learners.
The intense conflict in the years from 1980 to 1982 led to many resignations among teachers, while many others asked for transfers.
According to the Salvadorean Commission of Human Rights, between January 1980 and January 1981, 136 teachers were assassinated.
Many teachers belonging to the teachers' union ANDES became actively involved in the struggle for political justice as well as for their own economic interests.
Consequently many activist teachers have been forced to leave the country after threats to themselves and their families.
The total numbers of teachers fell in the early 1980s and only began to pick up after 1983.
For those who remain, quite apart from political pressures, conditions in public sector schools are often discouraging.
Official figures give average class sizes as forty to fifty, but it is reported that in the rural areas there are often seventy to eighty children in a class.
Even in urban schools, physical conditions are often difficult.
According to one teacher in an urban school, ‘there is no chalk, the blackboards are worn out, there aren't enough desks and the classrooms are not appropriate — some don't have glass in the windows so in winter teaching is practically impossible’.
Parallel to the state education sector are growing numbers of private schools and universities.
Enrolments in the private sector have grown from under 14 per cent of total enrolments in 1984 to nearly 20 per cent in 1988.
The private schools are for the élite, mostly in urban areas.
The best of them have produced a small number of highly educated and skilled people.
The majority, however, are not of very high quality, but the fees are beyond the reach of most Salvadoreans.
This is also true of some thirty private universities which have sprung up in recent years.
This means that at school level there are two worlds of education.
The Dean of the Faculty of Humanities and Science at the University of El Salvador argues that,
because of the conflict which El Salvador is going through, the education system has been divided into two.
One is the private sector, at the service of the governing and dominant class, which is to all intents and purposes closed to people who do not belong to the upper class.
The other large sector is the public sector in which there isn't any exclusivity.
Expenditure on education has diminished as a proportion of public expenditure, falling from 20 per cent in 1979 to 13.7 per cent in 1984, then rising to 17.8 per cent in 1988.
Defence spending for the same years was 12.7 per cent, 24.2 per cent and 28.2 per cent respectively.
In 1981, there was a reorganization of the educational structure involving decentralization of funding to regional ‘nuclei’.
However, since the scheme was implemented in very unfavourable political circumstances and at a time when overall resources for education were shrinking, its impact was limited.
In public sector schools in the late 1980s, shortages of government funding were bringing pressures to charge fees.
A communal representative explains:
One of the problems is that there are teachers who do not have a salary fixed by the Ministry of Education and sometimes this salary is made up from fees paid by the parents since the Ministry argues that they don't receive a sufficient subsidy to pay the teachers.
So we see that if you have a school that goes up to the ninth grade, the Ministry covers the costs up to the sixth grade but the other years are paid for by parents.
A teacher from an urban school in the Soyapango region gave her perspective:
As the economic crisis has got worse, the attention the government has given to education has got less to the point where instead of opening schools they are closing some of them, because — so they say — they can't pay the teachers'  salaries.
The war situation has also had an influence in the deterioration of education because there are places — especially in the rural areas — where there hasn't been any normality in schools for years.
Guatemala
In Guatemala, economic growth went into reverse in the first half of the 1980s.
GDP per capita, already low, slumped to the level of the early 1970s, with negative growth rates persisting from 1981 to 1987.
Guatemala turned to the IMF for assistance with its debt problems in 1983 and agreed a standard package of stabilization measures, including government expenditure cuts and the privatization of several public sector enterprises.
Open urban unemployment increased five-fold between 1981 and 1986, and 45 per cent of the working population did not have a permanent or full-time job.
For those with jobs, salaries remained at the 1980 level until 1985, while inflation rose.
For example, the price of the main staples, beans and maize, increased three-fold in 1985.
Among the most vulnerable sections of the population, these trends have been accompanied by high infant mortality and morbidity, poor housing, high levels of illiteracy and children working from a very early age.
The combination of economic crisis with government discrimination and neglect is reflected in the education system.
In 1986, there were an estimated 10,000 teachers without jobs and 800,000 school children without classrooms.
The proportion of GDP devoted to education is the lowest in Central America: 1.4 per cent in 1986, down from 1.8 in 1980.
This is lower even than El Salvador with 2.5 per cent, and 4 to 5 per cent for other Central American countries in 1986.
In 1987, the coverage at primary level was 62.02 per cent.
The situation is more acute in the rural areas when only 32 per cent of the population aged seven to fourteen years are enrolled at school.
At secondary level (nivel medio ) the coverage in 1987 was 20.97 per cent.
Added to this are the high repetition and drop-out rates.
In Indian communities particularly, whole families sometimes migrate in search of employment.
This affects the education of children as well as literacy classes and other types of non-formal education for adults.
Guatemala has relied heavily on external aid, especially from the United States, though this was suspended for a time under the Carter administration because of Guatemala's human rights record.
However, it has since been resumed, with a strong emphasis on political stabilization.
The level of US aid is not on the scale of that provided for El Salvador, but it has still risen six-fold since the beginning of the 1980s to US$82 million in 1986.
USAID, the World Food Programme, and the UN have funded food donations to the army-controlled model villages set up after the uprising in the highlands in the early 1980s.
Honduras
In Honduras, the pressures of a growing debt crisis built up in the late 1980s.
A 1988 loan agreed with the World Bank was suspended when the government resisted devaluation of the national currency, the lempira.
However, other austerity measures have been imposed which have checked spending on education.
The most obvious problem is the shortage of school places to meet demand, particularly at secondary level.
Large numbers of teachers are unemployed, not because they are not needed, but because the government does not provide funds to employ more teachers.
In 1989, the Minister of Education, Elisa Valle de Martinez, acknowledged that there were some 6,000 teachers out of work.
She added that 80 per cent of the annual education budget was spent on teachers' salaries.
While many schools did not have a full complement of teachers, the Ministry was unable to create new posts for lack of funds.
At primary level, official figures claim a gross enrolment ratio of over 90 per cent, but drop-out levels continue to be very high in rural areas.
Some 40 per cent of primary schools are ‘incomplete’: that is, they do not cover all six grades.
The vast majority of these incomplete schools are in rural areas where classes are also large — the teachers' union COLPROSUMAH claims that in some rural schools there are up to 120 children in a classroom.
Teachers have to cope with multi-grade classes with little in the way of materials and books.
As one rural teacher recounted: ‘Most of us have to teach six grades on our own in one room.
In my case, I've got a 16-year-old in the first grade.
'9 In some cases, schools are closed for two or three days a month while the teachers travel to the capital to collect their pay.
Figure 10.1 Drop-outs from a primary school cohort 1980–85
At secondary level, about 36 per cent of the age group (fourteen to nineteen years) is in school.
In line with the pressures towards  privatization within the economy as a whole, the state is increasingly ceding its role as provider of education, especially at secondary level, to the private sector.
Private schools, however, are only to be found in the urban areas, which further lessens the chances of secondary schooling for rural children.
The table below shows that private and semi-official schools far outnumber state-run schools at secondary level.
But the number of students per school in the state sector is considerably greater than in the private sector.
Table 10.1 Honduras: Public and Private Schools (secondary schools) 1985
In the private sector, there is little control over fees and curricula, and standards are very variable.
In this very poor country, private school fees are beyond the means of much of the population.
However, for families who can afford to pay the fees, the poor record of state schools makes private education seem attractive, even if in reality its quality is poor.
There is also a small sector of very expensive élite schools which teach in Spanish and English, used mainly by upper and upper-middle class families who aspire to send their children abroad to university.
The 1980s have also seen the development of four military schools run by the army but privately financed.
They offer a few scholarships but are mainly attended by boys from well-to-do families who want their sons to get into the officer corps.
In state schools, shortage of funds has meant that pupils or their families have to pay for materials and equipment.
As one community leader put it:
The Ministry of Education with its reduced budget cannot afford to subsidize the schools, so the teacher orders the students to sell lottery tickets in order to buy exercise books, blackboards and so on.
If education is supposed to be free, then educational materials should also be free.
He added that, in his view, education in Honduras is not geared to the needs of the majority of the population and is a ‘shop window’ education: ‘just for appearances, and not to solve the problem itself’.
South Africa: education and the ideology of apartheid
Change is at last on the horizon in South Africa, but its outcome and the effects on its neighbours are not yet clear.
However, any new  government will be faced with the legacy of a distorted education system and the need to find new strategies — as well as major financial investment — to change it.
In Namibia, the newly independent government is already facing this challenge.
The effects of forty years of apartheid ideology and hundreds of years of racial discrimination on South African society have been reflected and reproduced in its education system.
Education has become part of the political battleground, and its transformation into a non-racial system can only be part of a much broader transformation of society.
Since the National Party came to power in South Africa in 1948, the education system has been one of the principal instruments through which the apartheid system has been sustained and perpetuated.
At an ideological level, the purposes of segregated education systems were spelled out in the Bantu Education Act of 1953, which created an education proclaimed to be ‘appropriate’ to the limited prospects for black people under apartheid.
Meanwhile, Christian National Education was designed to fit white people to remain rulers and to enhance their belief in their moral and racial superiority.
In practice, this meant the maintenance of separate and unequal schools giving whites and blacks two different types of education, with great differences in quality and access.
Provision for the two other groups defined under South Africa's system of racial categorization, the ‘Coloureds’(people of mixed race) and Asians, was also separate.
Though marginally better in quality than that provided for the black population, their education fell far short of that which was provided in privileged white schools.
Grossly disproportionate amounts of money per pupil for each system reinforced these differences.
In 1960/61, expenditure per capita for black education at all levels was 12 rand, compared with 158 rand for each white pupil (calculated in 1988 rand).
Economically, these systems fed into largely distinct labour markets.
Until the 1970s, at least, whites retained a virtual monopoly on skilled labour by means of a system of job reservation.
On the economic front, changes in the economy and labour needs since the 1970s have been among the factors encouraging modification of this rigid system.
None the less, the changes in ‘Bantu education’ have not fundamentally altered its status as education for inferiority and subservience.
Since the 1970s, however, fewer and fewer black, Asian or Coloured people have been willing to accept this separate and unequal provision.
Because of its pivotal role in sustaining the apartheid system, education has always been a central political issue, and is perceived by all parties to the conflict as a terrain over which political struggle occurs.
In the 1950s, one focus of black resistance was the Bantu Education Act, along with the other legal structures of apartheid.
However, civil protest was pushed underground in the 1960s after the Sharpeville massacre and the banning of the African National Congress (ANC) and other anti-apartheid organizations.
Education was also at the centre of the revival of resistance to apartheid in the 1970s.
The most striking instance was the 1976 Soweto uprising which was sparked off by secondary school pupils' opposition to the authorities' insistence that they learn certain subjects in Afrikaans, viewed by most black people as the language of the oppressor.
(In contrast, the Coloured population of Cape Province regard Afrikaans as their language and have used it to express their radical sentiments.)
In this battle, secondary schools and their students were on the front line.
This set the tone for the 1980s, when, despite successive draconian states of emergency, both secondary schools and universities have played a major part in challenging the government.
By the mid-1980s, confrontations were not confined to major urban centres, but were occurring in most parts of the country.
Since the Soweto uprising, some reforms of the system have taken place, in response partly to this political pressure but partly also to the changing nature of the South African economy.
All but the far right have acknowledged the need to develop a more skilled workforce, since whites can no longer fill the demand.
The Department of Education and Training (DET) has consequently implemented some changes, including reform of language policy, development of training facilities (though many of these are financed by industry and capital, not by the state) and a marked increase in investment in the African school system.
In the 1980s, sections of the ruling party have also adopted a strategy of attempting to co-opt or at least pacify the small black middle class.
This has principally meant providing more access to consumer goods and services, such as education, while continuing to deny any section of the black population access to political decision-making, or fundamentally changing the economic order.
Given the extreme paucity of provision in the past, to close rather than merely narrow the gap between white education provision and that of other racially defined groups would require an investment well beyond anything that was envisaged before the 1990s.
Leaving aside the question of a total reform of the education system, it is estimated that to provide all children with roughly the same standard of provision as white children have now would entail at least doubling or trebling the education budget.
DET expenditure on black education has certainly risen very significantly during the 1980s, with per capita expenditure for all educational levels rising from 176 rand per pupil (1988 rand) in 1980/81 to 595 rand in 1987/88, though much of this increase had been taken up by the rising bill for teachers' salaries.
By the second half of the 1980s, total spending on African education had exceeded that for whites for the first time, though Africans make up 70 per cent of the population and whites only 17 per cent.
In the homelands, black education is even more under-funded than under DET jurisdiction.
The per capita expenditure in homeland schools in 1987/88 was lower than that in DET schools — with Kwazulu, for example, spending only 412  rand per pupil.
Between 1988/89 and 1989/90, there was a further nominal increase in expenditure on all African education departments (including so-called independent homelands) of 20 per cent.
However, with inflation running at nearly 13 per cent, the increase in real terms was much lower.
The fragmented structure of South African education A major difficulty in assessing how far these changes have actually affected conditions in South African schools is the way in which the education system is structured.
There are no less than seventeen ethnically based departments of education, eleven of which deal with the black population.
These are the Department of Education and Training (DET), responsible for providing education to African children living in ‘white designated areas’; the departments responsible for education in the so-called ‘self-governing states’ or bantustans/homelands (Kwazulu, Lebowa, Gazankulu, Kangwane, Kwandebele and Qwaqwa); and finally there are Ministries of Education in the so-called ‘independent states’of Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Ciskei and Venda, whose ‘independence’is recognized only by the South African government.
Most of these homelands are not even single stretches of territory, but are formed from a series of pockets of land interspersed among white areas.
In addition, there are four departments for white education based on provincial divisions, plus separate departments for Coloured and Asian education.
Table 10.2 South Africa.
expenditure on education by race (millions of rand)
These figures also have to be seen in the context of a rapid rise in demand and enrolments, despite the fact that black education is neither free nor compulsory, and expenditure is not keeping up with need.
Black population growth is not particularly high compared with other African countries — 2.39 per cent annually from 1980 to 1986 — but this still means a growing demand for school places.
In the late 1980s, this demand has been much increased by the partial return to school of those who were out of school or sent away to rural areas during the school boycotts and political turmoil of the late 1970s and early 1980s.
The increase in secondary school enrolments in DET schools has far outstripped the rate of population increase.
Despite some expansion of the system, classes are still very large, on average forty or more, and facilities are overstretched.
In 1988 and 1989, increasing numbers of secondary school students found them-selves excluded from school on a variety of pretexts, including failing their matriculation exams and political activism (see Chapter 13).
According to Sheila Sisulu of the South African Council of Churches, the DET's strategy has largely involved shifting resources from place to place rather than substantially expanding the system.
While they build schools or refurbish classrooms in one place, they are cutting teachers' posts in another, despite evident need.
Since 1987–88, the state has, for the first time, been responsible for providing stationery and textbooks, which previously parents had been expected to pay for.
However, experience around the country suggests that materials arrive late in the school term or not at all.
After years of political repression, the education system has little credibility with those it is supposed to serve.
Even for those who reach the last year of secondary school, only about 50 per cent pass the matriculation exam, and only a handful achieve the higher grade of ‘matric exemption’ which is required for university entrance.
The exam itself has been the subject of considerable dispute, with accusations that not only is the marking inconsistent and some of the markers corrupt, but that the DET and the homelands education authorities frequently ‘move the goalposts’ by altering the pass levels year by year.
The segregated nature of the educational system remains the same as ever, with only a few private schools taking pupils of all races.
For example, with the white population growing at less than I per cent per year between 1980 and 1986, many white schools have suffered dramatic falls in enrolments.
Since 1979, 196 primary schools and seven secondary schools have actually closed.
These facilities have not been for the most part made available to children of other races.
New legislation will allow for a local vote on desegregation of individual areas.
However, a change would be subject to the agreement of over 70 per cent of parents.
Two days after the unbanning of the ANC in February 1990, the  minister in charge of black education, Stoffel van der Merwe, announced that more money would be made available to the black education system.
He said it would take some time to redress the imbalance in spending on black and white children when five times as much is still spent on each white child as on each black child.
However, he told a press conference that for deeply ingrained historical and cultural reasons, to integrate black and white school systems now would risk chaos in the education field as well as political and economic instability: ‘One would probably increase the potential for conflict in the white community if eventually white education is controlled by anyone else but white people themselves.’
Furthermore, the reforms which had been implemented up to 1990 did not emerge from discussions between the communities concerned and the government but have been imposed from above.
Even specific changes which are beneficial at the educational level may be regarded with suspicion because of the political context in which they were made.
Unequal access
The political conflict in black secondary schools, especially in urban areas, has attracted attention to their very considerable problems.
However, segregated education has failed to provide even basic primary education for many black South Africans.
The majority of all black pupils are enrolled at primary level: 78 per cent of all enrolments in the DET's jurisdiction (compared with 56 per cent of all white enrolments).
Drop-outs in the first years of primary education remain very high.
Only 77 per cent of children enrolled in the first grade (Standard Sub-A- SSA) in 1985 survived into the second year (Standard Sub-B — SSB), little better than the 74 per cent of 1966.
It seems that drop-outs at this early stage have remained a serious problem, particularly in rural areas, though there has been some improvement in the retention rates over the whole primary cycle (SSA to Standard Five).
In 1986, official figures put the proportion of black South Africans over twenty without any education at all at 37.4 per cent(not including those in ‘independent’ homelands).
With the addition of the large numbers of children and teenagers who have had only a few years of schooling, rates of illiteracy of well over 50 per cent seem entirely credible (see Chapter 16).
During the 1980s, however, there have been very marked changes in the levels of secondary school enrolment, even allowing for political disruptions.
Between 1980 and 1987, overall enrolment in primary and secondary school increased by 42 per cent.
However, the increase in SSA enrolments was 24 per cent, only just keeping up with population growth, whereas in the final matriculation year (Standard Ten), the increase was 327 per cent .
While the absolute numbers reaching this  level are still relatively small, the rapid growth in secondary school enrolments does reflect the relative expansion in the availability of skilled and semi-skilled jobs, especially in urban areas, which has already been referred to.
South Africa is a large and complex country where conditions in one place cannot be generalized to those in another.
For example, drop-out rates are not spread evenly on a regional basis.
The problem of primary school drop-outs is particularly serious in rural areas and on white farms within the jurisdiction of the DET.
Though whites make up only 17 per cent of the population, they control the most fertile farming areas.
Within the designated white areas live the black workers and their families who provide the labour on commercial farms.
In educational terms they have remained in a kind of limbo.
On white farms, the children of resident farm workers receive schooling only if the farmer is prepared to build a school and take ultimate responsibility for its management.
Until recently the DET provided 50 per cent of the cost of building (75 per cent from 1988 onwards) and water supply, but no other infrastructure, and paid the teachers.
There is no compulsion on the farmer to provide education at all.
As a result, by the time the DET did a survey of farm schooling in 1986, only 3 per cent of the total of 5,782 farm schools offered education for more than seven grades, and 21 per cent did not offer education beyond four grades.
Only forty-nine farm schools had secondary classes, of which no more than five went up to Standard Seven (nine school grades) and nation-wide there was only one full secondary farm school.
Consequently, many farm children have never been to school.
Of those who do attend, many do not go until the age of eight or nine because the schools cannot fit them in.
Classes are crowded, with 40 per cent of schools having a teacher-pupil ratio of 45:1 or higher, and many schools have multi-grade classes.
The DET has proposed a number of measures to upgrade farm schools.
However, while they remain in the hands of farmers, and while agricultural workers are completely dependent on their employers not only for their jobs but also for housing and education, there can be little hope of real improvement or of community involvement.
In the past, children could be compelled to work on the farm, thus effectively denying them schooling.
This has now been made illegal.
But with this kind of education, these children's prospects are poor.
Angie Romorola of the National Education Crisis Committee (NECC) recalls interviewing children on white farms about how they saw their future.
Farmers often warned them of how violent and unpleasant life in urban townships could be, and said it was better to stay in the country.
But as one child said, unless you can find another sort of job (not on the farm), education is no use for farm work.
Here, he said ‘we're all just like mealies [corn cobs]in a sack’.
In the townships within white-designated urban areas, opportunities to go to school are greater, at least at primary level.
But the combination of poor school facilities, extreme political tensions in schools and in townships, constant repression and security force interference, recent exclusions of children from school and scepticism about the value of ‘Bantu education’ all contribute to high drop-outs and low achievement, especially at secondary level.
In many areas, there were sustained disruptions of schooling, especially during school boycotts in many areas in the early 1980s.
In Natal, the severe disruptions caused in the townships by conflict between supporters of Inkatha and the United Democratic Front (UDF) have meant that many children have lost years of school.
Indian and Coloured schooling has, on the whole, been better than the African system, but again, in the ‘white’ rural areas there are pockets of severe deprivation.
For example, in rural Cape Province, especially in the famous wine-growing areas, there are groups of Coloured workers who still live in semi-feudal conditions similar to those found among black workers on white farms in other parts of the country.
The ‘homelands’ are, for the most part, over-populated, overgrazed, and impoverished.
Apart from their resident populations, over the years they have served as a ‘dumping ground’ for people forcibly removed by the South African government from ‘white’areas.
These areas are dependent on South Africa economically, and are run by local political élites dependent on South African support, frequently with corrupt administrations.
The standard of living is low, and services limited.
The original goal of South Africa's bantustan policy was to create segregated reserves of cheap labour for factories, farms and services in the adjoining white areas.
Today there is still little local employment except in the ‘homelands’ administrations.
Migrant remittances from those who work in white areas are a major source of income.
The government's policy of dividing the different ethnic groups among the African population has in some cases encouraged particularist nationalisms, nowhere more so than in Kwazulu, where the ‘Zulu nationalism’ of the Inkatha movement has contributed to a polarization of black society in Natal, with highly detrimental effects on the education system and on the lives of young people (Chapter 13).
The school systems, decentralized to puppet ‘homelands’ governments, are of even poorer quality than those provided by the DET.
However, administrative separation from South Africa has not necessarily meant that homeland education departments are entirely autonomous.
The DET, says Taylor,
exerts a strong indirect influence on the other ten African departments, all of these having been established by the DET or one of its predecessors before being granted ‘independence’.
Not only were the structures and systems of these departments inherited from Pretoria, but the genealogy of their staffing  policies derive from the same origin.
The DET also plays a leading role in the drawing up of syllabuses and work programmes, the setting and marking of exams, and the approval of textbooks and other materials.
The majority of African departments adopt these curricular policies and materials directly; any changes which may be effected are of a minor quantitative nature.
At the same time, the decentralization of educational responsibilities to the homeland governments means that Pretoria and the DET can disclaim responsibility for problems in the homelands.
Another issue, as yet little studied or confronted, is that of gender differences in access to education and achievement at school.
So far, general levels of awareness of the consequences of gender discrimination are still very low, especially in the formal education sector.
On a broader front, even the popular movements are only now beginning to raise issues connected with gender and women's rights despite the long-standing existence of women's groups which have campaigned on a variety of anti-apartheid issues.
In terms of the future of formal education, priority has been given to achievement of non-racial education, and neither questions of female access and achievement, nor the gendered content of educational materials, have been given much attention.
In the non-formal sector, however, some groups have tried to address these issues.
According to Angie Romorola, gender inequalities are very well entrenched.
Whereas women are frequently family breadwinners (in contrast with women in white South African society), they are otherwise expected to be subordinate to men.
The apartheid system has historically led to the disintegration of family and kin structures, but has not replaced it with anything else.
In formal education, the pressures of life under apartheid have had contradictory impacts on women.
Girls are often pulled out of school to look after younger children, especially in urban areas, since there is no childcare for many children under school age.
The state offers small subsidies to pre-schools, but the system is poorly developed except for some voluntary projects, and in the townships both parents frequently work.
Another problem is the pressure on young women to marry and have children by the age of eighteen to twenty.
Until the age restrictions were introduced in secondary schools, it was not uncommon for boys to continue at school as long as it took — even until twenty-two or so.
For girls, this was less acceptable.
However, official figures suggest that more girls have tended to stay at school to secondary level than boys, both in the homelands and in DET areas.
In general, this is probably because the pressure on boys and young men to go out to work is much greater.
Where there has been serious political conflict, schoolgirls have often been involved in protests and boycotts.
However, there is rather less chance that girls will be detained or go on the run from the security forces, a factor which has increased male drop-out levels.
In recent years, teenage girls in townships like Soweto have been deterred from  attending school, however, by the growing levels of violence directed against them, including numerous cases of rape, both by males from their schools and by outside gangs.
An escape from these adverse educational conditions for the more affluent sections of black society is to send their children to the growing number of private schools, mainly in urban and suburban areas.
Many of these schools are more liberal in tone and educational curriculum, and have higher academic standards and a better environment than township schools.
However, these are only within the reach of the better-off and those who can win a scholarship or bursary.
Clearly this offers no solution for the majority of students from low-income families, while for most rural children no such alternatives exist.
A kind of halfway house for urban secondary students is the proliferation of Saturday and evening schools to help students pass their matriculation exam.
Some of these, certainly in Johannesburg, are located in the city, far from the townships, and involve a long journey.
On the whole these attract students with some money to spare.
Other classes of this kind, sometimes called ‘street academies’, exist in the townships and cater to youngsters who have dropped out of school or want extra tuition outside school.
But in poor families, many youngsters spend Saturdays earning money or helping at home, which prevents them attending such classes.
These institutions are simply coping with low pass rates in the matriculation exam, an immediate manifestation of a broader problem of apartheid education which they can do nothing to solve.
The government itself has encouraged individual rather than collective advancement by turning much of the initiative for vocational and technical training over to the private sector — with local and multinational companies selecting candidates for higher-level training and providing scholarships and bursaries to this end.
Since the mid-1980s, there has also been a sharp growth in the numbers of foreign aid donors giving various kinds of scholarships, either for study abroad or training in South Africa.
In the last few years, South Africa, though a rich country compared with its northern neighbours, has none the less been hit by international economic trends, including declining gold prices, as well as by pressures of sanctions.
Furthermore, a large proportion of the budget has been spent on both internal security and the war with Angola.
Inflation has been above 11.5 per cent since 1983, and reached 18.6 per cent in 1986.
Between 1981 and 1986, real average personal disposable incomes fell by over 17 per cent.
At the same time, economic recession has led to sharp increases in unemployment, especially among young black people, and there has been a growth in black migration from impoverished and drought-stricken rural areas since the ending of influx controls in 1986.
The living conditions of many of these migrants in illegal squatter settlements is often  precarious.
They also have difficulties in sending their children to school because they do not have the correct papers.
WUS and educational assistance to South Africa WUS International and WUS(UK) have a long history of supporting the efforts of the black majority of South Africans to overcome the educational discrimination which is an integral part of apartheid.
This support takes a variety of forms.
WUS provides scholarships and bursaries in front-line states for South Africans forced to flee into exile.
Young people and students were still fleeing during the summer of 1990, in fear of harassment, detention and violence, particularly in the Natal region.
WUS provides a limited number of scholarships in the United Kingdom, primarily for South Africans in exile, but it is also prepared to consider emergency applications from inside South Africa.
Following the unbanning of the ANC and other organizations and the release of Nelson Mandela, the focus of the programme has become much more developmental, supporting group training (Access) and postgraduate study.
In the United Kingdom, WUS also promotes and co-ordinates placements on the Southern African Campus Scholarship Scheme.
These are ‘solidarity scholarships’ run and financed by students, staff and institutions in the United Kingdom.
More than eighty higher education institutions now participate in this scheme.
Inside South Africa, WUS supports the provision of scholarships and bursaries, primarily, but not exclusively, in the fields of education and medicine.
Support in 1990 has enabled several thousand black students to continue into higher education.
WUS also supports more than thirty educational projects inside South Africa, ranging from literacy work to specialized research projects.
Attitudes to education
Like most other oppressive systems, apartheid education has had an impact on individuals, families and communities which goes beyond economic disadvantage and even political disenfranchisement.
A system which is openly and avowedly inferior does not encourage those who participate in it to have a high self-esteem.
In the case of South Africa, this kind of self-esteem has to be sought in deliberately resisting the implications of what is taught rather than accepting them.
The education system is designed to imply that the whole of black African society is inferior and marginal, morally and intellectually; that blacks have no history worthy of recollection; that their culture is at best no more than ‘picturesque’.
These ideas have been built into  curricula and materials.
Over the last few years, some of the gross distortions of early generations of textbooks have been removed.
However, history, geography, literature and indeed all social sciences are still, for the most part, filtered through the assumptions of white society.
One result is the profoundly ambivalent attitude to education of most black South Africans.
Responses range from feelings of helplessness to anger — the latter increasingly common.
Most people are keen for their children to be educated but despair at the kind of education they receive.
Many students have little faith in the value of what or how they are taught and largely despise school.
They also know that the chances of a job at the end of it are small.
Yet increasing numbers struggle to pass matriculation exams.
My teacher
My teacher's like a battle tank
Roaring at the enemy
The enemy is us
And the roaring is the lesson
He keeps us in a prison camp
Torturing us every day
And he will keep on torturing us
Till our minds are worn away.
Poem by a 13-year-old student, writing in a frequently banned student magazine, Cape Province, mid-1980s.
My teacher
The role of black teachers in apartheid education is even more invidious.
Teachers can be punished for deviating, either politically or administratively, from the system imposed on them, and this can include the loss of their jobs.
So they are required constantly to compromise.
The poor physical conditions under which many teachers have to work may be difficult enough, but their problems are compounded by the gulf which has developed in many schools between teachers and pupils, and the low regard in which teachers are held.
Their training and the pressure to conform to state rules and regulations have over the years made them appear to their pupils, and many parents, as agents of the regime.
Physical attacks on teachers by students are not unusual.
In recent years, the DET has begun to offer carrots as well as sticks.
About one-third of black teachers in DET secondary schools have no secondary teaching qualifications (see Figure 10.2).
While teachers without full qualifications are poorly paid, qualified teachers are now relatively well off.
So there has been a scramble among unqualified teachers to obtain upgrading.
However, they are not  always offered study leave or proper in-service training to achieve these qualifications, and so they tend to use school hours to do their own work rather than concentrating on their students.
Absenteeism among teachers is also common, encouraged by the present chaotic conditions in many schools.
Figure 10.2 Qualifications: South Africa: black teachers
Challenging the system
While the education system has been a major target for opponents of apartheid since the 1953 Bantu Education Act, it was not until the 1980s that more concrete attempts were made to formulate ideas for another kind of education system.
In the 1970s, the prevailing demand among political activists and their academic sympathizers was for freedom first and education later.
This view has since been altered to contend that the struggle for education is part of the struggle for freedom and that some demands which affect the education system should be fought for while apartheid is still in place.
One of the turning points was the schools boycott movement in the early 1980s, initiated by the black student movements, which left many thousands of black children from seven-year-olds to teenagers effectively out of school for several years.
Some parents moved their children to rural areas to avoid the disruption and continue their schooling.
As concern grew about this situation, particularly in the heartland of Soweto, parents came together in community groups with students and progressive teachers, and agreed upon an organized return to classes.
One outcome of this initiative was the formation of the National Education Crisis Committee (NECC) in 1985.
The return to school was accompanied by a new call for ‘people's education’, focusing on demands for an end to racial discrimination in education, democratic community participation in decision-making in schools, and a more relevant curriculum purged of racism.
Clearly, this is a programme which could command considerable support, but its development has been impeded by several problems.
The first, and most significant, was the re-imposition of the state of emergency in 1986.
The NECC's leadership were all detained, and the organization was banned, along with many other anti-apartheid organizations.
This effectively strangled its activities for several years.
Furthermore, most parent-teacher-student bodies in the community were suppressed.
Those groups which were able to continue operating were restricted in their mobility and contacts.
So, until recently, the ideas behind the movement have largely remained at the level of slogans and their deeper implications have not really been worked out.
However, since the unbanning of the ANC, UDF and other anti-apartheid groups, the NECC has regrouped.
Although the political future remains unclear, the new circumstances have allowed much more room to manoeuvre than in the past.
The challenges are none the less great, and the organization has still to define its role.
As one of its leaders put it, the NECC is ‘almost drowning in possibilities’.
State power, and consequently that of the education authorities, may have been eroded, but it still controls formal education.
The NECC's first initiative, echoed by Nelson Mandela on his first day out of gaol, was to urge all children to return to school.
This was viewed as crucial to end the long period of disruption in schools and to deal with the problems of student demotivation.
The leadership of the NECC is well aware of the contradictions in urging children back into the overcrowded classrooms of a system still based on apartheid principles.
However, while acknowledging the need to ‘normalize’ education, it aims to challenge the assumptions of the DET, not least their refusal (up until March 1990) to shift black children from overcrowded township classrooms into empty places in white schools.
Another area on which a challenge has been launched is on the standards of administration and marking of the discredited matriculation examination.
There are many kinds of difficulties confronting an organization which is trying to make a start on restructuring education, but without access to formal power.
Not least of these are disagreements within its own ranks.
For example, students, both at secondary school and university, for whom activism rather than strategic thinking has been the prime consideration in the struggle, have to be persuaded to co-operate.
Furthermore, numbers of other organizations, large and small, have been involved in a variety of ‘alternative’ educational projects, and the question arises as to how much autonomy these should retain.
There are also numerous problems arising out of the broader political situation: as of 1990 these include the possibility of reintegrating all or some of the homelands into a national education system; the outcome of the bid for national political status by the Natal-based Inkatha movement, with attendant violence which has severely disrupted life in the Transvaal as well as Natal; and the length of time it takes to dismantle the apartheid system completely.
Finally, the whole idea of people's education will need elaboration, and how it can be implemented will depend on these political developments.
One of its greatest challenges will concern the future role and status of teachers.
The alienation of large numbers of teachers, and their uneasy relationships with students and communities are problems which will not vanish overnight.
A recent step forward was the announcement in October 1990 of the formation of a broad-based teachers' organization — the South African Democratic Teachers' Union — which brings together a number of teachers' unions previously separated on racial, geographical and political lines.
This may initiate a wider discussion of the role of teachers in a new South Africa and begin to change entrenched attitudes.
Certainly the resolution of these problems will be crucial for the development of a more democratic and less authoritarian education system.
As one observer noted, there is a need to develop democratic practice in the classroom as well as outside it, if people's education is not to become simply ‘a process of looking for a new set of right answers’.
Namibia — a new beginning?
South Africa's education policy in Namibia mirrored its policies at home.
It created segregated education systems with eleven departments of education divided on regional lines in addition to departments for whites, Coloureds and Rehoboth (German speakers).
Afrikaans was the dominant language of instruction.
Statistics are poor and not easily comparable, but those which do exist show stark contrasts in conditions between different education authorities.
For example, in Ovamboland, the northern region, worst hit by the war, drop-out rates at primary school are highest.
Of the children who started school in 1983, 50 per cent had dropped out after four years.
The differences were also evident in the age range of primary school pupils.
In the white sector, 94 per cent of primary school pupils were aged twelve or below.
In Ovamboland 60 per cent of primary pupils were aged fifteen or above.
In other black education authorities (Caprivians, Hereros, Damaras) the main age range in primary schools was eleven to fifteen.
Very few Namibians reached the end of secondary school.
The system was highly authoritarian, with detailed control of curricula and how teachers used them.
While there did not seem to be an overall shortage of teachers, their distribution was very uneven between regions, and their qualifications varied widely.
As in South Africa itself, the authorities had increased spending on education over the last few years, so that qualified teachers are fairly well paid, and except in the poorest regions, school building stock is in reasonable repair.
In recent years, there has been considerable private sector intervention in secondary level education and vocational and technical training, mainly by the large mining companies.
This, in outline, is the situation facing the government of the newly independent state.
Because of its mineral wealth, Namibia is not a poor country by African standards, but the challenge will be to channel that wealth towards internal social and economic development, rather than into the pockets of multi-national and South African mining interests.
Meanwhile, large numbers of Namibians are extremely poor and many more are still dependent on remittances from workers in South Africa for a living.
The South West African People's Organisation (SWAPO), formed in 1959, became involved in educational provision as well as in fighting the South African occupation.
With the help of the United Nations Institute for Namibia (UNIN) and other agencies, SWAPO developed a network of schools which served the large refugee population in camps in Angola and Zambia.
These schools were for children but adult education and literacy classes were also provided.
The movement has therefore had considerable experience of educational provision in exile.
Access courses for Namibians WUS(UK) has run two special scholarship programmes in the United Kingdom for Namibians forced to leave their country before independence and take refuge in the front-line states.
These courses have allowed two groups of mature students whose education was inadequate and disrupted to study science from pre-GCSE to degree or HND level.
The two groups on the four- and five-year study programme had been denied any science education at all in pre-independence Namibia.
WUS(UK) also organized crash courses in exam techniques, English language and study skills for these students.
Members of the group progressed from pre-access courses to study science in higher education.
Most studied mining and geology, areas vital to Namibia's future.
As independence approached, all the Namibian students on these courses went home to take part in the election process.
Around half returned almost immediately, while half deferred their studies for a year.
On coming to power, SWAPO announced an ambitious programme of educational expansion, to provide ten years of schooling for all Namibians with English as the official language of instruction.
This programme is likely to take time to implement.
As in post-independence Zimbabwe, enrolments will probably expand very rapidly.
If that is the case, in the short run the education system may have difficulty in servicing this new demand.
First, there is the problem of how to integrate the fragmented educational administration; and second, how to put into effect a new curriculum to replace the South African one.
Aside from the logistics of creating new books and materials to replace the present South African-produced materials, there will have to be a major push to upgrade and retrain teachers.
Although many teachers opposed the apartheid regime, their only training has been in the rigid and authoritarian methods of education used in black South African schools, with no freedom or initiative allowed to the teacher.
Retraining would, therefore, need to include some rethinking of the role of the teacher.
Another hurdle will be the use of English as the medium of instruction.
While SWAPO's decision to opt for English as the official language reflects a wish to avoid conflicts between different indigenous languages, relatively few people who have not been refugees know English well, and this will have to be taken into consideration in teacher training.
Imposing English at all levels of the education system may not turn out to be either practical or appropriate.
The history of educational neglect in Namibia has left many adults, especially in rural areas, without any schooling.
The demand for  literacy and adult education is likely to be considerable.
The Namibian churches, which played an important role in resistance to the South African regime, and in providing basic education before independence, seem likely to play an important part in this non-formal education.