

The People
The handwriting in the old records has faded.
The faces in the old photographs look out solemnly and silently at us.
Some of the names in the old minute books are only names.
They belong to a world a hundred years away from us.
We cannot help but wonder what kind of people they were, how they lived and what kind of place they lived in.
It is probably impossible to recapture with any approach to accuracy or completeness the atmosphere of a past age but, happily, in the 1930s a former member of the Edenderry congregation left an account of what it was like to grow up in that distant time.
There was the school with its faded maps, its cardboard-mounted Ten Commandments and the Regulations of the National Commissioners of Education in Dublin (for this was long before the Partition of Ireland), the De Vere Foster copybooks, Joyce's histories, Sullivan's geographies and grammars, long desks with the initials of  past generations cut on both sides, clerical school management (the Methodists controlled five schools in the area — Thomas Street, Edgarstown, Derrycarne, Cloncore and Ballinary), teachers paid by results and anxious under the eyes of H M Inspectors (too often then unenlightened inquisitors).
Generally the curriculum following the three ‘R’ s, tonic sol-fa notation for music, Irish and English history, drawing (both freehand and scale), geography and in later years a little elementary science.
Occasionally teachers were allowed to fit into school hours or overtime courses some algebra, Euclid, French, Latin and Irish.
The Principal of Thomas Street School (later the Reverend Canon J A Davidson MA) taught some Greek.
Discipline was severe.
Children literally had to ‘toe the line’— a circle painted on the floor for the use of classes.
The pupils discussed, then as later, whether a horse's hair across the palm of the hand would split the bamboo cane picked by the master for its elastic swishing quality.
Is it any wonder that, when the occasional circus came to town, they mitched?
Outside the schoolroom there was much to excite a boy — fair-days, the Royal Irish Constabulary, the donkey races, the pig-killings, the fights outside the public houses, the drumming of the Orange parades and the occasional riots.
There was also much to offset these scenes — catechism, religious instruction, Sunday School prize-givings and what were called soirees, really tea-parties with currant loaves and penny baps.
There were rare excursions to seaside or country by train or charabanc, or the occasional boat trip on Lough Neagh.
At home there was plain living.
Potatoes and bread were the staples of the diet.
Champ, panada (bread and milk), slim bread (potato bread), porridge of various kinds, soda farls, oatcakes, apple dumplings — all were popular, most of them being based on bread and potatoes.
Fish, especially herring and pollen, came from Lough Neagh.
There were, of course, fresh vegetables, some fruit (apples, pears and plums) eggs, milk, buttermilk and meat.
Many of these were collected from the farms of relatives and neighbours.
It was a table with few delicacies.
The salt box, the griddle, the fire of turf — or of coal (at £1 a ton) brought in heavy lighters by canal and river from Newry and Warrenpoint — the settle-bed, oil-lamps and candles meant an inside round of household work added to the labour of garden, byre and field, all relieved by the excitement of weddings and wakes.
Picture-houses, plumbing, household science, wireless, television, electricity and gas and other urban amenities belonged to the future.
Eventually the area around the Memorial Church was lighted by a single gas lamp on the opposite side of the road at the junction with Killicomaine Road.
In the 1930s one elderly man made his way to church through Bachelor's Walk on winter Sunday evenings by the light of a hand-lantern.
Old customs and superstitions still lingered.
One of the ‘traditious obscurities’ of those days was the Christmas Rhyming, a practice shrouded in mystery.
The fragments of the drama thus enacted — St George, St Patrick, Beelzebub, the Devil and Devil Doit — may have derived from pre-Christian times.
The pulpit had won a victory over the theatre, and the stage was thought by many to be a thing of the devil.
But the Christmas mummers remained — and some who read this will be able to recall them.
Clothes were much less colourful.
The women wore dark colours and shawls and even small boys looked uneasily serious in their heavy best clothes and cloth caps.
But if clothes were drab, language was much less so.
Wireless, the cinema and television had not yet had the opportunity to smooth down all individuality in the spoken word and local dialect still flourished.
Some of that almost-lost flavour can still be savoured in books like William Lutton's ‘Montiaghisms’(1923, but compiled 80 or 90 years earlier), P W Joyce's English as we speak it in Ireland’(1910) or, more recently, T G F Paterson's Country Cracks’(1939).
The population of the area was then over 60% rural.
In the countryside of North Armagh the  smallholder was dominant and most of the smallholders were handloom weavers.
A typical weaver's cottage from the district may be seen in the Ulster Folk Museum.
Earlier in the nineteenth century it was estimated that there were 2000 handloom weavers within a radius of 7 or 8 miles from Portadown.
Many of these later moved into the town with the building of factories equipped with power looms.
The first of these factories was built in 1860.
Wages were paid in gold sovereigns and half-sovereigns.
The farthing was still a useful unit of currency and the coins of the time had a grace and beauty which have since disappeared.
A man might hope to support a wife and fairly large family on a pound a week; some managed on ten shillings (50 p) a week.
Matchmakers were still at work in the countryside.
On the small farms the woman of the house looked after the home and the farmyard — stable and cattle-byre, pigsty, hen-house, hayrick and turfrick, the straw-covered pit of turnips and mangels.
The men looked after the fields and the garden.
Immemorial folklore confirmed the division of tasks.
The old were regarded with respect and age had its special privilege and authority.
Death evoked perhaps the chief expression of traditional social life — every man in death commands a multitude.
For those who wished to widen their horizons there were educational influences outside the classroom.
There were books, discussions, lectures, contacts with other traditions.
Some of the churches attempted to provide for the needs of their members by maintaining small libraries.
In 1846, for example, Newmills Presbyterian Church (shortly to celebrate its Bi-Centenary in 1996) had a congregational library of 128 volumes.
In the 1880s the Edenderry Sunday School library contained 327 volumes, mainly biblical, theological, biographical, reference and children's books.
There was some fiction but not one of the great nineteenth century novelists was represented in it.
Additions were made at regular intervals and there was a pleasing rule that, even if a Sunday School scholar was unable to read, a book might nevertheless be lent out for the benefit of the family.
In 1886 the sum of £8-17-0 was raised by a Spelling-Bee to buy new books for the library.
By 1898 the number of books had fallen to about 180, 44 of which had been added the previous year.
Two hundred catalogues of the library were printed and there were about a dozen borrowers a week.
By 1905 the number of volumes had risen again to almost 300.
Prizes awarded in the Edenderry Sunday School between 1898 and 1911 included Southey's ‘Life of Nelson’, C H Evans's ‘Kings without Crowns: Great Orators and Statesmen’, ‘John Knox and his Times’, ‘Ulrich Zwingli’, Thayer's ‘Benjamin Franklin’, Morley's ‘Life of Richard Cobden’, Southey's ‘Life of Wesley’, Justin McCarthy's ‘Story of Gladstone's Life’, Ruskin's ‘Lectures on Architecture and Painting’ and John Richard Green's ‘Short History of the English People’.
Most of them were read.
In the 1930s the prizes tended to be more of a purely religious nature — the Methodist Hymn Book and Sunday School Hymn Book, the New Testament and the Bible.
In 1937 Mrs Edna Wall, at her own request, received a copy of ‘Hymns Ancient and Modern’.
The Public Lecture was very popular and the Reverend J C Robertson and Dr Alexander McCrea lectured in Edenderry Memorial and Thomas Street on the Reformation, the Book of Genesis (an attempt to reconcile Darwinian theories with Biblical revelation) and John Wesley.
The Reverend George R Wedgewood, later to be Vice-President of the Conference, lectured on the eighteenth century and the place of the Wesleys in it and the Reverend Mark Guy Pearse, colleague of Hugh Price Hughes of West London Mission, spoke on Cornwall.
The Reverend James Smyth LLD later Principal of the United Church Theological College in Montreal, had an excellent lecture on Napoleon.
In 1907 the Reverend C S Greaves discussed the Eternal City, Eldorado and his own travels in Palestine.
The Reverend Wesley Guard of Belfast, soon to preach at the opening of the Memorial Church, lectured in Thomas Street Schoolroom at 8.00 pm on Thursday 9 May 1889 on ‘Henry VIII and his Times, or A Chapter in Providence’.
Mr Charles Johnston JP presided.
Tickets were sixpence each and the proceeds were in aid of Edenderry Tabernacle Sunday School.
Have you ever wondered why the main hall attached to Thomas Street Church is still known as the ‘Lecture Hall’?
Some were ambitious to explore other spheres of life beyond the local scene.
A book like Samuel Smiles's ‘Self-Help’(1859) was still widely read and a potent influence.
(It has been republished in recent years with a preface by Sir Keith Joseph.)
The most accessible way of progress was through education, for most people had very little money and men were prepared to study in the early morning and late at night during a long week's work — 10 hours a day for five days and five hours on Saturdays.
Many examples could be quoted.
Harry Lamb worked on his father's farm, managed on five hours' sleep a night and studied to prepare himself for the Church of Ireland ministry.
He spent a long life as a rector and was a Canon of St Patrick's, Armagh.
Moses Jeffers was a weaver in the linen factory of Hamilton Robb.
He saved enough to buy a small hat-shop in Belfast, installed a manageress and on the slender profits of this enterprise read medicine at Queen's University, Belfast, becoming later a consultant physician in Sydney, Australia.
The present writer owes him a particularly deep debt of gratitude.
William John Johnston, with very little formal education, emigrated to Canada at the age of 25, graduated from McGill University as Bachelor of Divinity.
becoming later a Doctor of Divinity and a distinguished Minister of the United Church of Canada.
Robert England, after service in the 1914–18 War — he was the last officer left alive at Vimy Ridge and won the MC at Cambrai — graduated from Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario and the Sorbonne and, after a series of educational, business, academic and government appointments, was chairman of the University Requirements Committee in Ottawa.
Remember that people were then leaving school at 12 or 14 and there was no secondary education available in the town.
Lurgan College (or the Watt's Endowed School), founded in the 1870s, Friends' School Lisburn and Methodist College, Belfast, were beyond the reach of the ordinary boy.
(Girls had even less chance of continuing their education.)
There was, incidentally, a moment in the 1860s when it seemed that the newly proposed Methodist College might be founded in Portadown but then, for various reasons, Belfast was chosen.
At the time of writing it is good to notice that local boys from ordinary homes in Portadown are still doing well.
The Court Circular for 19 October 1990 reports the following: ‘The Queen this afternoon visited Oriel College, Oxford and was present at the Installation Service in the Chapel of the Reverend Professor Ernest Nicholson as the Fiftieth Provost of the College.
The Queen later honoured the Provost with her presence at dinner.’
Professor Nicholson (Hart Memorial Primary School, Portadown Technical College, as it then was, and Portadown College) is a former parishioner of St Mark's and his wife, Hazel, was a member of Derryall Methodist Church.
The Church as it was from 1891–1908
The Place
What sort of place was Portadown?
It originated in the seventeenth century during the Plantation of Ulster.
The earliest inhabitants of the area some 4000 years ago, however, left traces of their presence in the form of tools like stone axes, many of which may be seen in the Armagh County Museum.
Many of these axes were discovered in Edenderry.
Fishermen of the time from Lough Neagh almost certainly travelled up the Bann to the crossing-point at the place where Portadown now stands.
During the early Christian period there was a church at Mahon associated with St Patrick and a well named after him.
Danish invaders found their way to Lough Neagh between AD 849 and AD 1014 but whether they came up the Bann is uncertain.
One relic of their presence survives in the name of Oxford Island — Ost-fjord or East Inlet.
There are early mentions of the Portadown district in Latin documents about Papal taxation in 1296 and 1302 where the references are to Plebs Varren (or, more familiarly, Ballyoran) and the name ‘Ballywarren al' Portadowne’ is in the Ulster Inquisitions of 1609 but Portadown as a village only came into existence at the Plantation of Ulster.
Following the Flight of the Earls from Lough Swilly in 1607, the English government decided to settle Ulster with English settlers and in 1610 William Powell received a grant of 2000 acres in the Manor of Ballynevoran.
It included over 40 townlands on both sides of the Bann and despite their unfamiliar forms some of the names may strike a familiar chord: Knocknamocally, Ballynonaghie, Ballyvickranell, Edenidery, Taunagh, Mehain, Clonagh, Ballygaragan, Carricke, Garravaghy and Dromnasough.
Powell sold out to Richard Rolleston the following year and he, in turn, transferred the land to Richard Cope who by 1619 had sold most of it to Michael Obins.
Michael Obins lost the estate in 1626, having been outlawed for non-payment of debts.
In 1631 it was granted afresh to his widow, Prudence, by King Charles I with the stipulation that a free market was to  be held in the district weekly ‘on the Sabbath day’(ie on Saturdays)— and Saturday is still the market day.
Michael Obins built a large Elizabethan-style residence for himself and 14 houses in which were settled 14 English families.
By 1837 all that survived of the house were the garden and the avenue.
The last member of the Obins family to hold land here was the Reverend Michael Eyre Obins, born about 1779, who in 1820 sold the property to Robert Sparrow of Tandragee, whose grand-daughter, Millicent, married a member of the Montagu family (Lord Mandeville) in 1822.
Through her marriage the lands passed to the Dukes of Manchester.
The various owners are recalled by the street names: Obins Street, the Walk (ie Castle Walk), Castle Street, Castle Avenue, Montagu Street, Mandeville Street.
The Obins Castle was situated near where McGredy's Nurseries used to be.
The Arms of Portadown College are based on charges from the Arms of the Obins and Montagu families.
Had the Powells not come from England in 1609–10 there possibly would have been no Portadown, for a map of 1609 shows no trace of any settlement in the area.
Drumcree and Seagoe might have developed as small villages.
The town grew very slowly and in the seventeenth century suffered as a result of the Cromwellian Civil Wars.
In 1641 the Castle was taken and plundered by Toole McCann.
Many English settlers (some say 154) were thrown into the Bann and drowned.
The wooden bridge over the river was destroyed but shortly afterwards was replaced by a similar structure.
The town was burnt in June 1646 by the  Irish and in October of the same year was occupied by a garrison of English troops.
During its occupation by Cromwell's troops, in 1657, it was found ‘a fit place for a school’ and Simon Hornby was master.
About the same time it was recommended that the church at Seagoe should be removed to Edenderry for the greater convenience of the parishioners, a suggestion not implemented.
In 1660 the Carrick estate was bought by Captain Valentine Blacker from Sir Anthony Cope of Loughgall.
In 1689 and 1692 troops of King William III were quartered in the town, on the latter occasion staying for the winter.
In the garden of Burleigh Court, situated near the present Ulster Bank, there stood for a long time an old pear tree known as ‘King William's pear tree’.
In the mid-eighteenth century the linen industry made its appearance, though power looms had to wait till after the nineteenth century Industrial Revolution.
In 1750 the town sought to have a linen market set up but met with opposition from Richhill where a linen market had been flourishing.
Another market, for wheat and general grain, was established by Major Obins and Mr George Woodhouse in 1780 and by 1819 the annual purchases in this market amounted to over 5000 tons.
One of the most unusual figures of Portadown in the eighteenth century was the Very Reverend Stewart Blacker, something of a clerical pluralist, being Rector of Drumcree, Vicar of Seagoe, Archdeacon of Dromore and Dean of Leighlin.
Born in 1740, he entered Trinity College, Dublin in 1759, having ridden at Newry Races in 1758.
While Curate of Annahilt (near Hillsborough) he kept a private pack of hounds.
While Dean of Leighlin he hunted on the banks of the Barrow but his main residence was at Carrickblacker where he kept a stable of fine horses and in 1786 imported Hungarian hares to improve the native stock.
From 12 October 1810 to St Patrick's Day 1811 he either hunted or exercised his hounds every day, Sundays included.
As he conducted Divine Service in the old Seagoe Parish Church his dogs scampered around the churchyard.
He was well known at the Maze Races where he took part in many heats with various friends, including Edward Wakefield, the Quaker from Moyallon.
Their race at the Maze Meeting was the subject of a sporting print called ‘The Dean and the Quaker’ and the name was later adopted by a local tavern.
He ran a steeplechase from Loughgall to Hamiltonsbawn with Colonel Cope of Loughgall, a race  which the Dean won.
He continued to hunt and race till he was well over 83, dying in 1826 at the age of 86.
In 1820 Portadown had about 100 houses and a population of 900.
There were 17 public houses, roughly one for every 50 people.
A good linen and yarn market was by now held in the town every Saturday, having been established in 1762.
The bridge over the Bann was an important crossing-point.
A new one had been built in 1708 and this was replaced by a further wooden bridge in 1750, which was, in turn, replaced in 1764.
A great flood in 1786 washed this away and it was followed by a bridge of 13 arches.
The present bridge, widened in the 1920s, was begun in 1835 and completed in 1837 at a cost of £9000.
This bridge was built on dry land and afterwards the course of the river was diverted.
A straight channel was cut under the new bridge for the river to run in and it joined the original channel near the site of the old boathouse, the river's original course having been near where the old Post Office used to stand.
The widening of the bridge in 1922 cost £15 000.
The railway had come from Belfast in 1842, the original station having been at Seagoe and some will still recall the old sidings which used to be near the signal-box there.
In 1848 the passenger station was built at Edenderry, a fine building, now regrettably demolished.
By the mid-nineteenth century there was a healthy trade in corn, pork, cattle and agricultural produce.
Corn was shipped to Newry and Belfast for export to England and vessels up to 60 tons brought back timber, coal and slates.
Linen yarn was sold in great quantities at the Saturday market and lawn, cambric and sheeting found buyers in the bleachers and factors of Banbridge.
Cotton goods were woven for the Belfast merchants.
There was also porter-brewing and a large distillery used 3000 tons of malt annually.
Visitors to the town have left varying impressions.
About 1816 it was unfavourably compared with Clonmel which had then a population of 10 000.
Portadown was criticized for having failed to take advantage of its favourable position for trade.
In the centre of a rich and densely populated countryside with ready access by canal and river to 5 of the most populous counties in Ireland it still remained ‘but a small town of very insignificant appearance’ with only about 867 inhabitants.
The second edition of Lewis's ‘Topographical Dictionary’ in 1840  speaks of how the town had been greatly improved during the previous 40 years.
The chief trade was in corn, pork, cattle and agricultural produce, on average £10 000 to £15 000 weekly being laid out in the purchase of grain.
Sir Charles Coote, over 30 years earlier, had spoken of the large brick houses and well assorted shops, though he clearly regarded Richhill as being more important.
In his 1842 ‘Irish Sketchbook’ William Makepeace Thackeray has compliments to pay, all the more valuable because he is critical of a great many other, better-known places which he visited during his tour of Ireland.
He writes of ‘the little town Portadown, with its comfortable unpretending houses, its squares and market-place, its pretty quay, with craft along the river, a steamer building in the dock close to mills and warehouses — a pleasant conclusion to this ten miles' drive (from Armagh).’
A later traveller in 1854 spoke of ‘the thriving little town of Portadown, situate upon the Bann, in a very superior trading position, having sufficient depth of water to float vessels of 50 to 60 tons burden.
By means of the Ulster Canal it carries on a communication between Belfast and Enniskillen, and with Newry (and the sea) by the Newry Navigation.
The railroad between Armagh and Belfast opens up another important commercial communication.
The markets are well supplied with agricultural produce, and with linens and yarns from the surrounding country.
The town, though small, is wealthy and respectable and is much noted for the spirit and enterprise of its merchants.’
North Armagh escaped comparatively lightly during the famine years of 1844–1847.
The people in the town and those in the surrounding countryside were relatively more prosperous than most in Ireland and the economy of the region was better balanced.
More unexpected is what happened in Lurgan where the Lurgan and Portadown Workhouse had one of the highest death-rates in Ireland, second only to that of Limerick.
In the sixth week of 1845 it held 260 people; for the same week in 1846 the figure was 320 and in the last year of the Famine 893.
From the moment of entering the Workhouse the expectation of life for most was a matter of weeks or even days.
The killer was not starvation, but typhus which spread quickly in the overcrowded and insanitary conditions.
Some 30 or 40 years ago an  elderly lady living near Knocknamuckley was speaking about a neighbour who had been taken into ‘B’ block in the Lurgan and Portadown Hospital.
She spoke of her with a feeling of pity and horror difficult to understand — until one recollected that ‘B’ block, now modernized and comfortable, had been part of the old Workhouse building.
Not only was there a stigma of social disgrace which still lingered; there was also the shadow of fear.
The notice of the Portadown Methodist Watchnight Service for 31 December 1848 is worth quoting in full: ‘You are affectionately invited to attend the above service which will be held in the Portadown Wesleyan Chapel in Thomas Street on Sunday, 31st December 1848, to commence at 10 o'clock p.m. and to continue till the commencement of the New Year.
Among the many mercies vouchsafed to our land during the year now nearly expired have been respite from famine and pestilence and preservation from Civil War, while anarchy and bloodshed have prevailed over almost the whole of Europe.
To these may be added cheap food and tokens of improvement in our staple trade.
For the numberless marks of God's goodness our fervent gratitude is justly due.’
The nineteenth century saw the most dramatic growth in population the town was to know.
It had a population of 767 in 1814.
By 1891 this had risen to 8430 and in 1901 to 10 092.
The main reason for the growth  in numbers was the migration of linenweavers, and their families, from the country to the linen factories and spinning mills.
By the beginning of the twentieth century there were 7 large weaving factories in the town and 4 outside the town.
In 1891 Portadown was a much more leisurely place than the town of 1991.
Old photographs, such as those in the Sprott Collection, show wide, uncluttered streets, no traffic save for a few carts and other horse-drawn vehicles and plenty of space for people to stand.
Carrickblacker Road had a distinctively rural air about it.
On market-days and fair-days the cattle were driven along the streets or allowed to rest on the roadway.
Sometimes they caused havoc in gardens where the gates had been incautiously left open.
St Mark's Church looked different with the smaller tower.
Sir John Lavery's painting in the Ulster Museum of ‘The Twelfth of July in Portadown’(though much later — 1928) gives a lively impression of the town in festive mood.
The surrounding countryside impressed by its look of prosperity and the sense of a thriving people.
Sir Charles Coote in 1804 again and again speaks of the North Armagh countryside as being ‘in high population and improvement’.
In the 1974 Centenary history of Ballinary Church Sister Bettina Bridges quotes part of a letter written by the widow of the Reverend T McCord who was Minister of Derryall, Derranville, Ballinary and Cloncore in 1910.
It gives an evocative glimpse of a winter landscape: ‘In those days we travelled on push-bikes and the rampart right along to Ballinary was high and soft.
I can recall driving home with the Jacksons in a high cart.
It was winter and icy.
The rampart shook under our weight and the ice all over the bog cracked and broke on both sides.
There was a moon — lovely memory.’
In his memoirs, ‘My Web of Time’, the Reverend R H Gallagher notes that he gave up his car in 1939 on the outbreak of war and never had another afterwards.
He henceforth had a bicycle.
As late as the 1950s bicycles were still providing Ministerial transport on the Circuit.
There used to be a Circuit bicycle, kept in Thomas Street, for the use of visiting Edgehill students down to preach in the country churches.
The son of another Superintendent has told how he and his mother often had to remove the leggings and gaiters from his father when he arrived home soaking wet and utterly stiff and weary after cycling several miles to and from a meeting on a winter night.
It is worth remembering that the first pneumatic bicycle tyre appeared on a cinder track in Portadown in August 1889.
The Church and Bachelor's Walk 1920
Carrickblacker Road in the early 1930s
The Churches in Early Days
For 200 years, from the foundation of Portadown in the early seventeenth century until the early years of the nineteenth century, there was no church in the town.
Portadown itself lay in the parish of Drumcree and the little suburb of Edenderry was in the parish of Seagoe.
The Bann marks the boundary between the diocese of Armagh and the diocese of Dromore.
Both parishes are ancient, of pre-Reformation date.
The parish system was established towards the end of the twelfth century but no list is available till 100 years later.
Then in the Papal Taxation documents of 1296 and 1302 there are listed the parishes of Kilmore and Plebs Varren (Ballyoran), the latter identified as Drumcree.
It was noted in the 1296 list that Plebs Varren was of no value and could not be assessed.
There are few other references to Drumcree in early documents and this is possibly because for certain periods it was absorbed in Kilmore.
It may be that it suited occasionally that the same parish priest looked after both of them.
On 5 January 1505, for example Henry Iharran, a priest of the Armagh diocese, was given undisputed possession of the united parishes of Kilmore and Drumcree.
In the Middle Ages St Columba of Iona was the patron of Drumcree, possibly a link with the Celtic background of the church then.
The Roman Catholic church of 1777 (now removed to the Ulster Folk Museum) was dedicated to St John the Baptist, as in the modern church which replaced it nearby exactly 200 years later.
The present Church of Ireland Church of the Ascension is probably built very near, but not actually on, the pre-Reformation site.
A map of the Escheated Counties (prepared in 1609 with a view to the Plantation of the following year) shows the ruins of a church on the spot.
In the eighteenth century Drumcree, both the Church of Ireland parish and the Roman Catholic parish, included Portadown and to this day there is still no Roman Catholic parish of Portadown.
St Patrick's Church in William Street, consecrated on 17 March 1835, has always been in the parish of St John's, Drumcree.
On 17 May 1955, the Feast of Ascension, the foundation stone of the present Drumcree Parish Church was laid and the completed building was consecrated on 28 October 1856.
It succeeded a plain stone building, roughcast and whitewashed, with room for 500 and a general attendance of 400.
The churchyard around it has probably been a burial place for 1000 years.
The Vestry books of the Church of Ireland parish go back to 1773 and until 1870 all those present at Vestry meetings signed the minutes.
There are recorded the signatures of those who helped to shape the town: Obyns, Atkinson, Dawson, Paul, Shillington, Workman, Pepper, Overend and others.
The strong link then still existing between Methodism and the episcopal Church is evident in the fact that so many Methodist names are recorded in these Parish registers.
Mr Thomas Shillington is listed as a churchwarden in Drumcree in 1793 and various members of the Paul family served in this office in 1785, 1810, 1811 and from 1813 to 1816.
It is a happy thought that, even today, a close friendship exists between Drumcree and Derryanville churches.
The old parish of Drumcree contained 66 townlands and stretched from Muckery to Ballyworkan.
In 1824 the new Church of Ireland parish of Portadown was formed by cutting off 13 townlands from Drumcree and the new parish church of Portadown, originally St Martin's and now St Mark's, was consecrated on 14 November 1826.
Drumcree parish was further reduced in 1867 when another 5 townlands, together with some from Kilmore, went to make the other new parish of Diamond Grange.
Since then Drumcree has contained 48 townlands.
There is an interesting contrast between the Church of Ireland and the Roman Catholic Church in that the Church of Ireland tends to create new parishes out of old as the need arises while the Roman Catholic Church builds new churches where they are needed but keeps still to the already existing parish structure.
The pattern is repeated many times over.
There has been a parish of Seagoe, again, for almost 1000 years though the earliest vicar recorded is Patrick O'Dubayn in 1405.
Until Disestablishment in 1870 the archdeacons of Dromore were, from time immemorial, rectors of Seagoe.
One interesting relic of Seagoe's distant past is the Cloch Bann, an ancient bronze handbell thought to have been used at funerals.
It disappeared for centuries but in 1725 it was  rediscovered in Ballinabeck graveyard in the parish of Scarva and is now in the National Museum in Dublin.
Like Drumcree, Seagoe was originally much more extensive, stretching from Lough Neagh to near Gilford.
In 1839 several townlands from Seagoe were joined with some from Tullylish to form the parish of Knocknamuckley.
Edenderry, hitherto a small village in the parish of Seagoe, became officially part of Portadown in 1840.
It contained at that time 23 houses.
The ruins of old Seagoe church are to be seen in the lower graveyard.
The present church was built on the opposite side of the road in 1814 and was originally a very plain structure with a square tower at the west end.
In 1837 it was described as ‘a neat country church built of stone — roughcast and whitewashed, 77′ long and 37′ 6″ broad.’
In the tower was a belfry containing one bell with the inscription: Parish of Sego A.D. almost entirely rebuilt and enlarged by the addition of a chancel and south aisle designed by Sir Thomas Drew.
Sir Thomas, born in 1838, had been a pupil of Sir Charles Lanyon and was President of the Royal Hibernian Academy in 1900.
From 1895–1897 he was President of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland.
He designed Rathmines Town Hall in Dublin.
His most important work in the North was Belfast Cathedral in 1899.
He died in 1910.
Much of the cost of this rebuilding of Seagoe Church was met by the Baroness von Steiglitz.
The stone font in the church is very old and there are some ancient pieces of Communion silver — a paten dated 1699 and two chalices, dated 1769 and 1791 respectively.
Mr David Riley BA is at present engaged on a history of the parish to which we look forward very much.
It may be convenient here to say something briefly about some of the other religious denominations which came to the town in the nineteenth century.
The mother-church of Presbyterianism in the area is Vinecash.
The congregation here was formed some time after 1690 though the present church building only dates from 1879.
The first Presbyterian services in Portadown were held in the basement of a building where the Ulster Bank now stands and then in 1822 the first church was built in Edenderry on the site where the lecture hall now stands.
The present First Portadown Presbyterian Church was opened in 1858.
Second Portadown (Armagh Road) was opened just over 10 years later.
The Salvation Army was established in the town in 1881 by Captain and  Mrs Preston and has always been in Edward Street.
The original citadel was destroyed by fire in 1938 and the present building opened in 1940.
General Booth visited Portadown in 1902 and spoke in the Town Hall on ‘The Lessons of my Life’.
He was welcomed by the local clergy and a great number of other leading figures in the community.
He also visited Lurgan and the late Mrs Sleator once related how, as a very small girl in Lurgan on that day in 1902, she disregarded her mother's instructions that she was not to leave home (‘I am still obstinate!’ she confided), went to the Town Hall where the General was speaking and saw him there.
Then, wishing to get closer quarters, she ran all the way to the railway station, gained a good position and ran forward to touch his arm.
Later while training as a deaconess in London she saw his funeral in 1912.
The society of Friends was established at Moyallon in 1675, the present Meeting House dating from 1736.
A number of members of the Society began meeting in the building now occupied by Mr Ross Raymond's cycle business — then the Anchor Cafe — and the Meeting House in Portmore Street was opened in 1905.
The Young Men's Bible Class, 1907
Methodism
The population of Portadown increased more than tenfold in the nineteenth century.
The years of rapid growth were helped by the establishment of linen markets in the town, the prosperity of the handloom weavers, the coming of the linen factories in the second half of the century and the easy communications provided by the Newry Canal and the road and rail links with Dublin and Belfast.
Almost exactly parallel with the growth of business prosperity in the town was the growth of Methodism.
When, for the first time, the Reverend John Wesley stopped in Portadown, then a village of about 700 inhabitants, on Friday 10 April 1767 he made his oft-quoted remark that it was ‘a place not troubled with any kind of religion.’
This referred less to the irreligious habits of the people than the fact that the village as yet contained no place of worship, for Wesley went on to say that when he began his service (probably at a spot near the present Ulster Bank and using a mounting block as his pulpit)‘the people gathered form all sides and, when I prayed, kneeled down upon the stones, rich and poor, all round me’.
His text was from Acts 17 v 30: ‘— now God commandeth all men everywhere to repent’.
Four years later, on Friday 28 June 1771, he recorded that he ‘preached in the street at Portadown to a serious and well-behaved congregation’.
Mr Wesley had kindly words to say about the people of the little town and neighbourhood and there is no harm in reminding ourselves of what he thought about or predecessors: ‘They have in general the finest natural tempers I ever knew; they have the softness and courtesy of the Irish, with the seriousness of the Scotch and the openness of the English.’
In 1771 he preached also at the flourishing society of Derryanville and at Kilmoriarty there was the largest congregation he had seen during the week.
In all, Wesley paid seven visits to the town and neighbourhood, in 1767, 1769, 1771, 1773, 1775, 178 and 1785.
Later, however, another preacher, the Reverend Adam Averell, a relative of Mrs Shillington's, had less kindly things to say.
In 1799 he  spent two days in what he called ‘proud Gallio-like Portadown’.
He felt that few places in the North had longer withstood the truth than this town.
Yet even then Mr Averell thought that there was the dawn of a better day and that many more would hear and obey the Divine call.
He preached in Portadown again in 1801, and in 1802 preached within the uncovered walls of the new preaching house.
In 1809 he had an open-air congregation of 1500, more than the entire population of the town.
Methodism seemed to encircle the little town before it entered it.
It took root in various places round the town — Terryhoogan (or Ballinabeck, near Tandragee) in 1756, Clonmain in 1762, Grange in 1764, Kilmoriarty (or Kilmararty, as the old form had it) in 1767, Derryanville before 1784 (‘a little village out of all road, surrounded by bogs…thus God has His secret ones, in a little corner of the land…some of the liveliest Christians in the kingdom’).
Bluestone is not mentioned by Wesley but a Methodist Society was formed there at an early date.
It later declined but was revived about 1770 being still later greatly strengthened by Mr John Malcolmson and Mr Joseph Malcolmson, founder in 1789 of the Bluestone Sunday School, the first in Ulster and the second in Ireland.
Then in 1773 Samuel Lisk, a member of the Kilmoriarty Society, moved into Portadown.
In his little thatched house the itinerant preachers Mr John McNeese and Mr Thomas Payne preached.
After some time Mr Lisk moved to another part of the country and the services were held in a stable lent by a Mr Gardiner, an innkeeper, and in the house of a Mr Richard Atkinson.
In 1780 Portadown and Tandragee were part of the Charlemont Circuit and a service was held in Portadown every other Sunday.
In 1788 the Tandragee Circuit was formed in the house of James Lemon, a chandler.
The first Leader of the Class was John Hamilton from Newmills near Gilford.
The first Love Feast was held in Portadown in 1791 and was conducted by the Reverend Samuel Steele in the house of Thomas Bunting who had joined the Society the previous year.
In 1836 Portadown was separated from Tandragee and became an independent Circuit.
The Portadown Local Preachers' Meeting is older than the Circuit, having been formed in 1835.
It has met at regular quarterly intervals since then and is possibly the oldest meeting of its    kind in Ireland.
The 1849 Circuit Plan listed 16 Sunday preaching places and 7 preachers together with 2 on trial.
It was not till 1879, however, that the Portadown Circuit assumed the form familiar over the years: Thomas Street, Edenderry (services took place in the Tabernacle before the first church was built), Edgarstown, Mahon, Battlehill, Scotch Street, Derryanville, Derryall, Ballinary and Cloncore.
1939 Church Plan
1939 Church Plan
Not long after the first Love Feast plans were made for the building of a Methodist Chapel, facing the village green and just behind where St Mark's Church now stands.
It was some considerable time before this was completed.
The Methodist people had declined numerically, lacked effective or consistent leadership and had become feeble and thoroughly disheartened.
The unfinished building stood for several years as a mute witness to their sad state.
Then in 1799 Mr Thomas Shillington (who moved into the village of Portadown where his arrival infused new life and energy into the discouraged little band of Methodists.
The Shillington family was originally from England and had come to Ireland about 1658.
Mr Shillington, originally Anglican, became friendly, first with some Moravians, and then with a group of Methodists in Country Antrim.
He had come to County Armagh to run a farm owned by his father.
Largely at Mr Shillington's expense, the unfinished church was completed and opened for public worship in 1802.
Services were often held at a very early hour.
In 1806 a well known American preacher, the Reverend Lorenzo Dow, addressed a crowded congregation in the new church at 5.00 am and Wesley records preaching once at Kilmoriarty at the same hour: ‘the house was well filled and a little after six I cheerfully commended them to the grace of God.’
In 1803 the Portadown Sunday School, the second in Ulster after Bluestone, was opened.
It was not confined to Methodists, but was for all children who wished to attend.
The ‘Rules for the Portadown Sunday School’(quoted in full in W J Green's ‘Methodism in Portadown’) deal with, among other matters, the arrangements for the opening and closing of the Sunday School punctual attendance, order and discipline and the visiting of children who had been absent.
Rule 5 strikes a note familiar to all Sunday School teachers and Superintendents: ‘Scholars who shall have been marked absent for twelve Sabbaths of the year shall not be entitled to be present at the Annual Festival Excursion.
Scholars  have not been four weeks connected with the school up to the Sabbath preceding the Festival not to be eligible for admission.
In special cases this rule to be subject to the discretion of the Committee of Management.’
As always there is a hint that justice is tempered with mercy.
The Rules for the Sunday School were reaffirmed in 1862 and were used as a basis for the new Sunday School started in Edenderry in 1867.
In the 1803 Sunday School there was a library for the older Sunday School scholars — those in the Bible or Testament classes.
The library encouraged in many children a desire to read and was seen as a general benefit to the community and not just as a benefit to the Sunday School.
This tradition continued until the 1900s.
The year 1808 saw a revival of religion in the area around Portadown and remarkable open-air meetings were held in Portadown itself, at Mahon, Scotch Street, Derryhale, Richhill and Dawson's Grove.
About 5000 people attended a meeting at Mahon where Mr Alexander Moore preached and hundreds were converted.
In the town itself over the next few years Class meetings were formed in West Street, Corcrain, Edenderry, Levaghery, Lisniskey and Kernan.
A period of revival came also in 1817 when in two months 60 more members were added to the Society and the congregation in general more than doubled.
The progress of Methodism in the town shows a pattern of major advance about every generation, that is, every 30 years or so.
The first church was opened in 1802.
This was replaced in 1832 by a second church (now the premises of A D Thornton and Co) on the right-hand side going up Thomas Street.
In 1860 the present Thomas Street Church was completed just after the 1859 Revival.
This was followed in turn by Edenderry memorial Church in 1891.
Another period of revival came in 1832 and one of the leaders of this was the Reverend Edward Hazleton, Superintendent of the Tandragee Circuit, of which Portadown was still a part.
Field meetings and other services were arranged and were well attended.
Many people found the grace of God and the numbers in Societies and Class meetings greatly increased.
In 1840 the Reverend William Reilly and the Reverend Joseph McKay were appointed to Portadown.
In those days sermons at the Love Feast lasted 45–50 minutes and the town was said to be ‘rich in piety, gifts and wealth’.
About 1844 there was yet another period of spiritual prosperity and in one year over 300 people found Christ.
Mr. Reilly remarked of Mr William Paul, a leading member of the society, that he ‘exceeded anyone I had known in his spirit and power in prayer; and oh, how rich and copious were his quotations from scripture and our hymns’.
A plaque to the memory of another William Paul (1844–1912) praising the Christian virtues of one who was ‘beloved and trusted by all who knew him and who went about doing good’ was erected in Edenderry Memorial Church (now the Memorial Hall) in 1913, the Reverend George R Wedgewood, Superintendent of the Circuit and Vice-President of the Conference, presiding.
In 1858 one of a missionary deputation to the North wrote of Portadown: ‘Here Methodism is stronger in proportion to the population than in any other town in Ireland, or indeed that in many towns in England.
The public collections for the Missions were very large — nor are the claims of home overlooked, as in some other places.
Portadown is one of the very few Irish Circuits in which an adequate provision is made for the sustentation of Ministers on the spot.’
Like other churches, Methodism felt the overwhelming influence of the 1859 Revival in Ulster, when in under a year 100000 people in the Province were converted to Christ.
It began in 1857 with four young men meeting for prayer in an old school-house near Kells in County Antrim.
The first conversion came on New Year's Day 1858.
The Revival movement spread quickly through Antrim, north and south, to Belfast and County Down, to Londonderry and Donegal, then to Tyrone and Armagh.
The Reverend John Dwyer, appointed to the Circuit in 1857, has noted the details of that momentous time.
On Saturday 4 June 1859 it was announced that prayer meetings would be held in the Town Hall at 6.00 am, 12.00 noon and 8.00 pm.
The meeting at 8.00 pm was so crowded that many had to leave.
The prayer meetings were then held in the Methodist and Presbyterian churches.
Open-air prayer meetings were held on 9 and 10 July, one of Mr Cowdy's lawn in Killicomaine attracting an attendance of over 1000 people.
The first great movement of the Holy Spirit was felt at a meeting held in Mr John Montgomery's field in Edenderry where a young man was describing the work of God as he had seen it in Ballymena.
For the remainder of that summer churches were filled to overflowing and numerous conversions took place.
One of the most impressive series of open-air meetings was held in a field belonging to  Mr Shillington, the site of the present Thomas Street church.
On one Sunday at least 40 people were converted and no service was held at which there were not several conversions.
What was true of Methodism was true of the other churches in the town and district, and in the county as a whole.
It is reckoned that on one occasion 15000 people attended a prayer meeting in Armagh.
They came into the city in trainloads.
Perhaps the highest point of that remarkable year for Methodism in Portadown was the Quarterly Love Feast held in September 1859.
(The Love Feast was an early Methodist institution which had some elements in common with the Communion service but did not set to duplicate it and was certainly not an attempt to replace it.
Those who wished to do so gathered to share in the fellowship of a symbolic meal — a piece of dry bread and a cup of water.
Later, plain biscuits were used in Edenderry instead of bread.
During or after the consumption of the good one or another would stand and say very simply what love and grace of God meant to him or her.
For the most part it concerned the speakers' contemporary experience.
One touching moment during a Love Feast in Edenderry was once when a visitor to the service, who had never attended a Love Feast before but who had felt he wished to share in it, stood and held up half the biscuit he had been given.
He explained that his wife was a permanent invalid, unable to come to church, but said he: ‘Since the day we got married we have shared everything we had and I am bringing this home to give to her.’)
the weather on that September day in 1859 was fine and people crowded into the town in great numbers.
The Methodist chapel proving insufficient to hold them, the large schoolroom was opened.
It was at once filled and then the large room in the then Town Hall was taken.
Even that was not enough and the Courthouse held a fourth congregation.
Examples of revival in the surrounding countryside were numerous.
There had been a weeknight meeting, held once a fortnight, at Ballintaggart.
The numbers attending were usually small but on one occasion the minister (Mr Dwyer himself, it is implied,) found that 300 people, some of whom he had never seen before, had gathered to hear him.
The meeting went on till late in the evening and many found peace with God.
In 1859 the Methodists in Portadown had 12 preaching places, including churches, halls, cottage meetings and weekday services.
In 1861, two years later, the corresponding figure was 43, a direct result of the Revival.
The building of the present Thomas Street Church in 1860 was not the result of the 1859 Revival but a providential event parallel to it.
Planning had begun in 1857 and originally envisaged the enlarging and improving of the existing 1832 church on the opposite side of the street.
Eventually this plan was abandoned in favour of a completely new church and, in Mr Dwyer's own words: ‘— while God was pouring out His Spirit and building His spiritual house, a spacious and attractive sanctuary was rising for the accommodation of worshippers who were soon to fill it with songs of praise.’
The new church was officially opened on Thursday 18 October 1860, Mr T A Shillington, son of the first Mr Shillington mentioned earlier, conducting the preparatory prayer meeting at 7.00 am.
The total cost of church, schoolroom, vestry, classrooms and minister's residence was over 5000, a debt which was cleared within a few years.
The Men's Bible Class, About 1919
Edenderry Sunday School 1867
Seven years later and 100 years after the Reverend John Wesley's first visit to Portadown a new Sunday School was founded in the Edenderry area.
The new school came into being to provide for the increasing numbers of Methodist children in Edenderry.
The first meeting of Sunday School teachers was held on Wednesday 25 September 1867 in the home of Mr James Johnston of Edenderry at ‘half past six o'clock’, beginning with tea.
Mr Hamilton Robb presided and present were Mr James Johnston, Mr James Johnston, Mr James Woodhouse, Mr Thomas Russell, Mr Alexander Reynolds, Mr Alfred Lowe, Miss Johnston, Miss Matthews and Miss C Matthews.
It was proposed and agreed that a morning Sunday School should begin on the first Sunday in October at 9.45 am, this proposal to be submitted to the Superintendent minister, the Reverend James Donnelly, for his approval.
The teaching of the Catechism on the first Sunday of each month at an afternoon School was also proposed.
(The teaching of the Catechism has something of the air of a lost cause about it.
In later years, for example, attempts were made in 1930, 1932, 1936, 1938, 1944, 1948, 1952, 1962 and since then, to establish it but the frequency with which resolutions were passed on the subject reveals the intractable nature of the problem.)
It was resolved also that half an hour should be occupied each Sunday at the close of the School to teach the children the hymns of the Lancashire Sunday School Hymnbook.
Many of the children probably could not read or write.
In the Parish Marriage Registers of the time, for example, plenty of intelligent young couples signed by making their mark which was then attested by the officiating clergyman.
Universal literacy was still in the future.
Mr James Johnston, in whose house the first meeting of Sunday School teachers took place, was in real terms, the most generous benefactor Edenderry Church has ever had.
In his will he left £500 towards the building of a Sunday School Chapel in Edenderry.
When we consider that the total cost of the 1891 church, excluding the site, was £657 we can realise how large this benefaction was.
He is commemorated by a Memorial stone on the front of the old church.
For the first few years the Sunday School met in a private house, possibly that of a Mr Thomas Leathem.
The first Sunday School Superintendent was Mr Alfred Lowe and he remained Superintendent for just over nine years.
The story of the Sunday School has been recorded elsewhere but it is interesting to note the length of time the Superintendents served.
From 1890 to 1896 there were four Superintendents.
Then Mr H W Stevens served from 1897 to 1914.
He was followed by Mr W Laird Cowdy and Mr J T Abraham (Principal of Thomas Street School and father of Mr J E Cyril Abraham MA).
Mr S C Robinson, a member of the Bluestone Society, was Superintendent of the afternoon Sunday School from 1919 until his sudden death almost 30 years later.
A bronze plaque in the Memorial Hall records the church's gratitude to him.
He had built up the School into one of the most successful and efficiently run Schools in Irish Methodism.
The pattern of the Sunday School preceding the church is a common one and the rapid growth of this School from small beginnings, together with the increasing numbers of the Thomas Street Society, led to the providing of a wooden building, called the Tabernacle, somewhere near the present Eden Avenue in 1869.
This building probably held about 100 people and was used for a Sunday evening service as well as the Sunday School.
By 1871 there were signs that the Tabernacle needed some repair.
Mr Thomas Russell was asked to board up the back part of he building to keep out the rain.
A new harmonium was bought for £7-0-0 and in January 1871 a decision was taken to expel several unruly and ill-behaved boys.
The annual Festival was planned for Carrickblacker with lemonade and buns as refreshment.
From the late 1880s to the 1900s names like Robb, Shillington, Cowdy, Collen, Thompson, Killow, Lutton, Lamb, England, Magowan, Ramsey, Reynolds and Sinnamon occur in the records of teachers.
In the 1890s there was a strong Methodist presence in Edenderry and in the early years of the twentieth century the row of houses running from Watson Street to Mr Hoy's butcher's shop was known as ‘Methodist Row’.
Starting off with the good Presbyterian family of Mr Moffatt at the corner — one of his daughters, Mrs Victoria Mullen, married a Methodist — there followed in order Englands, Magowans, Lyttles, Bells, McClatcheys, Lambs, Ramseys and Pattons.
In 1889 the average attendance at the morning School was 64 pupils and 4 teachers and in the afternoon 100 pupils and 12 teachers.
In 1891 the average attendance in the morning was 68 pupils and 7 teachers and in the afternoon 127 pupils and 10 teachers.
At one time in the early 1900s at least four members of one family are named as teachers.
The annual Tea Meeting on 12 January 1886 involved buying tea at 2/6 per pound (about 13p), sugar at 2d per pound (about 1p) and 15 pounds of sweets at 5d per pound (a total cost of around 32p).
The excursion in June 1888 was to Warrenpoint and the total cost for all the children for the day was £3-15-8 (£3.77).
Seventy-one tickets were sold to outsiders and ‘the children seemed to enjoy themselves in spite of the heavy rain’.
The cost of a similar outing to Waringstown in 1902 had gone up to over £10-0-0.
From 1885 there was also a flourishing Band of Hope which met in the Tabernacle with an average attendance of 99 by the year 1889.
There was a strong total abstinence element in the later Junior CE as well.
Mrs Edna Wall remembers Mrs Bessie Forde and Mrs Cooper as leaders marching the band of 90 or so little ones in the early 1930s to outdoor meetings in different parts of the town and always, when they came to a public house, they stopped and sang: ‘Dare to be a Daniel —’ with a special emphasis on the words: ‘Keep outside the public house and bring your money home.’
The late Mrs Ethel Sleator maintained a similar unceasing witness.
The church in 1953 with Reverend John Keys standing at the gate.
the Memorial Church 1891
On 11 September 1889 it was reported at a Sunday School teachers' meeting that in the will of the late Mr James Johnston a substantial legacy had been left for the building of a Sunday School Chapel in Edenderry.
A committee had already been formed and had met on Friday 14 January 1887 to consider proposed new premises in Edenderry.
The members were the Reverend W Nicholas BA (Superintendent), the Reverend Robert Jamison and the Reverend William Merrick, together with Thomas Shillington JP, William J Paul JP, William Mitchell, John Lutton, D G Paul, Thomas Proctor, Watson Walker, James Steele, James Johnston, Hamilton Robb, William Hall and Alexander Reynolds.
Subsequently 6 or 8 members attended each meeting.
Mr Nicholas (later Dr Nicholas) presided.
Mr D G Paul was appointed secretary and Mr Thomas Shillington treasurer.
Within two months they had made a first attempt to get a suitable building site — part of the field in which the new Presbyterian School was to be built.
(Edenderry Public Elementary School, demolished to make way for Carrick Eden Grange, was built in 1888–1889.)
Application was made to Mr Atkinson, the Agent of the Baroness von Steiglitz of Carrickblacker.
However, the ground sought had already been promised for a schoolmaster's residence.
Mr George Henry Quarry, a Belfast solicitor was then applied to for some land at the top of Carrickblacker Road but initially there was no response from him and other possible sites investigated were some ground opposite where James's Street now stands and land behind where the little Roman Catholic church was later built (now Pritchard's Motors) and near the site of Edenderry Orange Hall.
A reply was then received from Mr Quarry but the proposed ground rent of £15 a year was considered too high and another effort was made to get from the Baroness von Steiglitz some ground at the corner of what is now Carrickblacker Avenue and in the same field where the existing Tabernacle stood.
The terms were not satisfactory and by December of 1887 a further approach had been to made to Mr Quarry who suggested a  price of £300 plus an annual ground rent of £2.
The committee offered £300 plus £1 a year ground rent.
The £300 would be raised by collecting £150, borrowing £100 and seeking a grant of £50 from the Chapel Committee.
In March of 1888 negotiations with Mr Quarry were still continuing but by September of that year a proposed lease for purchase on the ground had been drawn up and it was signed on 10 December 1888.
The terms were a payment of £325 and a ground rent of £1 a year.
In January 1889 the committee sought also the gift of a small piece of land from Mr W R Atkinson of Eden Villa.
There is no doubt that the site then secured at the top of the Carrickblacker Road was the best of all those they had considered.
By March 1889 plans had been submitted by the architect, Mr Henry Shillington, and various alterations were suggested to reduce the cost which was estimated at £695 including seating, fencing and heating.
The interior was to be wainscotted to a height of 4′ 6″, some minor changes were made and a tender of £532 from Messrs Collen Brothers was accepted.
When the committee inspected the work in July 1890 some further changes were made which increased the cost to £657 in addition to the cost of the site.
Some minor faults and one more serious defect in the front gable were to be remedied.
Details of the furnishings were discussed in August and October but by the middle of January 1891 the building was ready and the seats were in place.
It is plain from the design of the building that it was planned very much with Sunday School work in mind.
Almost up to the eve of the opening services the building was known as the ‘Edenderry Memorial School Chapel’.
On 16 February 1891 it was agreed that John White should be appointed sexton at a salary of 13/-(65p) per quarter.
The first baby baptised in the new church was John White's son who was to become Mr Mervyn White's father.
The opening service was arranged for Thursday 19 February 1891 at 11.30 am.
A full account was published in the ‘Portadown News’ the following Saturday, 21 February.
The Superintendent, the Reverend Andrew Armstrong, conducted the service.
He was born at Plymouth in 1830 and in his youth moved to County Fermanagh.
Converted in his early teens (about 1843–1844), he entered the Ministry in 1855 and exercised an appreciated pastoral ministry in many parts of Ireland.
He died in 1898.
The second minister was the Reverend Caleb S Laird MA, born in 1851 into a noted Methodist  family in Drumshanbo.
He graduated MA at Queen's college, Belfast and entered the Ministry in 1874.
His preaching was scholarly and evangelical and he would probably have been elected Vice-President of the Conference but for the onset of ill-health.
He died in 1908.
The third minister was the Reverend P E Donovan who was born as a Roman Catholic in 1861 in Skibbereen.
He entered the Ministry in 1888.
In early life he was employed by Mr R S Woulfe, a Methodist merchant in household and Mr Donovan was converted and had to leave home for employment in the North of Ireland.
He was appointed to Londonderry in 1893 and founded the Londonderry City Mission in 1894.
From 1904 he was Connexional Evangelist and conducted a series of missions all over Ireland.
As a retired minister he became Superintendent of Colportage.
He was a founder member of the Junior Ministers' Convention in 1888.
He married one of the daughters of the Rt Hon Thomas Shillington.
Mr Shillington's other daughter married the Reverend James M Alley.
Mr Donovan died in 1953.
Two visiting ministers at the opening ceremony were the Reverend Wesley Guard and the Reverend R Fletcher.
The Reverend Wesley Guard in 1891 was minister of University Road Church, Belfast.
He was born in Limavady in 1839, the son of a Methodist preacher, William Guard.
He entered the Ministry in 1862 and exercised a very popular ministry.
He was very much in demand an eloquent lecturer and was three times Vice-President of the Conference, in 1893, 1902 and 1911.
The Reverend R Fletcher was minister of the Primitive Methodist congregation in Portadown.
In the early years of the nineteenth century methodists had divided over the matter of their relationship with the Established Church.
Some wished to receive Communion in the parish church and there were others who wished to receive Communion from Methodist preachers.
Those who accepted Communion from Methodist preachers were known as Primitive Methodists.
In Portadown in the late nineteenth century there were two Primitive chapels.
One was in West Street (the Irish Primitive Chapel) and the other in Mary Street (The English Primitive Chapel).
In 1878 Irish Wesleyan Methodists and Irish Primitive Methodists united to form the Methodist Church in Ireland.
It would seem, therefore, that the  Reverend R Fletcher must have been the pastor of the English Primitive congregation.
The Mary Street Chapel was eventually bought by St Mark's Parish and became their Mary Street Mission Hall.
It was demolished in 1970.
The opening service of Edenderry Memorial Church in 1891 began with the singing of the hymn:
‘We give immortal praise
To God the Father's love —‘.
Mr Armstrong engaged in prayer.
The hymn: ‘Pleasant are Thy courts above’ was sung, after which the lessons were read by the Reverend C S Laird.
The anthem: ‘Blessed by Thou, Lord God of Israel’ was sung by Thomas Street Church choir and the sermon was preached by Mr Guard who chose as his text the fourth verse of the twenty-seventh Psalm: ‘One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord and to enquire in His temple.’
The offering, in aid of the Building Fund, was taken up by Messrs T Dawson, J Collen, C Johnston, W J Paul, W Mitchell and T H Spence.
After the singing of another hymn the congregation adjourned to the open air for the unveiling of the Memorial stones.
There are six stones commemorating four people: two stones to the memory of Thomas Shillington of Tavanagh House, two in memory of his mother Emily Paul of Erindale, one in memory of James Johnston of Edenderry and one in memory of Hamilton Robb of Edenderry.
The stones were unveiled by Mrs Shillington of Tavanagh House, Master Graham Paul, Mr William J Paul, Mrs. Hadden (daughter of the later Hamilton Robb), Master Willie Paul and Mrs Shillington of Belfast, a daughter of Mr Thomas Shillington.
After the singing of the Doxology the congregation separated.
The ‘Portadown News’ report describes the church as occupying a commanding site and with the gable where the Memorial stones are placed facing the principal approach.
The windows are described as high Gothic with small square panes in four shades of coloured glass.
‘Inside the church the appearance is bright and cheerful.
There are very comfortable seats in light-coloured stained wood.
The ceiling is closed up with varnished boards which renders the acoustic properties  excellent.
Lighting, heating, ventilation have all been carried out on the most approved modern principles.
By a very ingenious mechanism a wooden screen can separate the transport from the body of the church at a moment's notice reducing the latter in size when necessary and converting the former into a commodious, well lighted lecture hall.
And again by another series of screens the lecture hall can be transformed into two or three classrooms as occasion requires, each provided with a separate entrance.’
The side windows were replaced in 1976 with plain glass, the lower parts frosted, and the main west window has been completely restored and reglazed after the original design in honour of the Centenary celebrations.
Many will recall the church as it was, for there is no indication that it changed greatly over the years.
Under the large west window was a raised platform reached by two steps at each side of the pulpit-desk which was placed in the centre.
The rails on the platform were lined with red baize and the pulpit cushion was covered with the same material.
The choir sat in ordinary Windsor chairs in a semi-circle behind the minister or preacher, who had a round-backed armchair.
The organ, powered by foot-pedals, was placed directly below the pulpit.
There was a handle at the side of the organ and sometimes Mr Bobby Hughes, stepson of Mr Alfred Shortt, acted as organ-blower.
(The original organ was replaced in 1917.)
Round the wainscotted walls ran narrow benches which could be folded down.
They doubled as bench-tables for small children at Sunday School parties and prizegivings.
There were two side aisles and the centrally arranged seating consisted of wooden benches aisles and the centrally arranged seating consisted of wooden benches with cast-iron frames.
Alternate benches were so made that the back could be swung over so that by a simple movement you had two benches facing each other instead of one behind the other and back-to-back with the adjoining classes, the teacher sitting on a chair between the ends of the benches.
At harvest services when the church was crowded and extra seats were needed the stewards simply borrowed what chairs they could get form the neighbours living down the White Row in Carrickblacker Road.
Congregations on Sunday were good, the larger congregation being at the evening service.
It was necessary to come to church at 6.30 pm for the 7.00 pm service if you wanted to avoid sitting on the narrow side-benches.
The recollection of the summer evening sunlight coming through the large window behind the preacher's head evokes many nostalgic memories.
In August 1899 Mr Robb reached an agreement with the Trustees to cut a street, approximately named ‘Century Street’, through their ground.
In return he gave them other ground at the rear of the church and also on the right-hand side of the new road and bordering Killicomaine Road.
Some houses at the bottom of Killicomaine Road still pay ground rent on a long lease to the church, through the Trust Steward.
The Trustees 1954
The 1900s to the 1930s
Various activities developed during the 1890s and early 1900s.
In May 1908 the Girls' Work Meeting was able to give the proceeds of a sale of work (£25) to the church.
In the same year £20 was spent on improving ventilation, providing a shed and replacing the old wooden railings by iron railings and gates.
The sexton's salary was raised to £6 a year.
The Primary Sunday School began in 1908 and was held at 2.15 pm before the afternoon School at 3.00 pm.
Mr J T Reynolds was Superintendent and Mr Jimmy Killow secretary.
Mr Killow was one of the most original personalities about the church in those days.
He lived in a small cottage in the fields just off what is now Princess Way.
In fact, the part of the road nearest the Gilford Road was known as Killow's Lane.
He had taught himself shorthand and then taught the subject to others.
He had a wide interest in many things including astronomy and had read all the works of Sir Robert Ball.
He was also interested in phrenology and conducted a male voice choir.
In earlier life he had been in Canada and it is certain that at least some youthful potential emigrants to Canada were inspired by his accounts of life there.
When the Primary School opened there were 46 on the roll.
It was obvious that further space was needed for Sunday School work and by 1911 an extension, 17′ x 30′ was planned at the back of the church.
It was completed in 1912 and Mr Harry Wright senior remembers it being built.
A washroom and WC were included at the left corner of the new room.
Outside at the rear of the building two WCs replaced the former earth closets.
Mains water was introduced and the necessary sewers.
The cost was £160.
Some will still recall the warm fire at the far end of what became known as the Primary Room and the tiny wooden chairs which allowed small feet almost to reach the ground.
When this room became available both Sunday Schools met at 3.00 pm.
In 1918 the sexton's salary was increased to £10 a year.
The late Mr Tom McCabe was sexton about this time.
His duties were defined as being: ‘to attend to the opening and closing, lighting and heating, dusting, washing out and general care of the premises; the trimming of  the ivy so as to keep it clear of the spouting and the roof; the keeping of the borders tidy; and the cleanliness of the WCs.
The floors of the church and schoolroom to be washed out when needed and not less than three times a year.
The gas (lighting) to be extinguished as soon as the congregation has dispensed, so as to avoid waste.
You will also be required to see to the boiling of water for tea when a tea-meeting is held and the washing up of the delf, etc, afterwards.’
Others who have undertaken the care of the church and halls in later years have been Mrs Bell, Mrs Carson, Mr and Mrs Redpath, Mr James Twyble, Mr John Lavery, Mrs David Binks, Mrs K McClatchey and Mr William McFadden.
The outbreak of the Great War meant that young men from Edenderry as well as from other parts of the Circuit went to serve their country; some went directly from Portadown and others who had emigrated in earlier years joined the armies of the Dominions, especially Canada.
Many did not return.
One young man was killed a few weeks before the Armistice.
The names of those who served and of those who died are recorded on the magnificent War Memorial in the vestibule of Thomas Street Church.
This was unveiled and dedicated on Sunday 25 June 1922 at 11 am.
It commemorates 31 men from the Circuit who died and an additional 160 who served.
The Reverend Wesley Roddie led the prayers; the Reverend Herbert Deale read the lesson.
After all the names recorded had been read out, the Memorial was then unveiled by Mrs Hadden and dedicated by the Reverend Hugh McKeag, a former Circuit minister, who also preached the sermon.
Mr McKeag (later Dr McKeag) had been immensely popular on the Circuit and was often invited back for special services.
He was born in Coleraine in 1863 and entered the Ministry in 1885.
With his keen mind he soon became one of the statesmen of the church.
He was elected Vice-president of the Conference in 1918 and was the first Methodist chaplain to the Northern Ireland Parliament after the Partition of Ireland.
He was chairman of the Methodist College Board of Governors for a number of years and died in 1938.
He was minister of Edenderry from 1891–1893.
In 1920 the Sunday School requested more space for the primary department and suggested that the schoolroom could be enlarged by the removal of the inside washroom and WC.
The Trustees turned down this request, saying that a larger scheme at a later date would be preferable.
This larger scheme was not planned and implemented till well over 50 years later.
Three whitewashed, two-storey houses had been built beside the church.
Later, the two houses nearer the church were made into one.
The one beside the church was used by the sexton and the others were let to tenants.
Some who at various times occupied the houses were the McCabe, Brown, White, Lamb, Mann, Wells and Carson families.
The garden of the house beside Century Street was enclosed by a tall, black wooden fence, parts of which in time of storm often collapsed.
The houses remained until the early 1950s when they were knocked down to make way for the new church.
It is recorded that the Trustees were in trouble in 1920 with the local authorities over the question of sanitation in the houses.
Near the end of its life the houses nearer Century Street was derelict for some time.
Yet these houses, together with the small neat church with its yellow facing-brick and Gothic windows, the cottage across the road and the leafy entrance to Bachelor's Walk formed one of the most painted and photographed corners of Portadown and graced many of a local postcard.
In 1921 the Young Ladies' Sewing Group was granted the use of the schoolroom for one night a week.
The following year the sexton's salary was raised to £12 a year.
In 1922 also an application was received from ‘a few of the young ladies and the young men of the Edenderry Memorial congregation’ for ‘the use of the field at the rear of the church for recreation, viz. the playing of Lawn Tennis.
They are prepared to pay the same amount of rent as you are at present receiving from it.’
The application was signed by Herbert McClatchey, James Magowan and Twinem Jackson.
A decision was at first postponed but permission was granted later in the year.
Such was the beginning of the Edenderry Tennis Club whose president has always been the minister of the church.
In the early 1930s the average morning congregation ranged from 72 to 113 and the evening congregations were between 120 and 140.
The total income for the average quarter was £50, rising to £60 or £70 in 1939.
It is pleasant to read that in 1936 Mr George Ramsey was ‘cordially asked to take charge of the harvest decorations in the church and cheerfully agreed.’
When Mr Ramsay died in 1943 the Leaders paid tribute to one who was greatly loved: ‘Testimony was given to his worth and zeal in the work and all that pertained to the welfare of the church, and particularly to his services in the choir and his love for the weekly prayer meeting.’
A splendid edition of the music version of the Methodist Hymn Book for the use of the organist was presented in his memory.
In December of the previous year the Leaders had paid an equally affectionate and touching tribute to a neighbour of Mr Ramsey's, Mr James Lyske: ‘This meeting desires to put on record their deep sense of a loss upon the death of Mr James Lyske, a Class Leader for many years, a life-long member of the Memorial Church and an official of the CE Society.
Mr Lyske was a man of fine Christian character; he was interested in all that pertained to the work of God and a regular attender at Christian worship.
His was the quiet type of a Christ-lived life, and his influence was marked for good and for a strong quality of wisdom which left its mark upon many whom he came in contact with from day to day.
He had the gift of displaying Christian courtesy and kindness and was a generous contributor to all church funds.
We shall miss his presence and friendship from this meeting and he will be missed from the wider courts of the Church.’
He had been a member of the Leaders' Meeting from its inception.
The Reverend S E McCaffrey in an article published in the Circuit Magazine in September 1970 recalls that during his time in Edenderry  (1928–1932) Mr Watson Walker was the oldest Edenderry member.
He had been a member of the Building Committee which, forty or so years before, had planned the Memorial Church.
Even more interestingly, he was possibly one of the last people to have vivid personal memories of the 1859 Revival.
It would be impossible to list all those who have laboured diligently and gladly in this congregation.
Some names have already been mentioned but it is possible to think of so many: of Mr Tommy and Mr Bobbie Reynolds and their work in choir and Sunday School, of the dignified and gracious figures of Mr and Mrs T H Watson (parents of the Reverend George Watson), of Mr W A Mullen DL and his son Mr Cecil Mullen, generous and energetic benefactors of the church in so many ways, of Mr R J Magowan OBE JP for over 40 years secretary of the Trustees, of the brothers Mr Herbie and Mr David McClatchey, their service as Trustees and members of the choir, of Mr David Lyttle, Mr Norman Lyttle and Mr Sammy Lyttle, active in all aspects of the church's life but especially concerned with choir and Sunday Schools of Mr Willie Holmes and his daughters Winnie and Amy, of Mr David Lamb and his family, of Mr Twinem Jackson, who, with Mr Magowan, still had time to give years of public service to the community at large in Portadown, of Mr C J McKinley, concerned with the Building Fund over the years and Superintendent of the morning Sunday School from 1943 to the 1960s, of Mrs Sleator with her wholehearted love for the church and for people, of Mr Bertie Montgomery, always cheerful and serene, who, among so many other things, began the practice of taping the services for the benefit of the elderly and housebound, of M Alfred Shortt and his long and generous association with the Sunday School, or Mr Dan Humphries, helping over the years with the church's finances, of members of the Calvert and Hardy families and of those who, belonging to other Societies, nevertheless gave years of service to Edenderry — Mr Sam Robinson, Mr Joseph Cranston, Mr John Curry, Mr James Mullen, Mr W J Green, Mr Isaac Holland, Mr Eric Walker, and Mr William Bustard.
The list could go on and on.
In his article, Mr McCaffrey speaks of exploring the Circuit by bicycle.
He remembers most warmly the lively discussions in the Men's Bible Class, the chief spokesman being Mr John George McCann who, with his family, for many years gave skilled and professional help with  the harvest decorations.
There was also a strong Senior Christian Endeavour Society in Edenderry then with large numbers including some of the Local Preachers: Mr David England, Mr William England (Superintendent of the morning Sunday School from 1931 to 1943), Mr W J Green, Mr David Ruddock and Mr J Cranston.
Edenderry had also a fine choir ‘pervaded by a spirit of friendship.’
Mrs Bessie Forde, then a member of the choir, recalls how any girl actively interested in church life could spend the week: Monday evening the Junior and Senior CE Societies; Tuesday and Thursday evenings the GLB company, led by Mrs Waugh and Miss Mildred Forsythe, met regularly in Edenderry); Wednesday the Midweek service; Friday the choir practice and on Saturday a prayer meeting for the services on Sunday.
The choir would also arrange Services of Songs — hymns illustrated by appropriate lantern slides.
R.J. Magowan
T.C. Mullen
Planning a New Church
In 1910, when the Golden Jubilee of Thomas Street was being celebrated, the Quarterly Board looked at all the work of God on the Circuit and among other things they recorded their feeling that ‘in Edenderry there is set before us an open door and we are determined to enter in.’
That attitude shaped the thinking of the Leaders and Trustees in Edenderry and during the mid-1930s the need for a larger building was felt.
The scheme had its beginning in a conversation between Mr Twinem Jackson and Mr Norman Lyttle on Sunday 13 December 1936.
A meeting of Leaders and Trustees was held in the Carleton Cafe the following Friday evening, 18 December — they wasted no time — and after a prolonged discussion the decision was taken to build a new church as soon as possible and certainly within the following five years.
A committee was formed with Mr Jackson as chairman, Mr N A Lyttle as secretary and Mr T Wilson as treasurer (Mr Wilson lived just across from the church, in Carrickblacker Road, was managing director in  Messrs Shillington's an d notably generous to small boys collecting for Missions at Home and Abroad).
The other members of the committee were:(whose son, Waldo, was later to have a distinguished career with the BBC).
At the beginning of 1937 steps were taken to sound out the feeling of the congregation about opening a Building Fund.
Such an account was opened in September 1937 and by the end of that year £451-8-6 had been received.
Two ideas were being considered by 1938 — either to build a new church or to remodel the existing church and build a new hall.
In January 1939 Messrs Hobart and Heron of Belfast were asked to submit plans for a new church estimated to cost about £4000.
Plans were submitted within a month or two and the estimated cost of the building was £3500.
There were eventually two plans.
One was for a building which would seat 306 people as well as the choir.
There were to be two aisles, one at each side of a central block of pews and then pews at each side.
At the back of the church behind the pulpit were choir room, vestry and toilets and above the vestry a committee room.
The second plan was a modification of this.
It also seated about 300 together with room for a choir of 215.
The pulpit, instead of being central, was placed to the right-hand side, looking from the back pews.
The major change was structural provision for two transepts near the pulpit.
These, when built, would provide an extra 90 seats (45 each) giving a total of 390.
The impression given in both plans is of an exceptionally well proportioned and attractive building placed rather further back from the Carrickblacker Road than the present church.
However, like the Temple in the Book of Ezekiel, it was to be a vision only.
The year 1939 was not a good year for building.
The events of that September stopped all new building work and instead the Leaders had to consider such things as provision of black-out curtains for the church.
(They passed the cost of these on to the Trustees.)
The raising of money for the Building Fund went on through the war years and many heroic efforts were made.
The sum of £2,440 was collected between 1937 and 1945.
By July 1954 this had risen to £18025.
The money was brought in by direct weekly collection, but sales of various kinds and by that once universally popular but now  almost vanished institution, the Guest Tea.
(Some, in this less heroic age, may not know what a Guest Tea was.
Briefly, if a church, for example, wanted to raise money, the ladies of the congregation organised themselves into small groups, often into pairs, and each group distributed invitations to perhaps a dozen or fourteen friends to a tea to be held in the church hall or some other suitable place.
Each pair of ladies was totally responsible for a table and to this table their personally invited guests came.
The ladies provided tablecloths, china, cutlery and everything else including flowers.
Self-respect stimulated by a little gentle rivalry demanded that all should be the very best available.
They also provided the food and baking would go on for days beforehand.
The main course was usually a lavish cold salad.
On the evening you then had perhaps 100 or more guests altogether sitting down to a splendid meal followed afterwards by an entertainment organised by some of the men of the congregation.
The entertainment often included artistes who might be out at such gatherings several times a week.
Men were also in demand for fetching and carrying At a suitable moment after the meal a plate or basket was passed round each table and the guests put in their subscriptions.
Some invitations would discreetly hint at the minimum subscription but the best Guest Teas never did.
There was a well understood code of honour in these matters and guests invariably responded nobly.
Of course, you, in your turn, were invited to other Guest Teas and you cheerfully supported those who had supported you — it was not quite like that mythical island where the inhabitants made a precarious living by taking in each other 's washing.
Guest Teas called forth a great deal of generosity, a great deal of hard work but they were also enjoyable, exciting and profitable.
Perhaps they are due for a revival.
Our Lisburn correspondent reports that they are making a comeback in that area!)
There were, as well, jumble sales, and stories are told of men's  silk hats mysteriously and miraculously transformed into stylish ladies' bonnets, and of feather mattresses disintegrating, to the great discomfort of those transporting them.
The war meant the stationing of men and women of the Army and the RAF in and around Portadown.
They helped to swell the congregations of the churches with formal church parades on Sunday mornings and informal attendance on Sunday evenings.
After the Sunday evening service in Thomas Street free suppers were provided and musical entertainments given.
On many Sunday evenings the music consisted of hymn-singing from the Methodist Hymn Book.
A weekday canteen, managed by Mrs Forsythe of Seagoe, provided meals for servicemen and women at nominal cost.
There was also a reading room where men could read, or write letters, or play various board games.
As well, parcels were sent regularly to local men serving in the forces.
Edenderry, together with all the other churches on the Circuit, contributed to these efforts.
Many soldiers were converted to Christ.
Perhaps the most striking case was that of William Patrick James Fair (Bill Fair) who had been a student for the Roman Catholic priesthood at the Carmelite College in Cork.
He had abandoned the priesthood and his religious faith and had become uncaring and Godless.
Coming eventually to the North of Ireland he joined the British Army and was posted to England.
There he entered upon a course of wild living and then, in the providence of God, he was sent to Portadown.
One Sunday evening in 1942 he wandered aimlessly into the old Memorial Church.
The preacher at the service was the Superintendent, the Reverend R H Gallagher.
From the beginning of the service Bill Fair was gripped, and the sermon, on ‘The Choice of Moses’, was the means of his conversation.
That night, disregarding the jeers of his companions, he wrestled and prayed in the barrack room until he found peace with God.
He joined the CE in Thomas Street, was received as a member of the Methodist Church and became a Local Preacher on Trial.
He left the Army in 1946 and became a Lay Pastor first in Norfolk and then in Yorkshire.
He was disappointed not to be accepted into the Methodist Ministry but he was welcomed by the Anglican Church.
He entered Chichester Theological College and later became a curate in Lincolnshire.
He survived a serious brain haemorrhage in 1955 and in the same year became rector of Thelveton  in Norfolk.
He later was rector of two other Norfolk parishes and retired in 1979 after a heart attack.
In his last years he lived in Wymondham and continued to preach in Wymondham Abbey and neighbouring parishes.
He died in his sleep on 22 February 1986 and was buried in Wymondham.
His wife, now in her eighties, survives him, together with their three sons and six grandchildren.
Bill Fair never forgot either his spiritual father, Mr Gallagher, or Edenderry Church and that summer evening of his conversation.
When the present church was opened for worship in 1954 he wrote asking what the Leaders would like as a gift for the new building.
They asked, appropriately enough, for a visitors' book and this is still in use in the vestibule of the church.
By now it contains hundreds of names from all over the world.
It contains also, on the fly-leaf, the following inscription:
‘Edenderry Memorial Methodist Church, Portadown.
Given by Bill Fair who, while serving with the H. M. Forces, on 21st June 1942 wandered aimlessly into the old church and there entered into a deep, rich and satisfying experience.
’(For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and death.)
In 1939 many men and women went, as others had done 25 years before, to serve in the Army, the Royal Navy and the Royal Air Force.
Among those who went were John B Dynes and Edward Wright who had already served in the 1914–1918 War.
W S Magowan had gone in 1914; his youngest brother, Ernie, went in 1939.
The list of those who served and who had, or have, links with Edenderry Memorial is impressive:.
Samuel Clayton, serving with the RAF, as killed over northeastern France.
Thomas Dawson also died when serving with the RAF and Henry Kane of the Royal Navy died at sea.
The names of all those from the Circuit who served, and all who died, in the 1939–1945 War are recorded in the Book of Remembrance kept in Thomas Street Church.
The ordinary work of the church continued during those difficult and strenuous days.
On 4 December 1940 it is recorded that ‘the child of Mrs McKinley was received as a Junior Member’ and in 1943 a Cottage Meeting was started i the home of Mr and Mrs Walsh of Breagh and a good attendance was reported.
On the last Sunday in May 1943  were received as full members.
In March 1937 Mr and Mrs James Kilpatrick had been received as members and in May 1944 Mrs Jean Kilpatrick became a Class Leader.
A proposal was made that a GLB Company should be started in Edenderry under the leadership of Mrs Mary Montgomery.
In October 1944 the Leaders faced the problem of redecorating the Primary School room which had been handed back to the church after having been in use during the War as a First Aid Post for a unit of the St John's Ambulance Brigade led by Miss Mary Lutton.
The estimated cost was £100 and it was decided to have a special gift day the following December.
The Memorial Hall and Church 1991
The Reverend W. P. J. Fair with his grand-daughter Jane E. Elizabeth, 1972
The Post-War Years and the 1954 Church
In June 1945 the Circuit Stewards expressed a hope that Edenderry might soon become financially self-supporting.
This was achieved in 1953.
In August 1945 the Leaders asked the Superintendent, the Reverend Ernest Shaw, to allow the Reverend Thomas Kennedy to concentrate on visitation in the Edenderry district for at least the following 12 months in view of the probable building of a new church and the need for special attention to the work of God in the area.
The vision of the new church had not been lost during the war years.
In 1947 the Methodist Conference met in Portadown for the first time.
One reason for varying the itinerary of the Conference was the stringency of post-war rationing.
It was thought fair to avoid placing too frequent a burden on places like Belfast.
At this Conference a former member of Edenderry, the Reverend John England, General Secretary  for Home Missions, was inducted as Vice-President of the Conference and President of the Church.
His term of office came between those of two Ministers with close associations with Portadown — the Reverend R H Gallagher BA (whose first sermon at the beginning of his last term in Portadown had a singularly apposite text: ‘This is the third time I am coming to you’ II Corinthians 13 v 1) and the Reverend W. E Morley Thompson.
On Conference Sunday, Mr England was welcomed to his home church by his former neighbour, Mr R J Magowan, then Chairman of the Urban District Council and later first Mayor of Portadown.
Each generation in Edenderry has had members called to the full-time ministry of the church: the late  (now of the Presbyterian Church) and, more recently, the Reverend David Kilpatrick.
The late Reverend Dr Albert Holland had a close association with the Edenderry Senior CE Society.
In 1947 the average giving for each Quarter was £57 and the average loose collection for each Sunday was about £2.
For a fortnight, in March 1949, the Reverend James Wisheart, Superintendent of Evangelism, conducted a very successful mission.
In 1950 the Circuit organized a Veterans' Tea, held in Thomas Street Lecture Hall on Thursday 26 October.
Forty-five people were honoured of whom six had each given over 50 years' service to the church.
Inscribed Bibles were presented to them and among the recipients were several members of Edenderry.
In May 1951 a committee undertook to decorate the church with flags and bunting on the occasion of the visit to the town of Queen Elizabeth (now the Queen-Mother) and the Princess Margaret.
A Women's Fellowship Meeting was formed and met in January 1952.
The president was Mrs T W T Jackson, the vice-presidents .
The secretary was Miss Winnie Holmes and the treasurer Mrs C J McKinley.
Over the last forty years the Women's Fellowship has made an invaluable contribution to the life of the church.
Its members have tirelessly provided refreshments for all kinds of church events and have supported most generously both Edenderry Church, and the Methodist Church Overseas Department with their missionary boxes.
A Congregational Picnic was held in Killicomaine on the evening of Thursday 26 June 1952 and proved a great success.
By now plans for the building of a new church were in preparation.
The earlier plans of 1939 were considered inadequate and in 1951 Mr Robert Frater ARIBA was asked to provide plans for a church to seat about 386.
The plans were to include a vestry, church parlour, toilets and classrooms and the estimated cost was placed at £15,000.
By 1952, after delay in obtaining building permission from the government (for all new building was still strictly controlled) this figure had increased to £28,000.
Revised plans, omitting the classrooms and making other alterations, reduced the cost to £16,500 and in January 1953 the then Ministry of Finance granted permission to build.
In April of that year the contract was awarded to H Lyttle and Son at a price of £16,524.
The plans, like those prepared in 1939, included structural provision for two transepts, near the pulpit, to be built at a later stage, though it now seems unlikely that this will ever happen.
The Foundation Stone was laid by Mr W A Mullen DL during the Methodist Conference which, for the second time, was being held in Portadown.
The ceremony took place on Saturday 13 June 1953 at 2.30 pm and was presided over by the Reverend Colin Roberts, President of the Conference.
The lesson was read by the Reverend R M L Waugh BD Vice-President and the Reverend John Keys led the prayers.
The Superintendent of the Circuit, the Reverend W E Morley Thompson, welcomed all who were present.
The stone was dedicated by the President.
The Mayor of Portadown and Senior Circuit Steward, Councillor W D Irwin and former ministers — the Reverend J B Jameson, Secretary of Conference, Reverend W Moore Graham and the Reverend Tom Kennedy — brought greetings.
The praise was led by Thomas Street Old Boys' Silver Band.
Both this ceremony and the opening of the completed church in the following year enjoyed ideal weather.
Between the stone-laying and the opening of the church there took place another, less publicized, ceremony.
On Wednesday 14 October 1953 at 12 noon the Trustees gathered to see a steel box, 8″ x 6″ x 3″, specially made by Portadown Foundry Ltd, placed in a cavity in the foundation stone and firmly sealed.
This box contains the following: 1 set of Coronation coins and a 5-shilling piece; the Conference handbook for 1953; the ‘Irish Christian Advocate’ Conference number 19 June 1953; the ‘Belfast  Newsletter’for 15 June; the ‘Northern Whig’for 15 June 1953; the ‘Portadown News’and the ‘Portadown Times’for 19 June 1953; Circuit preaching plans April 1953 to March 1954; the Order of Service for the Foundation Stone Laying; a list of the Trustees with their signatures; Circuit reports for June 1951 and 1952; the Circuit Year Book for 1952 and the architect's plans for the new church and proposed possible enlargements.
On Saturday 4 September 1954 the completed church was opened.
A congregation of 600 met (assembled both in the church and the Memorial hall).
The Mayor, Mr T W T Jackson, also Society Steward of Edenderry, the Town Clerk, Mr George Magowan, and the Assistant Town Clerk, Mr Ken Jones, attended in their official capacities.
The church doors were opened by Mr W A Mullen DL, HM High Sheriff for County Armagh.
Sixteen memorial plaques in the vestibule were unveiled by the Reverend John England and the Reverend J B Jameson.
(In April 1955 four additional plaques were unveiled and dedicated by the Reverend Dr Albert Holland.)
Mr W D Irwin presided and the hymn: ‘We give immortal praise —‘, used at the opening of the 1891 church was again sung.
The building was dedicated by the President of the Church, the Reverend Ernest Shaw, and the sermon was preached by the ex-President, the Reverend Dr R M L Waugh.
Special services followed during the month of September and guest preachers included .
the total cost of the church was £21,932 and by 25 September 1954 £20216 had been raised, including £2084 at the opening services.
The remaining debt of about £1700 was quickly cleared.
Both the first church and the present church have been Memorial churches.
In the entrance hall of he present church the 20 bronze plaques commemorate both old and young — from Desmond William Green, who lived for 6 weeks, to many who died in the  fullness of age.
Below the Foundation Stone a later tablet was unveiled on 3 April 1960 to commemorate T W T Jackson who was born in 1895 and died in 1956.
He had served the congregation as Society Steward for over 30 years and had held many other offices as well.
He had a warmth of personality, a generosity of nature and a love for Edenderry which were unique.
As the inscription on the stone says: ‘He loved God and his neighbour.’
More recently two other plaques have been placed inside the church on the side walls near the pulpit.
These were unveiled and dedicated on the evening of Sunday 13 April 1986.
One commemorates the Reverend John Keys (1907–1985), Minister of Edenderry from 1950 to 1955, and the other the Reverend H Frederick Aiken (1927–1975), Minister from 1973 to 1975.
Mr Keys was minister during the building of the 1954 church and Mr Aiken saw the planning and the beginning of the new church halls but did not live to see their completion.
The plaques were unveiled by Mrs Lila Keys and Mrs Eileen Aiken and the special church and the halls recall with love and gratitude the generations past.
In 1953 the Men's Fireside, now led for several years by Dr Mathews, came into being.
Its first president was Mr Wesley Weir senior.
The vice-president was Mr Twinem Jackson, the secretary Mr David Lamb and the treasurer Mr Richard Dickson.
They began in a most practical way by going round the then new Killicomaine estate and compiling a list of Methodist people who had moved into the area.
On 7 June 1953, on the occasion of a broadcast service from Thomas Street Church at 7.45 pm a receiving set was installed in Edenderry so that the congregation there could join in the worship.
In the mid-1950s a company of the Girls' Life Brigade was formed with Mrs J H Montgomery as Captain and by the end of 1955 a Lifeboy Team was in existence.
A Boys' Brigade Company followed in 1968.
Mr William Coulter was appointed Captain with Mr Kenneth Twyble as Lieutenant.
Mr Coulter, a member of Thomas Street, retired as Captain after four years but remained for several more years as Lieutenant.
Mr Twyble took over as Captain and still holds that position.
The Company has continued to flourish over the years and Edenderry now has a thriving Company Section and Junior Section.
There was a growing feeling that the second minister on the Circuit should be free to concentrate his energies on the Edenderry district and that in fact the No 2 Manse should be at should be at this end of the town.
In 1955 also the idea of a Children's Church on Sunday mornings was first suggested (thought it did not start till November 1960) and in December 1955 for the first time there was a Christmas tree in church.
In 1957, for the first time during a Presidential visit to the Circuit, the President (the Reverend S E McCaffrey) preached at an evening  service in Edenderry.
In that year the electricity bill for one of the winter quarters was just over £25 but before today's Society Stewards become too wistful they should also reflect on the fact that the average Sunday offering then through the envelope system was below £17, or about 7p for each subscriber.
In 1958 the Reverend C H Bain BD and Mr Tom Butler conducted a memorable mission and in 1959 the transferred membership of Mr and Mrs Sam Craig was received from the Armagh-Richhill Circuit.
Mrs Craig was welcomed as a member of the Leaders' Meeting in March 1963 and has given 30 years' service as secretary of the Women's Fellowship.
In 1960 the old church had to be re-slated at a cost of £400 and in 1960 also Mr J H Montgomery recorded some of the harvest services for the benefit of members unable to get to church because of age or illness.
On 6 March 1961 the Leaders expressed their appreciation of the work being done by Mr Gerald Neilands in providing transport for elderly members of the congregation.
In July 1961 a new manse was bought in Margretta Park for £4100; the debt was paid off by 1963.
In October 1962 the choir felt it was difficult for them to give a strong lead to the congregational singing because of where the choir was placed and it was recommended that the Trustees should take expert advice on the rearranging of the pulpit area of the church.
Nothing, however, was done in the matter till 1987.
In November 1962 a series of three special evening services was planned on the theme of ‘How to have a happy family life’ and the preachers on successive Sunday evenings were , then headmaster of Methodist College, Belfast.
Other special services followed: The Reverend Wesley Gray brought the Dundonald Ladies' Choir; a team of nurses came from Lurgan and Portadown Hospital and a team of laymen came from Belfast: Thomas Street Old Boys' Band and the Old Girls' Association Choir came and one service was taken by Mr Donald Woodman BEM BA and the Portadown College School Choir.
On 6 March 1963 the suggestion was first made that there might be a printed Order of Service each Sunday.
In January 1964 the Leaders learnt that the Reverend William Buchanan (President of the Church 1990–1991) was unable to accept an invitation to succeed the Reverend  Val Silcock as second minister on the Circuit.
On Monday 2 March 1964 Mr Silcock welcomed Miss Margaret Medlow and Mr Kennedy McClatchey to the Leaders' Meeting and some further discussion took place on the possibility of moving the Communion rail forward and bringing the choir in behind the rail.
The Reverend W I Hamilton succeeded Mr Silcock in 1964 and there was a fairly constant preoccupation with financial matters and a feeling that the congregation did not fully appreciate the costs of running the church.
In 1964 also the Young People's Bible Class moved from the afternoon to the morning.
The Memorial Hall 1991, formerly the church of 1891.
The present church 1991.
Planning the New Hall 1965–1976
It is recorded that on 4 January 1965 ‘Mr R J Henderson said that he thought something should be done to start a Building Fund.’
Mr Jim Henderson, born in County Fermanagh, then in business in Dungannon, had moved from Moy to Portadown when he started a business in Portadown.
His death in the summer of 1990 deprived the church of the service of one whose whole life was characterised by a willingness to help others, by an integrity of character universally acknowledged and by the greatest generosity and kindness.
His financial skills were freely given to the work of the church and the warmth of his welcome to visitors and his genuine interest in people made him a host of friends.
In May 1965 £100 from the Society Stewards' accounts was set aside as the beginning of a Building Fund, the purpose of which was either to extend the existing halls or to build new ones.
In March of the following year Mr Henderson was appointed  treasurer of the Building Fund and the cost of the building scheme was estimated at £18,000 a sum which could be met over a period of 7 years.
The proposals were to be put before the congregation and this was done at a Congregational Tea in the Town Hall on Thursday 5 May 1966 at 7.30 pm.
Later that month the Ministry of Development gave general permission to build.
About 320 people attended the Congregational Tea and the scheme was officially launched.
By the following month over £9000 had been promised.
Weekly collections and other fund-raising activities were organised.
The Ulster Girls' Choir gave a concert in January 1967 and a garden fete in Chambers Park later in the year which raised £350.
Two further very successful fetes were held in following years.
The Women's Fellowship organized various 1- and 2-day shops and the Old Boys' Choir gave a concert.
Early in 1970 the Sunday School tried to collect 3d pieces to ring the church as part of their effort towards the Building Fund.
They also raised £70 by a sponsored walk.
The ‘Edenderry Memorial Calendar’ raised £270 and in 1975 two further 1-day shops brought in £500, while Bread and Soup lunches contributed £171.
Many outside bodies continued to help — the RUC Choir and Band, the Ormiston Choir, the Woodvale Quintet and the Ballyclare Male Voice Choir.
The sale of cookery books and glass-cloths brought in more money, the cookery books producing £746.
In the midst of this activity there came celebrations for the Centenary of the Sunday School.
The Centenary services were held on Sunday 1 October 1967, the morning service being a service of thanksgiving at which the preacher was the President of the Church, the Reverend R D E Gallagher MA BD.
In the afternoon the Senior Sunday School was addressed by Sister Bettina Bridges.
At 4.45 pm there was a special Centenary Tea for all the Sunday School children.
The evening service was one of dedication for the Sunday School teachers and the special preacher was the Reverend George Watson, the senior Ministerial Old Boy of the Sunday School.
After the evening service there was a reunion supper for all past and present members of the Sunday School and their friends.
A short history of the Sunday School was written to celebrate the event.
Discussion about what to build continued through 1968 and 1969.
At the beginning of 1968 one possibility considered was the complete  clearing of the site, including the old Memorial church.
In 1970 the possibility of building on the tennis courts was discussed and this idea was favoured by the Connexional Church Plans Committee.
The Trustees, however, felt that the tennis courts should be preserved as an amenity for the area.
A new idea was put forward in the spring of 1970 — that a new church should be built on the cleared site and that the 1954 church should be altered to become, first a dual-purpose building and then, when the new church had been completed, a church hall.
By July 1971 the estimated costs had risen to £47,000 and the Building Fund stood at £12,000.
The officials of the Ministry of Development were keen that the new building should be on the tennis courts because a new road was planned to run through Bachelor's Walk parallel with the present buildings.
In March 1973 the Trustees returned to the original idea of building a church hall attached to the Memorial hall.
This new plan also envisaged the building of the new rooms above the existing vestry and church parlour and joining the church and the halls.
The architect was Mr Gordon McKnight.
In January 1975 the contract for the buildings as they now stand was awarded to Messrs A A Quinn of Tandragee at a price of £54932.
The building project was overshadowed by the deaths of the Reverend Fred Aiken and of Mr Archie Quinn, principal of the firm of contractors.
The oldest surviving Trustee, Mr David McClatchey, also died.
Mr Quinn's sons completed the contract very efficiently and successfully.
The new buildings were dedicated on Saturday 22 May 1976.
The doors were opened by Miss Winnie Holmes, a member of one of the oldest families linked with the church and a most generous subscriber to the Building Fund.
The Reverend W I Hamilton led in prayer and the lessons were read by the Reverend Frank Bolster, Chairman of the Portadown District.
The President, the Reverend Dr Hedley Plunkett, dedicated the building and preached the sermon.
Greetings were received from the Venerable Archdeacon J Shearer MA BD, Rector of Seagoe and now Dean of Belfast, and the Reverend W M Craig BA BD, Minister of First Portadown Presbyterian Church, later Dr Craig and Moderator of the General Assembly.
The total cost of this scheme was £60273.46 and by June 1980 this had been completely cleared and the Building Fund had a credit balance of £2603.63.
It should be said also that both the 1954 church as the 1976 halls owned a tremendous amount to the generosity of the Rank Trust.
The main hall 1991.
1976–1991
Other improvements took place during the years following.
A very useful addition is the communications room created between the two halls in 1978–1979 at a cost of £619.69.
The new large hall also provided the opportunity for the formation of a very active Bowling Club as well as offering further scope for the activities of all the young people's organizations.
The question of the choir seating was discussed again in 1978, 1979 and 1980.
A new Baldwin electronic organ was bought for £6800 to replace the original Compton organ installed in 1954 at a cost of £1150.
(A Challen piano had been presented for use in the church in 1976.)
The new organ was dedicated by the Reverend Hamilton Skillen at the evening service on Sunday 28 March 1982.
The guest organist was Mr Roger Jarvis BMus GRSM FTCL LRAM and the preacher was the Reverend Samuel Blair.
The choir, conducted by Mr Adrian Robinson, sang two anthems.
We do not know who the first organist in the old church were.
Possibly one of the earliest was Miss Robb who had shown a keen interest in the purchase of a new harmonium for the Sunday School in the wooden Tabernacle.
The first certain name, however, goes back to the 1920s or even earlier — Miss Florrie Forsythe, of Seagoe.
Others were .
Over the years there have been a number of relief organists amongst whom are .
The year 1982 saw the death of Mr Sammy Lyttle, a longstanding member of the choir and sometimes choirmaster and in 1983–1984 there  were deaths of Mr Cecil Mullen, Mr J H Montgomery and Mr W J Green.
In 1984, under the leadership of the Reverend Patrick McConnell, the flat ceiling lights in the church were replaced by hanging clusters of lights and a new platform, in sections, was built for use in the halls.
In 1987–1988 the area around the pulpit was altered.
The front two pews were removed; a raised platform was built for the Communion table and choir who now sit inside the new, straight Communion rail.
The pulpit, Communion area and side aisles were all carpeted and the inside of the church painted to a colour-scheme prepared by Mr Brian Jeffers.
The pew cushions were also re-covered, as a gift, to match the new carpet.
The estimated cost of all the work was £10085 and the actual cost £12000.
A new Communion table was presented in 1989; also given in 1989 were a handsome new oak stand and cover for the silver baptismal bowl, itself an earlier gift from the same donors.
The original Communion plate, donated in 1958, was added to by further gifts in 1985 and 1990.
In 1985 the hour of morning service was changed from 11.00 am to 10.30 am, the Sunday Schools starting at 9.30 am.
Miss Margaret Medlow (now Mrs Johnston) retired from the Superintendency of the Primary Sunday School, thus ending an association of over 50 years with the Sunday Schools.
In September 1986 the Leaders' Meeting, by a majority vote, decided to use the book ‘Hymns and Psalms’ in place of‘The Methodist Hymn Book’.
In January 1987 a branch of the Young Women's Association was formed with Mrs Averil Capper as president, Mrs Norma Burke as vice-president, Mrs Sylvia Courtney as secretary and Mrs Gale Davison as treasurer.
YWA's answer to the Guest Tea has been the annual Treasure Hunt and Barbecue which has been enjoyed by many Edenderry members and friends in recent years.
The Reverend Kenneth Best conducted a mission in the autumn of 1988 which led to a deepening of the spiritual life for many and in June 1990 the present minister, the Reverend J Winston Good, was elected President-designate of the Methodist Church in Ireland and will take office as President in June 1991.
Mr Good's interest in youth work led to the formation of a Youth Fellowship shortly after he came to the church.
Among those who have helped with the leading of the Fellowship are Mr and Mrs Raymond Mulligan, Miss Rosalind Mulligan (now Mrs Ross) and  Miss Gail Baxter.
An even younger generation is served by a greatly appreciated children's church and a creche, both organized by Mrs Rosalynde Robinson and a group of helpers on Sunday mornings.
Perhaps one of the tiny members of the creche may live to see the bi-centenary!
Leaders and Trustees, December 1990
Conclusion
Over the years two streams have perpetually flowed together to make up the story of this congregation.
One stream is made up of those whose families have belonged to the church from its earliest days and who themselves have known no other spiritual home.
From them this informal account will recall at least some of the past and may awaken other recollections.
The other stream consists of those who have joined the congregation either through marriage, or by transfer from another church, or, to use the old Quaker word, by convincement.
Much of this story will necessarily be unfamiliar to them but it may offer some understanding of how the work of God here has developed and of what there is that is worthwhile in the legacy of the past.
No attempt has been made in these pages to measure the achievement of those 28 ministers whose names are recorded hereafter.
The good they have done and the influence they have had are known to God and cherished in the hearts of those who remember gratefully their words and their work.
Many of them have joined the Church Triumphant.
We are the poorer for their passing and the richer for their lives and example.
A Centenary celebration is a useful moment for reflection.
This brief history began with a word from Isaiah; it may fittingly conclude with a word from another prophet, Jeremiah:
‘Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and yet shall find rest for your souls.’
Jeremiah 6 v 16.