

Maintaining a safe environment
The activity of maintaining a safe environment
Every day people are engaged in many activities with the specific purpose of maintaining a safe environment, whether at home or at work or at play or travelling.
In order to maintain health, both personal and public, much energy has to be directed at maintaining an external environment which is as safe as possible, not only for the present but for future generations to inherit.
THE NATURE OF MAINTAINING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT
Throughout history man has been concerned with controlling the external environment or adapting to its vagaries.
To an amazing degree man has conquered the dangers inherent in the physical environment and has devised methods of protecting his family, his dwelling, his crops and his livestock.
Most humans no longer live in constant threat of danger, although there are powerful natural forces such as earthquakes, floods and drought which man is impotent to control.
The fact that this is the case is illustrated by events in recent history, such as devastating forest fires in the USA in 1988, the virtually annual floods in the Indian subcontinent in the wake of the monsoon rains, and the continuing drought in parts of the African continent which have taken the lives and livelihood of countless people.
It should not be forgotten either that in this so-called era of peace, there are wars going on in many parts of the world which means that some people are living in an unsafe environment and in constant danger.
Even under normal circumstances, however, people  throughout the world are still exposed to a variety of environmental hazards which jeopardise their safety, health, happiness and, indeed, survival.
Increasingly too, in this age of technological and scientific advancement, there are yet new hazards to contend with — such as the risks associated with radiation, chemical waste, the illicit use of drugs and modern war weaponry — and these, in contrast to natural forces, have been created by man himself.
There are many dimensions to the AL of maintaining a safe environment and, obviously not all can be discussed in this chapter.
Many different kinds of activities contribute to maintaining a safe physical environment and, because most are essentially preventive in nature, the remainder of this section considers the following topics:
preventing accidents
preventing fire
preventing infection
preventing pollution
Preventing accidents
Accidents can occur anywhere and at any time.
Frequently, though not always, they are avoidable.
Preventing accidents — in the home, at work, at play and while travelling — can and should be everyone's concern, both for their own personal safety and for others.
The human suffering which results from an accident can be severe and can result in some form of life-long disablement or disfigurement for the victim, not forgetting the stress and guilt which is borne by the person who may have had some responsibility for the accident occurring.
In recent years the problem of accidents and accident prevention has come very much to the fore because the huge scale of the problem is now recognised.
In Europe, accidents are now the third most important cause of death, and yet fatalities represent only the tip of the iceberg.
Accidents in childhood are of particular concern.
They are currently the single most common cause of death in England and Wales accounting for about one-third of all child deaths.
Accident injuries are also a major cause of morbidity in childhood, and the reason for a substantial proportion of hospital admissions among children in the 1–14 age groups (Constantinides, 1987).
Constantinides went on to discuss the permanent disability rate of 18.6–20 per 100 000 children per annum following accidents (road accidents, recreational accidents, and burns and scalds), and the type of disability included brain damage; deformity; loss of mobility; scarring; and sensory loss mainly due to eye injuries.
Discussing the aftermath of accidents involving burns, Forshaw (1987) maintains that the psychological damage, and indeed the necessary treatment, are as traumatic as the injury itself.
Injuries due to accidents are not random events.
They show clear regional, age, sex and social class variation; boys consistently show more accident injuries than girls and there is a steep social class gradient in child accident fatalities.
In a study in London carried out by Constantinides & Walker (1986) to look at all types of accidents in under-5s, there was a statistical correlation between more serious child accidents and unemployment, overcrowding, and lack of parental education beyond secondary school.
Injuries due to accidents they say, even if minor, are distressing events for children, parents and carers and great skill and tact are required during the follow-up period because parents often continue to feel guilty, anxious and defensive.
Internationally, the scale of the problem is similar.
The WHO (1986) reported that in industrialised countries, accident injuries rank fifth among the leading causes of death in children and young people.
It is now generally realised that unless something is done to reduce accidents, other measures taken for the good of a nation's health are being undermined.
Health care professionals have a vital role to play in accident prevention, though the problem needs to be tackled by multidisciplinary effort, organised at national and international levels.
Health education is an important aspect of prevention but that is unlikely to be effective in the absence of increased safety measures and legislation.
Individual effort is also vital.
Accident prevention cannot be viewed only in terms of the elimination of hazards.
The potential for accidents will always exist, so each individual must become skilled at maintaining safety in the face of hazards inherent in the environment.
Some of the ways in which this can be achieved are described in the discussion which follows of preventing accidents in the home; at work; at play; and while travelling .
Preventing accidents in the home
Most people probably think of their home as a ‘safe’ place but, in reality, the average home is potentially a very dangerous environment.
Even in countries where housing standards have improved immeasurably, and the promotion of safety in the home has been of long-standing concern, the problem of accidents is one of some magnitude.
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents Annual Report (1986) in the UK quotes that there are 5700 deaths and 3 million people injured each year in home accidents at an annual cost to the NHS of about £350 million.
As has already been mentioned, young children are particularly at risk, and they are dependent on adults to protect them from the potential dangers in their home environment.
What then are some of the hazards in the home environment which can cause accidents?
Some different groups of hazards are described below, along with related preventive measures.
There are fire hazards.
Open fires are increasingly less common in homes today but, where they do exist, the crawling child and toddler need to be protected.
A large  safety guard securely fixed to the wall will prevent a child coming into contact with a fire, and children's nightwear should be flame resistant.
Unfortunately, much modern household furniture is a fire hazard, and burning cigarette ends in chairs, settees, or beds can cause serious accidents not only because of the flames, but due to suffocation caused by noxious fumes from materials used in the manufacture of modern upholstery.
In recent years, so great has been evidence of the death toll due to noxious fumes, that legislation about furniture was enacted in the UK in 1988 — the Furniture and Furnishings (Fire)(Safety) Regulations (Statutory Instrument No. 1324).
The regulations are phased.
From November 1988, among other things, manufacturers must use foam which passes the ignitability test, and foam-filled furniture must carry permanent labelling; from March 1989, all furniture must pass the cigarette test; from March 1990, all furniture must have match-resistant covers; and from March 1993, all secondhand furniture must comply with 1988 regulations.
Not only manufacturers are involved; retailers must ensure that appropriate labels are displayed, and records of furniture supplied must be retained for 5 years and be available for inspection by the Trading Standards Office.
There are electrical hazards.
No matter how new and safe the wiring in a home, there is always the danger of injury and electrocution.
Faulty electrical appliances should be repaired by an electrician and even simple procedures, such as fixing a new plug or renewing a light bulb, can be hazardous if a mistake is made.
In any home where there is a young child, socket guards should be fitted to prevent a finger or pencil being poked into a potentially dangerous electrical socket.
There are chemical hazards.
Poisoning comes high on the list of accident cases, especially to children, and all toxic substances should be kept labelled and carefully stored in a safe place, preferably a specific cupboard in the kitchen, bathroom, garage or garden shed.
Wherever they are kept, they should be out of reach of children and, where appropriate, under lock and key.
The increasing use of child-proof containers for medicines is helpful, but  vigilance is still necessary.
It is unwise to keep medications in a handbag which could be lost or might be explored by a child, with disastrous results.
Apart from medicines, there are many other potentially dangerous chemicals, solid or liquid, which may be in any ordinary home: for example, substances for cleaning and decorating, and killing weeds and rodents.
One particularly toxic cleaner found in the kitchen is dish-washer powder.
One should not forget other commonly used substances, such as bleach and hair dye or nail polish and perfumes, which may well be left out in the bathroom or bedroom.
There are thermal hazards.
If tapwater is very hot, it can easily scald sensitive skin and one precaution is to run the cold water into the bath before turning on the hot tap.
Hot liquids, whether in a kettle or pot on the cooker, or in cups on the table or in the hand, should always be dealt with carefully, especially when there are young children because even an apparently small volume of liquid can cause severe scalding.
Hot food and drinks should not be placed on a table where there is an overhanging tablecloth; in a second, a scalding accident can occur if a child pulls on the over-hanging end of the cloth.
Another potentially lethal hazard has been identified when baby-walkers are used (Gray, 1987); it is easy for the child to reach out and pull on a kettle flex or iron flex which perhaps seemed safely tucked away and despite the apparent pleasure derived from baby-walkers, there is enough evidence of related accidents to recommend that they should not be used.
Other hazards in the kitchen include the hot cooker and hot baking utensils although protecting the hands and wrists with heat-resistant gloves helps to avoid burns.
There are hazards associated with sharp equipment .
In the home, there are scissors, pins and needles used for sewing; razor blades in the bathroom; sharp knives and, possibly, a food processor with sharp blades in the kitchen; nails and other sharp instruments in the toolbox; and shears and other tools in the garden shed.
All need to be used and stored with forethought and care, especially in the interests of children.
There are hazards associated with house design .
Safety should be considered in relation to positioning of lighting in the house and access areas, particularly where there are steps or stairs.
Provision of a stair guard, and secure door and window locks, are sensible precautions with children.
For elderly people, grab rails at strategic places (including the bathroom/toilet) and use of a non-slip bath mat are devices likely to prevent accidents.
Similarly, use of non-slip polish and non-skid pads under rugs, and prompt repair or replacement of frayed carpets, will help to keep the floor trip-free.
Glass is another danger and modern house design tends to favour large areas of glazing — glass doors and full length glass panels, either fixed or sliding — to allow for maximum natural lighting.
Safety glazing is effective but the high cost sometimes prohibits its use in private dwellings.
However, one inexpensive precaution is to apply self-adhesive warning stickers on the glass at eye level: for example, on a patio door which someone might inadvertently walk or run into while their attention is fixed on the garden beyond.
Whatever precautions are taken to minimise the hazards mentioned, accidents still can and do happen.
At the risk of repetition, it is worth mentioning again that children (especially those of preschool age) are particularly vulnerable to home accidents.
Kendall (1986) reminds us that accidents in infancy are related to what the child can do, so are related to stage of development, and quotes the relative incidence:
0–3 months
suffocation, smothering, choking, strangulation by clothing
3–6 months
burns, scalds, falls (causes of most head injuries), choking
6–12 months
falls, cuts and bruises, burns and scalds, choking, poisoning, drowning
As the child's mobility increases, accidents are often related to play, and when constant adult surveillance cannot be assured, young children can at least be protected by being put in a playpen or securely fastened in a bouncing cradle (placed on the floor), highchair or pram.
However, physical restraint is not a solution to accident prevention and, indeed, excessive over protection will only deny a child the opportunity to explore and learn about the environment.
All children have to develop a concept of safety and an ability to cope with the hazards which exist in that environment.
Parents and, depending on the circumstances, grandparents and childminders too, have a vital role to play in preventing accidents in the home.
Because they go into homes, health visitors have a unique opportunity to assess levels of safety and to offer appropriate guidance and help to parents.
However, to accomplish this, nurses need to be well informed about the subject of home accidents.
Articles by Moore, Ray and Ahamed are collected together, along with a fact sheet, in an issue of ‘Community Outlook’(1982) which is devoted to the subject of home accidents and clearly shows that there are many ways in which the nursing profession can contribute to their prevention; although these articles are not recent, they contain useful information which is still relevant.
But others, too, must accept their share of responsibility for safety in the home.
They include house designers and manufacturers, especially those concerned with the production of child safety equipment (CAPT, 1986), children's furniture and toys; and household products, especially commonly used chemicals and other potentially dangerous substances and articles.
Apart from children, the other groups most vulnerable to accidents in the home are those at the other end of the lifespan, the elderly, particularly those in the over 75 age group.
Falls are of particular concern.
There is a high mortality associated with old people who lie undetected for a long time, both related to the injury sustained and to complications; such as hypothermia, dehydration, bronchopneumonia and breakdown of pressure areas (Wild et al, 1981).
Fear of this happening may cause old people to be admitted to residential homes though, as Blake & Morfit (1986) show, falls are by no means uncommon in that setting either.
In the community, the fact that many simple, preventive measures are possible is well illustrated in an article by Mitchell (1984) and these range from encouraging elderly people to wear well-fitting shoes rather than slippers, to the use of alarm systems, and the involvement of neighbours and regular callers to an old person's house.
Again, as in childhood accidents, prevention of accidents in the home to the elderly requires a variety of approaches.
Everything possible needs to be tried if, as the numbers of elderly people increase by the year, the sought-after goal of independent life at home in the community is to be achieved.
The organisation, Age Concern, designated 1989 as the year for a Focus on Falls Campaign in order to attract support from orthopaedic surgeons, health authority general managers, and social work directors (Women's Herald, 1989).
Preventing accidents at work
Even when at work the AL of maintaining a safe environment cannot be forgotten.
Carelessness when cigarette- or pipe-smoking is a well documented cause of accidents and in many work places, smoking is now forbidden in designated areas because of the fire hazard (quite apart from public concern about smoking-related diseases p. 131).
In certain industries, indeed, smoking is a major hazard and employees are prohibited from taking matches, lighters and cigarettes into the work area.
But associated with the prohibition is the education and training of workers so that they are aware of the dangers and understand the reason for preventive action.
What has already been said about thermal hazards can also apply at work.
Where automatic stoking equipment is not in use, furnace workers wear heat-resistant clothing, especially gloves; and also goggles to protect eyes from glare and sparks.
This also applies where substances like molten steel, glass and tar are poured.
In some climates, outdoor workers have to be trained to take protective measures against exposure to long periods of sunlight leading to dehydration because of perspiration loss; or to heat stroke; or after long exposure, to an increasing rise in the incidence of skin cancer (Nichols, 1988).
At the other end of the scale, there are industries where excessive cold is used such as refrigeration in the fishing industry, and cold storage rooms in the catering business.
Workers need to understand how quickly human tissue freezes, and the necessary precautions to prevent its occurrence.
Workers who can be exposed to excessively cold weather conditions have not only to know about survival measures during over-exposure, but be able and willing to carry them out.
Workers in the pharmaceutical industry and in laboratories obviously have to be knowledgeable and skilled to avoid the many chemical hazards which can threaten the safety of their environment.
When the chemicals could damage the skin or the eyes, adequate protection is essential.
And in establishments where workers handle infected material, for example in laboratories or in hospital laundries, strict contamination control measures and protective clothing are obligatory.
Where workers make sharp equipment, or use machines  with cutting edges and moving parts, use of adequate guarding is essential to maintain safety in their environment.
Wherever possible automatic safety factors are built into the machines, for instance by making them unworkable unless the guards are in place.
If this is not the case, it is imperative that workers build safety factors into their work pattern from the beginning and there is usually work training to underscore this.
Some groups of health care workers are subject to certain types of injury and accident.
For example, back injury is common among nurses and there is growing concern about the need to instruct nurses in proper lifting techniques (p. 252) and to encourage them to use mechanical lifting devices as much as possible.
Exposure to radiation is another area of concern, affecting radiologists, doctors, dentists and nurses who are involved in the use of X-ray procedures and care of patients undergoing treatment with radioactive substances.
Female staff of childbearing age, particularly women who are known to be pregnant, require special protection from radiation hazards and there are codes of practice which apply to radiotherapy and X-ray procedures.
Quite apart from radiation hazards in the health care sector, there is concern about the magnitude of the risk of cancer for workers in the nuclear industry itself.
In an attempt to quantify the risk, the Ministry of Defence in the UK commissioned a study of staff engaged in atomic weapons research at Aldermaston and associated establishments who had had repeated exposure to low levels of ionising radiation.
A total of 22 552 workers were followed up on an average of 18.6 years.
Overall mortality was 23% lower than the national average for all causes of death and 18% lower for cancer.
For a small group of workers, however, who had experienced above average external exposure and had also been monitored for internal contamination by radionuclides, the mortality from cancer of the prostate gland and the lung was raised (Beral et al, 1988).
In workforces in the USA, excess mortality from prostatic cancer has also been reported in the Oak Ridge National Laboratory and in a weapon plant but, Beral et al continue, recent data from the Japanese atomic bomb survivors show no association between a single acute exposure to high levels of radiation and mortality from prostatic cancer.
The authors indicate therefore that excesses of prostatic cancer in industrial workforces are unlikely to be due to external radiation.
Cancers in other specific body sites were also monitored and compared with surveys from other countries but more research requires to be done.
Certainly following the far-flung effects of the disaster at the Chernobyl nuclear power station in 1986, the health hazards associated with nuclear products have been highlighted, not only for employees and people in the immediate environs of a nuclear plant but also for people and terrain far distant from the scene of the nuclear leak.
Considerable public pressure is being put on governments and large companies to utilise energy sources other than nuclear power for industry and commerce, and there are strident demands for stricter supervision to prevent accidents and to monitor the disposal of nuclear waste products.
According to the International Herald Tribune (Keller, 1988) there are reports from Moscow that five planned Soviet nuclear power stations have been cancelled since the 1986 disaster in the Ukraine.
So important is the subject of a safe work environment that most countries have legislation requiring protective practices at all places of employment.
Standards are set for ventilation, heating, lighting, hygiene, safety features of tools and equipment, fire precautions, first aid facilities and provision is made for occupational health services.
In the UK, the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 is an important piece of legislation in this respect.
It imposes statutory obligations on employers to set down and implement policy to safeguard the health and safety of their employees.
However, the employees also have responsibilities and are required both to exercise reasonable care, and to cooperate with their employers' health and safety policies.
More is said about the subject of safety in the ALs of working and playing.
At international level, the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) collaborate to produce various recommendations which seek to establish worldwide standards of safety with the purpose of preventing avoidable accidents at work.
Preventing accidents at play
It seems paradoxical that man must attend to the AL of maintaining a safe environment even during leisure activities.
But for those who choose arduous outdoor recreations like climbing, water sports and ski-ing this is particularly so.
Suitable attire is essential; careful attention should be paid to the weather and its forecast; and extra rations and a heat-reflective sheet for warmth must be carried if there is any possibility of encountering adverse environmental conditions.
Those who pursue water-related sports should learn to respect natural events like tides and floods.
For safety they should cooperate when local authorities display signs, warning that the seashore is dangerous.
Becoming a competent swimmer is obviously sensible and for those who sail a knowledge of seamanship is essential.
Sailing is becoming much more popular in the UK and from the USA comes a warning about personal standards of responsibility while enjoying water-related recreation.
Williams & Gonzalez (1987) highlight the increasing problem in the number of accidents caused by drinking and driving afloat.
According to the National Safety Council boating accidents are the second leading cause of transport injuries, and the US Coastguard estimates that at least half of those accidents are alcohol-related.
Discussing the ever mounting toll, they maintain that ‘combined with the effects of all  the sun, wind, spray, vibration and happy fatigue which go with boating, even moderate amounts of alcohol can be dangerous’.
Even at festive times like Christmas, extra safety precautions need to be taken with Christmas trees, fairy lights and decorations.
Extra precautions are necessary on other occasions when bonfires and fireworks form part of the festivities.
An increasing number of countries are moving towards a policy of prohibiting the sale of fireworks to the public and instead, having organised displays operated by experts; ensuring that there is careful segregation of spectators from staff who are igniting the fireworks.
In spite of knowledge of precautions, injuries from accidents during sport and leisure activities are common-place and account for a significant proportion of emergency admission to hospitals.
This may reflect the fact that many people today have more leisure and money to spend on such pursuits than in the past.
Certainly sports such as motor-cycling, hang-gliding, ski-ing, skating, yachting, diving, skate-boarding, marathon running and squash have become popular among a broad cross-section of the community.
All of these, some more than others, carry the risk of injury from accidents and even the safety of some long-standing sports — notably rugby — has become the focus of attention.
It has been roundly criticised because of the risk of cervical spinal cord injury, and there has been a plea for changes in the rules to make it safer (Burry & Calcinai, 1988).
Boxing has been the subject of adverse criticism for some time (Corsellis, 1989).
It is not only players of a sport who risk injury, but in some cases the spectators too, and for example the problem of ‘football hooliganism’ has become a matter of concern in the UK.
In an attempt to prevent violence and injury, steps have been taken to combat drunkenness at football matches and to improve crowd control.
Of course even in a well-controlled crowd there are bound to be accidents when many thousands of spectators are gathered together, and Sadler (1983) describes the medical problems which commonly occur and how they are managed on such a large scale, with particular reference to the nurse's role.
In the main, sporting accidents affect young adults; the more challenging and potentially dangerous sports inevitably appeal to people in that age group.
However, accidents do happen to school-age children in the course of play, and consistent with the activities of this age group, they suffer fewer accidents in the home (compared with pre-school age children) but more accidents outdoors and in the school playground.
The results of a study undertaken in Cardiff (Wales, UK) of 10 000 school children injured by accident are reported by Maddocks (1981).
In the 5–9 year age group, 15% of injuries happened in school and 24% out of doors (compared with 23% at home); and for 10–15 year-olds, 29% occurred in school and 26% out of doors (compared with 11% at home).
The comment is made that the proportion of accidents in school is high, considering the relatively small part of total time spent there.
It is also relevant to note that 55% of injuries which occurred at school happened in the playground.
Some schools have attempted to increase playground safety but here again, as in the home, preventing accidents needs to balance the necessity of supervision and restriction in the interests of safety, against the need for children to enjoy themselves and to develop a sense of personal responsibility for their own safety.
Preventing accidents while travelling
Every person has a responsibility for maintaining safety while travelling.
Laws and regulations can lay down safety standards but individuals have to comply with those standards.
Ignorance is no plea in law, so people have to be taught about safety while travelling, and encouraged to develop a positive attitude and strict self-discipline in relation to prevention of accidents.
This is said to be the ‘age of travel’.
Certainly this century has seen incredible advances in the speed of travel, both inter-city and international, and in the distances people travel — indeed as far as the moon.
Holidays and business trips abroad are now commonplace occurrences and an elaborate network of international communication attempts to ensure the safety of travellers by land, sea and air.
There are also carefully planned strategies to cope with emergencies and the victims of major travel accidents, wherever they may occur in the world.
At national level, the major concern is with preventing accidents on the roads.
According to Central Statistical Office data (1988) the largest number of road casualties per hour coincide with the times of day when traffic is at its heaviest, reaching a peak between 5 and 6 p.m. and with a secondary peak between 8 and 9 a.m.
Child casualties peak between 3 and 4 p.m. with a secondary peak at lunchtime.
Making international comparisons between seven EEC countries, Japan and USA, the data shows that the UK had the lowest death rate of these nine (9.4 per 100 000 population) and Portugal the highest in the EEC countries with 30.2 per 100 000 population.
Safe road surfaces, adequate street lighting and sign posting, compulsory driving tests, road use regulations, compulsory speed limits and minimum mechanical safety standards for vehicles are all examples of measures taken by national governments to maintain a safe environment on the roads and to prevent accidents.
In addition, many governments have extended legislation to other areas, for example , laws which permit police to use a breathalyser test to detect and detain drivers who have been drinking in excess of the alcohol limit.
It is obviously still a necessary preventive measure because in a recent survey reported by Eason (1989) involving 1576 motorists, when asked whether they obeyed speed limits and other road laws, 5% admitted driving while over the alcohol limit.
Extrapolated, this figure means that as  many as 1.5 million British drivers regularly drive after drinking too much.
The UK government is concerned about the number of deaths caused by careless driving while unfit because of excessive alcohol consumption, and a recent White Paper,The Road User and the Law , recommends among other things, that this offence should carry obligatory disqualification from driving for at least 2 years, an unlimited fine and a maximum penalty of 5 years' imprisonment (Lowry, 1989).
In an increasing number of countries, use of seat belts in cars is now obligatory.
Even in the short time since the introduction of seat belt legislation in January 1983 in the UK, there has been a demonstrable reduction (of approximately 25%) in the number of deaths and serious injuries (e.g. internal chest injuries and fractured skull) among front seat car occupants.
Pressure groups are now campaigning for the law to be extended to cover back seat passengers too, principally with the safety of children in mind but also to protect front seat occupants who can be injured in a crash if an unrestrained person in the back is thrown forward.
Pending such legislation, improved baby carriers are constantly being produced, and many manufacturers now fit back seat belts into new cars.
It is interesting to see how a law has so rapidly effected a dramatic and important change in people's behaviour concerning safety while travelling where even aggressive publicity campaigns apparently failed to make the necessary impact.
In a number of countries for some years, the wearing of crash helmets by motor cyclists has been obligatory.
Currently, in an endeavour to reduce serious injury and fatalities, especially among children and teenagers, brightly-coloured helmets for pedal cyclists are becoming popular.
Most pedal cycle deaths are caused by severe head injuries and a recent Australian study suggests that head injuries can be substantially reduced by wearing helmets, indeed certain schools insist on their use by children who cycle to school (Doyle, 1988).
Apart from the risks to car drivers, passengers, and cyclists themselves however,pedestrian casualty figures are also alarming.
Safety campaigns aimed solely at pedestrians are not sufficient in view of the fact that a substantial proportion of pedestrians are struck by vehicles and killed or injured, not on the road but on the pavement.
Preventing accidents while travelling is an enormously complex issue.
Legislation has a part to play in maintaining safety but individuals have a responsibility to control personal behaviour for their own benefit as well as for the survival and well-being of others.
Preventing fire
Any activity which aims at preventing fire is a component of the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
These activities are an essential part.
of living and in many countries there are educational pamphlets and programmes from several sources to spread knowledge about fire hazards and to encourage self-discipline in carrying out precautions.
At a domestic level, fire can be prevented by maintaining equipment in a safe working condition, for example repairing frayed flexes, avoiding trailing flexes, ensuring that electrical circuits are not overloaded, having fires adequately guarded, and using self-extinguishing devices for movable articles which can be knocked over with relative ease such as oil lamps and oil-heaters.
In the kitchen, a major contribution to safety is carefulness when using fat for cooking purposes; if it ignites, the most effective way of controlling the blaze is to cover the pan with a lid or metal tray and turn off the heat supply to the cooking apparatus.
Individuals are responsible for fire safety in their own homes but most householders insure against the possibility of accidental fire damage to the fabric of their home and to the contents.
For public buildings — shops, hotels, warehouses — proprietors have the responsibility to take adequate precautions against fire and there is legislation which permits inspection of premises to ensure that the necessary safety measures are enforced.
Despite precautions human carelessness can precipitate the utter devastation caused by fire.
Unsafe disposal of lighted cigarette ends has been thought to cause many fires involving buildings used by the public, for example the football stadium disaster in Bradford, England in l985 and the King's Cross Underground station fire in London in 1987.
Similar tragedies can occur even in rather unusual settings and caused by a different train of events, for example the North Sea Piper Alpha episode 1988, where staff died either on the blazing oil installation or drowned in the surrounding sea of fire.
Such disasters with heavy loss of life and the untold misery of injury and scarring for survivors, highlight the need for closer supervision of existing preventive strategies; greater staff awareness of alarm and rescue measures; and increasing vigilance on the part of companies and individuals to reduce human error.
When fire does occur, detecting, containing and extinguishing the flames are the three main principles of immediate action.
Smoke detectors may give the first alarm but detection is often by smell and by seeing smoke and flames.
Combustion cannot continue in the absence of oxygen and certain commercially produced fire extinguishers work on this principle.
If sufficiently limited in extent, however, merely smothering the fire with thick material will cut off the atmospheric oxygen supply and extinguish the flames.
Closed windows and doors help to contain smoke and flames for about 20 minutes, and as inhaled smoke can immobilise people who are attempting to escape, these vital minutes may permit a more orderly evacuation from other parts of the building, and simultaneously allow time for professional help to arrive.
Most countries have a paid, professional fire brigade who are expert in fire fighting.
They also, however, contribute to fire prevention and play a considerable part in  educating the public, especially school children, to become more fire prevention conscious.
Apart from conflagrations in buildings, environmental fires can occur.
For example in hot dry weather, carelessly attended picnic fires and inadequate disposal of lighted cigarette ends can start a forest fire, although ignition can occur spontaneously from the heat produced by sun shining through glass carelessly left lying on the ground especially near dry shrubland and trees.
Obviously knowledge as well as self-discipline is necessary to prevent accidents and maintain a safe environment.
Preventing infection
An essential dimension of the AL of maintaining a safe environment is preventing infection.
Infection results from the successful invasion of the body by pathogenic micro-organisms and, because these are ever-present in the environment, preventing infection is a fundamental issue in disease prevention and health promotion.
Much is now known about the biological characteristics of pathogens and the epidemiology of infection, and successful methods have been developed which can inhibit the growth and spread, and harmful effects of these organisms.
However, while public health measures at national and international levels can do much to prevent and control infection, the participation of individuals is vital because of the continuing importance of many basic personal and domestic hygiene activities.
Therefore, everyone requires to understand about the sources of infection, the modes of transmission of pathogenic microorganisms, human portals of entry, susceptibility to infection and principles basic to the control of infection.
These topics are discussed in detail in textbooks dealing with microbiology but are outlined briefly in the remainder of this section and the main points of the first three subjects are summarised in Figure 6.1.
Sources of infection .
The source of infection is the site where the pathogenic organism grows and multiplies.
The natural warmth of the human body encourages microorganisms to multiply rapidly.
However for pathogens to establish themselves in the human body they must be in the right place, in sufficient numbers and be sufficiently.
virulent.
The body's defence mechanisms against infection — immunity (p. 82)— can usually cope with small numbers and the body only succumbs to infection when the invading numbers are large or when, for various reasons, resistance is lowered.
Pathogens are usually species specific and, therefore, the most common sources of infection in man are human beings themselves.
The skin and all body orifices are colonised with microorganisms shortly after birth; indeed, the body acts as ‘host’ to these microorganisms which are called commensals, and are referred to as the body's natural or resident flora .
They are not usually pathogenic but can become so under certain circumstances, for example when the body's immune system is not functioning adequately, or when they are transferred to another part of the body, usually by the hands.
A good example of the latter is the transference of commands such as E. coli , from the anal area, to the entrance of the female urethra, leading to infection of the urinary tract.
When tissue begins to react to the commensals causing inflammation, the process of colonisation has given way to infection.
Therefore people can infect themselves and auto-infection, as it is called, is important to recognise as a source of infection.
SOURCES OF INFECTION: EXAMPLES
human sources
auto-infection:
a person who contaminates himself at a site other than the original infected source
other humans:
person who is incubating an infection
: person who is suffering from an infection
: person who is recovering from an infection
: a carrier — person who is not affected but is harbouring pathogens
animal sources
e.g. dogs, cows, monkeys
e.g. birds, insects
inanimate sources
soil
MODES OF TRANSMISSION: EXAMPLES
by direct contact
direct transmission from an infected person to another person as in certain skin diseases.
sexually-transmitted diseases and some respiratory infections
by fomites
indirect transmission from infected person to another via inanimate objects in the environment
by airborne droplets and dust
infected person sprays pathogens into the air when breathing/coughing/sneezing/ talking/laughing: pathogens fall to the floor and mix with dust
by contaminated food and drink
infection (e g from infected food handler) transmitted in food and drink
by animals/insects
mechanical transmission (e g pathogens carried on the body/legs) or spread of pathogens by blood-sucking insects
HUMAN PORTALS OF ENTRY: EXAMPLES
by the placenta
to the fetus from the mother's blood supply, e.g syphilis, rubella
by inhalation
entry of airborne pathogens, e g common cold, measles, whooping cough, diphtheria, respiratory tuberculosis
by ingestion
pathogens in food and drink are ingested and digested, e.g. dysentery, typhoid, gastroenteritis, brucellosis, and bacterial food poisoning
by the skin
infection of skin an– mucous membrane by direct contact, e.g. certain skin diseases, conjunctivitis, infective foot disorders, sexually-transmitted diseases
by invasion of tissue
via a cut in the skin or surgical wound (e.g. staphylococcal infection)
via the bite of an animal or insect
Fig. 6.1 Infection: summary of sources of infection, modes of transmission and human portals of entry
Quite apart from resident flora,transient flora may cause infection.
They can be acquired from other people and any form of interpersonal contact may allow microorganisms to be transmitted from one person to another.
The source of infection may be a person who is incubating an infectious disease, or actually suffering from an infection, or recovering from one, or a carrier who is personally not affected but is harbouring pathogens which can infect others.
Animals provide another source of infection in the environment and, like humans, animals can harbour and spread pathogenic microorganisms.
The common house fly can carry many different pathogens; the mosquito carries malaria and yellow fever; brucellosis can be contracted from milk cows; and rabies in man results from a bite by an infected dog.
These are just a few examples of animal-borne infection to which humans are susceptible.
A few infections arise from inanimate sources: for example, pathogens that cause tetanus are harboured in the soil.
Modes of transmission .
In order to understand how infection is spread, it is necessary to know about the various modes of transmission.
These are noted in Figure 6.1 and are briefly discussed below.
Direct contact is most likely to lead to infection of the skin, conjunctiva or mucous membrane.
Skin diseases, such as impetigo or scabies, are transmitted by direct contact.
The sexually-transmitted diseases (e.g. syphilis, gonorrhoea, AIDS and non-specific urethritis) are so-called because they occur as a result of direct sexual contact with an infected partner.
Some oral and respiratory infections follow direct contact: for example, infectious mononucleosis (glandular fever) is frequently described as the ‘kissing disease’.
Direct hand contact can transmit infection from one person to another or, in the same person, from one location to another.
For this reason,handwashing is the single most important personal activity in preventing infection , so it is essential that people wash their hands after going to the toilet and before touching food.
Indirect contact involves transmission by fomites (inanimate objects in the environment such as clothing, bedclothes, crockery and cutlery, instruments and furniture) and these can act as reservoirs for infection.
Fomites with smooth hard surfaces e.g. glass, are easier to clean than those made of fabric.
Disinfection by physical and chemical means is important in preventing the spread of infection by fomites.
To prevent the spread of infection by airborne droplets, people should cough and sneeze into a handkerchief, preferably a paper one which can be disposed of by burning or flushing down the toilet.
Even during breathing and talking, organisms present in the nasopharynx, throat and mouth are expelled in droplets of secretion.
For this reason, masks may be worn by personnel in operating theatres and on other occasions e.g wound dressing, when the patient is likely to be at risk of succumbing to infection.
[It should be noted, however, that there is still considerable controversy about the wearing of masks.
Ingleston (1986), discussing an updated surgical dressings technique, declares that masks are not needed, while Ayton (1985) questions the use of masks even in theatre and says, ‘if there is good ventilation, the levels of airborne contamination may not be altered whether masks are used or not’.]
Droplets also fall to the floor and contribute to the dust and its microbial flora and this mode of transmission is especially important in streptococcal and staphylococcal infection in hospitals, hence the emphasis on reducing dust by damp dusting and vacuum cleaning in this environment.
Adequate spacing of beds also helps to prevent direct droplet spread of infection in hospital, as does good ventilation.
A person known to have an infectious disease is usually nursed in an isolation cubicle; and barrier nursing is another means of isolation.
Many of the common infectious diseases of childhood are transmitted by airborne droplets (e.g. chickenpox) and, therefore, isolation from other children during the period of incubation and infection is a means of preventing spread of these diseases.
Protection of food and drink from contamination, for example by flies, and handwashing before touching food are basic measures to prevent the transmission of infection in food and drink.
People who have infected sores, such as boils or styes, or who have diarrhoeal conditions, should not prepare food, especially when it is to be distributed to large numbers.
Contaminated food, water or milk can result in an epidemic outbreak and these infections, such as the salmonelloses and bacillary dysentery, are further spread by unwashed hands contaminated with faeces.
Milk and food can also be contaminated by infection in the animals which provide them and preventing the transmission of such disease (e.g. brucellosis) involves strict control over the source and supply of animal food products for human consumption.
Animals can also transmit infection on their bodies, as can insects (e.g. flies becoming contaminated with faeces) and many widespread epidemic infections are transmitted by blood-sucking insects such as the mosquito which causes malaria.
Human portals of entry .
The microorganism must invade the body tissues before infection results and, following invasion, infection will develop only if the body defence mechanisms fail to prevent multiplication of the pathogen.
There are various portals of entry.
Even before birth, the fetus can be infected from the mother's blood via the placenta, and for this reason, pregnant women have their  blood tested to detect, e.g. syphilis so that treatment can be provided to ensure that the baby is not infected.
Rubella (German measles) can cause devastating damage to the fetus in early pregnancy and girls who have not had an attack of this disease by the age of puberty are offered immunisation against this virus so that any baby conceived would be protected, although this should soon be rare in the UK because from 1988, MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) protection has been available to all infants.
Many microorganisms enter the body via the respiratory tract and those who have colds, for example, should minimise the spray from their sneezing and coughing by the use of a paper tissue which can be disposed of safely after one use.
Ingestion is another means by which microorganisms gain entry to the body.
The pathogens which cause dysentery, typhoid and some forms of gastroenteritis are excreted in the faeces, so hands contaminated with faeces, if inadvertently put near the mouth, can re-infect the person himself or infect food which may be consumed by others.
Strict handwashing routines are imperative to prevent this.
Fortunately the technology of the food processing industry is now so sophisticated that infection from this source has been virtually eliminated.
However, fresh food, and food consumed which has been prepared and cooked by others, must always be regarded as a potential source of infection.
Whether in a large institution, a small restaurant, a bakery, a take-away food shop or the kitchen at home, those who handle and cook food must adhere strictly to the rules of food hygiene.
Food poisoning (p. 159) is increasing; in fact, in the UK it is agreed that the published figures grossly underestimate the true incidence (Holmes, 1988).
The main types of bacteria responsible are salmonella (mainly in meat and poultry); Staphylococcocus  aureus (the skin and nose of human carriers is the main source);Clostridium perfringens (which contaminates raw meat, poultry and some dried products) and listeria, especially associated with cook-chill food products.
Raw foodstuffs are the most likely source of food poisoning and foods which encourage bacterial growth are meats and poultry (raw and cooked), foods with a meat base (e.g. soups), eggs, milk and milk products (e.g. cream) A national scare about salmonella in eggs/hens during December 1988 cost the UK government millions of pounds in compensation to farmers, and the increasing incidence of food contamination has given rise to concern about gaps in the UK food hygiene laws.
The government plans to announce shortly what it describes as the most far-reaching legislation since 1938 (Editorial, Glasgow Herald 1989).
There are three main principles involved in the prevention of food poisoning.
Firstly, the spread of contamination is prevented by separating foodstuffs (to avoid cross-contamination); by cleanliness on the part of the foodhandler; and by cleanliness of cooking equipment.
Secondly, pathogens already in food can be prevented from multiplying by adequate refrigeration of perishable foods and avoiding delay between preparation and serving of food.
Thirdly, thorough cooking and rapid cooking will usually destroy pathogens although it cannot be relied on to destroy spores or preformed toxins.
Holmes provides practical information about the hidden dangers of food and how to overcome them.
The intact skin, usually a barrier to infection, can sometimes be successfully invaded by pathogenic microorganisms, as can the body's mucous membranes (e.g. the conjunctiva).
Common examples of infective foot disorders are athlete's foot and verruca, notoriously picked up from public swimming pools and communal bathrooms.
A cut in the skin does potentially allow the entry of pathogens and for this reason even minor cuts and grazes should be attended to properly and observed for signs of infection.
Prevention of infection is the objective whenever surgical wounds are cleaned and covered with a sterile dressing or spray.
The number of microorganisms on the skin at the time it is cut will depend on how recently the skin was washed or, in the case of surgery, how adequately skin preparation was undertaken.
Invasion of tissue by pathogens may result from the bite of an animal or insect, e.g. rabies is caused by the bite of an infected dog; Marburg disease by the bite of a green monkey; and malaria is caused by the bite of a mosquito.
Susceptibility to infection .
People will be less susceptible and more resistant to infection if they have an adequate diet and sufficient exercise, sleep and rest.
Tired, malnourished people are prone to infection.
When a person is ill, the body's natural defence mechanisms are already under stress, and therefore, less able than usual to resist the invasion of pathogenic microorganisms.
An unfavourable environment may also decrease resistance to infection: for example, prolonged exposure to cold and damp may increase susceptibility to infection.
Resistance to specific infectious diseases can be acquired in several ways (p. 82), and, of course, infants during the first few months of life are relatively unsusceptible to many infections because of transplacentally derived immunity.
Prevention of infection .
In any scheme aimed at preventing infection, destruction of the pathogenic microorganisms plays a large part.
Agents which destroy organisms are called disinfectants or antimicrobial agents, and they are physical or chemical in nature.
Physical disinfectants include the natural elements like sunlight and freezing as well as generated heat and cold: chemical disinfectants include liquids and gases.
A success story of the 20th century is the discovery of antibiotics, substances which can be introduced into the human body to combat pathogenic microorganisms.
Another approach in preventing infection is based on the principle of isolation.
Isolating an infected person has long been used as a means of preventing the spread of infection  and has been very effective in campaigns against the more serious and highly infectious diseases, such as smallpox (now eradicated from the world), Lassa fever and tuberculosis.
As well as isolating the person suffering from the disease it is, of course, important to locate people who have been in contact with the sufferer and, if necessary, they too must be isolated, treated or kept under surveillance.
For this reason, ‘contact tracing’ has become an integral part of the control of infectious disease.
Galbraith (1983) outlines the aims and methods of contact tracing which has been used in recent years in the UK in relation to sexually transmitted disease and tuberculosis, and during limited outbreaks of typhoid fever, diphtheria and Lassa fever; and Brookbanks & Hampstead (1987) describe contact tracing related to hepatitis B.
Measures to increase people's resistance to infection are also important in prevention, and it is in this context that immunisation has played such a major role (p. 82).
In the United Kingdom, parents are advised to have their children immunised against diphtheria, tetanus, poliomyelitis, whooping cough, measles mumps and rubella (Renn, 1987).
Immunisation against tuberculosis is given to non-reactors to tuberculin in adolescence (the BCG test).
Nurses, particularly health visitors, have an important role to play in encouraging parents to take up immunisation and there is concern about falling rates of acceptance.
This may be partly due to the fact that in the UK, young parents of today are less aware of the seriousness of some of the diseases as Sieving (1988) points out in her discussion of the ravages of measles in developing countries.
There is no doubt too that parents have become more aware that immunisation can carry a risk of adverse reaction and this has been most publicised in relation to the whooping cough vaccine.
On the one hand there have been reports suggesting that the vaccine can cause brain damage, albeit in a tiny minority of children and, on the other, the whooping cough epidemics in recent years have re-awakened fears of the damage the disease itself can inflict.
Discussing infectious diseases on an international scale, Rogers (1987) quotes the UNICEF State of the World's Children Report (1987) which indicates that 3.5 million children under the age of 5 die each year from preventable childhood diseases and a further 3.5 million are disabled, mainly in the developing world.
Although the numbers have fallen in the last decade, a high proportion of the world's children do not even have the opportunity of having protection from some of the major childhood killers, diseases for which vaccines are available — measles for example is a major cause of childhood mortality.
However, an increasing number of countries are committing themselves to the goal of immunising 80% of their children by 1990 under the World Health Organization's Extended Programme on Immunisation (EPI).
Of course vaccines alone will not prevent child mortality caused by infectious diseases; better social and economic conditions, and better education about prevention play a major part, as they did in industrialised countries about a century ago.
Apart from immunisation of young children, pregnant women are considered to be a priority group because certain infectious diseases can cause serious damage to the developing fetus.
In the UK the rubella vaccine has been offered to all girls in early adolescence and to non-pregnant women of child-bearing age who are found to be serologically negative for this antigen but with the use of the new measles/mumps/rubella (MMR) vaccine to small children (1988), this will eventually become unnecessary.
Cytomegalovirus is a less well-known infection which affects considerably greater numbers of babies than rubella.
However, although only a minority affected by it develop microcephaly and other conditions associated with mental handicap, it is common and attempts have been made to develop a vaccine which would prevent potential damage.
Indications for vaccination against other infectious diseases (e.g. enteric fevers, cholera, typhus, yellow fever and rabies) depend on individual risk of exposure and international travel regulations.
The nature of immunisation programmes as a means of preventing infection is determined according to the prevailing circumstances of a particular country and readers in countries other than the UK should supplement this section with relevant local information.
Nobody now needs to be, nor should be, vaccinated against smallpox.
This disease has been eradicated from the world, an achievement which must rank as one of WHO's greatest successes, although some vaccine is being kept in a limited number of centres in case of resurgence of smallpox.
Control of epidemics .
Controlling epidemics is important in preventing infection and, in this age of travel, is a concern which extends beyond the boundaries of any one nation; it requires international collaboration.
Incidence of infection in each country is notified to the World Health Organization so that necessary strategies can be implemented to prevent spread to other countries by travellers, cargoes and animals.
An account of the spread of cholera through Asia and Europe in the 1830s is given by Swan (1983) and makes interesting reading even today.
A current threat which exercises considerable concern in the UK is rabies, and it has recently been highlighted by the decision to build a Channel tunnel.
Rabies was indigenous to the UK before successful eradication at the turn of the century.
However, the threat of importation of the disease has returned, not only on a small scale relating to violation of quarantine regulations by dog owners but because the rabies virus has been spread throughout Europe into France (UK's nearest continental neighbour) by the red fox and concern is rising too about rabies-infected bats in Europe.
If the rabies virus were to take root in the wild life of the UK, domesticated pets would be at  risk and so, in turn, would the population.
Apparently, however, the European Commission is planning a rabies eradication campaign within the next 4 years; a new vaccine for animals, it is hoped, will enable rabies to be eradicated in Europe (International News, 1988).
Concern about rabies may seem a somewhat trivial issue in a discussion of the huge topic of preventing infection, but it serves as a reminder that prevention is a subject which will always be fundamental to maintaining a safe environment, though the precise nature of the concern will vary among countries and over time.
As one disease is conquered or controlled, others appear, particularly those caused by viruses, and finding cures or methods of immunisation is a lengthy exercise.
Throughout the world, the virus hepatitis B has recently become a major health problem.
Acute and persistent infection is common and the incidence increasing.
The carrier state may lead to chronic liver disease including chronic active hepatitis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (Brookbanks & Hampstead, 1987).
High rates of infection have been found in neonates of carrier mothers, sexual contacts of carriers especially among homosexual men, intravenous drug abusers, and health care workers exposed to blood and blood products.
In ‘Controlling an epidemic’ Brookbanks & Hampstead describe how they contacted intravenous drug users and their contacts to help stop the spread of an outbreak, and WHO recommend that all health care workers receive vaccination against hepatitis B.
An even more alarming threat throughout the world is the growth in the incidence, and the accompanying high death rate associated with AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).
Essentially it is a sexually-transmitted disease but it is also carried in infected blood and blood products so ‘at risk’ are intravenous drug users; recipients of blood transfusions, for example haemophiliacs; and anyone who is in contact with the blood of infected individuals.
The WHO Special Programme on AIDS (SPA) predicts that by 1991, 1 million new cases of AIDS could develop in people infected with HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus which causes AIDS.
A global effort to combat its spread has been mounted by health care staff, international groups, governments and top-level policymakers and in January 1988, health ministers and/or colleagues from 148 countries (representing 95% of the world's population) attended the World Summit of Ministers of Health on Programmes for AIDS Prevention in London, organised jointly by WHO and the UK Health Ministry.
Kay (1988), writing about WHO's strategy, describes recent developments, current preventive programmes and recommended policies, and highlights not only the epidemics of HIV infection and of AIDS, but also the ‘global epidemic of social, economic, political and cultural reaction and response to AIDS and HIV infection’.
Kay gives an example of the economic implications by quoting the statistic that some 20–35% of patients in medical wards of some African hospitals have AIDS or AIDS-related diseases, so the impact on already slender health care resources is obvious.
In socioeconomic terms, AIDS affects the 20–49 age group, the most vital segment of the population when considering social and economic development.
Any social debate about AIDS acquires a political dimension with associated prejudice about race, religion, social class and nationality; in fact, it has become a direct threat to free travel between countries and to open international exchange and communication.
Kay mentions ideas posited by various groups such as promoting ‘sex cards’ certifying alleged freedom from HIV infection; stamps or tattoos to identify HIV-infected people; or a type of quarantine in which HIV-infected persons may live in society yet could not marry, be employed or travel; but these have all been rejected as unenforceable or unethical or unacceptable.
It is not surprising that health care staff seek guidance about a syndrome where there is still considerable uncertainty, and the International Council of Nurses issued a Joint Statement with WHO in April 1987, regarding the rights and responsibilities of nurses worldwide in caring for HIV-infected people (ICN/WHO, 1987).
This was followed up by joint guidelines on the nursing management of people infected with HIV (ICN/WHO 1988), and WHO declared December 1, 1988, a World AIDS Day to heighten awareness about the disease, and to provide information, as opposed to myth and rumour, about its spread and means of containment.
The United Nations Development Programme, the World Medical Association, and the Council of Europe are other examples of transnational organisations which are providing guidelines for controlling the spread of AIDS and offering strategies for collaboration in caring for people who are infected.
Further discussion about AIDS and how it affects the individual is included in Chapter 15 dealing with the AL of expressing sexuality.
Preventing pollution
One dimension of maintaining a safe environment is the prevention of pollution.
Preventing the pollution of drinking water by untreated human excrement, for example, has long been recognised as a basic health concern.
Nowadays, in most industrialised countries, national measures to ensure safe water are taken for granted but in several developing countries, polluted water is a major cause of diarrhoeal disease, often with a high mortality rate.
Unfortunately, industrialisation and urbanisation have brought a different set of problems, for example, in relation to air pollution.
Admittedly, air pollution has been brought under control over many populous areas as a result of smoke control measures and legislation associated with Clean Air Acts.
However, in the USA, the chemical fallout from industry and agriculture has prompted an environmental expert to warn of the many unseen air pollutants  which are not covered by the Clean Air Act and are damaging not only to human health — linked to ills from leukaemia to heart disease — but are implicated in the formation of ‘acid rain' which has devastated vast tracts of forest (Begley, 1988).
Increasingly acid rain is a problem in Europe too.
Not only the air we breathe but the natural waterways of the world are endangered.
Disposal of industrial waste into rivers and seas is a major source of water pollution, and a recent article in Newsweek (Hewitt et al, 1988) maintains that we have managed to clog the seas of the world with 20 billion tons of garbage.
Coastal waters have suffered most, yet they play the most important role in the chain of life as that is where the majority of marine species spend at least part of their lives, for example in the North Sea many fish have been found to suffer from skin infections, deformed skeletons and tumours.
Not only that, sea birds are often the victims of oil spills.
Human bathers, too, risk viral hepatitis, skin reactions and oral thrush.
However, the article goes on, during the last decade, a United Nations Organization programme has been coordinating the work of environmentalists to halt the scale of pollution, although political will by individual governments is also essential if the fragile ecosystem is to be preserved.
One pollutant which has attracted considerable concern in recent years is lead.
Lead occurs widely in nature, in the soil and in the water.
In compound form it has come to be used in paint as a pigment, in plastics as a stabiliser and in petrol as an anti-knock agent.
Lead has long been used by man and its toxic properties have long been recognised.
Severe lead poisoning is a cause of intellectual impairment.
It is widely known that there are harmful effects from inhalation of outfall from a lead works; for children who ingest it by licking lead-painted toys; and for families whose drinking water is supplied through lead pipes.
Some local authorities have removed lead pipes from the water supply system; and others have provided financial grants to enable house owners to do likewise.
However, more recently, concern has shifted to the more insidious problem which affects the entire population — pollution of roadside areas by leaded petrol.
Fall-out from exhaust emissions is not only directly inhaled but can be ingested because lead settles on the hands and on vegetables, crops and fruit growing near roadsides.
In many countries there has been a phased reduction in the lead content of petrol and in the UK, for example, lead-free petrol is on sale at a lower price, at selected petrol stations (the engine requires a minor adjustment to use it) and there are indications of a move towards the obligatory use of lead-free petrol for all vehicles.
Another concern which has been raised recently in the UK is the excessive amount of aluminium present in some baby milk powders, and this is exacerbated in certain areas of the country where the tap water used in reconstituting the milk also shows a relatively high aluminium content.
Excessive aluminium content is conducive to brain and bone damage and is said to contribute to the onset of Alzheimer's disease, a form of dementia, at an older age (Hodgkinson, 1988).
Research is in progress to seek further evidence.
An entirely different kind of problem in modern living is ‘noise pollution’ and that term is increasingly being used to describe the problem of excessive noise.
Everyone does not regard noise in the same way.
Latin and Anglo-Saxon temperaments are at variance about what would constitute an acceptable noise level; and young people do not seem to be so intolerant of noise as their elders.
However, an environment in which people cannot sleep adequately because of excessive noise cannot be considered a safe environment.
People who live near noisy factories, close to flight paths near airports, and in the proximity of busy motorways, all suffer from excessive noise by night and day.
During the day, other city dwellers can be disturbed by the noise of traffic, especially heavy lorries going past their homes.
People who work in heavy industry are subjected to the noise of machines and measures to minimise the effects include the use of noise-abating apparatus and the wearing of ear muffs.
As well as affecting sleep, noise is thought to create tension and fatigue, both of which can contribute to accidents and mental ill-health.
One of the most serious consequences of excessive noise exposure is partial deafness which may progress to a substantial hearing loss and constitute a severe social handicap.
Preventing pollution is one dimension of maintaining a safe environment which is largely a public rather than a personal responsibility.
However, there are many ways in which individuals can protect themselves and others from the potentially dangerous effects of pollutants.
Obviously, the first and foremost purpose in all of the activities discussed — preventing accidents, fire, infection and pollution — is human survival.
However, in circumstances when life itself is not threatened, the purpose becomes one of preventing, or at least minimising, injury and ill-health.
An accident can result in some form of disablement or disfigurement and, even if its effects are only temporary, the human suffering involved can be intense.
The effects of fire can be devastating: the pain of burned tissue, the stigma of visible scars and the loss of property and personal possessions.
Infection too can involve discomfort and absence from work; and it can mean isolation.
Pollution, though often more insidious in its effects, can cause ill-health and even permanent intellectual impairment.
To sum up, it seems logical to prevent rather than cure but of course prevention as well as being a politicoeconomic consideration, demands knowledge and self-discipline, and for these to be applied, individuals  must develop an understanding of the nature and purpose of maintaining a safe environment.
LIFESPAN: EFFECT ON MAINTAINING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT
The inclusion of the lifespan as one component of the model serves as a reminder that living is a lifelong process, from birth to death.
Safety is a basic human requirement for survival, development, health and self-fulfilment at every stage of the lifespan.
During prenatal existence, a safe environment is provided by the mother's uterus but, from the moment of birth, a baby becomes instantly exposed to all the hazards in the external environment and is totally dependent on adults for the provision of a safe environment in which to thrive and survive.
For young babies, choking and suffocation are major death risks; and protection from accident, infection, and excessive heat or cold is of vital importance.
When they become more active and curious, crawling babies and toddlers are increasingly vulnerable to accidents in the home and, as has already been described, falls, burns, scalds and accidental poisoning are major causes of injury and death at this stage of the lifespan.
In contrast, school-age children are most at risk to hazards in the outdoors environment, particularly in the roads and in the school playground.
Once at school, children cannot be under constant adult surveillance and learning about safety and personal responsibility for maintaining a safe environment is an important dimension of their education.
During adolescence bicycle accidents and sporting injuries become more common and, although more aware of danger, rebelliousness or over-confidence may result in lack of consideration for personal safety and the safety of others.
For young adults, hazards in the work environment become an added area of responsibility in the AL of maintaining a safe environment and the degree and type of danger vary according to the nature of the work.
Adults, especially when they become parents, seem to develop an increasing sense of responsibility concerning safety and may become involved politically over issues of personal, local or national safety, for example, safe road crossings outside schools, and local dumping of nuclear waste.
The process of ageing, which involves a gradual deterioration of physical and intellectual ability and loss of acuity of the senses, inevitably results in lessened ability to carry out the many activities involved in the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
Elderly people become more prone to falls often because of arthritic joints or dizziness, are vulnerable to pedestrian accidents perhaps due to lessened acuity in sight and hearing and at risk to the hazards of fire.
Maintaining a safe environment during the final stage of the life-span may involve dependence on others and on safety aids and require renewed awareness of the hazards which are ever-present in the external environment.
Cave (1988), editor of the safety magazine of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents (ROSPA), describes how to avoid some of the most common accidents which occur in this age group, and in conjunction with Age Concern, ROSPA had a Home Safety Campaign in 1989.
DEPENDENCE/INDEPENDENCE IN MAINTAINING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT
There are several different aspects of the concept of dependence/independence which is incorporated in the model, and can be considered in relation to the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
The general principle that dependence/independence status is closely linked with an individual's point on the lifespan was outlined in the discussion of the model of living, and is certainly applicable to this AL.
Broadly speaking, there is dependence in the early stages of the lifespan; independence during adulthood; and the likelihood of at least some degree of dependence again in old age.
Without question, babies are totally dependent on others for the maintenance of a safe environment and require to be protected from accidents, fire, infection and pollution.
Young children are also to a very great extent dependent on adults for their safety.
They do not have either the mental or physical equipment to be able to carry out the many complex activities involved in the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
Neither do they have any real appreciation of the hazards in the environment or a well-developed understanding of the concepts of safety and personal responsibility for maintaining safety.
Throughout adolescence, such attributes develop but, although more independent, people of this age-group are still dependent on adult guidance and surveillance.
In contrast, adults are expected to assume independence for maintaining a safe environment and are involved in doing so in the home, at work, at play and while travelling.
In old age, there may be the will to retain independence in this AL but circumstances and the effects of the process of ageing may force an elderly person to be dependent on others, at least to some degree.
Financial constraints may limit maintenance of safety in the home: for example, an old person may not be able to afford to replace worn carpets or an ageing electricity system and both are potential causes of accident.
In addition, loss of acuity of the senses — particularly impaired sight and hearing — will reduce an elderly person's awareness of danger, for example when crossing roads or when cooking in the kitchen.
Even if the senses are acute, physical frailty reduces the ability to take the necessary quick action to avoid accidental injuries, such as by falls or burns.
Although independence in the AL of maintaining a safe environment is the norm during adulthood, the fact that by no means all adults have this capacity is important to recognise.
People who are mentally handicapped cannot be expected to cope with many aspects of this AL independently.
As they may be engaged in a wide range of adult activities, such as cooking, shopping and so on, their dependence on others for safety is especially important to recognise.
Similarly, although many physically handicapped adults are extremely independent in their everyday lives, the AL of maintaining a safe environment is one aspect of living with which they may need considerable help.
In addition to dependence on people, a person who is physically handicapped will almost certainly be dependent on aids and equipment; for example, a specially equipped bathroom to minimise the risk of falling while bathing and going to the toilet, and special safety gadgets in the kitchen to ensure that cooking can be accomplished without the risk of being cut or burned.
Another group of people who are unlikely to achieve full independence for maintaining a safe environment in adulthood are those who are visually handicapped.
To a remarkable extent, blind people do cope with the many hazards to personal safety which exist but they are likely to be more vulnerable in an unfamiliar environment.
Therefore, while they may be independent in their own homes, dependence on others may be necessary in other settings, for example when out of doors or when travelling by public transport.
It is interesting to reflect on the value of a guide dog to a blind person as an aid to independence in the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
People who are mentally, physically and visually handicapped have been described in terms of their ‘dependence’ and this has been compared with the ‘independence’enjoyed by intelligent, able-bodied adults in relation to the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
However, it is worth pausing to question whether ‘independence’ in this AL is actually attainable by any adult person, irrespective of mental and physical ability.
The fact is that no individual has complete independence in this AL.
Irrespective of personal efforts to maintain safety, all people are exposed to dangers — natural forces as well as man-made hazards — which are inherent in the environment and which the individual is impotent to control or eliminate.
Equally important, the safety of any individual is dependent on the safe behaviour of others.
People can take every precaution to avoid accidents while travelling but cannot guarantee their safety because there are others who drive dangerously, or there are conditions such as poor visibility and icy roads, and these factors are outside their control.
Similarly, a person can attempt to avoid infection by washing hands before handling and eating food, but nevertheless, is dependent on others as to whether or not the food itself was free of pathogenic microorganisms when it was purchased.
Numerous other examples are easy to think of supporting the idea that complete independence in the AL of maintaining a safe environment is just impossible.
Every individual is dependent on others — other ordinary individuals as well as people with special responsibilities for maintaining a safe environment who include, for example, politicians, town planners, public transport personnel, employers and manufacturers, firemen, safety officers and police.
FACTORS INFLUENCING MAINTAINING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT
The AL of maintaining a safe environment is, by nature, multidimensional and therefore, not surprisingly, many different factors play a part in influencing the way individuals carry out the activities involved.
In keeping with the relevant component of the model, the factors involved are discussed under the following headings — physical, psychological, sociocultural, environmental and politicoeconomic factors.
Physical factors
If a person is to carry out the AL of maintaining a safe environment, many of the recognised biological systems are involved.
No one system is readily aligned as in the case of the AL of eating and drinking, for example, which is readily associated with the upper alimentary system.
However, for maintaining a safe environment, acuity in all of the five senses is obviously important because external safety hazards are identified by means of vision, hearing, touch, smell and taste.
Any impairment associated with the senses, therefore, will make a person less able to identify hazards in the environment and, consequently, more likely to have an accident.
For example, impaired vision and impaired hearing are obvious limitations on safety as a pedestrian, making such simple tasks as crossing a road a hazardous undertaking.
Impairment can be of the sensory receptor, or of the pathway carrying the impulse to the brain, or of the brain's interpreting ability.
Even if there is no impairment in an individual's ability to become aware of a hazard to safety, there may be some reason why he is prevented from taking the necessary avoiding action.
A physically disabled or ill person or a frail elderly person are obvious examples of people who may be physically unable to avoid accidental injury in certain circumstances.
Apart from specific anatomical and physiological disabilities which may make it less easy for the individual to maintain safety, there are many external agents in the environment which can cause injury and disease.
However the body has several physical internal mechanisms for combating the adverse external conditions which are an inevitable part of living.
For instance, the body has many reserve capacities which ensure that vital functions can continue even when an organ is injured or diseased: there  is more lung tissue than is normally required, there is reserve liver tissue, there are two kidneys, eyes and ears.
Apart from this ‘over-provision’ there are other mechanisms.
Physical barriers and secretions .
The skeleton acts as an internal physical barrier and is protective; the hard bony skull protects the brain; the vertebral column protects the spinal cord; and the ribs protect the lungs and heart.
The intact skin acts as a barrier between the internal and the external environment which contains many potentially harmful agents.
The filtering function of lymphatic tissue enables the tonsils and adenoids to trap pathogens.
The cilia in the respiratory tract hasten the exit from the body of possibly harmful foreign material.
By reflex action — a mechanism of the nervous system — the threatened hand is instantly withdrawn and the threatened eye closed.
The eye is further protected by the constant secretion of tears.
The inflammatory process .
Inflammation is another internal defence mechanism and is a reaction of living tissue to infection, injury and irritants.
Regardless of the cause, the reaction is similar.
A substance, histamine, is produced by injured cells; it causes capillaries in the area to dilate thus bringing greatly increased amounts of blood to the site of injury.
If this occurs on or close to the skin, it can be observed as redness and it feels warm to the touch.
As well as dilating, the capillaries become more permeable and allow fluid to escape into the tissues, which produces swelling.
In many instances, this swelling is enough to produce pressure on sensory nerves causing pain; to minimise the pain, the patient usually keeps the part as still as possible.
The cardinal features of inflammation are therefore redness, heat, swelling, pain and loss of function.
But these features are protective since they usually induce rest and aid healing.
Furthermore inflammation is frequently accompanied by fever and an increased temperature is unfavourable to survival of some microorganisms.
The process of tissue repair .
As inflammation subsides and damaged tissue cells are cleared away in the blood, repair begins in one of two ways:
repair by first intention occurs when there is replacement by cells identical to those which were damaged.
The best example is a surgical incision, which is sutured and heals without complication of infection.
Only a small amount of new tissue is required to fill the gap.
repair by second intention occurs when a considerable amount of tissue has been lost and the wound edges cannot be approximated; a mass of new tissue is required to fill the gap.
First, the damaged tissues are sealed with tissue fluid and blood, which clots.
Then blood vessels invade the clot and connective tissue cells from the blood enter the clot and form fibroblasts.
At this stage the healing area is reddish in appearance and is referred to as granulation tissue.
The fibroblasts are then converted to fibres which, when they contract, draw the wound edges together.
As the process proceeds many blood vessels become nipped and the scar tissue changes in colour from red to white which can take many years.
The healing process is completed when epithelium grows in from the edge and covers the granulation tissue.
The skin and the tissue in the digestive tract heal quite rapidly; bone takes longer and the cells of the brain and spinal cord, once damaged, cannot be replaced.
The rate of healing is influenced by several factors:
degree of injury is pertinent; the repair process takes longer when extensive areas of tissue have been damaged
nutritional state of the tissues is important; substances such as protein and vitamin C are essential for rapid healing.
Protein is needed for the formation of new tissue and vitamin C for the maturation of fibrous tissue
blood circulation , particularly any occlusion of blood flow, delays healing by depriving the cells of nutrients and oxygen, so vital to tissue repair
age can affect the rate of healing which is usually more rapid in younger than in older people.
This is partly due to the decreased circulatory effectiveness in the elderly
infection inevitably delays wound healing because the pathogenic microorganisms destroy tissue
The process of immunity .
Immunity is another type of internal defence mechanism usually arising in response to an infection.
The basic response to infection is inflammation (see above); another response is related to immunity.
The body reacts to the entry of any foreign materials (antigens) by developing substances called immune bodies.
Immune bodies which destroy microorganisms are called antibodies and those which destroy toxins produced by microorganisms are called antitoxins.
For purposes of description, the process of immunity can be classified into four main types (Fig. 6.2).
Natural passive immunity .
Antibodies and antitoxins circulating in the pregnant woman's blood are passed via the placenta to the fetus.
This inherited, natural, passive (the baby has not produced it) immunity to, for example, measles and whooping cough usually lasts only for a few months after birth.
Thereafter, the baby is vulnerable to such infections and this is borne in mind when organising immunisation programmes for the child.
Natural active immunity .
This type of immunity can be naturally acquired in two ways both of which involve the production of antibodies:
By having an attack of the infectious disease the body is stimulated to produce appropriate  antibodies not only to assist recovery but also to provide a sufficient quantity to remain in the blood for a longer period, sometimes throughout life, for example after an attack of rubella
By being exposed to repeated small doses of the infecting agent.
The amount is insufficient to cause the classical signs and symptoms of the disease but is sufficient to stimulate the body to produce antibodies which remain in the blood throughout life.
Many adults have developed an immunity to tuberculosis in this manner.
Artificially initiated active immunity .
This is produced by injecting a small dose of the antigen into the body and allowing time for the person to produce antibodies himself, which then remain in the body for a variable time.
It may be short-term, for example as a protection against influenza, or almost life-long, for example against diphtheria.
The antigen can be a modified toxin called toxoid and it stimulates the body to make antitoxins.
Artificially initiated passive immunity .
This is produced by injecting ready-made antibodies (usually developed in the blood of another human or in a horse serum and suitably treated for injection purposes).
This technique is only used when a person is dangerously ill and his own blood would not have time to develop the antibodies.
It can be lifesaving.
Fig. 6.2 Types of immunity
The phenomenon of shock
The body responds to both physical and emotional trauma by a phenomenon known as shock.
When it occurs, the body defences immediately try to compensate.
Basically shock is a state of circulatory failure.
The average adult body contains about 6 litres of blood and if all the innumerable blood vessels were widely open simultaneously, there would be insufficient blood to fill them.
The body functions with this relatively small volume of blood by controlling the muscle tissue in the walls of the small arteries (arterioles), thereby narrowing (vasoconstricting) or widening (vasodilating) the lumen.
The control is very exact and normally it is a state of vasoconstriction.
However, when the control is disturbed and the lumen of many arterioles are simultaneously vasodilated, the volume of blood is insufficient to maintain effective circulation and there is some degree of shock.
In shock, the body defences immediately try to compensate by permitting the vessels supplying blood to vital organs such as the brain, heart and kidneys to continue to do so, while the supply to muscles, skin and intestines is severely restricted.
In a severe form of shock, the body temperature falls; the blood pressure falls; the pulse increases; the person complains of feeling cold; the skin is grey, cold and moist; and there is generalised prostration.
If the cause of shock is treated satisfactorily, these adverse changes will be reversed but if not, the blood pressure falls further and death will ensue.
The most common causes of shock are the inhibition of vasoconstriction due to:
loss of blood, as in haemorrhage
loss of plasma, as in severe burns
loss of electrolytes, as in continued vomiting and/or diarrhoea, and heat exhaustion
alteration in permeability of blood vessel walls, as in injured tissue
severe pain
severe fright, as when hearing bad news or seeing horrifying sights
When there is, for example, loss of blood or plasma (sometimes called oligaemic shock) the reason for circulatory failure is more readily understood and expected because there is actual loss of circulatory volume.
But in instances of severe pain or severe fright there is no loss of fluid; shock (sometimes called neurogenic shock) is due to reduced vasoconstriction.
It is just as important to expect and recognise the body's warning signals of neurogenic shock so that it can be effectively treated.
All of these mechanisms — the inflammatory process, the process of tissue repair, the process of immunity and the phenomenon of shock — are anatomical and physiological body defence mechanisms against injury and disease which are protective, and are an attempt to prevent further damage.
However, there are other non-physical  factors which are just as important in maintaining a safe environment.
Psychological factors
Intellectual processes are involved in learning about maintaining a safe environment and in carrying out the many activities involved.
Therefore, people who suffer from intellectual impairment may be unable to acquire adequate knowledge and to respond quickly and appropriately to a threat to safety.
For this reason, severely mentally handicapped people depend on others for protection and surveillance and, similarly, parents and teachers accept responsibility for the safety of children in their care.
Attitude to safety and prevention is important and it is desirable that people develop a concept of safety and an awareness of their personal responsibility in maintaining a safe environment, for themselves and for others.
Undesirable attitudes do not help such as thinking that accidents, fires and infection happen only to others and hoping that someone else will do the campaigning about pollution issues.
Personality and temperament play a part in the attitudes people hold about maintaining a safe environment and affect their efficiency in carrying out the activities involved.
Mood is also an important factor.
Angry people may become aggressive and violent, possibly causing injury to themselves or to others, and ‘non-accidental injury to children’ and also to the spouse and to the elderly are increasingly recognised as serious current social problems.
Depressed people may endanger their own safety because tiredness, lethargy and loss of motivation and self-confidence result in a lack of attention to maintaining a safe environment.
Worried and preoccupied people are also vulnerable to accidents, perhaps especially on the roads either as drivers or pedestrians.
Confidence also plays a part in maintaining safety.
The over-confident driver or motorcyclist may overtake without due caution, thus increasing the risk of causing a road traffic accident.
Conversely the under-confident person may be  hesitant to predict danger or to react to it with sufficient purpose or determination.
Therefore, both over-confidence and under-confidence may play a part in creating an environment in which accidents happen more readily.
The individual's level of stress is known to be important in relation to maintaining a safe environment.
Some writers use an engineering analogy and point out that the words ‘stress’, ‘strain’, ‘tension’ and ‘pressure’are used when the load becomes too great and a breaking point is reached; it is the point where the strain is so great that metal ceases to bend and it snaps.
Hans Selye, who pioneered the stress concept in the 1950s, concluded that stress was the wear and tear on the body in response to stressful agents.
These he called ‘stressors’ and said that they could be physical, physiological, psychological or sociocultural.
Physical/biological stressors have already been mentioned.
Psychological and sociocultural stressors are frequently associated with life events/crises and can often cause intense feelings of fear and anxiety.
Life events can be developmental in nature: weaning, toilet training and puberty are examples that characterise all people's lives.
Others are the periods of inevitable stress and anxiety which although varying in degree and pleasurability/sadness do surround incidents like changing school, job or house; getting married or divorced; child bearing, and death of loved ones.
Psychological stressors are known to be important contributory factors in relation to accidents.
For example, research findings suggest that children of families under stress are more vulnerable to accidents, such as ingestion of poisons.
Stress factors include circumstances such as serious illness in a family, pregnancy, recent house move, one parent away from home and anxiety or depression in one or both parents (OHE, 1981).
And the potentially harmful effects of psychological stressors at work are discussed by Rogers & Salvage (1988).
The complexity of psychological factors involved in the AL of maintaining a safe environment means that publicity campaigns and health education programmes must go beyond simply imparting information about safety, realising that people often know what they should and could do, and yet do not act on their knowledge.
Health education programmes in schools can contribute towards the development of a concept of safety and a responsible attitude towards maintaining a safe environment.
In the same way, publicity campaigns and advertising and television documentaries can disseminate knowledge about safety, and attempt to change attitudes and behaviour in a positive way.
Injury, however, is not always accidental, and it is not only physical.
The emotionally devastating effects of non-accidental injury, especially to children, has been receiving dramatic mass media coverage recently.
The latest reports from Britain's two main protection agencies give a measure of the size of the problem.
The National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC) helped almost 51000 children in 1986/87 and the National Children's Home campaign Children in Danger showed that 30 000 children are now on the local authority ‘at risk’ register, an increase of 22% in the last year (Pope, 1988).
The plight of abused (physically, emotionally and sexually) children is a tragic and sensitive story which apparently often goes undetected because the mother, fearing reprisals or removal of the children, does not report abuse by her husband/partner or visiting relative (who often is the perpetrator); in many cases having suffered violence herself from him (Jones, 1988).
In an NSPCC Report (Vousden, 1987) workers involved with families were asked to indicate the factors they thought precipitated child abuse and, as in previous years, the one recorded most frequently was ‘marital problems’, particularly in cases of emotional and sexual abuse.
Other factors were ‘inability to deal with normal child behaviour’ and ‘inability to respond to the maturational needs of the child’.
External stress caused by unemployment, debts and poor housing were also mentioned but not with the same frequency as issues concerned with the parent/child relationship.
The Butler-Sloss Report (Cleveland Report, 1988) highlighted the problems in the UK and makes recommendations, and the Children's Legal Centre has published a booklet (1988) which concentrates on the procedures professionals should follow when dealing with suspected child abuse.
The specific problem of sexual abuse in children and rape in women will be mentioned in more detail under the AL of expressing sexuality.
While the problems of child abuse and violence against women have been much publicised, abuse of the elderly — sometimes called ‘granny bashing’(Eastman, 1988)— has been given less consideration.
Garrett (1986) quotes Hocking who called the syndrome ‘miscare’ and considers that many families begin their caring commitment with genuine concern and sympathy but become overwhelmed by the task, so the relationship sours, resulting in harm to the old person.
Garrett goes on to indicate that the harm may not only be physical, but may include mental and social suffering such as neglect (withholding, e.g. food, fluid, washing facilities, or overmedicating); exploitation (often financial — misappropriation of pension, savings, jewellery); psychological abuse (ridicule, humiliation, removal of decision-making); and even sexual abuse including rape, and not always against female elderly.
Such treatment could not be condoned but it must also be borne in mind that an increasingly dependent elderly person may be a heavy burden on a carer who has other family commitments including children, or who also may be obliged to continue paid employment; and the stress on the carer is considerable (Tyler, 1987).
And such circumstances of course, are not helped by low income and poor, overcrowded housing.
When indications of abuse are identified, says Garrett (1986), a supportive programme to relieve the pressure on the family may be appropriate such as counselling, home care assistance, the provision of incontinence supplies, and the organisation of respite care.
It is occasionally necessary to remove the elderly person to hospital, temporarily or permanently, and in certain circumstances this is the only possible action.
The issue of non-accidental injury, although mentioned under psychological factors, obviously also has physical, sociocultural, environmental and politicoeconomic aspects and is another reminder that although in this textbook, the five factors are dealt with separately for the purposes of discussion, in reality they are closely related.
Sociocultural factors
Each culture has a unique interpretation of the concept of ‘safety’ and what is deemed to be responsible, ‘safe’behaviour by individuals.
This is true largely because the problems associated with maintaining a safe environment are different in different parts of the world.
The most obvious differences are apparent when comparing problems in so-called developing societies with those which confront the  industrialised societies.
There are obviously wide differences in the provision of social amenities and social services.
The structure of the society, too, may vary from a large extended family system where care for all dependants — the young, the elderly, the mentally handicapped, the ill — is shared, to the small nuclear family, typical of the Western world, where often the state has taken over many of the traditional caring activities of the family, with their attendant safety aspects.
Within any one society also, there are internal differences in relation to the problems of maintaining a safe environment and the particular kinds of hazards to which certain groups of people are exposed.
There are social class differences as is apparent, for example, in statistics concerning accidents.
Analysis of such statistics pertaining to the UK (OHE, 1981), showed that there is a substantial social class difference in childhood mortality from accidents and violence, the overall rate for children of parents in unskilled occupations being nearly five times that for children of parents in the professions.
The differential is even greater when pedestrian fatalities are singled out for analysis; and significant class discrepancies have also been observed for specific types of non-fatal accident, such as burns and scalds.
Such social class disparities have been linked to a variety of factors, for example, the deficiency of safe play areas for children of the lower social class groups is offered as one explanation for the high rate among them of pedestrian fatalities.
Social class inequalities are always difficult to explain precisely but there is no doubt that they exist in relation to the AL of maintaining a safe environment (Whitehead, 1987).
Currently, especially in the Western world, the mass media provide a constant reminder that personal safety is threatened not only by the elements, and objects and events in the environment, but also by the humans who make up the society.
Social disorder is not new but throughout history, it has had varying degrees of prominence as a problem.
During the last few decades, despite the distress of individuals who are the victims of such social disorder, the problem has seemed relatively ‘containable’ in social terms.
Now, however, there is mounting anxiety about the rising tide of crime, social disorder, purposeless thuggery and vandalism, much of it accompanied by violence.
According to an article in the Telegraph Sunday Magazine (Hall, 1987) some large housing estates, known to have violent inhabitants, have even been singled out as ‘no-go’ areas, where milk floats, postmen and repair men venture at their peril.
On the other hand, upmarket housing developments are now heavily protected by high gates, guards and video cameras, although even modest householders, in city and quiet rural areas alike, are resorting to burglar alarms on their homes and cars, or organising Neighbourhood Watch schemes.
In various ways, legally and illegally, more people are arming themselves against potential attackers at home, in the street, and even in recreational settings.
Some football hooligans, the article goes on, are now so organised that they have the audacity to leave professionally printed calling cards in the pockets of their battered victims.
In the international sporting context, there is also grave concern about the safety of competitors and viewers at meetings such as the Olympic Games because terrorists, sometimes representing minority and almost unknown groups, stage an attack to wreak revenge or to gain publicity for their cause.
For similar reasons, hijackings involving aircraft, ships and cars are not uncommon.
In the work setting, too, incidents involving violence are becoming increasingly common; assault and even murder are now occupational hazards.
It is perhaps not too surprising that staff in the diplomatic corps and in government intelligence agencies are targets for violence while engaged in their daily work, but it is relatively recent in the UK, for example, to have an estate agent, a social worker, and a health visitor murdered while at work (Smith, 1988).
And there is an increasing number of instances of assault at work targeted at community nurses and staff on accident and emergency units in hospital (Finney, 1988), a circumstance which would have been almost unthinkable even a decade ago.
Recently in an attempt to reduce the current wave of social violence, projects have been piloted in the UK and 20 ‘safer cities’ will be set up in selected areas which have high rates of crime and violence, and other social and community problems (Delamothe, 1988).
There is now much more public demand for support to the victims of violent crime.
In addition to medical prescription, victims require emotional support and reassurance which is not available from sources such as the family.
They also require information about compensation; help with approaches to the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, social services, crime prevention officers, and legal advice centres; and practical help to repair or recover property following robbery (Shepherd, 1988).
Environmental factors
It is obvious that environmental factors exert a far-reaching influence on this particular AL and, indeed, the concept of ‘safety’ has no real meaning unless it is considered in relation to‘the environment’.
In many developing societies the lack of basic amenities, such as clean water and proper sanitation, produces an inherently unsafe environment.
Infectious diseases, particularly the diarrhoeal diseases, are both difficult to prevent and control in such circumstances and they are largely responsible for the high morbidity and mortality rates in many areas of the world.
In  industrialised countries, such rudimentary amenities as piped water and sanitation have long been taken for granted and there has been a virtual elimination of major infectious diseases over the past century.
However, affluence and technological advances have created new kinds of safety hazards for people who live in Western society.
There are all the industrial hazards such as excessive noise, polluted air and contamination of water by industrial waste and, as has already been described in detail, a large-scale problem in the form of accidents.
In an earlier section of this chapter, a great range of activities which individuals carry out in maintaining a safe environment were mentioned in relation to preventing accidents in the home, at work, at play and while travelling.
Houses, factories and offices, sports grounds and playgrounds, and roads are also ‘environments’.
In each of these environments there are numerous ‘factors’, many of which constitute a threat to the safety of individuals and numerous such hazards have been mentioned.
Taking a broader view of the term ‘environment’, other kinds of factors can be seen to influence this AL: for example, climate and geographical location.
It does not take much imagination to appreciate that maintaining a safe environment in high latitudes and high altitudes with the long months of snow, ice and subzero temperatures will differ from maintaining a safe environment in the humid heat of a tropical forest.
Even conditions beyond the earth's immediate environment can affect human beings and currently there is concern about the effect on health of an appreciable hole in the springtime ozone layer over Antarctica (McKie & Rycroft, 1988).
Apparently it has been recognised for over a decade that chlorine from chlorofluorocarbons may deplete the stratospheric ozone layer.
It matters because this layer absorbs all ultraviolet C and a proportion of ultraviolet B from sunlight before it reaches the earth's surface.
Concern for humans is raised because increased exposure to ultraviolet B is closely linked to skin cancer which is an increasingly common problem.
The Montreal Convention 1987 aims at reducing the production of chlorofluorocarbons by half by the end of the 1990s but the scientists maintain that a drastic reduction is needed soon ‘to prevent an environmental problem from becoming an environmental catastrophe’.
One response to that plea was the convening in London, in March 1989, of the Saving the Ozone Conference, attended by 124 nations; among other topics, the delegates discussed possible international cooperation which would strengthen the Montreal Protocol (Cramb, 1989)— a matter obviously requiring political will.
Politicoeconomic factors
Both political and economic factors influence the AL of maintaining a safe environment to a very great degree.
Although many of the activities involved are carried out by individuals, and there is much scope for personal decision-making  making and responsibility, the business of maintaining a safe environment is very much a political concern and responsibility — at local, regional, national and international levels.
As has been described, many aspects of maintaining a safe environment are controlled by legislation.
Laws exist which ensure that as far as possible, accidents, fire, infection and pollution are prevented.
Governments also accept a responsibility to increase public awareness of hazards and safety measures and desirable standards of safety through publicity campaigns and education.
All such activity is in the interests of both personal and national safety, but also is based on an economic argument.
An unsafe environment will result in accident and ill-health, and both are a burden on a nation's economy.
Of course, preventing accidents and promoting safety also costs a great deal of money.
Safe houses, roads, vehicles, workplaces and play areas all cost money.
So too does the provision of emergency services (such as the fire service) which are sufficiently well-equipped and manned to respond promptly and effectively when required.
The economics of maintaining a safe environment are not just the concern of government for, through taxation, individuals contribute to the national purse.
For example, a substantial proportion of the road tax levied on vehicle owners goes towards paying for road maintenance and improvements.
For individuals, the costs of maintaining a safe environment are, however, by no means all in the category of indirect taxation.
Maintaining safety in the home is an expensive business and, for families with children, the purchase of recommended safety equipment — such as car safety seats, stair gates, a playpen and a cooker guard — adds up to a considerable sum.
For families of low income such items are almost certainly prohibitively expensive.
At other stages of the lifespan, maintaining a safe environment in the home for elderly or disabled people may also be expensive.
Families caring for elderly or disabled relatives save the state up to £24 million a year, according to a report by the Family Policy Studies Centre (Glasgow Herald, 1989).
It follows publication of a report by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys in 1988 which maintained that there were 6 million people in Britain providing informal care for a sick, elderly or disabled relative or dependant, i.e. one adult in seven.
Most carers were aged 45–64; and six out of ten were committed to looking after the dependant for at least 50 hours a week.
People do not need to be politicians to engage in politics.
Individuals and pressure groups can exert a considerable influence on government and have indeed done so very effectively in relation to many aspects of the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
For example, the recent introduction of seat belt legislation in the UK was at least in part due to persistent lobbying by sections of the community, including the medical profession.
Frequently too, people who live in a particular geographic location combine together to form a pressure group if their neighbourhood has been earmarked by government for the siting of, for example, a new motorway or nuclear power station or the dumping of nuclear waste which is considered to constitute a substantial threat to their safety and health.
All citizens have a responsibility to be involved in the politicoeconomic decisions which influence the AL of maintaining a safe environment — not necessarily for their own safety, but for the safety of others and especially for their children and, indeed, their children's children.
It is perhaps that long-term perspective which is at the root of present-day concern over the nuclear arsenal held by the superpowers.
Knowledge of the devastating effect which even a limited nuclear attack would have on the environment and the people in it has motivated increasing numbers to campaign vociferously for nuclear disarmament, either multilateral or unilateral.
It is interesting that doctors and nurses, who on the whole prefer to remain apolitical, have become actively engaged in this campaign.
Some are members of the CND, others of the Medical Campaign Against Nuclear Weapons.
In 1983 the Royal College of Nursing, the professional organisation for British nurses, issued a report on the nursing implications of planning for nuclear war.
The report outlines what would happen in the event of nuclear war and maintains that talk of planning for, and training in triage and mass casualty techniques is meaningless, because surviving nurses would be able to do little other than help to provide limited care for casualties and comfort the dying.
Opinion on the nuclear issue is divided and other arguments are involved too, for example economic considerations.
Some people think that the vast amounts of money spent by governments on nuclear weapons would be better spent on other needs, such as health care.
Protagonists argue that the nation's defence is more important and that the mere possession of nuclear weapons prevents attack by other nuclear powers.
However, there is no disagreement that preventing nuclear war is vital to maintaining a safe environment for people now, and for future generations.
INDIVIDUALITY IN MAINTAINING A SAFE ENVIRONMENT
The purpose of the model is to describe how a particular person develops individuality in carrying out the Activities of Living.
The following list is a résumé of the topics which have been discussed under the headings of the components of the model in relation to the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
Lifespan: effect on maintaining a safe environment
Babies
vulnerable to accidents, infections, excessive heat/cold
Preschool children
vulnerable to accidents in the home
Schoolchildren
vulnerable to accidents on the roads and in the playground
Adolescents
vulnerable to road, bicycle and sporting accidents
Adults
vulnerable to hazards in the work environment; vulnerable to road traffic accidents; responsible for safety of children
Elderly people
vulnerable to falls in the home, hazards of infection and fire, pedestrian accidents
Dependence/independence in maintaining a safe environment
Dependence in infancy/childhood/old age
Constraints on independence in adulthood (e.g. mental/physical/sensory handicap)
Dependence on others
Dependence on aids
Factors influencing maintaining a safe environment
Physical
acuity of the senses
physical ability/disability
susceptibility to infection
state of physical health/ill-health, anatomical and physiological responses to infection and trauma
Psychological
intellectual ability/impairment
attitude to safety (home, work, play, travel)
personality and temperament
mood and motivation
level of confidence
level of stress
level of knowledge about safety precautions
responsiveness to safety legislation/health education
non-accidental injury
Sociocultural
cultural factors (e.g. concept of safety)
social factors (e.g. prevalence of infectious diseases)
social class (e.g. risk of accident)
social unrest and violence
Environmental
housing
standard of safety in the home
exposure to hazards in work settings
hazards in play settings
risk of accident on the roads
exposure to environmental pollution
climatic and geographical factors
extraterrestrial factors
knowledge and attitude to safety legislation
awareness of local environmental hazards
personal spending on safety measures
political awareness/involvement (e.g. pollution, nuclear products)
maintaining a safe environment: patients' problems and related nursing
Each day, throughout the day, although not always aware of it, people are engaged in carrying out numerous activities which have the specific purpose of maintaining a safe environment.
As with all of the Activities of Living, there are many similarities in the way different people carry out this AL.
However, as the preceding section shows, a variety of circumstances determine an individual's vulnerability to certain hazards in the environment, and result in individuality in the way necessary preventive activities are carried out.
The concept of individuality provides the link between the model of living and the model for nursing.
Individualised nursing is based on knowledge of a patient's individuality.
Therefore, in relation to the AL of maintaining a safe environment, the nurses need to know about the patient's individual habits and any actual or potential problems.
While observing and discussing relevant topics with the patient (along the lines suggested in the résumé above), the nurse might bear in mind the following questions:
what kind of activities does the individual usually engage in with the purpose of maintaining a safe environment?
what factors influence the way in which the  individual carries out the AL of maintaining a safe environment?
what is the individual's level of knowledge regarding maintaining a safe environment?
what is the individual's attitude to maintaining a safe environment?
has the individual experienced any difficulties in the past with maintaining a safe environment and, if so, how have these been coped with?
does the individual have any actual problems or perceive any potential problems with maintaining a safe environment?
The objective in collecting this sort of information is to discover the patient's usual routines; what can and cannot be done independently; what previous coping mechanisms have been employed; and what problems exist or may develop in relation to this AL.
By its very nature it is likely that most will be potential problems relevant to the circumstances (though there may be actual problems too), and, therefore, the goals set and the mutually agreed nursing interventions will be mainly preventive in nature.
Accordingly, evaluation will be undertaken to ascertain that the preventive measures implemented have been effective.
The goal of individualised nursing for this AL will be achieved if assessing, planning, implementing and evaluating all take account of the patient's individuality in maintaining a safe environment.
That, in the most general of terms, describes how the nursing process method is applied.
However, in different circumstances, nursing assessment of the AL of maintaining a safe environment would differ in approach, scope and content.
For example, assessment by a health visitor of a mother's knowledge about maintaining a safe environment for her young child in the home would obviously be quite different from an occupational health nurse's assessment of an employee's risk of accident at work.
Therefore, in different nursing contexts there will be different kinds of problems identified and, accordingly, different types of nursing activities will be implemented.
Teaching is one type of nursing activity which is always relevant in relation to the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
Exploiting opportunities for education of people of all ages and in various settings (home, school and workplace) is probably the main way in which nurses can contribute to the collective effort to prevent injury and ill-health which is caused by accident, fire, infection and pollution.
These subjects were dealt with in detail in the first part of the chapter and should be recognised as background knowledge relevant to nursing in relation to the AL of maintaining a safe environment, so are not discussed further.
The remainder of the chapter deals with some circumstances in which nurses are directly involved with assisting patients who have problems in maintaining a safe environment.
There are two sections.
The first of these is concerned with patients in hospital.
Florence Nightingale said ‘the hospital shall do the patient no harm’.
Yet in most countries there is continuing concern about the number of patients who develop a hospital-acquired infection quite unrelated to the reason for their admission; about the accidents which happen to patients while they are in hospital; about the perennial danger of fire in hospitals; and about the dangers associated with the use of prescribed drugs in hospital.
In a way this is not surprising when one considers the size and function of a hospital, and the fact that hospitals are busy places: ‘busyness’ increases stress and tension, and errors and accidents are more likely to occur in such an atmosphere.
From the patient's point of view, admission to hospital involves a change of environment and routine and that, in itself, creates problems with the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
The second section, with which the chapter ends, may be relevant to the nursing of patients in hospital but is not confined to that context.
It considers, in very broad terms, the variety of circumstances which can cause a change of dependence/independence status for the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
This section, therefore, provides a direct link between the model of living and the model for nursing.
CHANGE OF ENVIRONMENT AND ROUTINE
Most human beings are conservative and dislike change, particularly enforced change as when a patient is admitted to hospital.
Patients can feel insecure and frightened in this new environment and anxiety increases the risk of accident.
A patient in an anxious state is more likely to bump into, or trip over, objects; shaking or tense hands are more likely to drop things, spill things and so on.
Some patients become disoriented, a more likely reaction if the patient is elderly or has already shown signs of mental confusion (Clarke, 1987; Ford et al, 1986).
Nurses can help all patients by talking with them, keeping in mind the objective of orienting them to the new environment and routine.
The sooner this is done the better.
Unfamiliar environment
Familiarity with an environment makes it less hazardous; for example people adjust spatially to avoid objects in their immediate vicinity.
Just on admission, a patient has not had time to make any necessary spatial adjustments.
This could well relate to the design of the hospital bed which may not be at the same height as the one with which the patient is familiar.
For some patients more than others, it is important for the nurses to know that familiar height.
Where mechanically-operated height-adjustment beds are provided and the patient is capable with instruction, of operating the mechanism, independence in this respect can be maintained.
When the patient is not capable, then the  nurse is responsible for operating the mechanism to maintain the patient's safety.
Several surveys conducted in hospitals have shown that the majority of accidents occur at the bedside (Moorat, 1983).
As long ago as 1978, the Scottish Hospital Advisory Service reported from observation visits to long-stay hospitals throughout Scotland that even when adjustable beds were provided, they were frequently found at a height too high for the patients' safety and unfortunately, this is often still true.
Patients may have to be nursed on a bed with a ripple mattress or an air bed.
While providing greater safety from the pressure hazard, they can create spatial problems for the patient.
The increased height relative to the bedside locker and bed table may require spatial adjustment.
Overreaching for an article on nearby furniture is a frequent cause of accidents.
Patients can be helped by nurses who, before leaving the bedside, test whether or not the patient can comfortably reach articles on the locker.
Disabled and older patients who experience difficulty when rising from a chair will like most people, have their ‘special’ chair at home, out of which they can rise relatively easily, and on which they may hang a walking stick to help with safe rising.
These patients can experience many kinds of problems when in a different environment such as increased stiffening of the back and limbs due to lack of exercise because they find it so difficult to get out of the hospital chair; and incontinence for the same reason.
Actual shearing injury to the sacral tissues and the heels may even be caused by patients sliding forward on vinyl-covered chairs.
Nurses can help, within the constraints of the type of chairs provided, by ‘matching’ the chair to the patient, not just helping the patient to any chair.
Noisy environment
Quite justifiably, hospitals have been labelled as noisy environments.
One study of noise in hospital by Bentley et al(1977), and still considered a classic reference, used the dB(A) scale, from among several decibel scales, because of its close relationship to noise which damages human hearing.
Measurements were taken in an open Florence Nightingale ward, a cubicle in a cul-de-sac of this ward and a general intensive therapy unit (ITU).
A profile based on pooled data of all observations is shown in Figure 6.3 and it should be studied in conjunction with the yardstick provided by The International Proposal for Noise Abatement with Respect to Community Response which suggests the following basic noise limits:
day time 45 dB(A)
evening 40 dB(A)
night time 30 dB(A)
Figure 6.4 shows that the noise level in the Nightingale ward and in the cubicle during the night was above the figure suggested for the usual bedroom; and during the day, the level in the ITU was above the ‘annoying’ level.
Fig. 6.3 Noise: profile based on pooled data (from Bentley et al 1977 Perceived noise in surgical wards and an intensive care area.
British Medical Journal 2: 1503–1506)
Fig. 6.4 Comparison of noise levels (from Bentley et al 1977 British Medical Journal 2: 1503–1506.
Figures 6.3 and 6.4 reproduced by kind permission of the authors and editor of the British Medical Journal)
A more recent study by Soutar & Wilson (1986) in the UK does not show much improvement.
They measured night-time noise, from 22.30 to 06.36, in the area next to the nurses' station in three different types of wards and found that night-time noise over 8 hours in the psychiatric ward was 49 dB(A); in the general medical ward was 68 dB(A); and in the acute admitting general ward was 66 dB(A) — the general wards being well above the Bentley et al‘annoying’ level.
The 91 patients in Soutar & Wilson's study were asked their opinion about the effect of noise on sleep and of the 28 who admitted that sleep was more difficult in hospital than at home, only 9 said it was because of the noise.
These results led the authors to assume that patients were unwilling to complain about noise levels.
The noise levels in hospitals in the USA seem to be similar.
A study reported by Hilton (1987) starts by providing references to show how excessive noise can provoke detrimental physiological responses — it can startle; damage hearing; stimulate epinephrine production; induce sensory disturbance; constrict peripheral and coronary arteries; reduce digestive secretions; and slow gastrointestinal motility.
Psychological disturbances have also been cited including annoyance and irritation; heightened arousal; impaired judgement; altered perception; interference with thinking; and reduced ability to hear.
It is considered, too, that at 50 dB(A), pain perception is enhanced.
Hilton's study carried out in four ITUs and two medical/surgical wards showed the noise level above the recommended figure at night.
In the recovery room, more than half the talking exceeded 67 dB(A), although considerable noise was also created by oxygen administration equipment, ventilators and alarms on monitors, as well as toilet flushing sounds and telephones ringing.
Hilton did a similar study in Canada with similar results.
Improvements are recommended in all of these studies such as shutting doors quietly (and oiling them when necessary); handling equipment carefully to reduce noise; muting the alarm systems and telephones; wearing soft-soled shoes; providing soundproof covers for computer printout machines; reducing conversations between staff and talking quietly; providing earplugs if requested; isolating ‘noisy’ patients from general wards when practicable so that they create the least possible disturbance to other patients — and, as Soutar & Wilson point out, most of these suggestions are simple and inexpensive remedies.
It has been suggested that from time to time, sound engineers should show staff how much they pollute the environment and by means of this simple measurement, educate staff to prevent noise pollution.
Discussing the patient's ‘auditory environment’ Gough (1986) provides vignettes showing how noise means different things to different people and reminds nurses that it is possible to be upset by silence, for example a child in an isolation unit — a salutary reminder of the importance of individualising nursing according to the circumstances.
Risk of accident
Some mention of accidents has already been made but further, more specific comment is relevant.
If nurses are to attempt to prevent avoidable accidents to patients, they need to be aware of what and where the hazards are; when accidents are most likely to occur; and which patients are most at risk.
For patients who are identified from assessment as being at particular risk, relevant preventive activities should be included in the list of interventions written on the patient's nursing plan.
Some of the nursing activities which might be relevant can be deduced from the following discussion, which is based on the reports of two studies of accidents in hospital.
The study reported by Moorat (1983) involved an analysis of accident reports from 1979 to 1981 in an English general hospital.
The following information was collected: patient's age and gender; time and place of accident; activity being undertaken at the time; and type of accident and injury sustained.
The questions asked and the main results of the study are summarised below:
How many patients have accidents while in hospital, and is the number increasing?
Over the 3 years in question, the number of accidents rose from 406 in 1979, representing 3.8% of patients, to 605 in 1981 (5.1%).
Where in the ward do accidents most frequently occur?
The findings were in keeping with what is known: that accidents most frequently occur at the bedside.
Other main locations were the toilet, dayroom, shower/bathroom and corridor.
What is the most dangerous time of the in-patient's day?
Contrary to popular belief that night-time is most dangerous, results dispelled this.
Early morning was shown to be the peak period, with most accidents taking place between 0600 and 1100 hours.
Afternoon was a relatively safe time, but a peak occurred in late evening (1900–2100 hours) when patients go to the toilet or commode and get into bed.
During which activities are accidents most likely to happen?
The two activities of using the toilet or commode and getting out of bed were responsible for 49% of all accidents.
Other main activities related to accidents were getting up from a chair, walking unaided and getting into bed.
It is interesting to note that getting out of bed is much more hazardous than getting in; even when 65% of the beds were of the adjustable height variety.
What kind of patients are particularly at risk?
Of all the accidents reported, 68% involved patients between the ages of 56 and 86 years.
Patients over the age of 70 are particularly at risk (44% of accidents involved that age group).
Female patients who had accidents were older than the male patients: those at risk being 76 years old or over.
While Moorat's study shows that older patients are especially prone to accidents in a general hospital, Blake & Morfitt (1986) carried out a study in a residential home.
Over a 16-month period, 296 accidents were reported and of these, 285 were falls (3 were scalds, and 8 were abrasions caused by wheelchairs) and the falls were most likely to  occur among those who had suffered previous falls indoors, frequently because of impaired gait and balance, associated usually with a pathological condition.
Of course, it is the active, more independent person who is most at risk of falling, and it has to be borne in mind that the prevention of all falls is not an appropriate objective in the care of elderly people.
Instead the primary aim should be the promotion of patient activity within acceptable limits of safety.
This does not, of course, imply that nurses should not be concerned with the prevention of unnecessary accidents.
Earlier in this chapter (p. 70) striking a realistic balance between protection and freedom was discussed in the context of preventing accidents in relation to children.
It is equally relevant when providing a nursing service for people at the other end of the lifespan — the elderly.
One of the themes in developing a mode of thinking about nursing and its practice must surely be preventing the potential problem of accident from becoming an actual one.
Risk of fire
Fire is a potential problem in all NHS premises and every year in the UK at least 2000 hospital fires are reported (Rogers & Salvage, 1988).
The consequences of fire in hospitals and other health care premises can be especially serious because of the difficulties and dangers associated with the emergency evacuation of patients, many of whom may be highly dependent.
The aim therefore, according to the government document ‘Firecode: Policy & Principles’(DHSS, 1987) is to ensure that outbreaks do not occur; and if they do, that they are rapidly detected, effectively contained and quickly extinguished.
Overall fire safety, says the document, depends on physical factors (building design and construction, equipment, furnishings); proper installation and maintenance of detection and alarm systems; local policies for handling emergencies; and staff training in all these matters.
The document summarises statutory requirements and policy guidance, and comments on information contained in other Firecode series documents.
However, irrespective of specific legislation directly related to fire safety, the Health & Safety at Work Act 1974, places a responsibility on all employers and employees to observe safety in their work premises.
As far as hospital employees are concerned, Dooley (1981) sees nurses as the front line operators when fire does occur:
Fire is a lethal and perennial menace in hospitals…
It is the nursing staff more than any other category of employee who will bear the burden of the consequences of fire.
It is the nurse who will have to decide on whether to evacuate or who to move, how and where.
It is a heavy responsibility and the appropriate attitude and degree of awareness should be cultivated.
Dooley, 1981 
Dooley suggests that staff training should cover: how to guard against fires; how to react in case of fire; how to raise the alarm; how to help evacuate patients; how to stop fires spreading; and how to help fight the fire.
The charge nurse of a ward has a special responsibility to know precisely what action should be taken in the event of a fire; to be aware of any special risks, such as oxygen or cyclopropane cylinders; and to familiarise all new staff to the ward with the routine and the location of fire alarms, exits and fire-fighting equipment.
Some patients, perhaps especially those who express anxiety about the risk of fire or who are known to have experienced a fire, may welcome being told about the fire precautions in the ward.
The prevention of fire in hospital has had considerable publicity recently via the mass media and patients are more aware of the potential danger, probably partly because in the UK public buildings have been obliged by law to  install smoke doors in public corridors — and they cannot escape one's notice!
Risk of infection
When patients come to hospital they are living in close contact with more people than usual.
The human body is a reservoir of microorganisms as illustrated in Figure 6.5 and they are easily transferred to other things and people via the hands.
A potential problem for patients is the risk of infection because they are in contact with greater numbers of pathogenic microorganisms than at home.
And this at a time when resistance is likely to be lowered.
A large number of organisms and lowered resistance are two of the necessary conditions for infection to become established.
It was to keep down the population of pathogenic microorganisms in hospital that ‘damp dusting’ of all laying surfaces used to be considered a nursing activity.
Nowadays such activities have been designated ‘non-nursing’ duties, but nurses liaise with domestic management to achieve a safe environment for patients.
Dust invariably contains pathogens which have settled out of the atmosphere.
In ordinary breathing droplets are projected 150 to 180 cm into the atmosphere and the distance is increased during talking, coughing and sneezing.
There is therefore ample opportunity for all surfaces in a ward to be contaminated, particularly bedclothes, bedcurtains, floors and footwear as illustrated in Figure 6.6.
It also shows the methods of spread of infection in hospital, an ever present patient's potential problem.
Nurses must be constantly vigilant in every activity so that there is no break in infection control and this is especially necessary because the patient can come into contact with pathogens which have become resistant to one or more of the antibiotics.
From studying Figures 6.5 and 6.6 it will be seen that in hospital there are many potential danger points for contamination by direct contact, for example with infected articles or with hands which have been inadequately washed or not washed at all after dealing with contaminated discharges or materials.
Fig. 6.5 The human body as a reservoir of microorganisms
Fig. 6.6 Spread of infection in hospital
Handwashing is undoubtedly the main activity in preventing the spread of infection.
The hands harbour the resident flora (p. 74) and also perhaps transient flora (p. 75) particularly between the fingers and under the nails and even immediately after washing, a few colonies of microorganisms can be cultured.
Handwashing seems such a simple task but in fact is a subject of surprising contention among health professionals.
Discussing the problem, Blackmore (1987) quotes several sources explaining why handwashing is essential if the transfer of infected material from person to person is to be restricted.
The bacterial flora of the hands are similar to other skin sites but hands are of special significance in the transmission of infectious agents and the most important site of contamination.
Most resident skin flora (p. 74) are not highly virulent and are not normally implicated in infections except when prosthetic surgery or other invasive procedures are performed, or when neonates or immunocompromised patients are involved.
In contrast,transient flora (p. 75), often found on the hands of hospital personnel can be pathogens acquired from colonised or infected patients and are often involved in cross infection.
Fortunately, these transient flora are more effectively removed by handwashing than the resident flora.
Hand-washing practices, she goes on, are often based on tradition and ritual, but adequate facilities should be available to do the job effectively.
In the study carried out by Blackmore she found that a cotton towel removed bacteria more efficiently than did paper towels but concluded that both types of towel were far superior to warm air drying methods.
Irrespective of facilities, however, Gidley (1987) discovered that handwashing techniques were lamentable.
After washing, twist taps were not turned off with the paper towel; and where elbow taps were available, they were used properly only four times; and when disposing of the paper towel in foot-operated pedal bins, nurses used their hands to open and close the bins.
The study (admittedly a small one with 33 observations of handwashing) demonstrated that the technique was poor; the time taken was brief; and it was not even carried out after all ‘dirty’ interventions.
Campbell (1988) also found that the technique used by nurses was often questionable.
Right handed people washed the left hand more thoroughly and vice versa, and they missed some parts of their hands while washing, eg. the wrists, under finger nails and under rings.
Obviously the teaching, or the learning, or the memory span, or the example shown by senior staff was defective.
Campbell pointed out that certain factors may influence noncompliance with accepted techniques, e.g. hand paper towels may lead to skin irritation and in turn to skin abrasion and infection; hot air dryers are noisy, slow and also may cause irritation; soap may be irritant and therefore not used; and sinks may be inaccessible.
Nevertheless, no amount of sterile packs and antiseptic agents will protect a patient from a staff member who has contaminated hands.
Measures to prevent infection have featured in the literature recently related to issues other than handwashing, e.g. in relation to bedmaking (Overtone, 1988); bed-bathing (Horton, 1988); changing urinary drainage bags (Blenkharn, 1988); giving enteral feeds (Hobbs, 1989); setting  up intravenous infusions (Krakowska, 1986); and re-use of disposable equipment in the cause of cost-effectiveness (Baxter, 1987).
Even the ubiquitous nurse's scissors bought by every student may not be free from blame as Oldman (1987) shows in her research.
From these few examples, it was obvious that the theoretical principles related to the spread of infection were not always put into practice.
These defective practices are causing concern.
Grazebrook (1986) gives a résum´ of how infection problems faced by hospitals have changed since the 1960s.
The introduction of antibiotics saved the lives of many who would previously have died, but their use has produced new and complex problems.
The widespread use of prophylactic antibiotics has  contributed to the development of a dependence on their effectiveness and less emphasis on the importance of surgical principles, a breakdown of isolation procedures and the establishment of antibiotic-resistant and virulent bacteria in hospital.
Moreover, she goes on, these problems are accentuated by the complexities of modern surgery and the large number of high-risk patients being admitted for hitherto inoperable conditions, particularly the very young, the elderly debilitated patient, diabetic, cancer and transplant patients, the severely injured, the burned and those undergoing surgery.
Other high-risk patients are those undergoing therapy with immunosuppressive agents, anti-cancer drugs and steroids.
Infection control is only one element in the care of a patient but it is an indicator of standards and there is no disputing how vital it is when one considers the prevalence of nosocomial or hospital-acquired infection (HAI).
The National Prevalence Survey conducted in England and Wales and masterminded by Meers et al(1981) provides an account of the methods and main findings — a total of 18 163 patients were surveyed in 43 hospitals.
Overall 19.1% were judged to be infected at the time of the survey, namely 9.9% community-acquired, i.e. present on admission, and 9.2% hospital-acquired, i.e. infection-free on admission and contracted infection as a direct result of hospitalisation.
Respiratory tract infection was most prevalent and mainly community-acquired.
The most common hospital-acquired infections were of the urinary tract (30.3%), respiratory tract (20%) and wound infection (18.9%) and these results are shown in Figure 6.7.
Fig. 6.7 Infection among patients in hospital (Meers, 1981).
The prevalence of infection among patients in hospital divided according to the major types of infection concerned, according to a survey of 18 163 patients in 43 hospitals in England and wales, 1980 (Reproduced from The Times Health Supplement With permission)
In the absence of reliable data, the cost of hospital-acquired infection (HAI) in the UK is difficult to calculate, but Ayliffe & Collins (1982) suggest that if 5% of patients acquire a nosocomial infection and spend three extra days in hospital, the cost to the country is £30 million excluding the cost of antibiotics, dressings, increased use of microbiology and primary care facilities; plus sickness benefits, supplementary benefits and reduced payment of income tax.
The patient, however, rather than succumbing to a nosocomial infection, may have an infectious condition when admitted and probably will be anxious about infecting others.
Barrier nursing and isolation will help the patient to feel some security that precautions are being taken.
However, as Barnett (1983) describes, isolation can have profound emotional effects on the patient: such as disorientation, anxiety, feelings of undesirability and distress due to separation from family.
Therefore, it is important for nurses to be aware of the problems of isolation as experienced by the patient, and to attempt to alleviate them.
It is essential that patients are told why they are being isolated  and the reason for the various precautions should be explained.
Information is needed too about the part the patient is expected to play in preventing the spread of infection.
Again, patient teaching is a vital nursing activity.
Just as cooperation between nurse and patient is absolutely essential for infection in hospital to be effectively controlled, so too is cooperation among all members of the multidisciplinary health care team.
One profession cannot successfully isolate and combat infection.
Only by the cooperation and commitment of all hospital personnel can any infection control programme be really successful; therefore a multidisciplinary approach is logical and must be actively encouraged.
A collaborative policy is required, for example, in ensuring that there is safe collection of, and provision of storage for hospital waste prior to incineration; quite apart from installing enough incinerators to deal with the growing amount of disposable equipment now used in hospitals.
Not only hospitals require an infection control policy.
As more and more people are being discharged early from hospital, pressure increases on community nursing services.
Timoney (1987) reports on a study undertaken to examine the current control of infection practices in a community unit of management, and makes some recommendations regarding improved communication with hospital staff, use of protective clothing, wound care, practices related to the use of catheters and drainage systems, disposal of equipment and so on.
The problem of waste from the patient's home is highlighted by Archer (1988) who reported the findings of a small study involving the practices of community nursing staff.
Control of infection is a constant challenge.
As our defence systems against pathogens improve, so does the adaptability of the pathogens to each new environment we provide, a point which is amply illustrated by the emergence of apparently ‘new’ diseases such as Legionnaire's disease, myalgic encephalomyelitis,(postviral fatigue syndrome) and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
In the absence of an infection control policy these infections can become major outbreaks with enormous cost implications, not to mention the suffering, pain and even death of the patients involved.
Risks associated with medications
At home many people have a personal medication routine such as taking medications orally; inhaling them from a nasal spray; applying them to the skin; putting medicated drops or ointment into the eye; injecting them from a syringe; inserting them in the form of a suppository into the rectum or in the form of a pessary into the vagina.
People are responsible in their own homes for maintaining safety in relation to these medications whether they are self-prescribed or doctor-prescribed.
Recently, there has been considerable national publicity and extensive media coverage demonstrating increasing public concern about self-medication, and about the adverse effects of ‘multi-prescription’.
Elderly people as a group, have received particular attention.
According to McGuire et al(1987) the literature suggests that 80% of elderly people admitted to geriatric hospitals are on medication and 10% are admitted with iatrogenic drug-related problems.
The McGuire et al 's study looked at the medication regimen of a group of patients on admission and on discharge.
The initial interview indicated that they knew little about their drugs and 20% admitted to having a problem, some relying on others to sort them out; some evolving a system which helped them; and others omitting to take the drugs altogether.
Knowledge of what they were expected to do on discharge was equally scanty and the elderly people did not seem to connect the pattern of drug-taking in hospital with a possible continuation once they were home.
In order to decrease the risks associated with medications following discharge from hospital, McGuire et al introduced a programme of drug self-administration with selected patients in one ward, in the belief that elderly people can be helped to understand their medications; that compliance can be improved by understanding; and that one of the most effective ways of improving understanding is through teaching and counselling about the process of self-medication prior to discharge from hospital.
Evaluating the scheme one year on, the programme of instruction was continuing and indeed, had been extended to other wards.
Maintaining safety in relation to medications is a personal responsibility while at home.
In hospital, however, the patient usually forfeits this responsibility and becomes dependent on nursing, medical and pharmaceutical staff.
In these circumstances, in the interests of patient safety, nurses become accountable for giving the correct drug, at the correct time, in the correct dose, by the correct route to the correct patient.
Due to the potential danger of drugs, and in the safety interests of all members of society, most countries legislate to control drugs.
In the UK the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 and its various amendments are in force.
Very strict rules apply to those drugs which in the Act are called ‘controlled drugs’; each dose has to be accounted for in a Controlled Drugs Register, whether the drug is given in hospital or in the home.
Different but equally stringent rules apply to the ‘scheduled drugs’, those on the ‘poisons list’ and all other ‘drugs’.
The UK Central Council for Nurses, Midwives and Health Visitors has issued new guidance to nurses (UKCC, 1988) about drug administration which is a follow-up circular to clarify its 1986 ‘Advisory Paper’.
It includes issues such as medicine administration in the community, and management's responsibility when there is any question of penalising a nurse for making a mistake which might have been associated with overwork or poor management.
Although rare, medication errors can occur in  hospitals too, and there is usually a hospital policy about the action to be taken in such circumstances.
Apart from risks to patients related to medications, nurses themselves may be at risk, for example, when handling cytotoxic drugs which are being used increasingly in the treatment of cancer.
It is, therefore, important for staff to adhere strictly to guidelines regarding the use of protective clothing, especially gloves, when administering these drugs, and also when disposing of any spillages; for their own safety and also for the safety of patients and other staff.
CHANGE OF DEPENDENCE/INDEPENDENCE STATUS
The dependence/independence continuum in the model of living serves as a reminder that all people experience change of dependence/independence status for the Activities of Living in the normal course of the lifespan.
In the context of nursing, the concept of dependence/ independence is an important one.
According to the circumstances, nurses either help patients to cope with enforced dependence (short- or long-term), or help them to regain the level of independence to which they were accustomed prior to the episode of ill-health.
There are many different reasons why people can experience difficulty in achieving or maintaining independence for the AL of maintaining a safe environment and, therefore, may require assistance from nurses or others.
The main reasons are briefly described under the following headings: physical problems; mental problems; problems due to sensory impairment/loss.
Physical problems
Physical mobility is essential for the many activities aimed at maintaining safety, whether at home, at work, at play or while travelling.
Those born with severe deformity of the skeleton, or absence of one or more limbs, usually experience some life-long difficulty in carrying out all the activities for maintaining a safe environment.
Some people, on the other hand, are suddenly rendered immobile, for example some of the ‘emergency’ admissions to hospital and those who suddenly collapse or become ill and are nursed at home.
For many of them, their inability to maintain a safe environment is only temporary, but for others it may be permanent.
Certainly, a tetraplegic person will be permanently and totally dependent for this AL.
People who are unconscious are also totally dependent.
Severely ill people can experience exhaustion and they simply do not have the energy to carry out the necessary preventive activities; they are dependent on nurses and others for maintaining a safe environment.
Even apparently minor problems, such as any enclosure of the hands or restriction of finger mobility, can render a person less independent for this AL.
If there is any restriction on movement, however slight, of the spine, hips and lower limbs, the person may be unable to get out of the way of a dangerous moving object with sufficient speed to prevent mishap.
Those who are bedfast or chairfast are similarly unable to take avoiding action.
Patients with broken bones can be additionally restricted by traction apparatus and they forfeit much of their independence for this AL.
Physical imbalance of any kind can interfere with independence too, for example affecting the patient who has had a limb amputated.
Recent anaesthesia and certain medications can cause patients to feel dizzy and unable to maintain their balance.
People who take sleeping pills can also be at risk of falling, especially if they rise to void during the night, and the ‘hang-over’ feeling in the morning can create a safety risk.
Most of the physical problems, therefore, are primarily mobilising problems.
These are discussed in detail in Chapter 13 but for each patient, the nurse needs to assess what that particular mobilising problem means in relation to the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
She can then identify actual and potential problems and include in the patient's nursing plan whatever precautions are necessary, for example to prevent accidents.
Mental problems
As well as those born mentally handicapped, there are people whose intellect is impaired as a result of infection or injury to the brain.
They may not recognise when they are in danger, for example when crossing a busy road, or they may not know how to carry out even the most basic safety precautions necessary for the prevention of fire, accidents and infection.
In a hospital for the mentally handicapped much of the nurse's time is devoted to maintaining a safe environment for the patients and also helping them to understand and put into practice essential safety measures.
Certain types of mental illnesses result in a diminished awareness, so that the sufferers are not able to be completely responsible for carrying out the activities to achieve a safe environment.
Depressive illness can result in suicidal thoughts and there may or may not be expression of intent.
Such people need help in maintaining their environment in a condition which is safe for them until their mood improves.
If this cannot be assured, then the person may require admission to a psychiatric unit.
One important role of such units, is that they provide a safe environment for mentally disturbed people, at the same time in severe cases, protecting members of the community from possible harm as a result of violence to persons or property.
Nurses are concerned with the AL of maintaining a safe environment in relation to individual patients but, at the same time, must  bear in mind the safety of others.
The fact that this AL has a collective dimension in addition to the personal one was mentioned in the early part of this chapter.
Problems due to sensory impairment/loss
All five senses are used in activities carried out with the purpose of maintaining a safe environment and, therefore, impairment or loss of any one can result in problems.
Some of the problems can occur so gradually, for example the onset of deafness, that the person adjusts gradually and so is able to maintain independence for this AL.
Sudden impairment or loss, however, is likely to cause dependence, at least temporarily.
Visual impairment/loss
It is unusual for a person to lose the sight in both eyes at the same time, but loss of sight in one can be followed later by loss of sight in the second eye.
One can get some idea about what it means to try to maintain safety by blindfolding even one eye and noting the several changed perspectives.
It is important to establish empathy with patients who have visual problems in order to discover what they might find helpful, and what is required for independence to be maintained or regained.
Aural impairment/loss
Again it is unusual for a person suddenly to become deaf in both ears, but for example, a loud nearby explosion can cause sudden deafness, perhaps permanently.The use of earplugs can simulate the effect, and help one to appreciate the implications for safety if a person does not hear the whistle of the boiling kettle, or the sound of a pot of food boiling over, or the noise of approaching traffic.
Sensory impairment/loss
The patient with sensory loss has a problem in that he cannot feel heat, cold, pain and pressure.
To help anyone who has sensory loss a nurse should try to imagine maintaining a safe environment with no awareness of heat, cold, pain and pressure.
Sensory loss sometimes occurs in large areas such as the lower limbs and lower trunk; in all four limbs and the whole trunk; in the arm and leg on the same side of the body.
Sensory loss frequently occurs with motor loss; the patient is paralysed and it compounds the problem of maintaining a safe environment.
The different types of paralysis are illustrated in Figure 6.8.
Smelling and tasting impairment/loss
When cooking, many people check the contents of for example bottles and packages by smelling or tasting them.
When deprived of these sensations they cannot be used as checks when maintaining a safe environment.
Nurses can help these patients by first observing tactfully whether or not they can read and write.
If so, they can be advised to pay special attention to labelling containers and paper bags as to their contents.
People who cannot read and write could be advised to use a signing system and could be encouraged to use any available adult literacy programme.
Fig. 6.8 Sensory loss in types of paralysis
As has been implied from the comments made, the nurse's ability to identify patients' problems with the AL of maintaining a safe environment which result from impairment/loss of the senses, to a great extent depends on an ability to be imaginative and empathetic.
Once aware of what the problems are, the nurse can help the patient to develop alternative ways of detecting and responding to hazards in the environment, thereby maintaining maximum independence for this AL.
Perhaps the importance of preventing potential problems from becoming actual problems is more obvious in this AL than in some others.
And one of the major ways of emphasising prevention is through health teaching.
Health teaching does not necessarily imply an elaborate preplanned programme of instruction; it does involve being alert to cues from the clients and assessing the appropriate time to discuss issues which they and the nurse consider important to the client's circumstances.
A recent research study (News, 1988), for example, showed that patients' smoking habits changed more favourably after nurses' intervention, compared to studies involving other health care professions.
There may be numerous opportunities for health teaching in the course of a nurse/patient relationship; on the other hand, the patient/client may be coping adequately, and therein lies a skilled nursing judgement knowing when to withdraw.
Individualising nursing
The first part of this chapter reflects the Roper, Logan and Tierney model — the nature of the AL of maintaining a safe environment; the relationship of the lifespan to the AL; the effect of an individual's dependence/independence status; and the influence of physical, psychological, sociocultural, environmental and politicoeconomic factors on the AL.
Mainly, the first part provides examples of potential problems occurring in everyday living and what might be done to prevent them from becoming actual problems.
In the second part of the chapter, a selection of actual problems and discomforts which can be experienced by people in relation to the AL have been described.
This provides a background of general knowledge about the AL as such.
While describing the Roper, Logan and Tierney model for nursing, general information was provided about individualising nursing (p. 51) which, in fact, is synonymous with the concept of the process of nursing.
Out of this background of general knowledge about the AL of maintaining a safe environment, and about individualising nursing, it should then be possible to extract the issues which are relevant to one individual's current circumstances (whether in a health or an illness setting) i.e. make an assessment of relevant issues according to the individual's stage on the lifespan; according to current level of dependence/independence; and take into account the relevant physical, psychological, sociocultural, environmental and politicoeconomic factors.
Collectively, this information would provide a profile of the person's individuality in living for this AL, and therefore guides the nurse in devising a plan for individualising nursing.
Fig. 6.9 The AL of maintaining a safe environment within the model for nursing
As indicated earlier in the text, this assessment would be achieved by various means such as observing the person; acquiring information about the person's usual habits in relation to this AL partly by asking appropriate questions, partly by listening to the patient and/or relatives; and using relevant information from available records, including medical records.
The collected information could then be examined to identify any actual problems being experienced with the AL and these could be arranged in some order of priority.
The nurse might also recognise some potential problems — not all possible potential problems but those which are relevant.
Realistic goals, mutually agreed with the patient when this is possible, could then be set to prevent potential problems from becoming actual ones; to alleviate or solve the actual problems; or to help the person cope with those which cannot be alleviated or solved.
Of course, some of the patient's problems with this AL, although identified from the nursing  assessment, may well be outwith the scope of nursing intervention.
In such instances, after discussion with the patient when appropriate, these problems may be referred to other members of the health care team such as medical staff, dieticians, physiotherapists or social workers.
Keeping in mind what the person can and cannot do unaided, the nursing interventions to achieve the mutually set goals could then be selected according to local circumstances and available resources.
Following implementation of the interventions, their effects could be evaluated in relation to the goals set, and if goals were not reached, they could be revised or rescheduled, or even discarded.
It is worth repeating here that although discussed in four phases — assessing, planning, implementing and evaluating — individualising nursing is not a linear progression; it assumes a built-in responsiveness to feedback at any of the phases, giving ample allowance for change within the overall framework.
Also, during an illness episode, an important consideration is rehabilitation of the individual, and planning for this could commence as soon as the person enters the health care system.
Another important feature is the professional judgement needed to discontinue the nurse/patient relationship when it is no longer relevant.
This chapter has been concerned with the AL of maintaining a safe environment.
However, as stated previously, it is only for the purposes of discussion that any AL can be considered on its own; in reality, the various activities are closely related and do not have distinct boundaries.
Figure 6.9 is a reminder that the AL of maintaining a safe environment is related to the other ALs and also to the other components of the model for nursing.
Acknowledgement
Thanks are extended to Miss M. Strachan, Senior Nurse, Glasgow University Department of Infectious Diseases, Ruchill Hospital, Glasgow for checking the sections of this chapter which deal with infection.
Communicating
The activity of communicating
Man is essentially a social being and spends the major part of each day communicating with other people in one way or another.
The activity of communicating is therefore an integral part of all human behaviour.
There is now considerable knowledge from research in the behavioural sciences about body or non-verbal language, use of which can enrich the AL of communicating.
And even in the more familiar mode of verbal language, research has uncovered some interesting and illuminating aspects.
An understanding of the complexities of both components of communicating is likely to help people to carry which is effective and brings satisfaction to themselves and to others.
But what does ‘communicating’ mean?
THE NATURE OF COMMUNICATING
Most written languages have an alphabet, and in English everyone is familiar with the 26 letters from which many thousands of words can be constructed, each having a dictionary definition to help the process of communicating.
Words however are only symbols and they can have different meanings for different people.
Even in the English-speaking countries of the UK and North America there are differences as the following pairs of words show: nappies, diapers; lift, elevator; pavement, sidewalk; the bonnet of a car, the hood of a car.
So there are occasions when it is important to check the meaning attached to a particular word.
Words can also have different meaning according to the context in which they are used.
Think of the word ‘game’ associated with a sports stadium and a  butcher's shop; the word ‘eye’related to biology and to embroidery.
The arrangement of words can affect meaning.
‘Blanket this on child the put’ has no meaning, Yet if these six words are rearranged to read ‘Put the child on this blanket’, the sentence does have meaning.
However, if they are rearranged to read ‘Put the blanket on this child’ the sentence has a different meaning.
Choice of words and their arrangement in sentences to convey exact meaning are therefore vital in the activity of communicating.
Some words such as‘older’ and ‘younger’, express relativity; to make them meaningful, further information is needed such as ‘older than x’.
Words can be emotionally neutral and factual like ‘black man’ and ‘illegitimate’, whereas others —‘nigger’and ‘bastard’— not only indicate a fact but suggest a derisive attitude.
Yet other words denote a value judgement assigned by the user — large, medium, small; good and bad being examples.
Consequently, especially when recording and reporting information, the need to use neutral, factual words is necessary.
The use of language involves a number of skills, mainly speaking and listening; reading and writing.
When speaking, it is not only what is said but equally important how it is said.
With practice, the clarity, speed, pitch, inflection and tone of voice can all be used to convey exact meaning.
In response to a request, the answer ‘I don't mind doing it’ can be said in a pleasant positive manner, assuring the listener that the task will be done willingly.
On the other hand it can be said in a grudging negative manner leaving the listener uncomfortable and possibly guilty at having made the request.
Listening is much more than hearing; it is an active process whereby the listener attends exclusively to the speaker, not only to the words that he is speaking.
There are advantages to listening in a face-to-face conversation which communication links such as the telephone and tape recorder do not offer, although being in the presence of the speaker is not an absolute prerequisite for ‘effective listening’.
For instance a telephone listening service is offered to people in distress by associations such as the Samaritans and Befrienders.
The listeners are trained to hear and interpret silences, sighs, sobs and so on.
Reading is a skill which many people take for granted.
Yet even in developed countries there is concern about the extent of illiteracy among adults, and special classes are offered to cope with this problem.
Many readers are hindered by inaudibly ‘pronouncing’ each word rather than scanning a group of words to get the meaning of a sentence and rapid reading classes can be helpful in correcting this deficiency.
Again, the skill of writing is often taken for granted, yet there are adults who are handicapped because they cannot write their name.
Adult literacy campaigns aim to improve writing as well as reading.
But even so-called educated people can have difficulty in writing fluently, especially when under stress as for example in an examination setting or when emotionally upset.
Individuality, and many of the complexities of human beings are reflected in their speaking, listening, reading and writing, so it is useful to consider the total process of communicating.
The process of communicating
The study of cybernetics has contributed considerable information about the process of communicating.
Basically communication is said to occur when a person (the sender) has a message which he sends in a particular medium, so that it is received by a recipient in whom it produces a response, followed by feedback to the sender (Fig. 7.1).
This seems a simple process.
Fig. 7.1 Basic model of communicating
Further thought reveals however that it is not so simple, and that there are several stages, at any one of which error can occur which breaks a link in the chain of communication (Fig. 7.2).
At the beginning of a conversation, one person has an idea which is encoded in language symbols and then sent by speaking.
The other person (the receiver) hears them, decodes and interprets by attaching meaning to them (interpretation).
‘Foreign’ words can be heard but meaning cannot be attached to them; they cannot be interpreted.
In response to interpretation the sequence is repeated in reverse and so on.
The complexity of the AL of communicating can already be appreciated.
Effective communication, of course, is dependent on the communicators' several abilities within the verbal language component, notably those of thinking, speaking, listening, reading and writing (Fig. 7.3).
However the necessary skills within the body language component are also of enormous importance.
The study of non-verbal communication or body language is now receiving much more attention and the term ‘kine’ has been adopted for each ‘unit’of body movement which transmits a message.
The kine is analogous to a letter in the verbal alphabet.
Kinetics is still a young science but it would seem that human ability to exert conscious control over body language is less easy than with verbal communication and most people, at times, are aware of sending contradictory messages.
For example, in response to a ring of the door bell the words ‘Do come in, I'm pleased to see you’ might be spoken while the facial expression might say ‘I'm busy, I wish you hadn't called.’
Fig. 7.2 Stages in the two-way process of communicating
Fig. 7.3 The complexities of communicating
Non verbal communication serves a number of purposes depending on the context.
The whole body may be conveying a message.
Humans use their bodies to express themselves in for instance the way they walk.
Walking boldly into a room may be indicative of a feeling of wellbeing; on the other hand it may be conveying a mood of anger, so analysis of further cues is required to differentiate.
In contrast walking slowly into a room may indicate reticence or apprehension.
The stance people take, too, can transmit an impression as varied as boredom, exhaustion, attentiveness and interest.
Facial expression is a rich source of information regarding the emotional state of the individual and some evidence of this can be found in the amount of space and time authors and playwrights give to describing the facial changes in their characters.
One can transmit impressions such as disapproval, disgust, anger, irritation, pleasure, love and understanding by facial gesture, indeed its effectiveness is recognised in colloquial expressions such as‘a look enough to kill’ or ‘a sour look’.
The eyes can be particularly revealing, and people vary in the amount of eye contact they make and maintain while communicating.
The lecturer who stares out of the window, for example, is unlikely to convey to students much personal interest in their learning.
Hands are also important in body language, usually to provide points of emphasis, while shaping with the hands the object being discussed, or an event, or signalling directions.
Hands also convey emotion, for example the interviewee attending a selection panel who reflects inner anxiety by restless, wringing movements or fiddling with small objects; or the angry person who shows white knuckles or clenched fists.
Feet, too, are used in communicating, for example toe-tapping may express a degree of anxiety, or enjoyment of the rhythm of music.
It is apparent that physical appearance and presence are powerful aspects of non-verbal communication, and the amount and variety of make-up products, jewellery, perfume, aftershave, spectacle frames in department stores is an eloquent reflection of the range of taste.
Clothes, too, although essentially intended to protect from the elements, provide a great deal of information about the wearer.
They express current mood, state of finance, preparation to take part in sport, or to go to work.
Indeed, the term ‘language of clothes’ is quite commonly used and is discussed in more detail in the chapter dealing with the AL of personal cleansing and dressing (p. 204).
Actually some groups in current Western society wear what could almost be termed a uniform, in that it serves to give them a distinct identity, for example skinheads, hippies, and the tinted, spiked hair brigade; in fact these non-verbal cues can influence interaction to such an extent that one has to be careful to avoid stereotyping, sometimes quite erroneously.
Communicating is a highly individual activity.
Communicators bring to the conversation their attitudes, beliefs, values and prejudices, these being fashioned by previous experience which must necessarily be affected by social background.
The contribution of each person is affected by their current needs: the need to be dominant or  submissive; the need to be talkative or silent and so on.
Yet in discussing communicating, it is not the individual who is crucial; it is the interpersonal relationship.
To understand the AL of communicating one has to understand how people relate to each other.
Purpose of communicating
Communicating involves a variety of complex behaviours which are difficult to categorise.
One main purpose of communicating is to establish and maintain human relationships.
Most people imagine that they are fairly competent communicators; adults have been doing it all their lives!
In fact, it is all too easy to conclude that if one's message is misunderstood, the receiver is at fault; and if the other person's attempt to communicate is not understood, then the other person's mode of expression is deficient in some way.
The individual's interpretation of a situation is based on personal beliefs about communication competence — one's own and the other person's — and these beliefs affect how the individual relates to others, and how others relate to the individual.
A lot depends on how individuals view themselves.
This self-perception is said to start at birth as the infant begins to develop a feeling of trust.
With a feeling of trust comes, among other things, the ability to recognise personal strengths and weaknesses, the development of self-respect and faith in oneself, the development of respect and concern for others; all of which are essential for the establishment and maintenance of human relationships, and are basic to the AL of communicating.
The simplest form of communication is dyadic, the individual with one other person such as a parent, a marriage partner, a friend, a colleague, but there are extensions of the dyad in the form of small group communication, as indeed happens even with children when they go to school and find opportunities for communicating with different children and adults, beyond the home setting.
Eventually adults become members of more and more dyadic, small and large group communication systems.
A term often applied to a large group system is an organisation and these are usually created to accomplish a specific purpose, for example a hospital is organised for the treatment of people with disease; and is perhaps within a yet larger organisation, a national health service, which in addition is responsible for maintenance of health, prevention of disease and rehabilitation.
In an organisation such as a hospital, communicating is a means to an end but in some organisations it is an end in itself.
For example in schools and colleges and universities, the purpose is communication in a teaching/learning context.
The mass media too are concerned essentially with communicating, usually giving information although it may also involve exchange in the form of readers' letters to a newspaper or phone-in programmes on radio.
Of course the mass media are not concerned only with information giving/exchange; they also communicate in order to entertain.
And this is true of the theatre, art and music.
Music in fact is a universal language of a non-verbal nature which is rich in expression.
It can be played, listened to, read and written throughout the world, irrespective of mother tongue and usually brings great satisfaction to sender and receiver.
Whether an end in itself, or a means to an end, communicating in some form or other permeates every aspect of living — maintaining a safe environment, eating and drinking, dressing, working and playing, expressing sexuality and so on.
There are a few individuals such as hermits or members of closed religious orders who choose to reduce their opportunities for communication and human interaction to a minimum (and they may find satisfaction in communing with nature, or with a deity) but for most people communicating with fellow humans is essential to living, to survival and to the quality of life.
LIFESPAN: EFFECT ON COMMUNICATING
The lifespan component of the model is particularly relevant to the AL of communicating.
Even in the prenatal period the fetus is communicating that it is growing in size; and in the later months of pregnancy that it is capable of movement.
The baby's first worldly experience of nonverbal communication, however, is usually the touch of the midwife's or obstetrician's hands or sometimes the mother's hands and everyone present at the delivery is relieved to hear the initial cry, the first verbal communication.
Thereafter the infant experiments with cooing and babbling and soon can sense the ‘meaning’ of words and phrases from how they are spoken, and by the volume, intonation and so on.
The baby is then ready to associate words with objects or people, and later begins to utter the correct word in response.
By a long process the child gradually learns and uses an increasing vocabulary.
A vital aspect of this learning is the stimulation from other people in the environment especially the mother or mother substitute who by speaking and singing to the child, and touching and cuddling, provides the basic experiences for interpersonal communication which are so crucial to further development.
Indeed, children deprived of such stimulation may grow up to have difficulty with human relationships.
During adolescence, the teenager may develop special meanings for certain words known only to the peer group and not understood by adults.
However as well as this private communication channel, most adolescents extend their vocabulary and modes of expression, verbally and non-verbally, as they move away from the constraints of home and school contacts, and explore new environments with different types of relationships.
It is estimated that the majority of adults have a speaking  vocabulary of 3000 to 5000 words although their reading vocabulary may well be more.
On the other hand there are those whose speaking vocabulary contains only a few hundred words of not more than three syllables and their reading vocabulary not many more.
Often current slang and colloquialisms make up the bulk of such people's language.
These factors will naturally have their effect on acquisition of writing skills.
In old age, deterioration of vision and hearing can lessen the ability to communicate effectively by causing distortion of sensory input.
Also there is a gradual loss of function of some brain cells which can result in forgetfulness and sometimes confusion.
Arthritic finger joints can make writing difficult.
Frailty can interfere with body posture and gesture and therefore with body language.
All these factors may contribute to problems in the older person's AL of communicating.
DEPENDENCE/INDEPENDENCE IN COMMUNICATING
Communicating is an AL where movement along the dependence/independence continuum has a direct relationship with the lifespan component of the model.
Even when a baby is born with the intact body structures required for communicating, it is necessary to learn to use those structures, to perceive, and to attach meaning to discrete sounds.
Stimulation from parents enhances the speed of learning, and great patience is required to perceive and decode the communicating done by babies and children, both verbally and non-verbally.
On the other hand, adults can be curiously lacking in perception.
An extreme example would be an instance when there are signs of child abuse and the cues are not picked up by people outside the home setting.
Another example is the puzzling situation when an otherwise bright, healthy child has difficulty mastering reading and spelling — a syndrome labelled as dyslexia — and investigation is required, perhaps to be followed by a special educational programme (Yule, 1988).
The young are certainly dependent on others for the AL of communicating and likewise, sometimes, the elderly.
Physical body structure, of course, influences the degree of dependence in communicating.
Intact physical structures which enable one to see, hear, taste, smell and touch, and those which permit speech and body language are basic to independence, although some degree of impairment can often be compensated for or coped with.
However, mechanical aids can do much to lessen the disability of impaired body structure.
The problem of diminished sight can be reduced or corrected by using spectacles or an illuminated magnifying glass: and for those who are severely handicapped the use of specially prepared large-print books or of Braille or of tape-recordings can help considerably in retaining a measure of independence.
For those who have impaired auditory structure and function, it is possible now to have quite sophisticated, unobtrusive hearing aids which dramatically improve their quality of living and there are also amplifiers available for telephone conversations and public meetings.
For those who are dumb, a sign language is useful and especially for mentally handicapped people who have speech difficulties, there are symbolic languages such as the Bliss Symbolic Communication System and the Makaton Vocabulary Language Programme which have greatly improved their capacity for communicating (Kiernan et al, 1983).
A few years ago, it was quite revolutionary to provide an aid, called Possum, for those who were quadriplegic; it enabled the paralysed person, by blowing on a type of keyboard, to manipulate light switches, radio and television sets, telephone and so on.
However, recent technological advances have made possible a robot which can be programmed to carry out a range of services on command.
These developments hold great promise for severely disabled people who, although dependent on a machine, can have a feeling of relative independence; their range of control in communicating and getting an appropriate response is increased and they are less dependent on people to carry out a number of everyday living activities.
FACTORS INFLUENCING COMMUNICATING
Like all other ALs, communicating is influenced by a variety of factors.
In keeping with the relevant component of the model, these are discussed under the following headings — physical, psychological, sociocultural, environmental and politicoeconomic factors.
Physical factors
Many physical factors influence a person's ability to communicate by means of verbal and non-verbal language, and especially important are adequately functioning body structures in the nervous and endocrine systems.
For example, for the acquisition of speech there has to be at least adequate hearing, an adequately functioning speech apparatus and the opportunity to hear others' voices for imitation.
The achievement of reading skills requires at least minimal vision, and the accomplishment of writing skills is further dependent on an adequately functioning preferred hand.
Communicating by body language is dependent on adequately functioning nervous and musculoskeletal systems.
Hormone production is also related, although less obviously, to communicating.
The sex hormones are responsible for the distinguishable difference between the male and female voice.
Structurally the male larynx is on average longer anteriorly/posteriorly so that the male voice after puberty is lower in pitch than that of the female.
However both males and females differ in the control which they have over the many muscles, including the  diaphragm, used in voice production.
Thus some people have low, monotonous voices and others can modulate the voice for effective and varied expression.
There are also differences related to patterns of physical contact as a means of communicating between males, between females, and between males/females; and these are mentioned in Chapter 15 when expressing sexuality is discussed.
As explained earlier when describing the model of living and the model for nursing, the 12 ALs are interrelated; so too the body systems as categorised by the human biologists are interrelated and it is only for the purposes of description and discussion that they are dealt with separately.
In order to show how human biology relates to the model for nursing, the authors suggest that the AL of communicating be particularly associated with the larynx containing the vital vocal cords, and the mouth, tongue and lips; the nervous system including the sense organs; and the endocrine system.
This juxtaposition of AL and body system gives guidance for curriculum planning, and also for knowing where to record problems, actual and potential, related to the AL of communicating if the Roper, Logan and Tierney model is used as a guideline for nursing plans.
Psychological factors
Level of intelligence affects communicating in that it influences learning ability.
It therefore plays an important part in the extent of the vocabulary acquired for use in everyday living.
A person with a limited vocabulary can usually manage well in familiar surroundings but may experience difficulty, for instance when filling in many of the forms which have become a feature of our modern society such as an insurance form.
However problems can arise even for intelligent people with an extensive vocabulary, for example when they are communicating with someone on a subject other than their own speciality.
Anxiety affects communicating as people going for an interview know only too well; interviewees may come away feeling annoyed that their ability to respond fluently has been impaired and they have not done themselves justice.
For others, in spite of adequate content in their conversation, the non-verbal behaviour of tremulous hands, dilated pupils, perspiration on brow and upper lip, can inform the interviewer of the state of tension.
Current mood also has its effect on communicating.
Excitement usually increases the rate of speech, raises the voice pitch and there may be more than usual gesticulation.
Anger is usually expressed by raising the voice.
Depression flattens the voice almost to monotony; movement is slowed, and a dejected facial expression is characteristic of many people when they are in a low mood.
In comparison, cheerfulness lightens the voice, and is likely to be reflected in a smiling expression.
Of course communication is two-way, and the mood of the recipients is also important for effective communication.
It is not uncommon to refer to a ‘hostile audience’ or a ‘receptive audience’.
Loss of self-respect and faith in self may make communicating a problematic activity.
In such circumstances, an event which normally would be considered insignificant might produce a reaction of worthlessness, guilt or shame; or might provoke over-criticism of others, probably a subconscious effort to raise self-esteem.
Those who have not experienced some type of long-term, warm, trusting relationship in their early years often lack self-confidence and may find it difficult to communicate effectively with other people.
Some people are aware of their lack of self-confidence.
As one of a variety of possible techniques to develop self-confidence, it is sometimes suggested that ‘assertiveness training’ is helpful, the idea being that stress is reduced if one knows, in appropriate circumstances, how to be assertive rather than aggressive.
Fessey (1988) maintains that assertiveness techniques should be used only if a need requires expression or a right is about to be denied.
She writes:
…assertiveness skills help to focus the emphasis of the request on the specific problem, and prevent the asserted comment from being aggressive or intensely personal.
In this way, the respondent's self-esteem is not severely diminished…the technique appears simple but requires an examination of the values and attitudes which shape our responses to others.
This process can be painful and revealing but it leads to greater self-awareness — the first step to unambiguous communication.
Bond (1988) discusses a self-help scheme of assertiveness training which, although geared to nurses, is really a specific application of general principles which can assist good communication in any context.
Communicating, both verbal and non-verbal, and deliberate or non-planned, is the basis of all activities associated with learning and teaching, and there is a considerable literature about the contribution of psychological principles in the approach to information-giving, teaching, and counselling.
These psychological principles are used in everyday living related, for example, to child development, all aspects of organised education, the impact of the mass media, and also in a variety of community services including health care services.
Psychological factors certainly affect both verbal and non-verbal communicating.
Sociocultural factors
Now more than ever, an increasingly mobile and multi-racial society demands that consideration be given to sociocultural factors in communicating.
Watson (1986) suggests how some of the communication problems can be surmounted when in contact with minority ethnic groups who have difficulty with a second language but even within one language there can be several local vocabularies which  strangers cannot understand.
Accent or dialect can communicate place of residence during acquisition of language; and it may take time for the listener to become accustomed to a different dialect.
Social status can also be conveyed by language.
For example in the UK, the range of vocabulary can be indicative of level of education attained; this can influence the type of job procured which determines economic bracket of income and in turn determines the person's social class according to the Registrar-General's classification (p. 272).
Apart from dialect or accent or social class indicators, the specialist vocabulary in certain occupations and professions is almost a ‘language culture’.
Technical expressions which are in everyday usage within an occupational group, can be totally alien to outsiders.
For example, despite the computer revolution, the language of computer users still has to be interpreted to the uninitiated; and for clients in the health care system, the vocabulary of staff is often unintelligible or, when only snatches are overheard and understood, is open to misinterpretation and can cause the client and family great distress.
Other sociocultural differences affect body language.
Mode of dress can communicate such diverse information as a person's ethnic origin, religious affiliation, occupation or social group and Helman (1984) cites examples of even self-mutilation to the body to indicate ‘group’ membership such as the insertion of large ornaments in the lips or earlobes in Brazil, East Africa and Melanesia.
The acceptability of touching fellow humans also varies.
Although communicating by touch is the most primitive mode, there are culturally determined touching patterns for adults.
Some cultures permit a reciprocal hug to signal welcome on arrival, and again on departure to signal appreciation of the visit.
The accepted practice in other cultures on these occasions is a kiss on each cheek; yet in others a kiss on the lips: in some it is nose-rubbing; and in others only reciprocal hand-shaking is acceptable.
There are also differences regarding the amount of gesticulation and mobility of the lips when communicating which are culturally determined.
There are culturally determined practices related to eye contact, for example certain aborigines, to be polite, do not look into each other 's eyes as they talk, whereas in the Western world it is polite to maintain eye contact during conversation.
The individual's social and cultural background usually influences the system of values and beliefs which determine behaviour, for example in the expression of spirituality via various ALs, possibly following a formal religion, or in the acquisition of a moral stance on particular issues.
In our model, these are subsumed under sociocultural factors and are involved closely with the AL of communicating.
Organised religions usually lay considerable stress on group interaction, and the selected places of worship, sometimes enormously costly to build and maintain and often elaborately decorated, provide the focal point for communication, sometimes in groups or sometimes for personal communion with a god or deity.
A concept which is more encompassing than organised religion is spirituality (Labun, 1988) interpreted as a ‘search for meaning’ in one's life and encompassing theistic and non-theistic approaches, which applies to agnostics and atheists as well as followers of a recognised religious persuasion.
Irrespective of personal interpretation of spirituality, the related system of values and beliefs can often bring comfort and reassurance during times of stress and when the individual is faced with moral dilemmas which require resolution.
Environmental factors
The appropriateness of the physical environment can certainly contribute to the effectiveness of the AL of communicating.
Poor ventilation in a room and extremes of temperature can be conducive to discomfort and interfere with concentration when communicating.
Lighting, too, is important.
Excessive light and glare can make a person feel too uncomfortable to converse, and poor lighting can mean that important non-verbal cues are missed.
Soft lighting is deliberately used for example by restaurateurs to induce a feeling of relaxation, enhance the enjoyment of the meal, and promote pleasurable conversation.
Environmental noise can have an effect on communicating.
Some people find it easier to speak about personal matters if there is background noise, be it music or the hum of conversation, while others find even the slightest noise distracting.
Rooms which afford aural privacy usually help when personal matters need to be discussed, for example, an interview or consultation with a member of health care staff.
In such a setting, too, conversation is more likely to be encouraged if the furniture is so arranged that the interviewee and the interviewer are not physically separated by a desk; that the chairs are reasonably comfortable and in a position to allow eye contact; and that there are no unplanned interruptions.
Apart from personal interviews, the physical layout of a room is important for any group work; chairs with desks in serried rows for example are not so conducive to discussion as chairs arranged in a circle or round a central table.
This type of arrangement allows all members of the group to see who is speaking, to have eye contact, to observe body language and to maximise the impact of non-verbal cues which are so important to the AL or communicating.
Politicoeconomic factors
The economic status of an individual will almost certainly be communicated to others in a variety of ways, for example by the choice of neighbourhood for purchase of a house, the choice of social circle and the type of occupation — at least in Western cultures.
Communicating can also be influenced by the economic status of the Local Government group which serves a neighbourhood.
For example it may influence the  availability of such services as play-groups and nursery schools when young children have wider opportunities to practice communicating; new types of activities and different relationships can be explored in these settings which add to the child's capacity to communicate and are critical at this stage of development.
Of course, technological advances have greatly enhanced the individual's capacity to communicate.
In industrialised societies, even in lower economic echelons, most people have access to and are influenced by mass media communications in the form of newspapers, radio and television.
Then at national and international levels there is an elaborate network of telecommunication, sometimes incorporating the use of satellites, which permits rapid transworld communication.
The availability of telephone, radio and television is often dependent however on services provided by government, so politicoeconomic decisions are involved and some would even maintain that the mass media provide opportunities for political pressure, and for communicating in the form of propaganda.
Nowadays all large organisations — including hospitals or indeed a whole health service — are aware of the need for effective communication within and between different levels and grades of staff in order to achieve efficient management.
There is widespread use of informal meetings, circulation of reports, notice board announcements, newsletters, in addition to the communication associated with committee structures and official correspondence.
Many organisations in fact are overwhelmed by a superabundance of communications and some are looking to computerisation to solve some of the problems created by information bombardment.
The rapidly growing use of computers in many areas of everyday living is often referred to as the computer revolution, similar in scale to the 19th century industrial revolution.
In the Western world, the use of computers is no longer novel in, for example, industry, commerce and banking, and the need for computer literacy is recognised to the extent that education for the computer age now begins at primary school level.
Currently in the nursing field, computers are being used as a medium for communicating in nursing practice, education, management and research.
Koch & Rankin (1987) and Ball et al(1988) describe examples of computer application, and the proceedings from an international nursing conference, held in Dublin (Nursing and Computers, 1988), give some idea of the extent of computer usage in the profession in a number of countries.
Of course, new technologies bring new problems and one cause for anxiety is the ease of retrieval of data.
This is especially true of personal data but also of enormous importance when research data or top secret intelligence are stored in computers.
One of the concerns is the use of a password for computer security which, it is now found, can be abused with relative ease.
So-called biometric security devices such as finger scanners are considered safer; they check finger prints to authenticate a person's identity before it is possible to gain entry to the system (Ernsberger, 1988).
The biometric security market also includes voice recognition and hand geometry devices.
Concern about the confidentiality of large amounts of personal data has necessitated legal action.
In the UK, in 1984 a bill was introduced in parliament seeking legal safeguards to ensure that computerised personal health data about patients is available only to health professionals and not to groups such as the police, tax authorities, industry, and social services personnel.
Vousden (1987) looks at the implications for nursing and medical records.
Politicoeconomic and legal factors have enormous potential to influence the AL of communicating.
INDIVIDUALITY IN COMMUNICATING
One of the fascinating things about individuality in communicating is that each person develops a distinctive voice, instantly recognisable, for instance, on a telephone.
Given the individuality of voice, it is little wonder that people also vary enormously in their communicating habits.
Any description of individual habits in this AL is influenced by the interplay of the four components of the model already discussed and how these focus on the fifth component, individuality in communicating.
The following is a résumé.
Lifespan: effect on communication
Fetal growth and movement/birth cry
Infancy and childhood — increasing skills/forming relationships
Adolescence — extension of skills/relationships
Adulthood — variety in performance
Old age — gradual loss of activity/reduction in skills and relationships
Dependence/independence in communicating
Unimpaired body structure and function
Seeing aids
Hearing aids
Speech aids
Possum/robots
Factors influencing communicating
Physical
intact body structure and function
speaking/voice pitch
hearing
seeing
reading
writing
gesticulating
Psychological
intelligence/range of vocabulary
self-confidence
self-respect, perception of self, and effect on perception of others
prevailing mood
information giving, teaching and counselling
Sociocultural
mother tongue
dialect/accent
vocabulary
personal appearance/dress
patterns of touching
eye contact/gesticulation
attitudes, values and beliefs
Environmental
temperature/ventilation
light
noise
type/size of room
arrangement of furniture
Politicoeconomic
income
occupation
communication channels/mass media
computers
legislation to protect data/individual
Communicating: patients' problems and related nursing
Unless they are detrimental to health, it is important that, during an episode of illness, the patient's individual habits of living are changed as little as possible.
It is therefore important that the nurse should know about these habits and use the knowledge to devise an individualised plan of nursing.
In order to discover what the patient can and cannot do, the nurse will be seeking answers to the following questions:
how does the individual usually communicate?
what factors influence the way the individual carries out the AL of communicating?
what does the individual understand about communicating?
what are the individual's attitudes to communicating?
has the individual any long-standing difficulties with communicating and how have these been coped with?
what problems, if any, does the person have at present with communicating, or seem likely to develop?
The nurse will find answers to these types of questions in the course of conversing with the patient and his family and observing their behaviour; and there may also be relevant information in other records such as medical records to which the nurse has access.
The collected information can then be examined, in collaboration with the patient when relevant, to identify any problems being experienced with the AL.
The nurse may recognise potential problems and it may be appropriate to discuss them with the patient.
Mutual, realistic goals can then be set to prevent potential problems from becoming actual ones; to alleviate or solve the actual problems; or to help the patient cope with those which cannot be alleviated or solved.
Bearing in mind what the patient can and cannot do for himself, the nursing interventions to achieve the set goals can then be selected according to local circumstances and available resources.
These interventions should be written on the nursing plan along with the date on which evaluation will be carried out in order to decide whether or not the stated goals have been, or are being, achieved.
All these actions, reactions and interactions are necessary in order to provide individualised nursing.
These same activities are used whatever the setting — home, clinic or hospital — and communicating is even more important (if that is possible) when a child is involved, or a mentally handicapped person, or when the contact is made for psychiatric problems, as Hardcastle (1988) clearly outlines in ‘First impressions’.
Particularly in hospital, communicating is the only means patients have of acquiring information about their illness, telling staff of problems, keeping in contact with relatives and relating to other patients.
However effective their communicating skills, it is highly probable that they will experience some problems in the course of adjusting to a new environment such as a hospital.
Many patients have the highest praise for the effectiveness of communication with hospital staff but there is also, undoubtedly, a lot of criticism, and it is useful to outline some of the problems which can arise when a patient is admitted to hospital.
Against the background of the general discussion in the first part of this chapter, the remainder of this section highlights some types of patients' problems related to communicating and the relevant nursing activities.
They are grouped under headings which indicate how the problem can arise:
Change of environment and routine
Change of dependence/independence status
Experience of pain
CHANGE OF ENVIRONMENT AND ROUTINE
Once the patient is inside the ward several dimensions of his communicating have changed, for example the social dimensions.
Members of the group with whom he lives, usually the family, are no longer present; the people with whom he communicates at work are absent; and likewise the people with whom he chooses to spend the leisure part of each day.
Unfamiliar people
The patient's problem is that he has joined a group of unfamiliar people, some of whom, the patients, are present all the time; others, the nurses, are in his vicinity for some of the time; and a whole variety of others appear ‘to come and go’.
It is little wonder that even the most confident individuals experience some difficulty in trying to make sense of such an environment, one which is alien to most people.
Admission .
In some instances the patient is very ill on admission and in these circumstances explanations and introductions have a lower priority than life-sustaining treatment and nursing.
So what can the nurse do to help the patient with the AL of communicating?
Initially only essential information need be communicated — that he is in hospital, that relatives have been informed, how to summon the nurse and so on.
As the condition improves there can be gradual and fuller exchange of information between nurse and patient.
For a patient admitted from the waiting list, the nurse who ‘admits’ him (that is the initial showing of the patient to the bed and the space which he will occupy) should help with the inevitable quandary of meeting new people in somewhat unusual circumstances.
It should be remembered that an anxious person, even an intelligent one, does not retain as much new information as normally.
The nurse should therefore attempt to communicate only the information necessary for the patient to manage say, the next 24 hours.
In one study, patient anxiety was measured and found to be highest in the first 24 hours of a hospital stay (Wilson-Barnett, 1978).
Throughout a hospital stay, communicating is important for all patients but in psychiatric nursing, communicating is the major therapeutic tool and the patient's initial relationship can particularly influence the effectiveness of the subsequent therapy.
Communicating with children (and their parents) requires special skills and Glasper et al(1989) discuss this, as well as the importance of the communication links between hospital and community services when children are ill.
Introduction of nurse and patient .
The first nursing activity is introduction of the nurse, by name, to the patient.
If name badges are worn, nurses need to remember that people who wear bifocal spectacles have difficulty in reading at that level, and any cues regarding inadequate vision should be noted.
The patient should be told of the mode of address used in that particular hospital for professional staff.
It is important to remember that patients need some information about the different members of the health care team so that they can relate satisfactorily to them.
If uniforms distinguish the different grades of nursing and domestic staff, then this is useful information for the nurse to communicate to the patient.
Introduction to other patients .
For all but the very ill or those admitted as an emergency the nurse can help the patient with his problem of being among unfamiliar people by introducing him to the other patients in his immediate vicinity.
These are the people who will be present throughout each day and they help to give the new patient a feeling of ‘belonging’, indeed other patients can be a great support and source of information to new patients (Rowden & Jones, 1983).
Only factual information such as how long each patient has been in the ward should be given.
It is important for the nurse to remember the professional responsibility of maintaining confidentiality so the medical diagnosis and any personal details about the other patients must not be divulged.
Communicating staffing patterns .
The nurse who admits new patients needs to explain whether or not they have been allocated to her in a patient allocation scheme; if so, for how long she will be on duty; and the staffing arrangements that will be made for the other two shifts.
If team nursing is the pattern, then this has to be explained and the other members of the team for that shift can introduce themselves as and when necessary.
If the work pattern is neither of these, again patients need to know this.
They should be encouraged to express any particular anxieties and queries until the nurse assesses from verbal and nonverbal interaction that they have a reasonable grasp of the staffing pattern as it applies to them and know from whom they can seek any further help.
Patients cannot be expected to feel safe and secure without this information.
Nurse/patient relationship .
The relationship between nurse and patient is essentially a human one.
However each patient is in the health care system for a purpose, seeking help with health problems, actual or potential.
The nurse is there to make the nursing contribution to the solution, amelioration or prevention of the patients' actual or potential problems.
Nurses therefore are not in the individual patient/nurse relationship from choice, but in the capacity of making a professional contribution.
A consideration of what the nurse brings to the relationship is therefore necessary.
The nurse brings to the relationship herself as a unique human being, the culmination of her particular life experiences.
She also brings compassion for people and a commitment to nursing, together with nursing knowledge and skills.
Her emotional maturity should be such that she does not have to gratify personal needs at the patient's expense.
For example a need to be dominant and make  decisions may deprive patients of practice which they require in order to deal with, for example, their problem of indecision, common in some mental illnesses.
Or again, a strong mothering need may motivate a nurse to dress patients when it would be in their best interest to re-learn dressing skills.
The nurse brings to the relationship a maturity which permits toleration of frustration if, for example, a patient is not at home when she makes a house call; or if a patient does not take the prescribed medication; or removes a dressing or falls out of bed.
The trigger points are innumerable but the nurse should have the maturity to deal with the resultant feelings in a constructive way that avoids reflecting any annoyance on to the patient.
Nobody expects a paragon of virtue but the nurse is meant to be realistic, is meant to have self-knowledge because the ‘self’ must be used in the relationship.
Personal needs have to be met by other supporting staff, by counsellors or by the significant others in the nurse's life.
The patient is also a unique human being who has been fashioned by life experiences.
Something is wrong, so already the image of self has changed.
Change is uncomfortable at the best of times and the patient is discomforted.
If the diagnosis is uncertain and an array of diagnostic tests is required, then the patient is bound to be anxious both about the tests and the potential results, and inevitably, is worried if surgery is prescribed.
Worried people do not concentrate, hear or understand so well as usual.
However, if the nurse takes the time to give information to the patient, it has been shown in various studies to be beneficial (Hayward, 1975; Wilson-Barnett, 1978; Boore, 1979; Bond, 1982).
By becoming a patient, not only treatment is sought; comfort is also sought from nursing staff, and information-giving seems to be an important component of comfort.
Psychological comfort is inextricably related to physical comfort although some interactions are deliberately planned by staff to contribute to psychological comfort.
It may be as fleeting as a look of acknowledgement when passing the patient's bed; or it may be less transient, for example helping the patient through the stages of accepting and coping with chronic illness; or when a patient has a mental illness, it may be the major emphasis for most interactions.
The value of therapeutic touch as a form of psychological comfort is currently receiving considerable attention in the professional literature.
Touch is the earliest and most primitive form of communication and is an important form of non-verbal communication throughout life; it can convey a myriad of positive and negative messages between people.
However the use and acceptance of touch depends on numerous cultural norms and personal characteristics; each culture has rules about how, when and where to touch another human, and this is related to gender, age and maturity.
Pearce (1988), writing about the use of touch in an intensive care unit, differentiates between instrumental touch (deliberate, physical contact needed to perform a specific task such as washing a patient or dressing a wound) and expressive touch (a relatively spontaneous and affective contact which is not necessarily a component of a physical task, such as holding a patient's hand during a painful procedure).
Expressive touch, she quotes, is used to enhance verbal communication in conveying empathy, trust, reassurance, security and the proximity of another person, and she goes on to quote several authors who have examined the effects of tactile language in a variety of health care settings — with the elderly, with the terminally ill, with people in pain, with anxious people and during labour.
It must be recognised, however, that for some people, touching would be an unacceptable invasion of personal privacy (Turton, 1989), and skill is required to detect this reservation, especially when the person has reduced personal independence.
Not only touch, but all activities carried out in the vicinity of the patient, offer the nurse an opportunity to show empathy.
Empathy is described in various ways and Burnard (1987a) discussing its use in psychiatric nursing quotes Carl Rogers' definition as ‘a process of entering into the perceptual world of another person’.
Burnard goes on to mention some of the skills involved: the ability to listen (to the words but also noting volume, pitch, eye movements and related body language); ability to offer free attention (to note and accept, not analyse and interpret); to suspend judgement (to refrain from categorising as good/bad, right/wrong); and to control what is said in reply and how it is said, with a facial expression which is genuine, not mechanical.
By behaving in this way, the nurse shows respect for the person's individuality, a point reinforced in our model for nursing.
In a later article, Burnard (1988) compares empathy and sympathy:
To empathise is to set aside our own perception of things and attempt to think the way the other person thinks, or feel the way he feels…a very different quality to sympathy.
Sympathy involves ‘feeling sorry’ for the other person — or perhaps, it involves our imagining how we would feel if we were experiencing what is happening to him.
With empathy, we try to imagine what it is like being the other person and experiencing things as he does.
Empathy of course does have limits.
It is not possible to completely enter someone else's frame of reference because other people live different lives but, Burnard goes on, nurses should try to empathise.
It does, however, require skill and in the 1988 article, Burnard outlines practical exercises to help develop empathy in a variety of nursing settings, while at the same time citing the problems involved in empathy training.
Every nurse needs to develop psychological and social skills as well as manual skills in order to maintain an effective nurse/patient relationship while the patient requires  it; and these skills are also required to relinquish the relationship when appropriate.
Of course it is not only the nurse-patient relationship which  contributes to the patient's care and well-being.
Inter-professional communication is required and Pearson (1985) enlarges on the importance of information exchange between nurses and other members of the health team.
When deficient, there are omissions or repetitions of activities; uncoordinated interruptions to the patient's rest and comfort; failure to meet the patient's psychological needs — in essence poor communication causing a breakdown in the continuity of care.
Discharge .
Providing patients with information on admission to hospital and throughout their stay may be acknowledged as an important part of nursing but frequently, discharge is a very rushed affair.
All too often patients and their families are not given enough information about planning the convalescent period, about continued medications and treatments, expected rate of progress, and return to employment.
But in Using a Model for Nursing (Roper et al, 1983), the third year student nurse contributing to the study in a surgical ward, commented that the model approach helped her to appreciate the need for planned discharge goals; even when admitting the patient, she was alerted to consider what the patient required to know on discharge in order to resume her usual Activities of Living.
Staff-to-staff communicating between hospital and community nursing services is another important aspect when considering a patient's discharge and Parnell (1982) highlighted some of the problems in her study.
For example available information was not being sent; there was reluctance to put certain items in writing; telephone messages left with a third party could be distorted; there was incomplete information; there was a lack of feedback.
She concluded that although her findings showed considerable improvement since previous studies, there were still problems and she made proposals to rectify at least some of them.
It would seem that better communication has been introduced in some areas.
Chisnell (1988) followed 50 post-surgery patients who required the services of district nurses following discharge from hospital, and communication with community staff certainly had improved for this small sample.
Unfamiliar place
Lack of usual contacts .
Patients newly admitted to the hospital environment will naturally be anxious about keeping in touch with family, friends and work associates.
Anxiety may be lessened by information about such things as a mobile shop where stationery and newspapers can be bought; ward arrangements for collection and delivery of mail; for making and receiving telephone calls, and for visiting.
Gradually the patients' new environment seems less strange and threatening as they become aware of the possibilities for communication between hospital and their familiar environment.
Disorientation .
Information is also needed by the patient to permit the continuance of other everyday activities.
It can be communicated by adequate labelling of, for example, toilets and bathrooms.
The letters should be sufficiently large and should be placed so as to cater for patients with poor vision.
This is especially helpful to older patients who may have difficulty in learning and remembering, and who may require to visit the toilet during the night.
As the days pass in this unfamiliar environment, some patients (particularly those with deficient vision and hearing, and those who for one reason or another do not read a daily newspaper) can lose track of the time of day, the day of the week and the day of the month.
The provision of a large calendar and clock in each ward can be useful in preventing this apparent disorientation.
The problem of disorientation has been studied particularly in relation to elderly people and the techniques of reality orientation (RO) seems a promising area for development.
It is really a psychological approach to the confused elderly person which aims to improve and maintain their level of functioning by stimulating them and their environment.
Ratcliffe (1988) describes it as a technique used in rehabilitating people with memory loss, confusion and time-place-person disorientation which adds a humanistic element to care, and discusses in some detail how it affects communicating.
Environmental factors, too, can affect communicating.
Ford et al(1986) carried out a study in a psychiatric setting in the USA arising from their concern that many confused elderly people, particularly those in advanced stages of Alzheimer's disease, did not respond to verbal communication and staff found it difficult to understand their attempts at communicating.
They altered the noise levels, and the lighting levels at mealtimes and were surprised themselves at the dramatic effect on behaviour — less agitation, reduced noise from the patients, shorter feeding times, and greater consumption of food.
Further studies are required, they say, but in this particular study, elements in the physical environment undoubtedly influenced communication and behaviour.
Unfamiliar language
Lack of understanding .
The new patient who probably has the biggest problem with communication is the one who does not speak the national language (Watson, 1986).
With increasing multiracial societies in most countries and the speed of modern-day travel such patients are found in hospitals throughout the world.
This is recognised as an international problem and voluntary organisations such as the League of Red Cross Societies have produced helpful translations in many languages.
At a local level, voluntary help is usually available; there is often a list of people  speaking other languages who are willing to act as interpreters.
Failing this, nurses can help by using empathy, ingenuity and miming.
Even when the same national language is spoken by patient and nurse, both can experience problems in aural perception when their attention has to be directed to listening because of accent or dialect.
The nurse can help to avoid this problem by speaking clearly and slowly, stopping for clarification when this seems necessary.
A problem can also be experienced when there is a difference in the vocabulary used by patient and nurse.
This can operate in both ways — the patient might use words which the nurse does not readily understand and vice versa.
Take the words used for the place for eliminating: bathroom, convenience, lavatory, loo, toilet, water closet (WC).
There are countless other examples but the above should serve to alert nurses so that they can prevent patients' problems in this area.
This is accomplished by becoming expert at observing and interpreting non-verbal cues indicating incomprehension, and by exploring with the patient the cause of the break in the chain of communication and correcting it.
Technical terms .
Further differences in vocabulary can produce problems for patients when words with a medical definition are used in the process of communicating: insomnia, migraine, obstruction.
Nurses should therefore discover from patients what meaning these words have for them, so that they can be sure that they and the patients are talking about the same conditions.
This naturally applies also to specific medical words, and when they are used, the nurse may find it necessary to correct inaccuracies and add explanations.
Embarrassing topics .
Some patients experience difficulty when talking with nurses about activities such as eliminating and expressing sexuality.
They may fear that they are not using the ‘right’ words.
It is therefore helpful if nurses start by saying that people use different words, and asking patients to give the information in their own words.
Yet another type of vocabulary can have difference in meaning for patient and nurse and thereby give rise to difficulties — words describing parts of the body, though having a particular anatomical reference, do not necessarily have that reference for lay people, even intelligent lay people.
Where appropriate, pointing to the area on one's own body is helpful or using visual aids, which can be as simple as drawing a diagram while explaining the location of the part.
Even the use of ordinary vocabulary can result in problems for patients.
An example is given by Lelean (1973).
The surgeon instructed a patient not to bend her back after an operation.
When she was allowed out of bed the nurses (who presumably had not received the instruction) no longer assisted in washing her and the patient said that she would be glad to get home so that her legs and feet could be washed.
Unfamiliar activities
Giving information to patients .
The activities which occur inside hospital and are taken so much for granted by staff can be bewilderingly strange to the patients.
Not surprisingly they feel anxious.
It is now recognised by staff that much of the apprehension and anxiety can be traced back to lack of communication and Wilson-Barnett (1988) discusses the development of different approaches to rectify the situation, drawing distinctions between information-giving, patient teaching or education, and counselling.
The provision of factual information seems to alleviate some of the initial anxiety on immediate arrival at the ward and many hospitals send to those who are being admitted from the waiting list, some type of preparatory material ranging from a leaflet to an illustrated brochure, the latter in particular for children.
But this type of information presupposes that the recipients have the necessary vision and can read, and that they are sufficiently orientated to understand what they are reading.
When this in not so, they are deprived of this initial preparation as are all those who are admitted as ‘emergencies’.
Of course, the written word is enhanced when given in conjunction with verbal information.
The value of giving information about specific nursing interventions, too, has been studied and documented (Hayward, 1975; Wilson-Barnett, 1978; Boore, 1979; Bond, 1982).
As well as being comforting, it can have other effects.
Hayward (1975) illustrated the value of giving preoperative information as a prescription against pain in the postoperative period.
Boore (1979) investigated the effect of preoperative information about treatment and care, and teaching exercises to be performed postoperatively; her study showed reduced stress in patients following surgery and also a reduced incidence of infection.
These studies are examples which illustrate the effects of good staff communication but there is also evidence of the results of communication breakdown.
Maguire (1985) investigated the reasons for poor nurse-to-patient communication and gave examples of some of the consequences in relation to diagnoses; to treatment; to investigations; and to potential complications which became actual problems.
The importance of effective nurse-patient communications cannot be overemphasised.
There is also a considerable amount of evidence to indicate that patients themselves see communication as a crucial part of their care.
Cartwright (1964) and Raphael (1969) did some early work on this issue yet in a recent article Macleod Clark (1988) reminds us that studies in the 1970s and early 1980s indicate that patients were more dissatisfied with communication than any other aspect of their care.
These studies examined nurse-patient communication in a variety of settings such as intensive care units, geriatric wards, surgical wards and radiotherapy units, and their findings were disturbingly consistent.
One of the recurring discussion points was the apparent lack of communication  skills teaching for nursing staff.
Giving information to relatives .
Relatives, too, seem concerned about lack of communication and the ‘unavailability of the nurses’.
Information collected about the relatives of cancer patients showed that only a minority have anything more than superficial contact with the staff caring for the patient, and a number of these relatives would have welcomed an opportunity to share their anxiety, not only about the patient but about their own feelings (Bond, 1982).
Darbyshire (1987) provides an interesting outline of the approach to relatives down through the ages and quotes the Health Service Ombudsman who highlighted current complaints related to ‘failure to give relatives adequate or timely information….’
Teaching and counselling v. information-giving.
Having commented on the perceived need for information-giving experienced by staff, patients and relatives, it is interesting to note some recent work which shows that facilitating certain strategies for coping during stressful procedures is more effective than information per se for reducing signs of distress.
Wilson-Barnett (1988) indicates how information-giving seems to be gravitating towards ‘teaching’ individuals how to cope.
Wilson-Barnett differentiates between teaching (involving a change in behaviour) and information-giving (a process, and having less concern with how it is received…and not necessarily involving interaction or assessment of individual need).
The didactic emphasis, she continues, is now being questioned and shifting towards a more patient-centred involvement.
And as patients have become more involved in identifying and negotiating areas for learning and behavioural change, the field of investigation has come to borrow from the theories and practice of counselling.
Discussing the counselling process, McEvoy (1988) describes counselling as ‘an enabling interaction between two people which seeks to support the weaker person as a responsible human being’.
Burnard (1987b) commends the use of counselling and although writing specifically about psychiatric nursing, the skills can be used selectively by nurses in any setting.
Central to patient-centred counselling, he says, is the idea that individuals are the best arbiters of what is and is not right for them.
They may listen to others, but decide on their own course of action.
People are free to choose their own future, so the patient knows what is best.
Listening is the basis of counselling.
In the process of counselling, he goes on, the nurse does not offer interpretations laced with ‘oughts’ and ‘shoulds’— or the exercise degenerates into advice which may not fit the patient's beliefs and value systems.
The counsellor's task is to attempt to enter and share the personal world of the patient non-judgmentally, and understand the patient's view of the world at that particular time.
Counselling skills can be learned but they do require practice and Burnard warns that counselling techniques should not be overused or they may indeed impede listening and communication.
Essentially counselling is non-directive and without censure.
The objective is that the patient gains the insight to make a personal decision from the options available.
This approach, he maintains, is different from other aspects of nursing when the nurse uses knowledge and expertise to advise and educate.
Counselling is concerned with coping mechanisms which may be related to physical health problems, or may be personal and linked to relationships, or sociocultural issues including spiritual beliefs, or may be linked to economic difficulties.
Faulkner (1985) illustrates how counselling techniques can be used in the context of the nursing process.
Patient-centred approaches such as counselling are being evaluated in a research context and most studies, so far, have been with patients who have chronic illnesses.
Wilson-Barnett (1988) quotes from work with cancer patients, patients who have had a myocardial infarct, and patients who have rheumatoid arthritis; all examples where long-term contact with health care staff is more likely than in instances of acute and more transient illness.
(In realistic terms, there may be less opportunity for the use of counselling techniques during a brief hospital stay.)
She concludes that a mix of information-giving, teaching techniques and counselling may be required for any one patient.
Nowadays nurses are faced with complex situations, not only to take account of psychological and sociocultural factors during illness but also as promoters of health, and in helping patients and families to become involved in their own health care.
Appropriate knowledge and communication skills (information-giving, teaching, counselling) are required for these activities and skill is needed also to decide which communication approach is relevant to the circumstances.
Macleod-Clark (1988) maintains, however, that even in current basic nursing programmes, students are not given adequate preparation to function in this way.
If this is so, it is not surprising that so many complaints continue to be made by patients and relatives about poor communication.
However, legitimate concern about improvement must be tempered by the countless instances when communication certainly is effective.
Change of role
In the familiar world of the adult patient many parts are played and there is communication with many people: spouse, offspring, other family, friend, acquaintance, co-worker, employer and club-member.
There is control over when, how and where they communicate.
Now, on admission to hospital, the AL of communicating has to continue while assuming the sick role or patient role discussed on page 46.
Family relationships .
In hospital, the spouse's communication with the patient, in a setting that includes nightclothes, bed, single or multiple room/ward, is essentially different.
When the visiting spouse is accompanied  by offspring or other family members, further modification of the partners' behaviour may be perceived to be necessary.
At this sensitive period in these people's lives, such modification can be misinterpreted by any one or more members of this group and may have repercussions in family relationships.
Nursing includes ‘caring’ about the family and what they mean to the patient.
Indeed family disruption may have contributed to the illness.
After visitors have departed, nurses should pay attention to a patient's non-verbal behaviour as well as to what is said.
Nurses should not pry but they need to be sensitive to any cues which indicate a patient's desire to discuss anxieties.
Reversal of roles .
The reversal of roles can cause the patient anxiety.
Should the patient be the person who had attended to the business and financial side of family life, then there will have to be a reversal of roles; these items will have to be attended to by a responsible other person, usually the spouse.
And the previous level of frankness in communication between the spouses about these matters can narrow or widen the possibility of stress between them during these communications in a hospital ward.
Visitors .
The reaction of friends to the change of role can be a sensitive matter.
Patients may find it difficult to come to terms with which of their friends, co-workers and employers did, or did not, communicate with them during hospitalisation.
Some of these people may not have found it convenient to visit but may have phoned; some may have ‘visited’ but not gained access to the ward.
It is therefore important that the patients' lines of communication are kept open by relaying these enquiries to them — they are easily jotted on a memo pad and delivered at a convenient moment.
More is said about the importance of visiting on page 279.
Information-giver and confidentiality .
Another potential problem for patients is that they find themselves in the role of information-giver, and it is often information of a very personal nature.
Patients may not see the relevance of giving information about their social history when their problem is a physical one — and it may not be.
When it is relevant, great sensitivity is required in eliciting such information and telling patients how it helps in planning their nursing.
For example, if the person is severely incapacitated and has difficulty in mobilising, it can be important to know whether, when at home, it is necessary to go upstairs to the toilet.
It is therefore important to understand at the outset that anything communicated to members of the professional staff will be treated as confidential.
The knowledge that confidence will be respected is an important feature of effective nurse/patient communication, and is incorporated in professional codes of practice in a number of countries.
The UKCC Code of Professional Conduct (1984) states that registered nurses, midwives and health visitors shall:
respect confidential information obtained in the course of professional practice and refrain from disclosing such information without the consent of the patient/client or a person entitled to act on his/her behalf except where disclosure is required by law or by order of a court, or is necessary in the public interest.
This sounds reasonable but application of the principle may contain inherent conflicts of interest and further guidance was provided in an advisory paper on confidentiality produced by the UKCC in 1987.
Moore (1988) discusses the advisory paper and concludes that the UKCC clearly acknowledge the role of the profession, together with the Statutory Bodies, in defining acceptable ethical standards, but it remains the responsibility of the individual nurse to set standards through practice.
Melia (1988) comments on the UKCC document also and provides thought-provoking examples of circumstances where the guidelines could be applied.
Related to confidentiality is the collection, storage and retrieval of written records, a permanent form of communication.
Information imparted by, and collected about the patient is given in confidence, so the information gatherer has a responsibility to be familiar with the records system in use, know who has access, and be aware of risks associated with the legitimate use of records (Cowan, 1987).
Do all health professionals have access?
Do students have access?
Do research workers have access?
Is the system supervised?
With the advent of computer storage of records, the topic of confidentiality has received considerable coverage and some of the implications of the Data Protection Act, 1984, are discussed by Keighley (1987).
Members of the public in general are concerned about personal information held by computers.
Where health information is stored in computers, it is important that the patient understands the safeguards against unauthorised people gaining access.
Information-receiver and informed consent .
As already mentioned, an increasing number of research reports shows that a frequent complaint made by patients is lack of information.
Sometimes the required information is about what tests are going to be performed and why; the results of tests; the medical diagnosis, particularly if, for example, heart disease or cancer are suspected; how long to expect to be away from work and so on .
Whatever the nurse staffing arrangements, each one needs to know what the patient has been told and what currently appears to be understood.
Adequacy of communication is an essential part of nursing, not only to reduce patients' complaints but to permit nurses to comply with their professional duty to be accountable.
The UKCC Code of Professional Conduct (1984) states:
Each registered nurse, midwife or health visitor is accountable for his or her practice, and in the exercise of professional accountability shall: act always in such a way as to promote and safeguard the well-being and interests of patients/clients.
and a UKCC document published in 1989 ‘Exercising accountability’ provides guidelines for professional practitioners.
Apart from receiving and understanding information, has the patient consented to the various tests and treatments — what has come to be termed ‘informed consent’.
Discussing informed consent, Foden & Beauchamp (1986) remind us that the nurse/patient and doctor/patient relationship used to be founded on trust but now the trend is for mutual partnership, patient involvement and patient autonomy.
The nub of informed consent, they say, is that every human of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine what will be done with his body, and they trace the history of informed consent citing the Nuremberg Code (1949) and the Declaration of Helsinki (1964, amended 1983), which in the aftermath of war atrocities, attempted to ensure the principle of informed consent.
In relation to current practice in nursing, Wells (1986) refers to the European Charter on the Rights of the Patient (1983), which enshrines the rights to receive information about diagnosis, therapy and prognosis, and the right to decide whether treatment will be started or continued.
He then discusses the legal position in the UK when, if the patient needs diagnostic investigations which involve anaesthesia and surgery,written consent must be obtained by the surgeon, but points out that, in fact, the document protects the surgeon and the hospital, not the patient.
Related to informed consent and information exchange is the concept of patient advocacy.
Wells (1986) discusses the nurse's role as a patient advocate — not making decisions for the patient but ensuring that no one usurps the needs, rights and humanity of the patient — and in ‘Ethics and information’ discusses the potential difficulties; he sees a place for the nurse as the patient's advocate in certain circumstances.
Melia (1986) sounds a note of caution.
She poses the question that if nurses are asked to clarify information provided by the doctor about any procedure, does the nurse have a duty to inform the patient about inherent risks?
And how much information does the patient require to make a rational decision?
Melia suggests that as far as strictly medical treatment is concerned, it would be prudent to leave doctor's business to doctors!
The informed consent of the patient is also relevant when considering research which involves patient participation.
In the UK's National Health Service, ethical issues related to the conduct of research are countenanced in that each Health Authority has an Ethical Committee, and nursing research involving patients must be submitted to its scrutiny before a project can proceed.
Informed consent in relation to nursing research is discussed by Macmillan (1987).