

The Progression Towards a New Building
The First Plans for Rebuilding
In 1822, Soane had prepared proposals for rebuilding Downing Street which omitted the Foreign Office and the houses opposite.
Only the north side of the scheme was carried out in 1825–6 as the Privy Council Offices and the Board of Trade, and it was at the Treasury's instigation that Seward in 1833 produced a scheme to house various governmental offices in a block on the south side of the street, following Soane's lines.
Plans to rebuild the Foreign Office appear to have been set in motion with the discovery of the poor state of the building and complaints from Palmerston that it was too small and had no rooms suitable for banquets and receptions.
Decimus Burton (1800–81), who it seems as John Nash's protégé had designed various royal and governmental works, was commissioned in 1836 to prepare plans for rebuilding.
It was presumably as a result of this that Palmerston wrote to the Treasury in May 1836, explaining his views on the new accommodation.
He stated that there should be reception rooms capable of taking nearly fifty guests for dinner parties to celebrate birthdays, and ‘occasionally upon the arrival of Foreign Princes in this country’.
There was no need for an official residence for the Foreign Secretary.
Burton prepared a series of schemes between 1836 and 1839.
The first proposed rebuilding the Foreign Office on land only owned by the Crown at that date.
This was inconvenient and too elongated and was soon superseded by a scheme involving the acquisition of sixteen houses that Sir Samuel Fludyer still owned on the south side of Fludyer Street, and the realigning and widening of Downing Street.
The Office of Works considered this to be too expensive in  land acquisition and Burton then prepared another scheme, which was confined to Crown land, retained Fludyer's house and No. 15, and had a wing extending along the south side of Downing Street.
He submitted this scheme to Spring-Rice, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who thought that its narrowness and extreme length made it most inconvenient, and he instructed Burton to prepare another, incorporating the Colonial Office which occupied Nos 12 and 14 Downing Street at the west end.
This, Burton's fourth scheme, proposed a block housing the Foreign and Colonial Offices immediately to the west of the existing houses in Downing Street, and although it did not involve buying any more land, it necessitated building on the park.
As he showed in a report, dated 30th March, 1839, to the Commissioners of Woods and Forests, the existing offices could be retained until the new block was complete, and it could form the first stage in a complete rebuilding of both sides of Downing Street.
In July 1839, the House of Commons set up a Select Committee to consider the various plans for Downing Street.
Apart from asking Burton about his proposals, it heard about the poor structural condition of the Foreign Office from Seward.
Thomas Chawner, the Architect to the Land Revenue Department, pointed out the need for a fire-proof building, and the dangers of overloading the existing structures with books and printing presses.
The Committee reported within three weeks.
It stated that the private houses, which formed the Foreign and Colonial Offices, were ‘inadequate to the present extent of public business, in parts unsafe, and generally in such a state of dilapidation as to render it inexpedient to expend any large sum in their substantial repair’.
One of the Committee members, Sir Thomas Fremantle, cited a comment by Chawner that Fludyer's house and No. 15 were suitable for private use for another twenty-one years, and moved that Burton's third scheme, retaining these houses, should be adopted.
Fremantle's motion was put to a vote and rejected and it was agreed to recommend that new fire-proof Foreign and Colonial Offices should be built on part of the park to conform with a general plan for rebuilding the area.
In the event, nothing happened.
It has been suggested that Melbourne's Government shelved the scheme through lack of money.
The Condition of the Old Foreign Office
The next thing that happened was six years after the Select Committee.
In March 1845 the Foreign Office wrote to the Treasury to say that the two easternmost houses of the Office had ‘within the last few days exhibited rents of a formidable nature’.
The Office of Works examined the damage and reported that the houses were in an ‘extremely defective and unsound state’ and should be rebuilt as soon as possible, but still nothing was done.
The working conditions in the Office at this time are described by Edward Hertslet, who entered the Foreign Office in 1840.
Writing in 1901, he said:
Some of the office rooms were comfortable enough in their way — far more so, indeed, than those in the new building — still, they were most inconveniently arranged, in proof of which it need only be mentioned that the Secretary of State in going from his own room to the Cabinet Room had to pass through two rooms occupied by other persons.
He tells us that the Foreign Secretary occupied a first-floor room overlooking the park, as did his private secretary and the Précis Writer.
On the floor below was the Permanent Under Secretary and the French Department.
The library reference room was on the Fludyer Street side of the building and although it housed some  to the 5,000 volumes in the manuscript library, some had to be distributed throughout the passages of the building.
Printers were in the attic overlooking Fludyer Street, and bookbinders were housed in the basement.
The Emergence of an Institution
Palmerston instituted a major reform of the Foreign Office towards the end of his first period there, but the scheme was not approved until after Melbourne's Government had resigned in 1841 and Palmerston was replaced by Lord Aberdeen.
The new organization had the Secretary of State at its head assisted by a private secretary and a Précis Writer.
The two Under Secretaries were immediately below the Secretary of State, and the Chief Clerk was next in seniority.
He was in charge of passports, the finances, organization and discipline of the Office, and the building fabric.
He was assisted by two clerks.
Six Senior Clerks were each in charge of the Consular, the Slave Trade and four political departments, which divided up the world between them into convenient geographical areas.
Each of these six departments had two or three clerks or junior clerks to assist them in the work.
Other members of the Office included the Librarian, a Sub-Librarian, two library clerks, a translator and a printer.
After 1847 the printing was carried out by the firm of Harrison, who operated inside the building.
The reorganized Office had a total staff of forty-one as well as House Assistants and Office Keepers.
Palmerston returned to the Foreign Office in July 1846 in Russell's administration and was able to enjoy the effects of the changes he had instigated until December 1851, when pressure from the Court forced him out of the Foreign Office.
Two months later he was able to bring down the Government, and Lord Malmesbury took over as Foreign Secretary in the new Conservative administration.
During one of Malmesbury's two brief periods at the Foreign Office he was dramatically made aware of the state of the building, when part of the ceiling of his room fell on to his desk.
Lord John Russell was Foreign Secretary for a few weeks only in Aberdeen's  Coalition Government, when on 21st February, 1853, he was replaced by George Villiers, fourth Earl of Clarendon (1800–70) who held the post until February 1858, in both Aberdeen's and Palmerston's Governments.
It was during these five years of Clarendon's first period at the Foreign Office that it seems to have changed its status from the personal domain of the Secretary of State to a professionally staffed institution with its own executive functions and, at the same time, positive steps were taken towards providing suitable accommodation for this new organization.
No doubt Clarendon's less domineering nature, compared to that of Palmerston, had much to do with the change of status, particularly when coupled with his appointment of Edmund Hammond (1802–90) in April 1854 to replace the ‘courteous, conservative’ Henry Unwin Addington as Permanent Under Secretary of State.
Hammond, who had been in the Foreign Office since 1824 after a distinguished academic career at Oxford, was considered to be ‘sharp and a glutton at work’, and emerges as a powerful figure who over nearly twenty years as the permanent head of the Office brought nearly every aspect of its work under his personal control.
Another factor which quickened the change in the status of the Foreign Office was the series of reforms instigated by the Treasury in 1848 which by 1852, when the Foreign Office applied for additional staff, sparked off an acrimonious controversy between the two offices.
This had reached its height when Addington retired, and Hammond was immediately plunged into dispute.
It is a clear indication of Hammond's formidable nature that, faced with the reforming zeal of Sir Charles Trevelyan (1807–86), the Assistant Secretary to the Treasury, the de facto head of the Civil Service, and a joint author of the influential Northcote-Trevelyan Report of 1854, he was able to make a special case for the Foreign Office.
The controversy was settled in 1857 when Hammond obtained a new office structure.
Pennethorne's Proposals
On 5th October, 1854, when the dispute between the Treasury and the Foreign Office was at its height, Aberdeen's First Commissioner of Works, Sir William Molesworth, instructed Seward's successor, William Southcote Inman, and his assistant John Phipps, to carry out another survey of the Downing Street offices.
They reported on 19th October, 1854 that subsidence had occurred in the eastern part of the Foreign Office necessitating a new foundation and rebuilt front wall.
Settlement had also occurred elsewhere, and the Foreign and Colonial Offices were so badly weakened by alterations and were so inconvenient that an entirely new building would be the only way to provide suitable accommodation.
Molesworth then examined Burton's proposals, but decided that ‘to appropriate a portion of St. James's Park to building purposes would be very objectionable’, and then instructed James Pennethorne (1801–71), the architect to the Board of Works, to prepare plans.
Burton was not told that he had been superseded, and it was not until February 1856 that he sent in his fee account, which was received by the Treasury ‘with great surprise’.
Molesworth might have been spurred into action by the formation of a private company by 1854, The Whitehall & Westminster Improvement Company, for the purpose of developing the whole neighbourhood.
According to its prospectus, it intended to apply for an Act of Parliament empowering it to acquire all the land south of Downing Street, as far as Parliament Square, between St James's Park and the river.
It aimed to pull down the houses and buildings on the site, except for the Board of Control, and to ‘build a wall in a line with the terrace of the Houses of Parliament, reclaiming about two acres from the River, and on this valuable site to erect Buildings, Streets and Terraces of the first class…
’ Parliament Street would be continued on the line of the Government Offices in Whitehall to ‘form a noble approach to the Houses of Parliament and Westminster Abbey’.
The company's architect was William Billington, CE, who worked from their offices in Great George Street.
Nothing more is known about the proposal, and by 1859 the company were no longer operating from there.
Pennethorne's scheme involved the disappearance of Fludyer Street and the complete reconstruction of Downing Street.
Downing Square became a large open space, with the street reduced to a short approach road from Whitehall.
Opposite the approach road, on the west side of the square, was the centre-piece of his scheme, a Ministerial Reception Suite, which was flanked on the north side by a wing containing the War Office, the Chancellor of the Exchequer's house and office, and the Prime Minister's office.
A residence for the Prime Minister was not apparently required.
On the south side of the Reception Suite, one wing projected eastwards containing the Colonial Office and some unappropriated offices, while the Foreign Office was the sole occupant of another wing which extended westwards from the south side of the Reception Suite, as far as the steps at the side of the existing State Paper Office.
Pennethorne incorporated this building, which had only been completed in 1832, into his scheme by adding another storey and possibly linking it by an arch to the Foreign Office.
The State Paper Office was architecturally the most interesting building to be demolished to make way for the present Foreign Office.
It stood at the north end of Duke Street, flanked by the park on its north and west sides, and was designed by Soane in 1829.
It was his last public building and represented a complete departure in style from his previous work.
It had many features that are associated with Barry's Italianate club-house style and, according to Dorothy Stroud, Soane was indebted to the Villa Farnese at Caprarola for many elements that he used.
Fig. 5 The Downing Street Public Offices, 1855, as proposed by James Pennethorne.
The building was a fire-proof repository for the papers of various government departments, including the Home Office and the Foreign Office, and was not accessible to the public.
It became redundant after the Public Record Office was completed in 1858, to Pennethorne's designs, as a central repository for all government archives.
Pennethorne made a number of designs for rebuilding Downing Street, and sent his final scheme to the Office of Works on 15th January, 1855, who passed it on to the Treasury.
They presumably put in train the arrangements for the necessary legislation, as on 27th April, Molesworth introduced a Bill to the House of Commons to enable the Government to acquire the land for the scheme.
The Bill sought powers of compulsory purchase for a five-year period of all privately owned property on the site.
This in fact was confined to a block of forty-eight buildings between Upper and Lower Crown Streets and Fludyer Street, owned by Sir Samuel Fludyer and the Dean and Chapter of Westminster Abbey.
The Abbey's property consisted largely of lodging houses in Crown Street, interspersed with public houses, stables and workshops.
On 11th May the Bill was given a Second Reading and referred to a Select Committee, which met on 10th July with Molesworth as Chairman.
Pennethorne was called to explain his proposals, and in an appendix to the proceedings, Molesworth said that after considering Inman and Phipps's report, he ‘proposed to commence immediately with the Foreign Office’.
The total cost of the scheme would be £585,000 which included £60,000 for the Foreign Office, required during that year, and £30,000 for its site.
The Bill was given a Third Reading on 20th July and became law on 14th August, 1855, with the short title,The Downing Street Public Offices Extension Act 1855 , but it was not until the following March that the Office of Works circulated the necessary notices to the tenants of property to be acquired.
In the meantime, Pennethorne had been working out the details of his proposals for the Foreign Office.
In May 1855 he was in contact with Hammond and this was followed by frequent consultations with other members of the Office to ascertain their requirements.
He produced his final design in August 1855, which Hammond later said was excellent, within the limitations imposed by the site.
With the problems of site and design settled and only the question of finance outstanding, there seems little reason why the scheme should not proceed as Molesworth had hoped, but as was to happen many times later, the repercussions of major political events were now radically to affect the progress of the scheme.
The Emergence of the Competition
Palmerston Comes to Power
On 29th January, 1855, Aberdeen's Government had been heavily defeated in the House of Commons on a censure motion criticizing its conduct of the Crimean War, but it was not until 6th February that Queen Victoria brought herself to appoint the seventy-one-year-old Palmerston as Aberdeen's successor, although his prestige and popularity had made him the inevitable choice as Prime Minister.
Palmerston's Government was largely a continuation of Aberdeen's administration, the most notable change being that Gladstone resigned as Chancellor of the Exchequer and was replaced by Clarendon's brother-in-law, Sir George Cornewall Lewis.
Clarendon remained as Foreign Secretary, and Molesworth, for the time being, remained as First Commissioner of Works.
With Palmerston in the key position and intimate with the defects of the old Foreign Office, it must have seemed likely that the rebuilding programme would be pursued with vigour.
But in July 1855 he then carried out a change in his administration that was to have a far-reaching effect on the scheme.
Molesworth's chairmanship of the Select Committee on the Downing Street Public Offices Bill must have been one of his last acts as First Commissioner of Works, as on 21st July, 1855, Palmerston promoted him to be Secretary of State for the Colonies, and appointed the President of the Board of Health, Sir Benjamin Hall (1802–67), in his place.
Hall was the son of a Welsh industrialist and Liberal Member of Parliament for St Marylebone.
At the outset he seems to have been on congenial terms with Palmerston, but their relationship went sour during Hall's two-and-a-half years   at the Office of Works: and almost from the date of Hall's appointment, events started to go badly for Pennethorne.
Fig. 6 The Rt.
Hon.
Henry Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston KG MP, Prime Minister and First Lord of the Treasury, 1855–58 and 1859–65.
The Abandonment of Pennethorne
On 31st July, the House of Commons, sitting as a Committee of Supply, was asked to vote the £90,000 required for the new Foreign Office.
James Bell pointed out that this was the first stage of a large plan which would cost £585,000.
Molesworth claimed that the House would not be committing itself to the larger scheme, nevertheless it was not in a mood for what George Bankes called an ‘extensive scheme to enable Cabinet Ministers to entertain foreign visitors and their friends’.
In the end, Palmerston had to modify the proposal so that only £30,000 for a portion of the site was voted, with £10,000 for necessary repairs to the old buildings.
Palmerston promised that a Select Committee would be appointed next session to reconsider the whole problem of the concentration of government departments.
So Pennethorne's scheme, like Burton's sixteen years before, was now shelved.
But for Pennethorne worse was to follow.
Hall instructed Pennethorne to implement arrangements to purchase the land authorized by the Act and to prepare block plans for Government Offices on the larger site between Parliament Street, Downing Street, Great George Street and the park.
Pennethorne submitted four alternative schemes with costs on 31st August, 1855, which were then revised and resubmitted to Hall on 14th September, when one scheme was chosen.
Considerable differences later arose between Hall and Pennethorne as to what was agreed at their meetings about the larger scheme.
According to Hall, ‘the lines were not good’ on the chosen plan, and it needed redrawing.
Pennethorne's version was that Hall had approved the scheme and directed him to draw it out in more detail, which he did, and submitted a set of drawings along with perspectives and an estimate to Hall in February 1856.
He said Hall again approved the designs and only suggested some slight alterations to the elevations, whereas Hall later said that he found them ‘objectionable and would never be accepted’.
But whichever version is correct, Pennethorne was certainly being criticized from an entirely different standpoint.
The third issue of The Saturday Review , on 17th November, 1855, carried a vigorous attack on Pennethorne's architecture.
It said that he was more suited in his role as surveyor of Crown property than as a designer of the Downing Street offices.
The outspoken tone of the article was typical of the style of writing the periodical was developing with authors shielded by anonymity.
Political comment from a high Tory stance and literary reviews were its chief contents, but there were architectural contributions, usually from the pen of its  joint editor, owner and founder, A. J. B. Beresford Hope, who was later to make an important contribution to the development of the scheme.
At the same time as Hall rejected the larger Downing Street scheme, in February 1856, he delivered another blow to Pennethorne's position as official architect.
In December 1855, he had instructed him to design a large extension to the Ordnance Office in Pall Mall to form a new War Department.
Pennethorne produced detailed drawings and an estimate, but Hall ‘took great objections to them’ as he thought that many rooms and passages were badly lit.
On 25th February, Pennethorne received a letter from Hall saying that all that was required was a ‘probationary sketch’, as the project offered a good opportunity for an architectural competition.
The Establishment of the Competition System
On 13th March, 1856, the Office of Works wrote to Pennethorne and ten other architects inviting them to take part in a limited competition for the War Department.
Because of the urgent need for the new accommodation, the designs were required within six weeks, and each competitor who submitted would receive 100 guineas.
The successful competitor would also receive the usual 5 per cent fees on the cost of the work.
Apart from Pennethorne, P. C. Hardwick, Sydney Smirke, Salvin, Mair and C. R. Cockerell expressed interest, and Sir Charles Barry and John Shaw did some preliminary work.
Palmerston received a letter from T. L. Donaldson (1795–1885) asking to be a competitor, which Palmerston passed on to Hall.
Hall then wrote to Palmerston, on 20th March, only one week after asking for the designs, saying that he would not include Donaldson as I think it very doubtful whether the new Department will be proceeded with, as I hope the Downing Street improvement will be carried out', and two days later The Saturday Review in an article on the competition also suggested that the War Department should be moved to the Downing Street area.
So immediately after launching the competition, Hall was having second thoughts about it, and on 28th March, only a fortnight after its inception, wrote an extraordinary letter to the Treasury, killing it off completely.
He asked for approval for having inaugurated the competition, but then said that if time would allow it, the War Office should be incorporated into the Downing Street scheme, particularly as the Pall Mall site was too small.
The explanation which Hall later gave for this was that although the War Department competition was dead, he was seeking official approval for the principle that, for all important government buildings in London, ‘a competition, limited or otherwise, should take place, instead of the work being committed, as a matter of course to an officer of the establishment’.
A few days later, on 4th April, Hall announced in the House of Commons  that the War Department would move to Downing Street, and that an international competition would be held for the designs for concentrating government departments in the Downing Street area.
The Saturday Review congratulated Hall for adopting its suggestion that the War Department should be moved.
But Pennethorne, as well as losing the Downing Street scheme, could now no longer expect to be automatically appointed the architect for any important government buildings.
Since 1840 he had been the Government Architect, firstly in the combined Office of Woods, Forests and Land Revenue and the Office of Works and Buildings and, when that organization split in 1851, he remained as architect to both the Office of Works and the Office of Woods.
He had been responsible for a number of important buildings which, as well as the Public Record Office, included part of the Ordnance Office (1850–1), the Museum of Economic Geology in Piccadilly (1847–8) and the western portion of Somerset House (1851–6).
He had also carried out several town planning improvements in London, but early in 1856 with the appointment by Hall of Henry Arthur Hunt (1810–89) to the new post of Surveyor of the Works and Public Buildings, he found that his duties had been drastically curtailed.
The Role of Henry Arthur Hunt
Hunt was to emerge as a key figure in the campaign for a new Foreign Office.
After completing his articles, he had entered the office of John Wallen, who took him into partnership in 1827.
He started his own practice in the following year, and was employed as a surveyor by the builders Grissell and Peto on Hungerford Market.
This was being built between 1831 and 1833, and it was probably about then that he first met Gilbert Scott.
In 1831, Scott was introduced to a ‘Mr Wallen, a well-known surveyor’ who advised him to complete his architectural training by working for a builder.
Scott then joined Grissell and Peto and also worked on Hungerford Market.
In 1836, Hunt had produced, single-handed, a detailed estimate of the cost of the Houses of Parliament for Sir Charles Barry, and on Barry's recommendation in April 1841 was appointed Surveyor to the Dean and Chapter of Westminster Abbey.
Here he must have had further contact with Scott, who became Surveyor to the Fabric of the Abbey in 1846, particularly in connection with the Broad Sanctuary houses, which Scott built on the Abbey's land between 1852 and 1854.
Meanwhile, Hunt had carried out further costing work for Barry on the Houses of Parliament, and when Hall arrived at the Office of Works with the dispute over expenditure between Barry and the Office at its height, he shrewdly persuaded Hunt to change sides in an attempt to gain the upper hand.
Inman was retired prematurely and his post abolished, and Hunt was given an annual  salary of £1,000 for a minimum of one day a week at the Office, although according to the Secretary, he was usually there ‘nearly half a week’.
He retained his private practice as a quantity surveyor from his office at No. 4, Parliament Street.
Pennethorne regarded Hunt's appointment as another move to deprive him of work which was rightfully his.
On 26th May, Hunt came to see him and said that he was taking over the purchase negotiations for the Downing Street scheme, and particularly upset Pennethorne by producing one of Pennethorne's drawings to assist him in the work.
Pennethorne immediately complained to Hall, asking why he had lost the work; Austin, the Secretary, wrote back on 28th May, saying that the Office had been reorganized with Pennethorne retaining the architectural work, subject to certain buildings being open to competition, and Hunt, ‘the most fit and experienced person that could be found’, taking over the surveying work.
Pennethorne protested that since 1845, he had devoted himself entirely to the Office's work and now found that he had lost all his work.
Hunt had taken over his surveying duties, major buildings were subject to competition, and Phipps, as before, dealt with minor works.
The dispute came to a head in May 1856, when Pennethorne refused to help Hunt to prepare a report on the state of Pennethorne's various jobs.
On 26th June, Pennethorne sent a long memorial to the Treasury explaining his position and his grievances, and Hall gave his version to the Treasury on 21st July.
The affair was promptly settled two days later with a letter from James Wilson, the Financial Secretary to the Treasury.
He said that Pennethorne could not claim ‘as of right, employment as the architect of the New Public Offices’ but he should not be deprived of his surveying work.
This seems to have satisfied Pennethorne, and he agreed to help Hunt as requested.
The Select committee on Public Offices
As promised by Palmerston during the previous session, a Select Committee was set up by the House of Commons on 28th April, 1856 to consider ‘the best means of providing Accommodation for the various Public Departments in the Neighbourhood of Downing Street’.
Fifteen MPs were appointed to the Committee, and Hall was elected chairman at its first meeting on 30th May.
At the second meeting on 9th June, Hunt was called as a witness; he presented a paper which demonstrated that if all the Government Offices ‘scattered about in various parts of the metropolis’, with the exception of the Admiralty and the Inland Revenue at Somerset House, were housed in four storeys, although architecturally ‘hardly desirable’, allowing for courts and roads, they could fit into the area between Richmond Terrace, the river, Parliament Square and the park, and still leave space for expansion.
This area could be purchased for  £1,503,425.
If the Inland Revenue and the Admiralty were to be included, the site would have to be greatly increased, and other localities should be considered.
At the next meeting a week later, Hunt said that the building, which he supposed would be ‘an elaborate Italianate building’, would cost approximately £1,000,000.
But as there would be a saving of £1,000,000 for the values of rents paid for existing offices, the total cost of the scheme would be £1,500,000.
The Committee's main witness was Trevelyan who, having reformed the organization of the Civil Service, was now anxious to improve its accommodation.
He was highly critical of the use of private houses for Government Offices.
Where adjoining houses were used, the halls and staircases were a waste of space, and in separate houses the accommodation was either too large or too small.
As most houses consist of large drawing rooms and smaller bedrooms and studies, the chief of the office often sits alone in the best room, while the clerks are put into the smaller rooms.
He also complained that with separate houses for each office, each house had to have separate office-keepers, housekeepers and messengers.
He went on to criticize Soane's Privy Council Offices and Board of Trade, which had been remodelled by Barry in 1844.
He said that this was one of the few buildings to have been built as Government Offices, but was still built ‘in accordance with the principle of a private residence’.
Four separate domestic establishments for the housekeepers and office-keepers were housed in the basements and upper storeys.
He strongly advocated the greater efficiency derived from the concentration of Government Offices in the Whitehall area, close to the Treasury.
The Inland Revenue and the Admiralty at Somerset House should also be included, but the War Department was in the most urgent need of new accommodation.
He proposed that a departmental committee should be set up to advise the Commissioner of Works and, looking at the War Department first, should draw up a specification of their requirements, and a competition should be organized ‘open to the architects of every country, in order that no means may be neglected of obtaining the best designs’.
They should have placed at their disposal Inigo Jones's original designs for Whitehall Palace, ‘which are of acknowledged beauty’.
The ‘new Palace of Whitehall’
Trevelyan was clearly excited by the prospect of a new Palace of Whitehall, as not only was a large part of his evidence to the Committee devoted to an eloquent description of a monumental scheme he envisaged, but he also produced another scheme for the area in 1866.
The scheme he described to the Committee was visionary, in the sense that many of his suggestions have actually been carried out, although lacking in the  architectural unity that he intended.
The work, which should be carried out in stages, included an opening from St James's Park to Charing Cross, a railway from Westminster to the City of London, and three large blocks of offices.
One near the site of Young's War Office building, one on the site of the Admiralty extension and the largest on the site of the blocks of building at present occupied by the Treasury and the Foreign Office.
The centre-piece of his plan was the Banqueting House, which would be opened up to the park by demolishing the Horse Guards.
The general effect of the plan would be, that towards the park we should have a beautiful range of public buildings.
Towards the river we should have a grand place; on one side a handsome lofty range of public offices, and on the other side the beautiful river with stone quays, and Lambeth, which would no doubt gradually partake of the improvement.
At one end we should have the ancient Palace of Westminster bringing down our historical associations from the times of the early Saxon kings, and at the other we should have the Palace of Whitehall carrying them on to the revolution…
I consider that we have a very important national duty to perform in this respect; this city is something more than the mother of arts and eloquence; she is the mother of nations; we are peopling two continents, the Western and the Southern Continent, and we are organising, christianising and civilising large portions of two ancient continents, Africa and Asia; and it is not right that when the inhabitants of those countries come to the metropolis, they should see nothing worthy of its ancient renown.
Now, I conceive that a plan of the kind which I have sketched…would answer the purpose, and more especially as it would give the honour due to the focus of all our liberties, of that regulated freedom which we hope will overspread the world.
The Committee had four more meetings and reported to the House of Commons on 18th July, 1856.
It recommended that the concentration of Government Offices should take place on the site that Hunt had proposed and that an opportunity will be provided, ‘without incurring any additional expense, to make a great opening from Whitehall to Westminster Abbey by erecting the new buildings on each side of such thoroughfare’.
It urged Parliament to sanction the acquisition of the necessary property and to submit the design of the offices to public competition.
The parliamentary session closed on 29th July, without any further progress being made, but on 4th August, Hall and Hunt met Cornewall Lewis and Trevelyan to obtain the Government's approval for a competition, and to seek the first steps towards acquiring the land.
Lewis said that the Government thought that it was only necessary, at present, to provide suitable accommodation for the War Office and the Foreign Office, but preliminary  steps could be taken towards acquiring the land, and Hall could obtain designs for laying out the whole area.
Up to £5,000 could be spent on premiums for the competition.
The Case for a New War Department
The urgency which at this stage was given to the need for a new War Department building was a direct aftermath of the Crimean War.
Hunt told Hall's Committee that it occupied seventeen different buildings of which seven were requisitioned during the war.
This was a ‘standing cause of inefficiency and expense’, according to Trevelyan, and ‘full of evil and trouble’.
At the outbreak of the war in March 1854, the control and administration of the Army was divided between a number of unco-ordinated bodies, including the Commander-in-Chief, the Home Secretary, the Board of Ordnance, the Board of General Officers, and Treasury Commissariat.
There were also in the Government, the Secretary at War and the Secretary of State for War.
During the war, various reforms attempted to consolidate these diverse institutions, including the appointment in February 1855 of Lord Panmure to a position combining both governmental posts.
But even after the war, the Department consisted of a number of separate bodies all owing allegiance to the Secretary of State but independent of each other.
The main concentration of the Department's buildings was on the south side of Pall Mall, where the Board of Ordnance was originally established in 1806.
The Commander-in-Chief, who jointly with the Secretary of State controlled the affairs of the Army, remained at Horse Guards and was not included in Hunt's proposals.
Framing the Competition Conditions
On 19th August, 1856, Hall sent identical letters to Clarendon and Panmure, saying that he had directed Hunt to prepare the instructions for the competition, and asked the Secretaries of State to appoint a representative from each of their departments to give Hunt the ‘extent and kind of accommodation required’.
Sir Benjamin Hawes, his Permanent Under Secretary, was appointed by Panmure, and Hammond was appointed by Clarendon.
Hammond, as well as carefully going through the various room assignments with Hunt, asked for a two-storey fire-proof building with attic and basement, and limited accommodation for servants and messengers.
The office was to be separated by a party wall from other government departments.
The Under Secretaries with their political departments and the Consular Department should be on the principal floor with the Secretary of State.
The Passport Office, the Slave Trade and Chief Clerks' departments and the library should be  on the ground floor.
On the second floor, presumably an attic floor, he wanted a second library, with possibly the Treaty Department and the translators.
This layout was a physical expression of the administrative structure that Hammond was organizing for the office particularly, as Mary Anderson points out, the special status awarded to the Under Secretaries and their political departments, by placing them on the same level as the Secretary of State.
The accommodation schedule for the War Department was completed on 13th September and that for the Foreign Office on 20th September.
In the meantime, Hall wrote to Hunt on 21st August to say that the competition should be in three parts, with separate premiums for each.
These should be for the site layout, the Foreign Office and the War Department.
Four days later, Hall met a group of ‘eminent architects’ to discuss the competition.
He had invited thirty-three to his office but only nineteen attended.
Those present included the architects involved in the abortive War Department competition, as well as William Burn, Gilbert Scott, Matthew Digby Wyatt, and George Godwin the editor of The Builder , who was able to give that journal a first-hand account of the proceedings.
Hall was accompanied by Hunt, and Pennethorne was also present.
Hall reported to Palmerston on the same day that he had met the architects ‘in conclave’ to discuss the competition conditions, and was happy to say that he had arranged them very satisfactorily.
But according to a report in The Builder , some architects protested against the competition, while P. L. Hardwick wanted to limit it to British architects.
Hall told the meeting that these matters had been settled by Parliament and could not be altered.
The architects asked Hall about judges, and his reply was that he intended to hold a public exhibition of the designs before deciding whom to appoint.
Their only effective alteration was to alter the scale of the drawings, from 1 inch to 10 feet (1:12O) to 1 inch to 16 feet (1:192).
The Builder commented that the submission date of 1st February, 1857 gave too short a time and that it was a mistake to divide the competition into three parts.
The site layout should be obtained first, followed by the two building designs.
It stated that, ‘The course adopted, prompted by a desire for expedition, can scarcely be considered the best calculated to obtain a grand whole’.
A week later,The Saturday Review in its now usual trenchant style also condemned the division into parts, and criticized Hall's reluctance to appoint judges.
The day after the meeting, a draft announcement was written, and it was finally published in various journals and newspapers on 20th September.
It said that the Commissioners of Works were inviting ‘architects of all countries’ to submit designs for the concentration of Government Offices on the site between Whitehall and the Houses of Parliament, and for two buildings, one for the Foreign Office and the other for the War Department, which  the ‘Government have determined to erect forthwith, as parts of a general scheme’.
On receipt of letters from architects after 30th September, the Secretary of the Office of Works, Alfred Austin, will forward them ground plans, a statement of premiums and other particulars.
The Competition Conditions
Two ground plans were to be sent out by Austin.
‘Plan no. 1’, at a scale of 1 inch to 44 feet (1:528), showed the site designated for the offices as a block between Downing Street and Charles Street, and Duke Street and King Street, within a larger area shown for the block plan.
‘Plan no. 2’, at 25 inches to the mile (1:2,500), showed the surrounding part of London.
Seventeen premiums were to be awarded.
The site layout had a first premium of £500, a second of £200 and a third of £100.
The two office designs were each to have a first premium of £800, a second of £500, a third of £300, a fourth of £200 and three further premiums of £100 each.
Lewis at his meeting with Hall on 4th August agreed that up to £5,000 could be spent on premiums, and Hall in his letter to Hunt on 21st August at first suggested fifteen premiums, five for each design, with the offices treated equally.
The longest part of the conditions was the schedule of requirements for the three parts of the competition: under ‘Design, No. 1.,
General or Block Plan’ was a list of twenty government departments and their floor areas; under ‘Design, No. 2.’was a list of rooms required by the Foreign Office; and under ‘Design, No. 3.’was a list of rooms for the War Department.
The Foreign Office was to be on the western part of the site designated for the offices, and the War Department on the eastern part.
The apparent inflexibility of the office schedules could have given the competitors an unnecessarily difficult task.
Hammond had supplied Hunt with the superficial areas of the rooms he required, but he inexplicably changed these to dimensions, although a note did say that ‘dimensions of the several rooms may be varied, provided the superficial area of each is not materially altered’.
Further inflexibility is apparent in the lack of spare accommodation.
Only three spare rooms were to be provided on the second floor of the Foreign Office, and none were to be provided in the War Department.
As both organizations were undergoing far-reaching reforms, a tightly specified brief was not required and, in the event, it seems to have been changes in the Foreign Office structure which led to the abandonment of that part of the competition.
A further deviation from Palmerston's and Hammond's requirements was in the provision of an official residence for the Secretary of State.
Hammond felt that the differing sizes of the families of Foreign Secretaries, and problems about ownership of plate and linen, made it inadvisable to include a residence, but like Palmerston he wanted rooms for official functions.
The schedule, by  asking for the residence to have ‘the requirements of a Nobleman's Town House’ with twelve to fourteen bedrooms, a dining room to seat fifty, and a reception suite to accommodate 1,500 guests, was not only ensuring accommodation for official functions, but also attempting to perpetuate the traditional view of the Secretary of State as the embodiment of the Foreign Office; a view which Hammond was systematically demolishing.
Apparently in deference to The Builder's comments, the submission date was extended and designs had to be inscribed with a motto and delivered to Westminster Hall on or before 20th March, 1857.
The Government Offices Competition
Official Reaction
Following an enforced climb-down by Palmerston over a scheme by Hall for military bands in the Royal Parks on Sundays, the cordiality between the two men seems to have evaporated, and on 13th October, 1856, Palmerston sent Hall a blunt admonition over the Government Offices.
It stated that he had seen an advertisement in the papers asking for designs for the redevelopment of the whole area between Downing Street and Great George Street, yet Hall knew the Cabinet had decided against this large scheme and that only the purchase of the Fludyer Street area would be completed.
If then you have invited the artists of Europe to send in plans for a Plan which we have no intention of executing, two questions will arise — the first is who will pay the Premiums which you propose to offer for these Plans, seeing that we could hardly propose to Parliament to vote Premiums for Plans that are not to be executed, and secondly whether the Artists of Europe will not think that they have been trifled with in being asked to send in Plans for an undertaking which the Govt had on consideration determined not to attempt.
With regard to the War Department, I quite agree with Panmure, that the best course will be to lodge that Department in an unpretending but suitable manner in Pall Mall, and to carry that arrangement into effect at the same time that a Foreign and Colonial Office are building in Downing and Fludyer Street.
Yours sincerely Palmerston
So within a fortnight of launching the competition, it appeared that two-thirds of it were not required, and the premiums had been offered without authority.
Hall no doubt attempted to justify his action, by referring to the meeting that he had with Lewis on 4th August, and although Palmerston said that he had checked with Lewis, there must have been some misunderstanding between the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
But Palmerston's surprise at the announcement seems genuine, and Hall, who was not a member of the Cabinet, probably failed to keep it informed about his proposals.
Nor had it been mentioned in Parliament since the previous April, when Hall proposed setting up the Select Committee and holding an international competition.
He announced that if ‘the House would sanction such a plan’, he would give notice in the Autumn for the preparation of an Act of Parliament to acquire the necessary property.
No such sanction was obtained but, after the end of the Parliamentary Session, Palmerston on 7th August instructed Hall to prepare the Bill for land acquisition.
Pennethorne's scheme had demonstrated the inadequacy of the land authorized under the Downing Street Public Offices Extension Act of 1855, and consequently Hall now sought powers to purchase compulsorily all the remaining land north of Charles Street between Parliament Street and the park, including a block between King Street and Parliament Street indicated on ‘Plan no. 1’ as ‘This Block of Buildings to be removed’.
On 14th October, after an inexplicable delay, Hall instructed the Office of Works solicitor, John Gardiner, to prepare a Bill.
This was completed by 10th November, and Hall sent it to Palmerston on the following day.
Trevelyan, on behalf of the Lords of the Treasury, acknowledged Hall's draft Bill on 5th December, 1856, but said that the Government would not be committed to asking Parliament for the necessary funds during the ensuring year, and:.
that it appears to my Lords that this space of ground, including property in Downing-Street which the Board of Works has the power to appropriate to the purposes of public offices, will be sufficient for any new buildings which it is at present desirable to commence in that locality.
Three days before this was written, Hall had another meeting with Lewis.
At this Pennethorne was instructed to take steps to purchase the remainder of the property authorized under the 1855 Act as soon as possible.
But it also seemed that the Treasury had wanted to forget about the competition, as three days later Hall sent them a long and detailed reminder about its progress.
This crossed with Trevelyan's letter, so he wrote again on 12th December, pointing out that the £30,000 voted by Parliament was only for a portion of the site authorized and that an additional £80,000 would be required to purchase the whole area.
In reply to Trevelyan's comments about this land being sufficient  for the new building, Hall made the astonishing remark that this could only be determined after the plans were sent in by the competing architects.
He said this knowing that the architects were designing for a larger site quite unaware that only a portion had  been authorized.
Professional Reaction
If the Treasury were oblivious to the competition, it aroused considerable interest among the architects of Britain and Europe.
Immediately after The Builder published its report about Hall's conclave on 30th August, 1856, architects began to write to the Office of Works asking for details.
Twenty-seven were told that they were too early and to re-apply after the advertisement appeared.
By 5th November, 1856, 1,050 applications had been received; g by 5th December, 1,628 sets of conditions had been despatched; and two months later, four months after the start of the competition, Hall told the House of Commons that 1,791 had been despatched, of which at least 270 had gone to foreign competitors.
Count Walewski, the French Foreign Minister, read the advertisement in the Moniteur and told Lord Cowley, the British Ambassador, that not only were the premiums too low, but that the time should be extended for French competitors.
Hall replied to Cowley on 4th November that the premiums could not be altered, but designs from architects not residing in Britain could be submitted up to 4th April, 1857.
The French architect, Alphonse Crepinet, according to The Builder , received the programme on 25th November, 1856, spent six weeks on various studies, passed a fortnight in London, and ‘had but six weeks left to finish his design in the midst of other engagements’.
Time was even shorter for the British architects.
Hall's extension to 20th March was considered by The Saturday Review to be such a ‘pitiful and illusory concession’ as to make it hardly worthwhile, while the Architectural Association, on 5th November, 1856, put in a strong plea to Hall for a further extension of time.
It felt that the date for the block plan could be retained, but the time for the two office designs should be extended to spring 1858.
Hunt, who drafted the reply, said that the dates could not be altered; they had had 1,050 applications and only one request for an extension.
Scott said that, having just completed writing his Remarks on Secular and Domestic Architecture, Present and Future , the ‘great competition, then, found me in rather a prepared state of mind’.
It was probably as a result of Hall's ‘conclave’ that, ‘long before the programme came out’, he retired from active engagements to design suitable elements for a public building.
I designed windows suited to all positions, and of all varieties of size form and grouping doorways cornices parapets and imaginary combinations of all these, carefully studying to make them all thoroughly by practical, and  suited to the class of building.
I did not aim at making my style ‘Italian Gothic’ my ideas ran much more upon the French to which for some years I had devoted my chief study.
I did, however, aim at gathering a few hints from Italy, such as the pillar-mullion, the use of differently coloured materials, and of inlaying.
I also aimed at another thing which people consider Italian I mean a certain squareness and horizontality of outline.
This I consider  pre eminently suited to the street front of a public building.
I accompanied it however with gables, and high pitched roofs with dormers.
He then tried out these elements on an abortive design for Halifax Town Hall, before the competition officially had started.
In spite of the high figures quoted by Hall, only 218 entries were received at Westminster Hall, as requested, by the appointed dates.
But even this low figure, which was officially quoted as being the number of entrants, did not properly represent the situation.
Some architects, such as Banks and Barry, had various parts of their work hung separately, which were accordingly separately numbered by the Office of Works, while others, such as Scott, had alternative designs under the same number.
There were, it seems, only fifty-three competitors who entered all three parts of the competition, and only twenty-one of all the submissions came from foreign architects.
The block plan needing the least work was the most popular design, with at least 152 submissions.
The Foreign Office attracted about eighty-four entries, and the War Department about eighty.
The closing dates were strictly adhered to by the Office of Works.
Several schemes from British architects, which arrived after Friday, 20th March, 1857, were rejected, including one from H. E. Kendall, who only managed to get his work to the hall on the following Monday.
While at least three schemes from foreign architects that arrived after 4th April were similarly rejected.
The reasons for the ultimately poor response from architects probably stem from the conditions.
It seems that on receipt of the documents, potential competitors were able to consider the implications and appreciate the pit-falls.
Some may have been discouraged by the attitude of the Office of Works to questions.
Scott's experience was typical: when he wrote in on 1st December querying various aspects of the schedules, he was brusquely told a week later that no variations were permitted, and the designs must be prepared in accordance with the printed instructions.
The Foreign Office during the competition period was certainly aware that it was taking place but apparently quite unaware of its implications.’
On 7th October, soon after it was launched, Clarendon suggested temporary accommodation for the Office, to which Hall enigmatically replied that nothing could be decided until the designs were sent in.
By early 1857 the protracted dispute with the Treasury was reaching a settlement, and on 16th March it was finally agreed that the five political departments should be increased to six, and  a new class of assistant clerks should be appointed.
Thus unbeknown to the competitors, the last valid part of the competition was removed four days before the submission date.
The Exhibition
The exhibition of competition designs in Westminster Hall was arranged by the Office of Works.
The whole hall was used and, in spite of the comparatively poor response, it seems that there were difficulties in fitting in all the work.
Screens were placed along the length of the hall dividing it into four aisles, leaving spaces at either end and a way through to the Law Courts, which at that time were on the west side of the hall.
The inevitable outcome of not stipulating a standard size was the jumble of different sized drawings shown on a sketch in The Illustrated London News of 9th May, 1857.
The Builder complained that it was difficult to identify the separate sets of drawings and there were also complaints about the lack of light, while some drawings, like Scott's principal view, were placed so high that they could not be seen properly.
The numbers conferred by the Office of Works for identification did not run consecutively, and one competitor complained that his work was hung in two separate parts of the hall.
The exhibition opened for a private view for the members of both Houses of Parliament on Friday, 1st May and Saturday, 2nd May, 1857, and the public were admitted on the following Monday.
From the outset, commentators seem to have been astonished at the great interest the competition evoked.
On 9th May,The Builder said that:
we may safely say that nothing so remarkable as the scene of Westminster-Hall during the first three days of this week, had ever been known of by architects.
No Monday last, when the designs were first displayed to the public, it is believed that 10,000 persons visited the exhibition; on Tuesday, when the crowd was somewhat less, 7,000 were present; and on Wednesday the numbers again reached to 10,000.
The body of London architects seemed each day transported en masse to Westminster.
It is a source of much satisfaction to us that this amount of interest in the exhibition is being taken by all classes.
The Illustrated London News on the same day expressed the popular euphoria that the competition and its organizers attracted when it wrote:
Once for all we offer Viscount Palmerston and Sir Benjamin Hall our sincere and hearty acknowledgements for the comprehensive manner in which this large question has been dealt with.
We are happy to find that there is to be no repetition of the Buckingham House measures — beginning a vast edifice without money and without a definite plan, the upshot of which could be  nothing but bungling.
Great Britain is the richest empire on the globe: she has one imperial metropolis, and one small quarter of the general capital devoted to her public offices; if, therefore, there are any ten acres on the globe that ought to be covered with externally imposing and conveniently constructed public edifices, they are those adjoining Whitehall.
On the other hand,The Saturday Review's wry comment was that ‘the Public Office market is open, and we must be up and bargaining’.
The exhibition was open for five weeks until 5th June, when it had to make way for models of the Wellington monument competition.
The public, however, had only a total of fifteen days to view the exhibition, between the hours of 10.00 a.m. and 5.00 p.m., as Thursdays and Fridays were reserved for the judges.
No official guide was produced, but H. G. Clarke published A Critical and Descriptive Catalogue of the Competition Designs for the Public Offices now on view in Westminster Hall .
He sent a copy to Hall, with a request to sell it for sixpence at the exhibition.
Hall agreed to this, with the proviso that Clarke should not have the exclusive right of sale at the exhibition.
The Appointment of the Judges
On 16th February, 1857, in reply to a question in the House of Commons from Beresford Hope's brother-in-law, Lord Robert Cecil, Hall had re-affirmed his decision not to appoint the judges until after the plans were sent in.
He intended ‘to nominate some gentlemen who were not connected with engineering or architecture and to associate with them others having a thorough knowledge of those professions’.
Five days later,The Saturday Review , in an article probably from Hope, condemned Hall's reply, and made a clear political comment.
On the one hand, it said there were problems of finding professional men free from ‘the bias of well-known preference of style, the bias of co-operation in architectural societies, the bias of well-known friendship, and that of equally conspicuous antagonism’.
While on the other hand, it attacked the idea that ‘the irregular, half-informed, capricious voice of popular favouritism’ should have any say in the outcome of the competition.
It is obvious that it thought the enlightened amateur, like Hope himself, was the ideal judge.
Hall's positive views about the timing of the judges' appointments probably originated as early as 1835, when the plans for the new Houses of Parliament were being considered.
It was alleged then that although the names of the judges were not announced until after the designs were submitted, some architects knew who they were to be and had pointed their designs towards them.
Hall, at that time, also urged that an exhibition of the plans should be held to enable the public's reaction to be obtained before a Commons Committee considered them.
In the end, Hall's attempt to involve the public was strangely muted.
By the  second day of the exhibition, and before it was opened to the general public, he had appointed the judges.
The list of names was approved by the Prince Consort before Hall had sent it to Palmerston.
As anticipated, enlightened amateurs predominated among the judges, with the addition of some professionals.
Hall called it a ‘mixed commission’ with members chosen as the representatives of various interested bodies.
The Duke of Buccleuch represented the House of Lords, William Stirling the House of Commons with Viscount Eversley, a former Speaker of the House of Commons.
Earl Stanhope represented the Society of Antiquaries; David Roberts, the Royal Academy; I. K. Brunel, the Institution of Civil Engineers; and William Burn, the Institute of Architects.
The Saturday Review in its now usual vein commented that although they were ‘all men of various claims to distinction’, they hardly appeared competent to examine and assess the baffling array of entries with which they were to be confronted.
In the event, the Duke of Buccleuch played only a minor role in the outcome of the competition.
The Saturday Review remarked that he was ‘in no way prominent for artistic taste or knowledge’, and his only possible interest could have been that his London home, Montagu House, was on the opposite side of Whitehall from the site.
William Stirling, the Conservative MP for Perthshire, possibly of all the judges, conformed most closely to The Saturday Review's ideal.
Like Hope, he was immensely wealthy, and was able to combine passive politics with active art patronage and writing.
At the time of the competition, he was considered to be the foremost authority on Spanish paintings.
He later inherited the Maxwell baronetcy to become Sir William Stirling Maxwell, ‘the most eminent man in Scotland’.
Viscount Eversley, who as Charles Shaw-Lefevre had just retired as Speaker, like the Duke of Buccleuch, appears to have had few qualifications to enable him to assess the competition and in the end, like the Duke, was not involved in the final outcome.
Philip Henry Stanhope, fifth Earl Stanhope on the other hand, was clearly an enlightened amateur with an established reputation as a historian.
He was the author of several political histories, President of the Society of Antiquaries, the founder of a prize for a historical essay at Oxford, and shortly before the competition he had persuaded the Government to take the first steps towards setting up the National Portrait Gallery.
David Roberts's reputation as an architectural painter seems to have been his only qualification to be a member of the panel.
He was well known as a painter of Middle Eastern subjects and had travelled extensively.
He had met Scott in Venice in 1851.
The most able of the judges was unquestionably Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
It is tempting to speculate that were it not for the onset of the protracted illness in February 1858 Which led to his death in September 1859, his influence  might have produced a very different outcome to the competition.
He had designed many buildings himself and had employed architects in subordinate capacity, such as Matthew Digby Wyatt at Paddington Station.
He is said to have been the joint author, with Donaldson, of the Commissioner's design for the Crystal Palace in 1850.
Why Brunel should have agreed to spare the time to become involved with the competition is not clear, except that his brother-in-law and close friend was Sir Benjamin Hawes, who had framed the War Department's accommodation schedule.
Another interest that he had in the scheme was that his clerk occupied No. 20 South Parade, which was within the area covered by the 1855 Act, and Brunel's office and home were at No. 18 Duke Street, adjacent to the site.
The only architect appointed to be a judge was William Burn (1789–1870).
Although The Saturday Review said he was ‘not one of the magnates of his profession’, he had considerable ability and experience.
He was born in Edinburgh, and worked in London for three years from 1808 in Robert Smirke's office, where he knew C. R. Cockerell and Henry Roberts.
In 1811 or 1812 he returned to Edinburgh to set up practice, and by the 1820s had become the leading country house architect in Scotland.
He carried out some work for the Duke of Buccleuch at Dalkeith Palace in 1828 and, from then onwards, he obtained a considerable amount of work from the Duke.
By 1838 it was said of him that he ‘ranks so deservedly high in his profession’, and he gradually began to obtain an increasing number of English commissions, so that by 1844 he moved back to London leaving his partner David Bryce in charge of his Edinburgh office.
Brunel had also commissioned him to prepare an abortive scheme for him for a house at Watcombe in 1851.
Burn designed in a wide range of styles, from the chaste Grecian at Camperdown House, Dundee in 1821, to the Scottish Baronial style he used at Fonthill in 1856.
But it was as a planner of convenient houses that he particularly excelled.
It is surprising that he attended Hall's conclave as he had a well-known dislike of competitions, but it is less surprising that he was selected to be a judge in view of his connections with two of the other judges and the probability that he would not wish to enter the competition himself.
The judges' first meeting was not held until nearly a fortnight after their appointment, and even then the only business was the election of a chairman.
Lord Eversley proposed that the Duke should be chairman, and this was agreed.
They then arranged the next meeting for a week later, Thursday, 21st May, 1857, and adjourned.
George Buckler, Pennethorne's assistant at the Office of Works, acted as the secretary to the panel and kept a minute book.
Perhaps the general inertia pervading the early proceedings of the panel stemmed from a knowledge among the four parliamentary judges of how irrelevant the outcome of the competition would be.
The Validity of the Competition
The very day after the judges' first meeting, the slenderness of the chances of anything being built, as a result of the competition, was publicly revealed.
In the House of Lords, on Friday, 15th May, 1857, the Duke of Somerset, who as Lord Seymour had been the Commissioner of Works responsible for appointing Pennethorne to design the Public Record Office in 1850; now queried the competence of the present Office of Works.
He was particularly alarmed at the possible cost of the block plan scheme, and wished to know:
what instructions had been given to the architects as to the ground they were to cover; how far Parliament would be bound by the decision of the Commission [of Judges]; and how we were to guard ourselves against an expenditure which we had been told by high authority would amount to not much less than £5,000,000 or £6,000,000…
Lord Granville, the Lord President of the Council, replied that the competition had been held in accordance with the recommendation of a Select Committee.
The two offices would be on a ‘similar site adjoining Charles Street, of which the Government was now in possession, with the exception of a very small portion indeed’, which would be the subject of another Bill to be introduced to Parliament.
This of course was incorrect.
The Government did not own any land in Charles Street.
It had not even completed purchasing all the land authorized under the 1855 Act, and the ‘small portion’ it did not own was approximately 1.25 acres (0.5 ha.).
Although Granville probably realized the damaging implications of the fact that the Government had asked for the office designs without owning or having authority to acquire the land for them, he then went on to say that with the block plan, Parliament could choose:
whether they would go on with the scheme or with a part of it, having the public offices in a well-devised and properly-arranged manner, all connected with each other, instead of being, as now, disconnected.
This would be matter for future consideration.
It was, however, clearly laid down that the architects would have no claim whatever, except for the prize money offered for the several designs that might be approved.
The plans would become the absolute copyright of the Government, to choose from the several plans the whole or such parts as might be found desirable; but the architects would not have the slightest claim to be employed in the execution of the works.
Lord Ellenborough, an outspoken Tory, thought that their Lordships should not acquiesce to the report of a Select Committee of the House of Commons.
He was worried about the enormous expense involved, and he asked whether St James's Palace, now empty, could not be used for the Foreign Office.
Lord Malmesbury queried the Government's view that the concentration of offices would produce a saving in ground rents, when the land alone for the block scheme ‘would cost a million and a half of money’.
However, Lord Redesdale thought that if the Government ever wanted the larger site, ‘the truest economy would be to purchase at once the ground about Charles Street.
and Duke Street and the shabby buildings immediately adjoining’ and not wait until its improvements had enhanced the value of the privately owned land.
Fortunately for the Government, this short debate in the House of Lords seems to have attracted little attention from the press, and it continued to receive general approbation for the exhibition, with the relevance of the competition remaining largely unquestioned.
Judging the Competition
The Saturday Review on 16th May, 1857, the day after the Lords debate, launched a characteristically scathing attack on the Duke of Buccleuch's appointment as judge.
It pointed out that he had, after considerable difficulty, recently obtained a new lease for Montagu House and had commissioned Burn to rebuild it.
As the site of Montagu House was within the area of the block plan design, the article asserted that neither the Duke nor Burn would be disinterested assessors.
‘We neither blame the Duke nor Mr. Burn, but we think they made a great mistake in accepting their nomination’.
At the second meeting of the judges, on Thursday, 21 st May, the atmosphere seems to have been very different to what it had been the previous week.
Hall appeared with a letter from the Duke, who perhaps not unexpectedly said that he had some ‘pressing business in Scotland’ and, therefore, regretfully had to resign his duties, 2 although Burn later said that this was due to the death of the Duke's uncle.
All the other judges were present, and they elected Stanhope to be the new chairman.
With only Brunel and Burn professionally qualified to examine the schemes, the technical difficulties facing the judges must have by now become apparent.
As Scott remarked, they ‘knew amazingly little about their subject’.
According to the minutes, they ‘expressed a wish to have some practical gentlemen to examine the plans in detail for them.
Sir B. Hall having stated that he felt perfect confidence in Messrs. Angell and Pownall, he withdrew from the meeting.’
Of the two assessors, as they were to be referred to, Samuel Angell (1800–66) was the better known.
He had travelled in Italy and Sicily, where he had studied the Greek temples, he became the surveyor to two city companies, and was a London District Surveyor.
His architectural predilections were evident at the Royal Academy in 1850, with compositions called Palladiana and the Works of Vignola and, at the time of his appointment as an assessor, he had just started  his best known work, the Italianate Clothworkers' Hall in the City of London (1856–60).
He had been invited to Hall's conclave, but did not attend.
The other assessor, George Pownall (1808–93), did attend Hall's meeting.
He was Surveyor to Eton College's Chalk Farm Estate, and was one of the few architects working in an Elizabethan style at that time.
His Staple Inn Buildings, of 1857, and his Nos 2–4 Brook Street, Mayfair, of 1860, are both in this style.
Burn said that immediately after the assessors were appointed he proposed that each judge should examine the schemes separately and indicate on them which he considered to be the best.
They should then meet and decide between themselves what the outcome would be.
This arrangement was apparently carried out, and at the next meeting, on 26th May, it was found that sixty-seven schemes from all three parts of the competition were ‘deserving further consideration’.
The judges then voted for each of these schemes, and it was agreed to send the numbers of the plans, but not the votes cast, to the assessors.
Brunel then prepared some guide-lines, which were approved by the other judges and sent to the assessors by Buckler on the same day.
These stated that Angell and Pownall were to consider the competition conditions, and to:
examine with reference to their general compliance with these conditions, the several drawings bearing the numbers given in the enclosed list; and to prepare a statement, giving first the Conditions which they assume to be required in the cases of each of the three classes of designs and secondly, showing whether any and which of the several sets of drawings selected fail to comply with such conditions; and also in what respect, and to what extent, these conditions are neglected or departed from.
Such examination and statement should be made without regard to any opinion as to the merit, or demerits of the drawings or designs which should not be taken into consideration or referred to.
Meticulous instructions followed, showing how the report should be set out.
At a meeting on 5th June, the day before the exhibition closed, the judges were told that the assessors were ‘proceeding assiduously’, and a week later reported their conclusions.
They had taken as long as seventeen days to examine seventy-five schemes.
No doubt their slowness, coupled with the initial inertia of the judges, meant that the exhibition had to remain intact, seriously hampering preparations for the exhibition of models for the Wellington monument which began to arrive at the hall the day after the Government Offices exhibition closed.
The reason for the delay became apparent in Angell and Pownall's report.
They had not confined their work to the schemes the judges selected, but looked at the remainder of the exhibition, and added eight of their own choice.
Only  thirty-nine of the schemes they examined conformed to all the conditions.
They then arranged these conforming schemes into three schedules, one for each design, and placed them in order of merit, which again they were specifically told not to do.
In their report, they stated that in classifying the designs,
we beg to state that we have been guided not by mere aesthetic reasons only, but our opinions are based upon the observance by the competitors of the instructions furnished for their guidance, together with the general disposition and arrangement of the plans, the practicability of the designs in a structural point of view, and their capability of convenient application to the public service.
In the face of criticism from the other judges of Angell and Pownall for overstepping their instructions, Burn thought that because ‘of their experience and their minute examination of the plans, which was far more minute than could have been done by the judges’, it would be helpful to have their placings.
But he was overruled by the others; one judge said ‘you had better appoint them judges; and then I will retire, because I see no use in having them to act in the same capacity in which we are acting ourselves’.
Stirling later made a particularly telling comment when he said that ‘the agreement of three architects in any particular section would render it quite impossible for the other judges, as unprofessional men, to record an adverse opinion’.
Although the other judges would not look at the assessors' lists, Burn met them at the hall and compared his list of preferences to theirs.
They found, in fact, that there was an extraordinary consensus of opinion between them.
Out of thirty-nine placings, there were only two differences.
Burn told Stanhope about this, but the judges chose to ignore the concerted view of the architects.
At the next meeting of the judges, on 15th June, 1857, Angell and Pownall, who had presented their report three days before, were again present.
Their competence was further questioned when it was resolved that, ‘Messrs. Brunel and Burn be requested to examine further the plans proposed by Messrs. Angell and Pownall to be omitted, and to report to the Judges at their next meeting’.
Although this took place only three days later, Brunel and Burn had in that time examined forty-four schemes and produced a nine-page report vindicating the efforts of Angell and Pownall.
The judges then selected twenty-five sets of drawings to be rehung for their next meeting on 22nd June.
In answer to a question in the House, by Lord John Manners on 19th June, Hall stated that the judges would be able to make their award ‘on or about 25th instant’.
So pressure was now applied for a speedy conclusion to the work.
The judges met every day from Monday 22nd to Friday 26th, but their numbers rapidly dwindled during this frantic week.
Lord Eversley, whose wife had just died, did not attend at all.
Stanhope had some important business in Manchester and did not attend on the last two days, as neither did Roberts, who  was ‘not very well’.
However, the actual judging was completed on the Wednesday, and the last two days were devoted to drafting the report to be sent to Hall.
This therefore was entirely the work of Stirling, Brunel and Burn, although Stanhope and Roberts agreed to concur with what the others wrote and would add their signatures.
They awarded the first prize for the block plan design to Crepinet, the second to William Hastings of Belfast and the third to Morgan and Phipson.
The first prize for the Foreign Office design was awarded to H. E. Coe and Henry H. Hofland, the second to Banks and Barry, the third to Gilbert Scott and the fourth to Deane and Woodward.
The equal fifth, sixth and seventh prizes went to Thomas Bellamy, Charles Buxton and to George Edmund Street.
The first prize for the War Department design was awarded to Henry B. Garling, the second to Botrel d'Hazeville of Paris, the third to J. T. Rochead of Glasgow and the fourth to Prichard and Seddon of Llandaff.
The equal fifth, sixth and seventh places were awarded to Cuthbert Brodrick of Leeds, William G. and E. Habershon, and John Dwyer.
The report dated 27th June, 1857, was forwarded by Buckler to Hall, who said he did not receive it until the following Monday evening, 29th June.
The next day he reported its receipt to the House of Commons and forwarded it to the Treasury with some papers explaining the background to the competition.
The Aftermath
Hall had promised the House of Commons that the premiated designs would be re-exhibited at Westminster Hall, and this took place in July and August 1857, with the Wellington monument models occupying the centre, and the seventeen premiated designs on screens along a side and across one end of the Hall.
The competitors who had entered all three parts of the competition had usually designed all three parts together, and in some cases had shown drawings for the different parts on the same piece of paper.
The Office of Works were determined to re-exhibit only those parts of a competitor's work which had been awarded a premium, and consequently cut up some drawings to make this possible.
The Saturday Review denounced this extraordinary act of vandalism.
The three winners of the block plan designs ‘were the greatest sufferers by the dismemberment’, it claimed.
There was ample space in the Hall for all the prizemen's work to have been shown.
In the following December and January, and exhibition of the award-winning designs, organized by the Architects Institute of Edinburgh, was held at their George Street rooms.
The Competition entries
The Second Empire entries
The judges' decision aroused as much popular interest as the exhibition.
It was well covered in popular periodicals, and The Illustrated London News produced a series of articles and illustrations of the prize-winning schemes, far exceeding the leading professional journals,The Builder and The Building News , in the extent of its illustrations.
While The Saturday Review maintained its critical viewpoint with several incisive articles.
Clearly it was the stylistic aspect of the schemes which aroused this interest.
The tightness of the competition programme gave little scope to all, except the most imaginative of architects, for great variations in the layout of the two offices, and even the block plans tended towards similar solutions.
What mattered to the informed public in the late 1850s was whether the building was to be Gothic, Classical, Tudor, Italianate or an eclectic design.
All such styles were to be seen at the exhibition, but classically based designs predominated.
Competitors felt, as events were to prove with considerable justification, that official opinion favoured classical architecture.
Hardwick's complaint at Hall's conclave about inviting foreign architects to compete probably derived from the implication that architects from elsewhere would produce a better solution than British ones.
But it could also be inferred that by throwing the competition open to the architects of all nations, the sponsors were thinking in terms of a classical solution.
Had they wanted a Gothic design, they might well have restricted entries to Britain.
Inspired by Scott, and Burges and Clutton's winning designs for cathedrals at Hamburg  and Lille, the English, at that time, considered their ability to handle Gothic to be unrivalled.
Britain's most formidable political rivals, France and Russia, had imposing capital cities largely consisting of neo-classical buildings laid out in a formal manner, and the competition, with its coupled town planning and detailed design components, was a conscious attempt to provide London with visual images worthy of its far greater imperial status, which perhaps needed reaffirming after the trauma of the Crimean War.
The Paris Exhibition of 1855 and the war had brought Britain and France into close contact.
Many influential Englishmen had seen the magnificent accommodation that Napoleon III was providing for his bureaucracy in the New Louvre and the new architecture that was arising in the Paris of the time.
It was an architecture which revived the style of Louis XIV and, with its classical basis, filled the gap left after the decline of neo-classicism, and yet unlike that style it was readily adaptable to the hotels, offices and other new building requirements of the nineteenth century.
The judges clearly had a predilection for this style, the Second Empire mode as Hitchcock calls it, as out of the total of fourteen prizes for the offices, seven were awarded to designs in this style, including the first and second in each class.
It was not, as has been suggested, the popularity of the style among competitors which forced the judges to award a preponderance of prizes to designs in this style, as an examination of Clarke's catalogue and the lists in various journals shows that out of the wide variety of stylistic appellations, it was largely those described as French Renaissance which were awarded prizes.
The publicity given to the award-winning designs must have helped to establish the popularity of the Second Empire style for certain buildings in Britain and the United States in the 1860s and 1870s, but it did not introduce the style to Britain.
Between 1849 and 1851, the French architect, P. C. Dusillion, assisted by Donaldson, built a house for Henry Hope in Piccadilly, in this style, and Brunel was very familiar with P. C. Hardwick's Great Western Hotel at Paddington, built between 1850 and 1852.
Coe and Hofland's winning scheme for the Foreign Office was clearly derived from French sources, with its three-storied treatment and prominent pavilions capped with tall curved roofs.
It had two internal courts, with the principal office entrance from the east, a secondary entrance from Downing Street, and the entrance to the Foreign Secretary's residence under a porte-cochère from the park.
Like most other submissions, the reception rooms extended along the whole of the park front at first-floor level.
This west front was given an additional attic storey.
The building was apparently symmetrical about both axes, apart from a tall tower at the north-west corner.
After the awards were announced,The Saturday Review commented that it gave ‘the impression of an overgrown hotel at a watering place, with one of Wren's city spires perched on its north-west angle   next the parade, to hold the dinner-bell’.
It conformed exactly to the specification, but otherwise it is difficult to understand the award, unless it was the impressiveness of Coe's presentation that swayed the lay judges.
The assessors and Burn only placed it sixth on their Foreign Office lists, and Scott dismissed it as ‘a flash affair by my old pupil’.
Fig. 7 The Foreign Office Design by H.E.
Coe and H.H. Hofland, awarded first place 1857.
(Reproduced by courtesy of The Illustrated London News )
Henry Edward Coe had in fact been a pupil in Scott's office, where in conjunction with Street he had produced a fine set of elevational drawings of the Hamburg Cathedral.
He had set up in practice on his own about nine years before the competition, and his most important executed work up until then had been the Tudor style Royal Infirmary at Dundee (1852–5), which he had won in competition.
About two years before the Government Offices competition, he met Henry H. Hofland, who worked for W. B. Moffatt after the break-up of the latter's partnership with Scott.
They formed a partnership solely to enter the competition, and did no other work together.
They entered for the block plan and the Foreign Office only, and submitted eleven drawings in all.
Coe drew the elevations, perspectives and details, and Hofland made the plans.
Henry Bayly Garling's Second Empire War Department design was considered by the critics to have been a much better choice for first prize than Coe and Hofland's.
Garling entered a total of sixteen drawings for the competition, omitting the block plan, but showing the two offices separated by a wide street.
His successful War Department design was for a three-storey building with attics around four internal courts.
The general massing and arrangement of the building, with steeply roofed corner pavilions and a high central portion, crowned by a turret between two further pavilions, although taller, owed much to Godde and Lesueur's extension to the Paris Hôtel de Ville of 1837–49.
It owed so much that The Saturday Review on three occasions said that it should be ruled ‘out of court’.
The French Renaissance motifs were competently handled and showed up well against Coe's less able attempt.
The Illustrated London News said that its rich encrustation of sculpture would make the building ‘a monument and record of the great military men and achievements of the British nation’ with statues of eminent commanders and ‘the names and dates of remarkable victories’.
Garling's design was also placed first on Angell and Pownall's and Burn's War Department lists, although the first place they awarded to another Second Empire scheme on the Foreign Office list, was only awarded the second prize by the judges.
This was the scheme submitted by Sir Charles Barry's eldest son, Charles, and Robert Richardson Banks.
They entered for all parts of the competition, but submitted a Jacobean design for the War Department and the block plan separately.
They sent in a total of twenty-one drawings for both entries.
As with Garling's scheme, their proposals showed a new street between the two offices, but they sycophantically named it Clarendon Street.
The Foreign Office design was for a three-storey building around three sides of a court, which had on its fourth side as arched entrance screen separating it from the new street.
The main office entrance and the entrance to the Foreign Secretary's residence were from the court.
A state entrance was under a porte-cochère on the Downing Street side which led to the suite of reception rooms occupying the entire first floor of the northern wing.
Although the design lacked the copyism of Garling's submission, it seems to have derived some elements from the Paris Hôtel de Ville, particularly the high-roofed central block and corner  pavilions with their ornate single dormers.
The other architects to be awarded prizes for Second Empire designs on the War Department list were Botrel d'Hazeville, whose grand scheme resembling the Louvre was given second place; John Thomas Rochead, whose design united the two offices in an ornate single building with high-roofed corner pavilions, was awarded third place; the brothers, Edward and William Habershon, whose scheme for one large building with prominent central and corner pavilions and mansard roofs, around a central quadrangle, was given one of the fifth equal places; along with John Dwyer, whose treatment was very similar to Rochead's, but less ornate.
These latter five schemes, along with Coe's, would be a surprising choice, unless the lay judges particularly favoured the Second Empire style.
D'Hazeville's was described in The Saturday Review as ‘tame and commonplace’, although the assessors and Burn thought that it had sufficient merits to be placed fourth on their War Department lists.
Habershon's scheme was only eleventh on Angell and Pownall's and it did not appear at all on Burn s, g while Rochead and Dwyer's schemes were both rejected by Angell and Pownall for slightly exceeding the stipulated site.
Rochead had submitted alternative elevations for his plans, one in an Elizabethan style and the other in the French style, and to emphasize further their stylistic bias, the judges selected the latter version for a premium.
The ‘Italian’ Entries
Apart from the Second Empire, there were five Gothic and only two other classical designs in the prize list.
Of these classical designs, that submitted by Cuthbert Brodrick is the more interesting.
He entered for all parts of the competition and submitted twenty-one drawings.
He united the two offices into one neo-classical building with a carriageway running between them.
Each office had a central glass-roofed hall surrounded by access galleries.
The Foreign Office had an apse projecting towards the park, while the War Department had a massive three-part in-antis portico facing Parliament  Street.
This part closely resembled Brodrick's best-known building, Leeds Town Hall, which was the result of a competition that he had won in 1853 and was being built at the time of the Government Offices competition.
Apparently Angell and Pownall did not approve of Brodrick's novel lighting arrangements and recommended that the scheme be rejected.
However, the judges awarded it one of the fifth prizes for a War Department design.
The other classical scheme which won a prize was an Italianate design by Thomas Bellamy.
He only entered for the Foreign Office and the block plan, with a total of ten drawings, and was awarded one of the fifth prizes for his Foreign Office design.
The building he proposed had two internal courts, and externally three stories of superimposed Corinthian columns, an arcaded first floor, a central porte-cochère and, as The Builder pointed out, detailed elements derived from Vignola.
Another Italian scheme which attracted attention, although it did not receive a prize, was that submitted by Edward Middleton Barry.
Apparently it was a joint effort with his father, Sir Charles Barry, who as an employee of the Government on the Houses of Parliament was officially debarred from entering the competition.
They entered all three parts of the competition, but were rejected by Angell and Pownall as they went well beyond the site boundaries and the rooms were awkwardly shaped.
In the following year, the elder Barry exhibited a large rebuilding scheme for the whole Whitehall area at the Royal Academy which was a development of the competition entry.
It repeated and enlarged upon the treatment he used at the Board of Trade and Privy Council Offices, with the main entrance, under a large dome, into a grand hall 320 feet long by 150 feet wide (97.540 × 45.720 m) on the site of the Foreign Office.
Few of the many other non-prize-winning classical entries received much attention.
Those from Cockerell and James Fergusson were largely ignored.
John Young's was illustrated in The Building News on 4th September, 1857, and Robert Kerr's ‘picturesque Renaissance’ scheme, as he called it, which united the two offices in a magnificent north-facing block, was reviewed and illustrated in The Builder on 26th September.
The Eclectic Entries
The eclecticism of the mid-nineteenth-century architects was of two types: either they applied different styles to different buildings, as did Burn or the Barrys, or they applied motifs derived from different styles to the same building and so produced an original design.
The best-known architect working in this manner was Edward Buckton Lamb who submitted designs for all parts of the competition.
These were selected for examination by the assessors, but rejected for planning faults.
James Thomas Knowles senior and his son James Thomas Knowles junior entered separately for all parts of the competition with designs  in an eclectic manner.
Like Lamb, their schemes were turned down because of planning faults.
The Gothic Entries
What proved to be the most important designs in the competition, as far as the progress towards a new Foreign Office was concerned, were the Gothic submissions.
They were few in number, but attracted an attention out of all proportion to the space they took up in the exhibition.
The Saturday Review said that there were only four entries that it deemed to be good enough to be designated Gothic, but Clarke's catalogue listed a further fourteen Gothic schemes.
The writer of the article in The Saturday Review , presumably Hope, claimed to be aware of the identity of the authors of the four ‘ boná fide  Gothic designs’ while judging was in progress, but properly refrained from naming them.
They totalled seventy-six drawings and made such a lavish display, in a climate so obviously orientated towards a classical outcome, that they could almost be considered as a challenge to the sponsors with their instinctive bias towards classical architecture.
These architects fervently felt that the time had come for a new type of public building.
The radical changes which had taken place in England during the previous fifty years meant that something new must be tried.
The author of the Saturday article thought that the chances of the four schemes being selected for detailed examination were very remote and was probably surprised when the judges awarded prizes to all four, albeit rather low prizes.
As Scott said later, the judges ‘were not Gothicly disposed and though they awarded premiums to all the best Gothic designs they took care not to put any of them high enough to have much chance’.
Scott was awarded the highest prize, with third on the Foreign Office list, Deane and Woodward were fourth, and Street was awarded one of the fifth prizes on the same list.
Prichard and Seddon were awarded fourth prize on the War Department list.
The entry submitted by Thomas Newenham Deane and his partner Benjamin Woodward consisted of only five sheets showing the two offices, but they ‘were covered with architectural sculpture commonly attributed to Mr Ruskin, but really the work of Mr J. H. Pollen’, according to the Saturday .
The War Department formed the three sides of an internal quadrangle, entered by an arched carriageway from the long sides of the site, while the Foreign Office, which had internal courts, formed the fourth side.
The building was three storeys high, with a level roof-line over all the offices.
The Saturday commented that it was ‘dappled with imagery bold and graceful’, but that the groups of clustered or arcaded windows could be depressing.
Under a warm sun, with a cloudless sky, and flanked by the orange and the myrtle, in some quiet city of the past, it might arrest and keep entranced the lazily artistic eye of the pleased traveller; but for northern London and its bustling public offices, this conception palpably lacks nerve and sinew.
John Prichard (1818–86) and his partner John Pollard Seddon entered all parts of the competition with eighteen drawings.
Their office blocks appear to have been symmetrical and, as The Saturday remarked, based on the architecture of fourteenth-century Flemish Town Halls; ‘very picturesque and well massed up, albeit a little slight in parts, particularly the towers’.
It had a large central quadrangle entered from the south side, flanked by the offices and with the Foreign Secretary's residence on the north side.
Although a report in The Builder says that the offices and the residence were designed as three distinct buildings, in an accompanying perspective view from the north-west they seem to be inextricably linked.
A small plain building in the foreground of this view, which provides a foil to the scale and busyness of the main block, is an unasked for stable block.
George Edmund Street entered all parts of the competition with an impressive display of twenty-three drawings.
It seems to have been the only scheme to attempt an irregular solution, with recessed fronts to both offices towards the east and west sides of the site.
A groined passage ran along the length of the site connecting both offices, with the stairs leading off it.
As with most schemes, a carriageway ran in the opposite direction, connecting gateways in Charles Street and Downing Street.
The Foreign Secretary's residence was entered from the park front, which had the reception rooms along its entire length on the first floor.
As with Prichard and Seddon's scheme, Street provided unasked for stables, in a yard off Charles Street.
As instructed, the building was largely three-storey, but it stood on a high basement and was dominated by a spiky ventilation tower centrally placed over the War Department.
There were few gables, as Street thought that they were hardly compatible with the grand effect that he was trying to achieve.
The Builder commented that the windows were very varied and not placed over each other.
It quoted Street as saying that they were ‘varied according to the use and size of the several rooms’.
The entrances were placed where most convenient and there was ‘a high degree of natural and justifiable irregularity in almost all the parts’ which, although rejected in the Houses of Parliament, was he said, ‘the invariable practice of the best Gothic architects’.
He also proposed to remove Dover House and extend the park through to the river to the north of the offices.
Opposite to Street's display in the exhibition was an even grander show which The Saturday Review thought was the product of another ‘master hand’ and, as it assumed that the building would be Gothic, to avoid failure the Government should employ the two architects jointly.
This was the work of Street's former master, George Gilbert Scott.
Scott entered all parts of the competition with, according to The Builder , thirty-two drawings, ‘many of them elaborate, and to a large scale, and which included several well-executed perspective views’.
Like other competitors, he also produced a written explanation, but in Scott's case this was a thirty-page printed booklet.
No doubt this extensive presentation was the result of his premature start, and his large office, which at that time, had a staff of approximately seventeen.
Each office in Scott's design consisted of a central block, with parallel wings extending from the ends of the block to form a three-sided court.
In the Foreign Office the central block was adjacent to the park, while with the War Department he gave the judges alternative layouts.
The scheme, designated 116a, had the central block adjacent to Parliament Street, forming a large central quadrangle between the two offices, while scheme 116b had the War Department handed to form an entrance court off Parliament Street and another small court between the two offices.
The assessors chose 116a for their schedules which, although it had a flat elevation to Parliament Street, had the large internal quadrangle which was ultimately incorporated into the executed building.
The Saturday Review , presumably from the pen of Hope, said that it was in what it called the ‘modern palatial Gothic’ style:
the facade is grave, measured, and regular, the windows duly spaced, the balance carefully adjusted, the gables pronounced, the corner turrets all supported by rectangular or polygonal sub-structures.
The cornice is large, overhanging and emphatic; and the attic, of a single story, has projecting dormers of stone.
Inigo Jones's Palace of Westminster was not more regular, and still the Gothic feeling is dominant, but yet that feeling is of the possible Gothic of this age.
The Builder pointed out that although Scott ‘has sought not the style of any particular country, but Gothic in abstract, and gathered from the works of all countries’, perhaps because of the numerous secular mediaeval buildings in Italy, the character of his design ‘is more Italian, or at least Continental than it is English’.
But,The Builder commented, Scott would disclaim such a description of his work.
This is exemplified by the quotation from Horace, which he used as a motto, and was the longest of all the mottoes used by competitors to identify their work.
Nec minimum meruere decus, vestigia Graeca Ausi deserere, et celebrare domestica facta;
Scott clearly felt that his ideas derived from native sources, compared with the foreign inspiration of the classical schemes.
Another Gothic design did win a prize, although it failed to satisfy The Saturday Review that it was a bona fide Gothic scheme.
This was the work of an amateur architect, Charles Buxton, who submitted a design for the offices in association with the Habershon brothers.
However, as it was not on the list submitted to Angell and Pownall for examination, his design was probably never tested for its practicality or compliance with the conditions, and must have been brought to the lay judges' attention after the assessors had completed their work.
Buxton was Liberal MP for Newport, Isle of Wight, a partner in the firm of brewers, Truman, Hanbury and Buxton, and an enthusiastic amateur architect.
At the time of the competition, he was designing his own house, Foxwarren Park in Surrey, with the aid of another architect, Frederick Barnes of Ipswich.
His success in the competition apparently gave him considerable encouragement as, according to the introduction to his Notes of Thought :
Thenceforward he made the study of architecture one of his chief pleasures.
He arranged parties and expeditions for inspecting churches and old buildings both in London and in the country; he became one of the public advocates of the Gothic style for modern buildings; he caught at every opportunity of designing a lodge or a farmhouse or any other building.
His best-known work was the Buxton Memorial Fountain in Parliament Square, which he designed with S. S. Teulon in 1865 as a memorial to his father, Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton, a slave trade abolitionist and prison reformer.
The scheme he submitted was prepared ‘under his immediate superintendence’ by the Habershons.
The plan was the same as theirs, ‘with some slight variations’, so Buxton was responsible for the Gothic elevations only.
The Foreign Secretary's residence was on the park side of a building containing both offices, with high-pitched roofs, gables, turrets and dormers.
The design, according to The Saturday Review , exhibited a ‘considerable acquaintance with the luscious forms of French civic flamboyant’, but lacked dignity and self-respect.
The Block Plan
The block plans were thoroughly examined in the press, and although this part of the competition attracted the largest number of entrants, it had the least bearing on the final outcome.
The conditions were deliberately vague and even asked for suggestions regarding the siting of Westminster Bridge, although some work had already been carried out towards rebuilding the bridge on its existing site.
The plan submitted by Alphonse Nicolas Crepinet was part of his complete submission of seventeen drawings.
It was reproduced in The Illustrated London News and shows the various offices grouped around a new square on the axis of a realigned Westminster Bridge.
E. L. Garbett, who published a detailed analysis of all the block plans in The Builder , categorized this scheme as one of the ‘Obviously Non-competing Block Plans’ as he felt that it radically departed from the conditions, but neither the judges nor the assessors found it faulty.
William Hastings's scheme does not appear to have been illustrated.
He entered for the block plan only, with three drawings.
The Saturday Review described the scheme as the ‘sort of meagre and crude distribution of all the allotted space — and of a great deal more besides — into parallelograms, which we might expect from the speculative projector of Great Franklin Pierce City, Nebraska’.
It is difficult to understand why the judges selected his design for second prize, as the assessors had rejected it by saying that it was ‘Too expensive and involving too great a sacrifice of property’, and were supported by Brunel and Burn.
Equally puzzling was the choice of George Morgan and Richard Makilwaine Phipson's design for third prize.
They entered for all parts of the competition, and their designs for the Foreign Office and the War Department were both placed seventh on the assessors' lists, but Burn did not put them so highly, and in the end both designs were rejected by the judges, and their block plan, which had not even been seen by the assessors and presumably never tested against the conditions, was awarded third prize.
As with Crepinet's scheme, it showed a large square on the axis of a new Westminster Bridge but in the centre of the square was a reconstructed St Margaret's Church.
According to the Saturday , it displayed a ‘little more originality’ than Hastings's proposal.
The Outcome of the Competition
The Position of the Amateur Judges
The judges' handling of the competition seems to have been inconsistent and conspicuously unfair.
They departed, as in the cases of Buxton, Hastings and Morgan and Phipson, from the arrangements that they had devised for themselves, and in many cases ignored their professional advisers.
Where the two offices were united in one structure, Angell and Pownall seem to have given them an equal place on the Foreign Office and War Department lists, no doubt thinking that the implementation of the project would be considerably easier if the same architect were carrying out both offices.
The lay judges, like Stanhope and Stirling, on the other hand, must have been well aware of the realities of the situation, and that there was little chance of the prize-winners being commissioned to carry out the work.
It was perhaps with this in mind that they decided to spread the only rewards that the Government was likely to confer on the architects for all their work across as wide a field as was possible.
The Saturday Review bitterly commented that they had ‘framed for themselves a rule which we must characterize as both illogical and unfair — namely, of distributing their patronage so that no competitor should net more than one premium’.
The judges were certainly aware that with such an arrangement, they could be seen as having ignored the merits of the designs and the practicalities of execution, and attempted to explain their position in their report to Hall.
They said that they had difficulties with those designs which combined the two offices in one building, as the prizes were to be awarded for both parts.
It will be evident that these united designs compete under considerable  disadvantage with the single designs, and that unless a united design should be superior in both departments to all its single competitors, it could not receive a prize because one portion of it could hardly be executed without the other.
We have been obliged to meet this difficulty by treating the lower prizes as marks of distinction for merit rather than as indicating special selection of the design as fitted for separate construction.
So it might be assumed that Scott's design was placed higher than the other Gothic entries because it showed the two offices as separate structures, rather than one.
Had Angell and Pownall carried out their instructions and only checked the compliance of the designs with the conditions, much of the criticism of the judges disappears.
However, as professionals they were not content to act as mere checkers, but felt that they had an obligation to express an opinion of the work they saw before them, and found they had an extraordinary agreement with the views of Burn, much to the resentment of other judges.
The difficulties of the new professionally conscious architects of that time, when facing the judgement of enlightened amateurs, became a recurring situation during the campaign for new Government Offices.
The complexity of nineteenth-century building meant that increasing numbers of men had to devote their lives to its study, by making architecture their livelihood.
By establishing among themselves standards of attainment and behaviour, these largely middle-class experts aimed to seek social acceptability as professionals with a corporate identity.
The first attempt to organize a professional body occurred in 1831, when the Architects Society was formed.
Until that time the Royal Academy of Arts, which was founded in 1768, was the only body in England with a substantial representation of architects among its membership, although they were always out-numbered by painters and sculptors.
The Architects Club, founded in 1791, was a dining club with limited membership and in no way attempted to be a professional body, but The London Architectural Society, founded in 1806, was intended to be more representative and instructional.
However, its rigorous rules of membership brought about its early demise.
While the more broadly based Architects and Antiquaries Club, founded in 1819, while attempting to be an academic institution, did not aim to answer the growing need for a professional association.
The Architects Society had forty founder-members, a library, a museum, professorships, and held exhibitions.
It existed until 1842 when, through the efforts of its president William Tite, it merged with the Institute of Architects.
This body originated in 1834, when Donaldson organized a committee to draw up a scheme for the formation of an institute to ‘uphold the character and improve the attainments of Architects’.
In the following year, the Institute was  formally inaugurated on 15th June, with Donaldson as one of the Honorary Secretaries, and Earl de Grey as the President.
The involvement of Lord Grey, an amateur, typified the problem which faced the profession in the mid-nineteenth century.
It no longer needed the wealthy connoisseur for his erudition, it had acquired the  relevant expertise into its own hands, but it still needed his recognition to be acceptable to society.
His patronage may have seemed essential to the architects of that time, although corporate clients were emerging, such as Poor Law Boards, or boards of directors of railway companies.
However, Poor Law Boards were often controlled by the local squire, and members of the House of Lords and their families played important political and financial roles throughout the whole century.
But as the century progressed, their position became more ornamental than functional.
Grey was President of the Institute for twenty-four years, until his death in 1859, the longest tenure of office of all the Presidents.
By the 1850s his position seems to have been largely nominal, as the Council meetings were chaired by one of the three Vice-Presidents.
The membership had grown from 82 founder members to 253 in 1855, of which 128 were Fellows and 125 Associates.
New members with established reputations were often elected directly into the Fellowship class, as Scott, Bunning and C. R. Cockerell were in December 1849.
The Royal Institute of British Architects, as it was usually referred to, although the Royal prefix was only officially conferred in 1866, certainly answered the need for a professional organization.
But even as late as 1861, it only represented 9 per cent of all architects.
The group of architects who met Hall in conclave were probably all well known to each other.
Most of them were senior members of the Institute and Hall could well have been surprised to find himself confronted with a group of men bound together by a considerable degree of common purpose and understanding.
The judges' deliberate promotion of the Second Empire can perhaps be explained from the standpoint of patronage.
The lay judges, like Stanhope and Stirling, probably appreciated the shortcomings of neo-classical architecture for modern building, and saw the French style as a suitable nineteenth-century alternative.
It was a style which many of the country's administrators were familiar with, from their visits to France, and its classical origins made it acceptable to the cultured amateur.
The force with which the judges made their case for Second Empire can be explained by assuming that they felt that if they did not strongly press for this form of building, another, and less welcome style in their eyes, would be adopted.
The assurance with which Gothic schemes were presented made them the obvious alternative to Second Empire, but large secular Gothic buildings of this type were an unknown quantity.
The writings of Scott and Street, as much as  their designs, had shown that their Gothic was not just the selection of certain architectural elements, but a new approach to design.
It was a rapidly expanding philosophy, not controlled by a cultural elite, as the classical movements of the past had been, but by professionals.
The judges' decision can therefore be seen as an attempt by enlightened amateurs to retain their position as arbiters of taste in the face of these threats, by sponsoring a style of architecture which they felt would be an appropriate form of building in Victorian England.
The Abandonment of the Competition
The competition with its attendant publicity and the Lords debate on 15th May, 1857 seems to have persuaded the Lords of the Treasury of the need for Hall's Bill, which they had originally received early in December 1856.
On 6th June, 1857 he introduced the Public Offices Extension Bill, and it was given a Second Reading on 30th June, the day that he reported the judges' decisions, when it was referred to a Select Committee.
Hall reported the Committee's recommendation to the House on 9th July.
The Bill was then printed with the Committee's revisions, and considered by a Committee of the whole House on 13th July, who sent it for a Third Reading.
This never took place; successive dates were arranged, but the House had other more pressing business, and finally on 10th August the Speaker ordered the Bill to be withdrawn.
On the following day, Lewis returned to the position of before the competition, when he said in the House that the land authorized under the 1855 Act ‘would be sufficient for the site of the two offices which it was now contemplated to erect’.
Parliament during late June and early July 1857 was gradually becoming aware of the awesome events in India.
As late as 26th June, Palmerston was assuring the Queen that the Mutiny was only a local affair, but by 11th July the full extent of the fighting and accompanying atrocities were known to the Government.
In the face of this, the outcome of the competition must have seemed trivial indeed.
Lewis's statement, which wrote off the competition, was allowed to pass unnoticed, and the whole embarrassing affair, much to the Government's relief, might well be forgotten had it not been for the persistence of Beresford Hope.
Hope, who at that time was MP for Maidstone, seems to have conducted a solitary campaign in the House of Commons to keep the subject alive.
On 2nd July he had criticized the organization of the competition and the judges' decision to award only one prize to each competitor.
He proposed that a plan for the area should be considered first, which could show the Horse Guards and the Admiralty removed, and St James's Park extended to the river.
Hall said that he was intending to proceed with the two offices, and during the recess he  would have the interiors of the designs amended.
He would then have drawings and quantities prepared and would invite tenders for a fixed sum.
By 24th July the climate had completely changed.
On that day, Hope asked if Hall was intending to lay the estimates for the offices during that session.
Lewis replied that that was not the Government's intention, nor was it ‘committed or pledged to the adoption’ of any of the competition designs.
Gladstone warned the House of the danger of being drawn ‘step by step’ into massive financial outlay, without proper discussion.
On 10th August, the day the Bill was ordered to be withdrawn, Hope asked for a Royal Commission to consider the whole affair.
Lewis opposed the idea that Parliament should let the scheme be taken out of its hands and said that the Government would apply for a vote during the session to acquire land for the Foreign Office at first, followed by land for other offices.
‘The want of the present moment is a new Foreign Office, and to supply that want is the extent of our ambition.’
Lord John Russell, who at that time was not a member of Palmerston's Government, said that he had heard that Panmure did not want a new building for the War Department, and he hoped that:
the Government will throw aside the whole of these [competition]plans and consider what accommodation it is they want, and what sum of money they are prepared to propose to Parliament, and then let them obtain plans suited to the expenditure they propose.
The plans which they have at present are, without doubt, exceedingly handsome; but, to speak plainly, they seem to me infinitely more adapted for palaces than public offices.
Hall defended the action he had taken and proposed that ‘during the recess, to look at the designs which had been approved by the judges, and endeavour to ascertain the expense of carrying them out; but nothing further would be done until the House was informed on that point’.
William Tite, the Liberal MP for Bath, and the only professional architect in the House of Commons, then made his first contribution towards the new Foreign Office by suggesting that the Government should form its own plan out of all the ideas produced so far, such as‘the plan of Sir J. Soane, that of Mr. Pennethorne, and also the plans in the present competitive exhibition’.
In view of Tite's involvement in architecture as a profession, and his later attitude, this was an extraordinary suggestion.
However, the House was in no mood to agree to anything which could involve massive expenditure on public offices.
As George Bentinck, the MP for West Norfolk, put it:
The state of our affairs in India, in consequence of our false economy in the way of troops and ships, was one of a very serious character.
With those facts staring us in the face, it was monstrous and absurd to propose to sink a large outlay of money in the purchase of ground in this neighbourhood, and in the erection of new Government buildings.
Hall seems not to have fulfilled his promise to cost the winning designs, as Hunt, who presumably would have made the estimates, did not examine the plans, and there is no evidence of Hall having reported this information back to Parliament.
However, Hope characteristically persisted to promote his plan to reshape London by publishing The Government's and Mr. Beresford Hope's plans for Public Offices compared .
This seems to have been revised twice, and by the third edition it was re-titled as Public Offices and Metropolitan Improvements , with an appendix added, comparing the cost of Hope's plan with that of the Government's.
No further steps were taken until 28th October, 1857, when Wilson wrote to Hall, on behalf of the Lords of the Treasury, saying that as they did not want to incur additional expenditure on architects' fees for further rejected plans for the Foreign Office, they had looked at Pennethorne's plans and would use those.
This arrangement had been ‘decided upon as the one which the Government can best justify to Parliament’.
Hall was obviously astonished at Wilson's letter, although his reply on 5th November was couched in deferential terms.
He gave the history of the competition and suggested that one of the winning designs should be considered before Pennethorne's, and if the Government wanted a new design they should still employ the author of the Foreign Office design to do the work.
As to the saving of fees, any architect, including Pennethorne, would require fees at 5 per cent.
He felt that the prize money was a ‘comparatively trifling sum’ and that architects had entered the competition with the hope of having ‘the honour and credit’of executing the work.
If the Government did not fulfil these expectations, they could find difficulty in future in arranging any such competition.
Wilson wrote back on 28th November, saying that the Treasury Lords considered that the accommodation laid down in the competition had little relevance to the current proposals.
They were under no obligation to employ any of the prize-winners, who should be ‘fully satisfied by the payment to them of the liberal premiums awarded to them’, and they considered that it would be,
the most expedient course to consult the architect who had already been employed to prepare plans for the particular office now to be built, and who from his official position in connexion with the Board of Works might be resorted to with the least invidiousness to the professional public.
The Lords of the Treasury, Wilson said, regretted that this was ‘not altogether in accordance’ with the recommendations of the Select Committee, but they felt that they had no alternative.
Hall replied to the Treasury on 28th December.
He said that there were ‘cogent reasons for not adopting the course proposed by your Lordships’.
The Foreign Office accommodation, with the possible exception of the Foreign  Secretary's residence, would be almost the same as that laid down in the competition.
He reminded the Treasury that in 1856 he had made it a policy that all public buildings in London should be open to competition and not given as a matter of course to one of his officers, and if their Lordships did not want to hold another competition, they could well appoint the winner of the Foreign Office design, as the judges had selected the prize-winning schemes ‘not only in regard to their external appearance, but more especially on account of the excellence of their internal arrangements’.
He added that he could not agree that the prizes were liberal.
Wilson did not write back until 1st February, 1858.
The Treasury Lords regarded the rejection of Hall's Bill ‘as a virtual abandonment of the whole scheme by the House of Commons’, and as the site was now limited to that authorized under the 1855 Act, they did not see why the plan prepared for that site should not be used.
According to Lord John Manners, it was Palmerston, as First Lord of the Treasury, who was behind the Treasury's insistence that Hall should abandon the competition and appoint Pennethorne.
On 11th February, in the second week of the new session of Parliament, Tite asked Hall what steps were being taken about new Government Offices.
Hall gave a short history of the competition and asked Tite to move for the publication of the correspondence between himself and the Treasury, so that‘the public will then see all that has taken place’.
This had all the makings of another long-running acrimonious dispute, when again wider political events quite unexpectedly overtook the controversy.
Following an assassination attempt on Napoleon III, Palmerston introduced a Bill to make conspiracy to murder a felony.
It was well received at first, but the mood of the House changed and the Government was defeated on its Second Reading on 19th February.
Palmerston took the defeat as a vote of no confidence and tendered the Government's resignation to the Queen on 21st February, 1858, and she immediately asked Lord Derby to form the new Government.
The Architectural Profession's Reaction
When asking for his correspondence with the Treasury to be published, Hall could hardly have suspected that this was to be one of his last official acts.
He never again held office, and when Palmerston returned to power he was elevated to the peerage as Lord Llanover, from his estate near Abergavenny.
He took his seat in the House of Lords on 4th July, 1859, ‘but never took much part in the debates’.
Derby's Government in the Commons was led by the Leader of the House and Chancellor of the Exchequer, Benjamin Disraeli, who as a member of the Select Committee which examined the 1855 Act and Hall's Committee of 1856  was well aware of the need for a new Foreign Office.
As in Derby's previous administration of 1852, Malmesbury was again Foreign Secretary, and Lord John Manners First Commissioner of Works but, unlike Hall, Manners had a seat in the Cabinet.
John James Robert Manners (1818–1906), a son of the Duke of Rutland was to be a key figure in the campaign for a new Foreign Office.
He was educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he knew Hope, Baillie Cochrane and probably Stirling.
He first became an MP in 1841 as member for Newark and, apart from a break between 1847 and 1850, he remained in the Commons until he succeeded as the seventh Duke of Rutland in 1888.
In 1843 he joined with Disraeli, George Smythe and Baillie Cochrane to form the Young England group.
They were against the soulless competitiveness of Whiggery and derived their inspiration from the chivalry of the Middle Ages, as exemplified by the aristocratic Eglinton Tournament of 1839.
Manners remained a firm friend of Disraeli's until the latter's death in 1881.
He was First Commissioner in the Derby Governments of 1852, 1858–9 and 1866–8, and in his later years in Parliament he held various other government posts.
The publication of the correspondence between Hall and the Treasury on 25th February, 1858 brought an immediate response from the architectural profession.
Scott, who at that time was a senior Vice-President of the Institute, later wrote that he felt he was ‘at liberty to stir’.
He met Charles Barry and Digby Wyatt, one of the Honorary Secretaries of the Institute, at Hope's, and they ‘agreed to stir up the Institute’.
The Government were also planning to set aside the results of another competition that they had held for model barracks and this, along with the revelations over the fate of the Government Offices competition, provoked the Council of the Institute into action.
It sent the same strongly worded Memorial to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, ‘the Minister [sic]of War’, and ‘the Chief [sic]Commissioner of Her Majesty's Works and Buildings’.
These, which were read at an ordinary meeting of members, said that the administration had broken faith with the profession through not fulfilling the conditions on which ‘a large body of professional men’ had entered the competition.
If the original requirements had to be modified, then the fair and wise course would be to entrust the work to one of the successful competitors.
They then said that
it appears, from the correspondence moved for by Mr Tite, that the highest official authority is given to the revival of an old design, or the formation of a new one, by an architect not among the premiated in the comparatively recent competition.
Your memorialists cannot sufficiently strongly express their opinion of the impropriety of persistence in any such line of action.
Its obvious injustice would entirely destroy all confidence in the integrity of Government, and any reliance professional men might be induced to give to official programmes in the future; while its realisation would inflict a serious  and almost irreparable injury on the dignity and integrity of a liberal profession.
The Memorial, signed by the Honorary Secretaries, was sent to the three Ministers on 24th March, 1858, and ordered by the House of Commons to be published on the following day.
In the light of later events, it is possible to doubt Scott's altruism in taking the initiative in this case; clearly after the change of government with Manners' well-known enthusiasm for the Middle Ages, the chances were that a Gothic design would be acceptable, and Scott was the best placed of the Gothic competitors, although of course he was completely unaware of the ultimately crucial placings awarded to him by the assessors.
There does seem to have been a genuine feeling of outrage within the profession at the proposal to disregard the two competitions, and probably if Scott had not stirred, another architect would have taken the initiative.
But with the President of the Institute an amateur, the onus was on Scott, as a senior Vice-President, to act as a head of the profession, and quite properly he involved another aggrieved competitor, Charles Barry.
At this stage, Scott was obviously not pleading for the setting aside of the competition results, as has been suggested, but on the contrary, for the employment of the successful competitors, of whom there were four including Barry, with more right to the work than he had.
However, there was some opposition to this action, and a rift in the profession became apparent soon after the Ministers received their Memorials.
On 29th March a deputation of thirteen architects representing the Institute met Manners and General Peel, the new Secretary of State for War, at the Office of Works to reinforce the Memorials.
The deputation included two Vice-Presidents, Scott and Scoles; the Secretaries, Charles Nelson, Digby Wyatt and Donaldson; and several prize-winners in both competitions: Charles Barry and Garling, in the Government Offices, and T. H. Wyatt and George Morgan in the Barracks competition.
Morgan, as well as obtaining third prize for the block plan he submitted in conjunction with Phipson, gained two prizes in the other competition.
George Godwin of The Builder was also present, and they were introduced to the Ministers by three MPs, Hope, Stirling and Tite.
Hope, who was an honorary member of the Institute, restated the views expressed in the Memorials.
He added that Pennethorne ‘was a most respectable gentleman holding an official position, but not a competitor, or qualified to design or erect a national work’.
Tite then nullified the whole purpose of the Memorials and the delegation.
He said that the Government had only pledged itself to employ the successful barracks architects, but not the Government Offices architects.
The premiums should be a sufficient reward for them.
Hope and Digby Wyatt immediately disassociated themselves from Tite's comments.
Manners' reaction to the delegation was not perhaps as anticipated.
He objected to Hope's remarks about Pennethorne and, according to The Building News ‘attempted an anticipatory excuse, should the present Treasury adopt the unfair determination of their predecessors’.
But, in fact, the delegation was to be more successful than Manners' remarks revealed at the time.
The Select Committee on the Foreign Office Reconstruction
The Membership
Nothing apparently happened for two months after the Institute's delegation.
Then on 28th May, 1858, the influential Architectural Society of the Archdeaconry of Northampton sent a plea to Manners saying ‘that Gothic is best adopted for the Offices’.
This perhaps was more obvious lobbying for Scott than his initiative over the Memorials.
He was a active member of the Society, which he described as ‘the best of the local Societies’, and had addressed their meetings.
Another prominent member was Edward Augustus Freeman who, as a regular contributor to The Saturday Review , must have been familiar with Hope's aims.
It hardly seems likely that the Government was jolted into action by the Northamptonshire Society's letter, but nevertheless three days later the House of Commons ordered that a Select Committee ‘be appointed to consider and report upon the Re-construction of the Foreign Office in relation to the future Rebuilding of other Offices on a uniform Plan, due regard being had to Public Convenience and Economy’.
Two days later, fifteen MPs were nominated to be members of the Committee.
The Conservatives who, as the governing party, were in the majority included Hope, Manners, Stirling and Lord Robert Cecil, while the Liberals included Hall, Tite, Buxton and Wilson.
The first meeting took place on the following Monday, 7th June, when the seven members present made the momentous choice of Hope as chairman.
This was to be his most important contribution towards the new Foreign Office, but throughout the whole campaign, he unswervingly pursued what he considered to be the ideal solution to the problem.
His views on architecture were well known and, by selecting him as their chairman, the Committee considerably increased the chances of a Gothic building being built.
The fact that the selection of a style became such a contentious issue can be attributed to his sustained advocacy of Gothic.
Fig. 8 Alexander James Beresford Beresford Hope, MP, Chairman of the Select Committee on the Foreign Office Reconstruction 1858.
Alexander James Beresford Beresford Hope (1820–87) was a member of a family of connoisseurs, collectors and patrons, whose wealth derived from the family banking business in Amsterdam.
His father Thomas Hope, who settled in England about 1796, became through his writings and patronage the central figure in the neo-classical movement in England, and made his Duchess Street house, and Deepdene near Dorking, centres for his extensive collections.
Alexander, his third son, was educated at Harrow and Cambridge where he met, as well as Manners, Benjamin Webb who introduced him to the Cambridge Camden Society.
This Society, which later changed its name to the Ecclesiological Society, sought to make churches more worthy settings for worship and for the liturgy of the Church of England.
Hope was an ardent supporter of the Society, and was its President from June 1859 until its dissolution after 1878.
He was a fervent high-churchman but abhorred any association between the high-church wing of the Church of England and the Roman Catholic Church.
He inherited a share of the family fortune, including his home in Connaught Place, from his uncle Henry Philip Hope in 1839, but after his father died, his mother married William Viscount Beresford the Marshal of Portugal and Alexander became his heir.
On the Marshal's death in 1855 he added the Beresford fortune and estates, which included Bedgebury near Maidstone, to the Hope fortune of £300,000, and the second Beresford to his name.
He became an MP in 1841, immediately after leaving Cambridge, representing Maidstone as an independent Conservative until he stood down in 1852 in the hope of an Irish seat, but again represented Maidstone from 1857 until the General Election of 1859.
For 1865 only, he was MP for Stoke on Trent, which was near another Beresford estate, and in 1868 fulfilled his ambition to be University Member for Cambridge.
He held this seat until his death in 1887.
As an MP, Hope was not conspicuously successful.
Although he knew Disraeli, from the outset he had a personal antipathy towards him, and the party leaders disliked Hope's independent attitude.
His indifferent oratory is well known, and he never held office, although he aspired to the Office of Works.
He wrote that in 1874 Disraeli, then Prime Minister, sent ‘civil apologetic messages as to his  inability to find an office for me’.
However, he was partly compensated by being created a Privy Councillor in  Disraeli's resignation honours of 1880, an unusual distinction for an MP who had never held office.
Hope's political power stemmed from his marriage in 1842 to the  daughter of the Marquis of Salisbury, Lady Mildred Cecil, whose brother Lord Robert Cecil achieved the highest political offices.
The men were close personal friends and after Disraeli's resignation in 1880, Salisbury, as he had then become, took over the leadership of the Conservative Party, and in 1885 became Prime Minister as well as Foreign Secretary.
Hope's greatest power lay in his writings, which were prolific and varied, although an enthusiasm for the high-church and Gothic Revival architecture predominated in his works.
As well as writing two novels, he wrote several books about church architecture and liturgy, the best known being The English Cathedral of the Nineteenth Century , and numerous pamphlets, essays and letters to the press.
His most significant literary achievement was his involvement with two important periodicals.
The fact that they had contentious articles written with a fearless pungency seems to have been due to his joint editorship of both.
With Benjamin Webb, Hope edited The Ecclesiologist , the monthly journal of the Cambridge Camden Society, from its inception in 1842 until its last number in 1868.
The Saturday Review of Politics, Literature and Art was, as its full title stated, a much broader based weekly.
From its foundation in 1855, Hope had various professional journalists to assist him as joint editors, and its sharp, sardonic style of comment and outspokenness acquired for it the nickname ‘The Saturday Reviler’.
Apart from Hope and Freeman, other regular contributors included Benjamin Webb and Cecil.
However, it is as an active patron of architecture that Hope is best known, where he used his immense wealth to provide the tangible realization of his Gothic aspirations.
In 1839, Marshal Beresford started building Kilndown Church, near Bedgebury, employing Salvin as his architect, but by March 1840, ‘Hope appears to have taken charge of the alterations’.
The church was finished in 1845, with fittings which aimed to reproduce the mediaeval prototypes as authentically as possible.
In 1841, on the strength of his recent inheritance from Henry Hope, he assisted the newly appointed Master of Trinity College and writer on Gothic architecture, William Whewell, with funds for the restoration of the facade of the Master's Lodge ‘to something like its original shape’.
The work was carried out in 1843 and again Salvin was architect.
A year later, Hope bought the site of St Augustine's Abbey at Canterbury to rebuild it as a college for Anglican missionaries.
This was carried out to the design of William Butterfield and completed in 1848.
Hope also paid for the chapel.
Hope's most spectacular commission, All Saints Margaret Street, was also Butterfield's best-known work.
The Ecclesiological Society wanted to build a model church.
Hope bought a site for this purpose and acted as the client, although he claimed that he was only the Society's agent, and it was not ‘his’ church.
Butterfield, who presumably was Hope's choice, designed the building  in 1849.
Work started in 1850, and although it was substantially complete in 1852, it was not consecrated until 1859.
Hope had lost all interest in the project by then and Butterfield, according to Hope, by 1853 had become ‘quite spoilt by his work on All Saints’, ceased to ‘act as a gentleman’, and became more of an employee.
Hope also quarrelled with the vicar, and in 1854 left, not to return to the church for twenty years.
Hope's other building projects included an abortive scheme for a ‘Christian watering-place so to speak’ at Bedgebury, and a slightly more successful establishment at Sheen in Staffordshire, the other Beresford estate.
Butterfield carried out some work at Sheen for Hope, and he also employed R. C. Carpenter in alterations to Bedgebury Park between 1854 and 1855.
This seems to have been the last of Hope's involvement in actual building, and with the founding of the Saturday , he turned to journalism, although in 1865 the Institute of British Architects elected him as their President.
He had been elected an Honorary Fellow in 1850, and it is clear that Hope's wealth and position were still of sufficient value to the profession that he became the only amateur, apart from Grey, to be the Institute's President.
He seems to have been shy and introspective, but liked it to be known that his was the power behind the scenes.
It perhaps is typical of his approach that he held lavish dinner-parties at his home for the Ecclesiological Society, to which distinguished architects were invited.
One of these was held on Friday, 4th June, 1858, the day after he had been nominated a member of the Select Committee, when the guests included Scott, Cockerell, Charles Barry, Digby Wyatt and Street.
It is tempting to speculate what was discussed then.
The other MP nominated to the Committee, who eventually became President of the Institute, was William Tite (1798–1873).
He is one of the two architects ever to have held this position twice, but this may have been more in recognition of his wealth and status as an MP, and for his interest in the organization of the profession, than for his abilities as an architect.
He was knighted in 1869.
After completing his articles with Laing, his first major work on his own account was the National Scotch Church in Regent Square, off Grays Inn Road, which he built between 1824 and 1827, with a Gothic facade copied from the west front of York Minster.
He was a director of the London and Westminster Bank and in 1837 he was involved in C. R. Cockerell's construction of their new headquarters in Lothbury, but it was with his railway work, which he obtained through his important financial connections, that he was particularly prolific.
He was the titular architect of several British railways, and of the Le Havre-Paris line in France.
He built Southampton, Gosport and Nine Elms Stations for the London and Southampton Railway between 1837 and 1842, and various stations for the London and North-Western Railway, including Lime Street Liverpool in 1846.
These buildings were classical in  treatment, but occasional later stations, such as Carlisle Citadel of 1847 and Windsor Riverside of 1850, were Tudor because of local conditions.
Tite's best-known work is the Royal Exchange in the City of London.
This has a massive classical portico and was built between 1841 and 1844, after a competition and some complicated manoeuvring by Tite to obtain the work.
His attitude towards architectural style was well known before the Select Committee met.
He had attacked the ‘Gothic’ school at the Institute in 1856, and this had provoked replies from Scott and other supporters of the Gothic Revival in the columns of The Builder .
Apart from Buxton, Hope and Tite, there were other members of the Committee who had leanings towards a particular style of architecture.
Colonel Edward Akroyd, the Liberal MP for Huddersfield, had in 1856 commissioned Scott to design the stately Gothic All Souls' Church at Haley Hill, near Halifax, and the abortive Gothic scheme for Halifax Town Hall.
He later asked Scott to design a suburb of working-class housing, known as Akroydon, near Halifax, which was eventually taken over by Scott's former pupil W. H. Crossland.
The other Committee member who emerged as an  enthusiastic Gothic supporter was the Liberal MP for Haddingtonshire, Lord Elcho (1818–1914).
He had the reputation for being clever but lacking in tact or discretion, and held only a minor post in Grey's Government of 1853 to 1855, and although he remained an MP until 1883, when he succeeded as the tenth Earl of Wemyss and March, he never held office again.
The Proceedings
At their second meeting, on 11th July, 1858, the Committee started interviewing witnesses.
In all, thirteen were examined during seven meetings, but many of these were re-examined several times.
Scott had three separate interviews, Hammond four, Pennethorne seven, and Hunt, who provided the information about the organization of the competition and the cost of the schemes, appeared twelve times.
Hammond and Hawes appeared as the permanent heads of the offices to be rehoused, and of the remaining witnesses eight were architects.
Burn, Angell and Pownall were examined on their part in the judging; Coe, Scott and Charles Barry junior as competitors; and Sir Charles Barry as an architect who had ‘directed much thought to the subject’.
Pennethorne was examined on his controversy with Hall who, as well as being a member of the Committee, also gave evidence on this subject.
Hope asked the greatest number of questions, 782, while Tite, who seems to have been anxious to display his professional knowledge as well as counteract Hope's stylistic bias, was a persistent questioner, with 426 questions.
Hall asked 398 questions, but these largely related to his dispute with Pennethorne.
The  other members of the Committee had little effect on the course of the examinations.
Surprisingly inarticulate were Stirling and Buxton in view of their involvement in the competition.
Their total of thirty-six questions was less than 2 per cent of all the questions put, although it was Stirling who revealed the attitude of the lay judges towards the assessors.
Wilson was absent from the Committee until its fifth meeting.
The examination of witnesses was concluded on Wednesday, 7th July, when Hope produced a sixteen-paragraph draft report, which the Committee read and considered in detail.
The first six paragraphs described events leading to the setting up of the Select Committee and the reasons for the choice of witnesses.
These were adopted without dissent, but at the seventh paragraph, which gave reasons for rejecting Pennethorne's scheme, Tite proposed an amendment.
He withdrew it when it was agreed to omit the paragraph in its entirety.
Considerable discussion then took place over the remainder of the report, resulting in three divisions and the wording suggested by Elcho being adopted in every case.
However, the Committee were unable to progress beyond the ninth paragraph at that meeting, and another meeting was held six days later to complete the report.
Four more divisions took place then, before it was finally agreed and ordered to be sent to the House of Commons.
The report was first published on 13th July, with only the Proceedings, and it was not until after the close of the Parliamentary session that a full document with minutes of evidence, appendices, a map and an index appeared.
The wrangling and mis-management were now publicly exposed, but with Parliament dispersed, apart from the press, no effective protest was possible.
The Report
In its final form, the Report of the Select Committee consisted.
of fifteen  paragraphs .
It was critical of the judges' decision to award only one prize to each competitor, and pointed out that there was nothing in the conditions which debarred the same competitor from receiving prizes in more than one of the three parts of the competition.
In a contentious paragraph, which was opposed by Tite and Wilson, the Report said that the Committee had examined Pennethorne's scheme, as well as those awarded the first three places on the Foreign Office list, and recommended that ‘preference should be given to the successful competitors’.
The following paragraphs pointed out that in unlimited competitions, although successful competitors can reasonably expect to be employed, the Government cannot bind itself to employ them, but in this case they should be employed on the new Foreign  Office .
The tenth paragraph contained the Committee's central recommendation.
It stated:
Some of the prize designs being in Italian architecture and some in Gothic, your Committee particularly directed its inquiries to the question whether (apart from considerations of taste) either style had the advantage as to cheapness, commodiousness of arrangement, or facilities for light and ventilation.
The result of these inquiries is, that in those respects no material preference exists on either side.
As to the three first designs it must be recollected that while the first prize for the Foreign Office was awarded to Messrs. Coe and Hofland, yet they did not compete for the War Office again, while in the opinion of Mr. Burn and that of the assessors, Messrs. Banks and Barry stood first in merit for the  Foreign Office; yet, according to the same opinion, they were unsuccessful for the War Office, while Mr. Scott stood second both for one and the other.
The eleventh paragraph recommended that the buildings should be laid out according to a plan, and the ‘very able and magnificent block plan, by M. Crepinet, may furnish valuable hints towards preserving the desired unity’, and the twelfth paragraph said that a residence for the Foreign Secretary was not an absolute necessity, and if reception rooms were to be provided they should be available to every minister.
Paragraphs thirteen and fourteen recommended that the Government should immediately buy the parts of the site of the offices shown on the competition plans that it did not already own, along with the block of buildings between King Street and Parliament Street.
The Report concluded with the comment that the Committee felt it was not prepared to express any opinions about the reconstruction of the War Department.
The Implications of the Report
The four-and-a-half page Report was officially the sole product of the deliberations of fifteen MPs over forty days.
Its only important recommendation was that the vestiges of the competition should be preserved by employing the prizemen in favour of Pennethorne on the Foreign Office.
Its brevity, awkward composition and lukewarm style of its writing stemmed from the Committee's revisions.
Hope's original draft was longer, cohesive and more powerfully worded.
Nevertheless, he might have been well satisfied with the outcome.
It recommended the adoption of the procedure asked for in the Institute's Memorial, which he had helped to organize, and the substitution of moderate passages, in place of his forthright statements, only tended to give the Report the appearance of a more impartial document.
In fact it was unfair and represents a furtherance of Hope's ambition of a Gothic Foreign Office.
In Hope's original draft, Pennethorne was dismissed on the grounds that his  scheme had three faults.
First, that it was only part of a larger scheme, yet Hope had made the point that the new Foreign Office should conform to a larger plan.
Secondly, that it did not conform to Hammond's latest requirements, but then neither did any of the competitors' schemes; and thirdly, that the Committee had doubts about the accuracy of Pennethorne's estimate, yet no estimate was required from the competitors.
When criticizing the decision to award only one prize to each competitor, the Report discounted the judges' placings and only considered Angell and Pownall's and Burn's unofficial lists.
Therefore, Coe and Hofland's first prize was no longer valid as it was only sixth on unofficial lists, and Banks and Barry and Scott moved up to first and second places respectively on the Foreign Office list.
No adequate reason was given for Coe and Hofland's relegation.
Hope in his draft bluntly stated that it ‘cannot recommend the appointment of Messrs. Coe and Hofland, although they had obtained first prize’.
Their planning was good, but Coe's largely one-word answers during his examination convey an impression of nervousness, compared with Scott and Barry's elaborate replies.
This inexperience appears to be their only real drawback, but obviously the style of architecture did not suit Hope's taste.
The Building News commented that the reflection upon Coe and Hofland's ‘personal and professional reputations was most unfair and unworthy’.
It also seems unfair that the Report should appear to place Scott as an equal with Banks and Barry, because of his second place on the unofficial War Department lists.
The Committee had been appointed to consider the Foreign Office only and, although they heard a considerable amount of evidence about rebuilding the War Department as part of the denigration of Pennethorne, they specifically excluded it from their Report.
The technical background to the Report was provided by Hunt's evidence, and although this information appears to have been impartial, his relationship with Scott and interests in the site could well have coloured some of his evidence.
The Committee under Hope's tight control produced a Report which effectively left the choice of architect for the new Foreign Office between Scott and Banks and Barry.
Hope's final effort to push Scott in front of Banks and Barry came two months after the Report.
The Appointment of Gilbert Scott as Architect and his New Brief
Scott's Commission
On 25th September, 1858,The Saturday Review carried an article entitled ‘The Question of Architectural Style for the new Public Offices’ which, according to The Building News , ‘many will be inclined to take as an official article’.
It stated that Scott, who ‘has fairly earned the most distinguished place in the late competition’, should receive the commission, or the fourteen office prize-winners should compete against themselves.
It pointed out that the Committee had found that Gothic and Classic were equally suitable as the style to be adopted, but Coe and Hofland and Banks and Barry had mistakenly chosen.
classical on ‘the supposition that a Classical design would be more acceptable to public taste than a Gothic one’.
It declared its:
unalterable conviction in favour of the adoption for our Palace of Administration of the revived national style — a style so characteristic of our own age it is beginning to be called Victorian — we protest against being obliged to tolerate an effete Palladian or mongrel Renaissance architecture to please those who wish to claim the merit of a breadth of view and of artistic sympathy by denying that they have any prejudices on the subject, one way or the other.
The reason why Hope should advocate Scott in particular, when a limited competition might give the ecclesiologically sounder Street the work, may have been that Scott was more likely to carry out the work successfully.
In the event, Street was overwhelmed with a similar large-scale commission in later years, with the Law Courts.
On the same day that the article appeared in The Saturday Review , Hofland, perhaps prompted by the tone of the article, wrote to Manners commending Italian for the Foreign Office design and asking when the architect was to be appointed.
Hofland was apparently still hopeful, although a list of his qualifications for the work gives as air of desperation to his letter.
Seven weeks after the article, on 12th November, 1858, Manners sent the Treasury a letter, the first paragraph of which was later published as a Parliamentary Paper in the following form:
In accordance with the recommendation of the Select Committee of The House of Commons ‘on Foreign Office reconstruction'’, made in their Report, dated 13th July last, ‘‘that a preference should be given to the successful competitors in the erection of the New Foreign Office, it is the intention of the Government to employ as the architect of the proposed building, in the event of the necessary funds being voted by Parliament in the ensuing Session, Mr. George Gilbert Scott, one of the successful competitors'’.
The second quotation should have closed immediately after the words ‘New Foreign Office’, but as the paper stands it can easily be misconstrued that the Report recommended Scott's appointment.
The Treasury approved Manners' proposal on 24th November, and five days later the Office of Works wrote to Scott, informing him that he had been appointed architect to the new Foreign Office.
It asked him to omit the Foreign Secretary's residence, and although generally to conform to the 1856 conditions, he should ascertain Hammond's latest requirements and find out if the building could be reduced in size.
If possible, the building should not encroach on the park and should harmonize with later buildings to be built in the area.
The letter concluded:
As soon as you shall have considered the whole subject the First Commissioner will be glad to receive from you probationary sketches of the Plans and Design generally, and he will then give you further instructions with reference to the future preparation of detailed plans, specifications and estimates.
Scott's Qualifications for the Work
It would not have been difficult for Manners to justify his appointment of Scott.
His qualifications for the commission far outstripped those of the other prize-winners in the competition.
He was an Associate of the Royal Academy, having been elected in 1855.
He had exhibited work every year since 1847, and had given about three of a series   of lectures on mediaeval architecture to students at the Academy, which he had started the previous year.
He was also completing his two-year term as a senior Vice-President of the Institute of British Architects.
Fig. 9 Sir George Gilbert Scott, RA, architect of the Foreign, Home and Colonial Offices, and joint architect of the India Office.
His increasing literary output must also have been making him and his views known to the public.
He was in his own words ‘a confirmed scribbler’, and had had letters and papers published, several pamphlets and two books.
The first book,A Plea for the Faithful Restoration of our Ancient Churches , was based on a lecture that he had given and came out in 1850.
His second book,Remarks , was a much weightier production.
It was first published in 1857, with a second slightly amended edition in 1858, and was significantly dedicated to Hope.
His main argument was that Gothic, having been used for nineteenth-century churches, should now be considered as the basis of all building types, particularly domestic, although commercial and public buildings were considered.
This did not mean a slavish copying of mediaeval motifs, but rather that the style would provide a basis from which a future architecture would develop, using modern materials and techniques.
The book can be seen as an attempt by Scott to assert himself as leading expert on Gothic Revival secular buildings, perhaps having felt that during the great church-building period of the 1840s and 1850s his work was overshadowed by that of other architects, particularly Pugin and Street.
The Saturday Review rather patronizingly commented that it was ‘agreeably written’, and ‘recommended to general readers’.
But by expressing his views in this way, Scott must have given his clients a clear indication of the type of building he wanted to build.
His office was perhaps another factor in his choice.
At Spring Gardens, it was geographically the nearest to the site of all the successful competitors, and by the standards of the day, it was a large organization.
According to Sir Thomas Graham Jackson (1835–1924) who joined it as a pupil in October 1858, ‘Counting pupils, salaried assistants and clerks, I think we were twenty-seven in all’.
Some of the others who eventually became well-known architects were John J. Stevenson, Charles Hodgson Fowler, Robert Johnson, and Scott's own sons George Gilbert and John Oldrid.
The senior men were Richard Coad, John Burlison and a man Jackson calls John Bignold.
Scott clearly had the physical capacity to handle this large project.
Most impressive of all Scott's qualifications was his rare combination of youth and experience.
At forty-seven years of age, he was young enough that he could be expected to complete the work, and yet he had probably built more buildings than any of his close rivals.
He had completed his articles with James Edmeston of Bishopsgate before he was twenty, and was involved in several large building projects including Hungerford Market and the Fishmongers Hall (1831–4) when he worked for Henry Roberts, before he set up on his own.
From 1833, when he obtained his first two commissions including the period of his partnership with Moffatt between 1839 and 1845, Scott had completed  at least 167 new buildings and 65 restorations.
At the time of his Foreign Office appointment, he was engaged on at least forty-seven buildings, including major restorations of Westminster and St Albans Abbeys, Gloucester, Ely, Lichfield and Wakefield Cathedrals and eleven new churches.
Scott's appointment could be easily justified on the grounds of his qualifications alone, but the attempt by the Select Committee to make something of the competition results only serves to cast doubt on the reasons for the appointment.
As a means of selecting a design, the competition had been a complete failure, but in view of the effort which had gone into it, official opinion was not prepared to write it off.
Instead, extraordinarily tenuous arguments were used to relate the competition results to Scott's appointment.
All the competition had achieved was an examination of the various possible designs, and if Manners was determined to have a Gothic Foreign Office, it showed that Scott was probably the most suitable architect to carry it out.
On the same day that Scott received his letter of appointment, William Burges and John L. Pearson sent Scott their congratulations.
No doubt both men, as supporters of the Gothic Revival, expected Scott to adhere to his stated principles.
The Formation of the India Office
Disraeli's Government of India Act of 1858 was introduced as a direct result of the Indian Mutiny, and as a consequence of the administrative changes brought about by that Act, Scott's brief was considerably extended.
The affairs of the sub-continent since 1600 had been administered by the East India Company from its headquarters in Leadenhall Street in the City of London, but after 1784, a Cabinet Committee, usually known as the Board of Control, gradually took over various administrative functions from the Company.
After 1817 the Board had its offices in Canon Row, on the east side of Parliament Street.
The Act dissolved the Company and transferred its powers and those of the Board of Control to a new Secretary of State.
Lord Edward Henry Stanley, the eldest son of Lord Derby the Prime Minister, had been President of the Board of Control and in September 1858 was appointed by his father to be the new Secretary of State for India.
His two secretaries at the Board became the Under Secretaries, and in many respects the new Office was similar in organization to Offices of the other Secretaries of State.
Its staff, which was drawn from the Board and the East India Company, were considered to be part of the Home Civil Service, but there were two important differences from the other departments.
First, the Secretary of State had an advisory Council for India who were subservient to him, except for certain revenue and financial functions, and  secondly, the cost of the Office, which included its building and site, would be defrayed from the revenues of India.
There was no question that the new Office needed a new building.
The Canon Row building was too small, and East India House, in the City, which had been rebuilt by Holland in 1800 and extended by Wilkins in 1829, was too remote for proper governmental control.
Manners instructed Hunt to ascertain the accommodation requirements of the India Office and to examine the possibility of utilizing the land to the east of the Foreign Office site, originally designated for the War Department, for the new Office.
Hunt reported on 14th December, 1858 that he had found that the site was just adequate, but he could not make a precise calculation until the accommodation requirements had been considered further by the India Office and the space required by the Foreign Office had been settled.
On the following day, Stanley told the Finance Committee of the India Council that they had been offered this site, and pointed out the advantages of buying the land from the Government rather than obtaining a special Act of Parliament.
The advantages of such a close integration into the existing administration seems to have been obvious, as no doubt were those of a prominent site for a building which should be seen as the expression of a desire to give India a better government.
Stanley also told the Committee that Scott was about to rebuild the Foreign Office and he would suggest ‘that as unity of design is essential, Mr. Scott should be appointed to undertake the work’.
With the peculiar methods of financing the India Office, Scott's appointment came from Stanley and in no way involved the Office of Works and was largely beyond the control of Parliament.
He was made aware of his impending appointment about the time of Hunt's report, but it was not until 1st January, 1859 that he was sent his official letter of appointment.
This delay was probably due to the intervention of Matthew Digby Wyatt (1820–77) who, as Surveyor of the East India Company since 1855, had a strong claim for the work.
But Wyatt was known to have leanings towards classical architecture, and by choosing Scott after his intentions for the Foreign Office were well known, Stanley indicated that he also required a Gothic building.
Support for Scott could have come from Stanley's Parliamentary Under Secretary, Henry Baillie, who was a personal friend of Manners and had been a supporter of Young England.
The Partnership between Scott and Digby Wyatt
On hearing about the intention to appoint Scott, Wyatt wrote to Stanley, strongly protesting against the proposal.
He claimed that if he was appointed instead of Scott, both the Foreign and the India Offices ‘are likely to be better and more quickly built’, as the two offices were too much for one architect to handle simultaneously.
It was no argument, he said, that the two offices must harmonize, as only one of the four elevations of the building would be seen with the Foreign Office, and with ‘that exception the buildings should differ, because a picturesque style which might look well from a Park would look fantastic from a Street’.
Apparently this did not produce the desired reaction from Stanley, so Wyatt went on 17th December to see Scott who, with a disarming naïveté, immediately agreed to a proposal from Wyatt that he should take him on as an equal partner and relinquish half the work to him.
In a letter confirming their arrangement which Scott sent on the same day, his main concern was to ensure the approval of Stanley and the India Council.
He wrote that if they agreed that:
there would be a practical advantage in uniting some official knowledge of their wants as well as your artistic skill, on the one hand, with my own claims, whatever they may be considered to be, on the other; and were they to honour us by proposing a joint appointment, I can only say that I should feel much satisfaction in undertaking this great work in conjunction with a brother Architect for whom I have so great a respect as yourself…
The division of work would be that Scott would have ‘(subject to its conformity with internal arrangements) the general command of the external design, and Wyatt would have ‘the more especial direction of the interior’, except that they should work jointly on certain interiors ‘of a more public nature such as public halls staircases corridors and what may be called the state apartments’.
Fees and expenses would be divided equally between them.
Wyatt submitted Scott's letter to the India Council and, as a result, his official letter of 1st January, 1859 entrusted Scott with ‘the architectural superintendence of the building’, except that to ensure:
the perfect adaption of the internal arrangements of the new India Office to the requirements of the Secretary of State for India in Council, Mr. M. Digby Wyatt's experience be made available, and that the necessary designs and plans be accordingly prepared by him and Mr. Scott in communication with each other.
Wyatt was a member of the well-known family of architects.
His second cousin had been Sir James Wyatt, ‘the brilliant but facile’ Surveyor General.
He had been a pupil in the office of his older brother Thomas Henry Wyatt, the prize-winner in the barracks competition, and they later worked in partnership on several schemes.
Digby Wyatt's earliest extant building is the Gothic Aldingham Hall, Cumbria, of 1846 to 1850, and although he designed the Pompeian, Byzantine, English Gothic, Italian and Renaissance Courts at the re-erected Crystal Palace at Sydenham in 1854, and The Art Journal commented that he had ‘in practice attached himself more heartily to the classic’, he felt, like Scott, that the nineteenth century should have its particular form of architecture, but unlike Scott, he thought that this should be an adaptation of the Cinquecento style.
However, up to the time of his partnership agreement with Scott, he had only completed approximately ten buildings, and was perhaps better known as a writer and administrator.
He had by then produced over thirty publications, including books, reports, pamphlets and articles.
His first book,Specimens of the Geometrical Mosaic of the Middle Ages , appeared in 1848, and in 1849 the Society of Arts, of which Prince Albert was President, commissioned him to write a report on the eleventh Paris Exhibition.
He travelled there with Henry Cole, and as a result of the report and his friendship with Cole, Wyatt at the age of twenty-nine became the Secretary of the Executive Committee of the Great Exhibition of 1851.
This in turn brought him into contact with Owen Jones, the Superintendent of the Exhibition, for whom he wrote two introductions to Jones' Grammar of Ornament , first published in 1856.
It seems surprising that Scott should be so ready to co-operate over the India Office with a man with such a different background and approach to architecture from himself.
No doubt his personal friendship with Wyatt, which was sustained throughout the work, helped, but Scott, with some justification, seemed to regard himself as the senior partner.
He was nine years Wyatt's senior, and the official letter of appointment from Stanley, vesting Scott with the overall control of the project, would accord with Wyatt's reputation as an expert on decoration and ornament, rather than as an executive architect.
Scott also possibly thought that close co-operation with a member of the exclusive and highly influential ‘Cole Circle’, which derived from the Great Exhibition, could have distinct advantages.
The Gothic Design
The Attacks on Scott
On the same day that Scott was appointed architect for the new India Office, 1st January, 1859, came the opening of the controversy which was for the next thirty months to dominate the campaign to rebuild the Foreign Office.
The Battle of the Styles, as H. S. Goodhart-Rendel and Peter Collins specifically call the arguments over the architecture of the new Foreign Office, was centred on debates in the House of Commons between February 1859 and July 1861.
But even before Parliament assembled, the first shot in this battle came from an unexpected quarter, that of Scott's ‘valued friend’, John Henry Parker.
Parker, an Oxford publisher and bookseller, and writer of some popular architectural books, was President of the Oxford Architectural and Historical Society.
He was also the publisher of the monthly Gentleman's Magazine , and in its 1st January, 1859 number he published a letter from himself urging Scott to ‘get rid of the foreign look which pervaded’ his design for the Foreign Office, and to use English thirteenth-century architecture as his model.
Street declared in The Builder that Parker was expressing his personal views and not writing on behalf of the Oxford Architectural Society, and if Parker's ‘excessively antiquarian view of our own present duties were to be put forward as the real and right ground for us to work upon, I, for one, should have very little hope of the ultimate success of our course’.
No country afforded more examples of domestic architecture than Italy.
Even the Oxford Museum was not free from Italian influence and ‘Scott would be throwing away his best chance’ if he let himself be debarred from doing the same.
Parker complained next month in The Gentleman's Magazine that he had been misunderstood or misrepresented, and that his delight ‘at the triumph of  the Gothic over its rival, the Palladian style’ should be taken for granted.
For the past twenty years he had been trying to show the ‘educated classes’ the merits of Gothic and now found them acknowledged ‘by the highest authorities in the land’.
He intended no offence to Scott, who was the leading living architect, and only wanted to appeal to his good sense and taste, but he could not understand Street's attack on him, whose attitude that ‘no one is an architect until he has been in Rome’, is the same as our grandfathers.
An interesting aspect of Parker's letter is the comment that Scott was susceptible to reason, while Street is shown as less compromising.
Parker's complacency about acceptance of Gothic must have been short-lived.
On 11th February, 1859, Tite, at almost the earliest opportunity he had in Parliament after Scott's appointment, asked Manners why Banks and Barry had been passed over, as Scott's design was inconvenient and expensive and Scott was ‘as competent to erect an Italian building, as a Gothic one’.
Manners replied that the Select Committee had found no difference between Gothic and Classic, ‘as regards economy, commodiousness and public utility’, and his choice of the Gothic design was governed ‘by the site on which the Foreign Office was to be placed’.
Hall said that he could not see why the first and second prize-winners had been passed over, as a Gothic building would have nothing in common with the nearby Treasury Chambers and Whitehall.
Hope then made what was to be his last appeal to the House of Commons for a Gothic Foreign Office, as he was to be out of Parliament from May 1859 until 1865, when the present building was being built.
He said that Scott's selection was justified, as in the competition he had obtained the ‘sum total of merit’ on the lists of Burn and the assessors, and had proved to the Committee that his windows let in more light than any other public building in London.
If the House reversed the Government's decision to employ Scott, it would be a great injury ‘to a most distinguished man’ and a ridiculous situation would arise, with the India Office being built in one style, paid out of Indian funds, and the Foreign Office being built in another style.
He asked if Hall had forgotten that it was intended eventually to extend the new buildings as far as Great George Street where they would be seen with the Abbey and the Palace of Westminster.
William Coningham, Liberal MP for Brighton, declared that Gothic was a barbarous style, ‘peculiar to a sect of which the hon.
Member for Maidstone (Mr. Beresford Hope) was a distinguished representative, but it was antagonistic to the taste and feelings of the English people’.
Palmerston, making his first public utterance on the design of the new Foreign Office, then attacked the Government with what Manners later called ‘a dashing rattling sort of speech, which the House cheered and laughed at’.
He said that the Government had not given satisfactory reasons for choosing Scott.
If Scott had been selected because he was second for both the War Office and the Foreign Office, now that the War Office is no longer required, then surely  his claim is now reduced.
He agreed with Coningham's protest against Gothic: ‘it is going back to the barbarism of the dark ages’, and he could not see why all the buildings in the area should be the same style, as the ‘neighbourhood of Downing Street is full of buildings of totally different styles of architecture’.
He then said,
The State Paper Office, a most convenient fire-proof building, which cost the public £50,000, is, we hear, to be pulled down; and the mania for pulling down is to extend not only to it, but, in order to complete the ‘congruity’, we should have to Gothicise the Horse Guards, and apply Gothic exteriors to all buildings in the neighbourhood.
He had seen from the Select Committee's Report that Scott had studied the Greek and Italian styles as well as Gothic and, being ‘a person of great talent’, he hoped he would put ‘a more lively and enlightened front to his buildings’.
Scott's Defence and its Repercussions
Derby's Government had no clear majority in the House of Commons, and as at any time, Palmerston could return to power, the significance of his remarks were not lost on Scott.
He hurriedly wrote a long letter to The Times , which it published on 14th February, the Monday after the debate.
He complained that his design had been criticized for deficient lighting but he had shown the Committee that his windows were larger than those in sixteen or seventeen well-known classical buildings in London.
He had no intention of ‘Gothicizing’ the neighbouring buildings, and he was not going to demolish the State Paper Office for this reason, as Palmerston had implied, although like the other competitors he had assumed that it would be removed.
However, his new design was arranged so that it could be retained.
He then said:
as to cheerfulness of character, I really think that any unprejudiced person would come to the conclusion that, if compared with the Post-office, the Museum, the Palace, or even the Board of Trade or Whitehall Chapel, my design would carry the palm in this respect.
He asked MPs for fair consideration as he said:
I propose to erect a building which friends and foes have agreed in praising.
It will contain one of the finest and openest quadrangles in this country; its details will be more than ordinarily lively and cheerful; its amount of window light will exceed that of, probably, any public building in this country; its construction will embody every modern improvement, invention, and appliance; its materials will be the most perfect which long and earnest study enable me to render them, while its cost will not in the least exceed what is customary with public buildings in the usual style.
In his anxiety on finding out that he could be deprived of his commission, Scott had rushed into print, without properly considering the effect of his letter on others.
By claiming that his work was superior to that of fellow architects Barry, Smirke and Blore, he was not only casting doubt upon the ethics of the architectural profession, but was also blatantly arrogant.
He even had the audacity to claim that his building would be better than Inigo Jones' much admired Banqueting House.
When his letter appeared, Scott realized his mistake, and on the same day sent off another letter to The Times , attempting to explain his extraordinary remarks.
He felt he had
spoken with unbecoming censure respecting the works of  cotemporary architects, and somewhat boastfully of my own design for the building under consideration.
I feel it my duty to disclaim any such intention.
I wrote in great haste and under some excitement, from the statements to which I referred,[Palmerston's remarks]and plead this as my excuse if I expressed what I did not really intend.
In speaking of the works of others I referred to that disposition to be dissatisfied which the public have sometimes with and often without reason evinced.
However, the damage had already been done.
On the evening after the first letter appeared, 14th February, the Institute held a Special General Meeting to ratify the Council's recommendations for prizes and awards, which included one that the Institute's highest award, the Royal Gold Medal in Architecture for 1858, should be conferred on Scott.
He later wrote:
Professor Donaldson was so irate at my letter in the Times, which he considered to reflect upon English architects in general, that he proposed moving the Institute to reverse the recommendation of their council to award to me the annual Royal Gold Medal of the Institute, and was only dissuaded from attempting to inflict that gratuitous dishonour upon me by strong remonstrances.
Scott's first letter had been an appalling error, and it would seem sufficient reason why Donaldson should suggest reversing the decision to award him the Gold Medal, but Scott, when drafting his Recollections in later years, looked for further motives behind Donaldson's action as he could not ‘reconcile it with the character and generosity which Donaldson has usually evinced’.
He assumed that Donaldson's
somewhat morbidly correct ideas as to competition rendered the idea of the third premium man coming in first had much to do with it.
Though, as he agreed in throwing Coe overboard while Barry and I were reported, virtually, by the select committee, to be on an equality, I fear that personal feelings together with hostility to my style , had an even stronger influence.
The Reasons for Scott's Appointment
On Friday, 18th February, 1859, a week after Tite's question to Manners, Hall raised the subject of Scott's appointment again, saying that under the rules of the House he had been debarred from saying more before.
He now asked Manners why the first and second prize-winners in the competition had been passed over and Scott appointed, and requested that MPs should be given the opportunity to see all three designs displayed together before any further steps
Manners replied that he had three reasons for appointing Scott in preference to the other two prize-winners.
The first was that, as Hall had told the architects he had met before the competition, the Government were under no obligation to employ any of the successful competitors.
The second reason was that Palmerston had gone further than that by insisting on the appointment of an architect who had not even entered the competition, and the third reason was that the whole affair was so tangled when he took office that he appointed a Select Committee to look into it.
They reported that there was no difference between the first three prize-winners, and so he had appointed Scott because of the genius loci .
He intended to exhibit ‘the whole of the working designs, drawings and estimates’ of Scott's latest scheme in the library of the House, and if members wished, he would also exhibit the three competition designs in a Committee Room.
But they should not compare the two sets of drawings too closely, as the competition schemes were part of a larger layout, and Scott's latest design was for a much smaller building which, although it included an official residence, hardly exceeded the bulk and cost of the original office part alone.
Lewis claimed that the Opposition had forced Palmerston's Government to abandon the Bill to purchase all the land required for the competition schemes, and Pennethorne's scheme fitted the limited area owned by the Government.
Tite, obviously speaking as an architect, warned the House that if working drawings were prepared and tenders obtained from builders, Manners would find himself committed.
he should ask Scott for an accurate estimate now, when he could still withdraw.
Coningham said that he had looked more closely at Scott's scheme since the last debate, and ‘could not acquiesce in the high opinion which that gentleman appeared to entertain of himself, judging by the long string of superlatives in his own praise with which he wound up his recent letter to The Times' .
The Broad Sanctuary houses were common-place and unattractive, and it was ‘an important question of principle’ if this style was to be applied to other public building.
Palmerston wound up the debate with a forthright speech, which hardly seems to justify Scott's later remark that it contained ‘a quantity of poor  buffoonery which only Lord P.'s age permits’.
He supported Lewis and Hall, and reinforced Tite's warning that the Government could ‘incur a very large expense which possibly, may be wholly thrown away’.
Compared with Barry's Board of Trade, the Broad Sanctuary houses were hideous and it ‘would excite one's horror, if one were to imagine that any portion of London was to be covered with such edifices’.
The Support for Scott
On the day after the debate, Saturday, 19th February, ‘Habitans in Sicco’ wrote to The Times from what he called ‘Broad Phylactery’, to ridicule the classical attitudes of the Opposition, and said that he had lived in a Broad Sanctuary house for three years and found that it possessed ‘all the comforts and conveniences of any house in London’.
Two days later, Coningham replied that he thought the irregular treatment of the Broad Sanctuary houses stemmed from ‘no other motive than the architect's wish for the picturesque’.
However, all the leading architectural journals were vociferous in their support for Scott.
The Builder had an editorial on 19th February which contained extracts from a letter from Scott reasserting that his design was better lit, as convenient and no more expensive than a classical design, and it commented that Scott's opponents did not understand that he was not intending to reproduce old forms rigidly and he was only willing to introduce ‘the refinements and inventions of our own day’.
The next issue reported the second debate and suggested that a model would help MPs to understand the scheme.
Even more vigorous support came from The Building News which in a leading article on 18th February attacked the attitudes of Palmerston and Tite during the first debate, and made the incorrect comment that Hope had said that Manners was only following Stanley's lead in choosing Scott for the Foreign Office.
This was followed in the next issue by an examination of the reasons for the controversy, which could include personal vanity.
‘That the architect of the ‘cheerful’ Cemetery Chapel at Woking [Tite]should bear a grudge against the architect of St. Giles's, Camberwell,[Scott]is, perhaps, no more than might be expected from a spirit of professional rivalry degenerated into envy.’
It then mentioned the ‘Habitans in Sicco’ letter and some comments Street made at a meeting of the Architectural Photographic Association on 15th February when he assumed that the Opposition MPs either had not looked at Scott's design or that ‘they misrepresented the facts’.
The monthly Civil Engineer and Architects Journal , in its March edition, said that Hall was ‘indulging the weakness of feeling annoyed that the scheme on which he had so greatly and justly plumed himself should fall into the hands of his successor’.
Scott's appointment was justified by his reputation, and having  been chosen as architect of the India Office, he should not lose the Foreign Office.
Support for Scott again came from the Northampton Architectural Society.
They organized a petition to beg the House of Commons to confirm the use of Gothic for the new Foreign Office as the style ‘more national, and appropriate to the site than any other, and at least equally convenient and economical’.
At the same time they submitted a memorial to Manners which stated their conviction ‘that by a developement [sic]on the basis of the old architecture of the country there exists the best hope of our Public Buildings being effectually improved in character’.
It expected that Scott would produce a building to vie with his great designs abroad and concluded with the hope that ‘the recent discussions in which so much misapprehension has been exhibited will not shake your determination to carry out the selected design’.
The Preparations for Building
On 27th December, 1858, Hammond had requested a report on the condition of the old Foreign Office, which Phipps carried out and submitted to Manners on 12th January 1859.
It said that inherently bad foundations and faulty construction meant that the cost of maintaining the old building for any length of time ‘must be necessarily large’, and even at the time of his examination the building was undergoing further repairs.
On structural grounds alone, a new building was needed as it was now so weak that it probably would not be able to withstand building operations being carried out on the surrounding land.
The report was passed on to Hammond and Scott.
Scott prepared a plan showing the relationship between the Foreign Office and the India Office which he sent to the Office of Works, who then on 17th January, 1859 instructed him to proceed with detailed drawings and prepare an approximate estimate of the cost of the new Foreign Office.
From Manners' remarks in Parliament on 18th February, it is clear that he was by then already familiar with Scott's proposals although the detailed drawings were not sent to his office until 3rd March.
Scott's instructions to proceed with working drawings followed on 17th March with a request for a list of builders willing to tender for the work.
He wrote round to fifteen builders on 22nd March and, with what today would be regarded as incredible naïveté, asked them to meet him together at the Office of Works on 24th March.
Scott had appointed C. Balam of Balam and Lee as his surveyor.
It seems that Manners was anxious to press ahead with building as quickly as possible in an attempt to pre-empt the Opposition from changing the scheme if they returned to power.
But he still had to obtain Parliamentary authority for the purchase of the part of the site not covered by Molesworth's Act of 1855.
No doubt to obtain a quick and smooth passage for his measures, he was less  ambitious than in Hall's ill-fated Bill of 1857, and only sought power to purchase the outstanding 1.25 acres (0.50 ha.) between Charles Street and Crown Street and 0.5 acre (0.19 ha.) of St James's Park.
By omitting the blocks to the east and west of the site that Hall had included, Manners was effectively answering Palmerston's accusation that the Government was indulging in a ‘mania for pulling down’.
He introduced the Bill on 4th March, 1859; it was given a Second Reading on 18th March and passed to a Select Committee which besides himself included Hall and Stirling.
They made one minor amendment on timing; it was given a Third Reading on 5th April, and sent to the Lords.
They passed it on 19th April when it obtained the Royal Assent and became law with the short title,The Public Offices Extension Act 1859 .
Although it is not mentioned in the Act, the Government intended to act as an agent of the Government of India, by using its compulsory powers to purchase the site of the India Office and sell it back to the Indian Government.
However, because of the limited scope of the Act, the east front of the India Office would only be seen at an oblique angle from the narrow King Street, and it would not have the space in front of it, as originally proposed.
At the other end of the site, as the State Paper Office and its neighbouring houses in Duke Street would remain, only a third of Scott's west elevation of the Foreign Office would be seen from the park.
Hunt's invidious position as the Government's Surveyor of the Works becomes apparent upon comparison between the schedules of ownership attached to Hall's Bill and Manners' Act.
Westminster Abbey owned, or had a part interest in, twenty-three of the houses involved, in Crown Street, Crown Court and King Street, and by the time of the second schedule they had sold five of these to a private owner.
Hunt as the Surveyor to the Dean and Chapter of the Abbey must have been involved, and it is difficult not to assume that he had a conflict of loyalties in this transaction.
He also could be seen as having secured the continuation of his private office at No. 4 Parliament Street, when the block of buildings between King Street and Parliament Street was omitted from the Act.
The clearance of the portion of the site already authorized was in hand at this stage, but progressing slowly.
A sketch of the houses on the north side of the west end of Crown Street made by T. H. Shepherd in May 1858 shows them in the early stages of demolition, but two of his later sketches, dated March 1859, show almost the whole south side of Fludyer Street as still standing although notice had been served on some of the occupiers as early as March 1856.
On 7th April, 1859, Scott and Wyatt sent drawings and a joint report on their design for the India Office to Stanley.
They stated that the accommodation had been checked by the staff and in the design they aimed at,
ensuring abundant light, and ventilation in every part of the building together with that character of sober dignity which should (we venture to  consider) characterise a building of national importance, placed upon one of the most commanding sites in the Metropolis, and intended to correspond with structures of equal grandeur and extent.
Eight days later, Scott received an official letter approving the design of the India Office and instructing him to proceed with the working drawings.
But again political events were overtaking the scheme and bringing in their wake a radical reshaping of the whole programme.
Palmerston's Return
Following defeat over Disraeli's Reform Bill on 31 st March, 1859 Derby called a General Election for the end of April in the hope of strengthening the Conservatives position in the House of Commons.
But when the new Parliament assembled on 31st May the balance of parties was the same as before, and in negotiations which followed, Disraeli offered Palmerston a seat in a Conservative Government, with the possibility of being Prime Minister.
It is tempting to speculate on what would have been the form of the Foreign Office had this union occurred.
In the event, Palmerston and Russell agreed to sink their differences and with a united opposition the Conservatives' days were numbered.
A vote of no confidence in the Government was carried on 11th June and Derby's administration immediately resigned.
The Queen, after again looking for alternatives, faced the inevitable, and on 12th June asked Palmerston to lead a new government.
He had problems forming an administration and it was not until 1st July that he was able to tell the Queen of his main ministerial appointments.
Gladstone and Russell became Chancellor of the Exchequer and Foreign Secretary respectively, for the second time, and Sir Charles Wood, a former President of the Board of Control, became the Secretary of State for India.
Hall went to the House of Lords, and the new First Commissioner of Works was Henry Fitzroy, the MP for Lewes in Sussex and son of Lord Southampton.
He had been an Under Secretary at the Home Office when Palmerston was Home Secretary between 1852 and 1855.
Scott's fears had now materialized.
His ‘arch-opponent’, as he called Palmerston, was ‘once more the autocrat of England’, and although he thought that Fitzroy was on his side, he was ‘sworn to uphold Lord P's views’.
On 7th July, a week after taking office, Fitzroy was pressed by Tite to adhere to Manners' promise to exhibit Scott's new design for the Foreign Office along with the tenders and the prize-winning schemes from the competition.
He replied that the tenders would not be available for three weeks, but the drawings would be ready in ten days.
A week later, Tite again asked for the drawings to be exhibited ‘with as little delay as possible’.
Fitzroy acquiesced and said that they would be placed in a Reading Room on the following day.
Scott's drawings, as  anticipated, were not ready and all that MPs could see were the old competition drawings.
On Wednesday, 20th July, 120 of Scott's drawings of the Foreign and India Offices were displayed in the library of the House of Commons, along with a large model of both offices by Heburn Salter of Hammersmith, which The Builder thought would not ‘advance the interests of the design as a work of art’.
The tenders were not received until the following week.
The Final Gothic Design
Scott's design for the Foreign and India Offices was similar to his successful competition entry.
The two offices faced each other across a large internal courtyard entered through low archways from Downing Street and Charles Street.
While the mass of the India Office was similar to that of the War Department with its own internal courts, the Foreign Office was considerably shallower, being only two rooms and a corridor deep throughout.
Centrally placed towers, capped with high-pitched roofs, dominated the east facade of the India Office and the west facade of the Foreign Office.
The Foreign Secretary now had a smaller official residence in the north-west corner of the block, with reception rooms which could be used for ‘various practical objects connected with the department’.
This was Scott's third attempt to show how a residence could be included.
He had previously produced another scheme which, in accordance with the recommendation of the Select Committee, omitted the residence completely.
The scheme was extensively illustrated and described in some detail by the leading architectural periodicals, and there is an elevational drawing of the east front of the Foreign Office in the Victoria and Albert Museum.
The Royal Institute of British Architects has a highly finished perspective view of the same front, and an elevation and perspective of the east front of the India Office.
This closely resembles Scott's War Department 116a entry in the competition, the main difference being in the numbers and grouping of the windows.
These illustrations show slightly more freedom in architectural treatment than Scott used in the competition, as The Civil Engineer and Architects' Journal said, although he adhered to the general principle of uniformity,
the external design is nevertheless made everywhere to result from the necessities of the interior: the positions of the windows are decided not so much with regard to external effect, as with reference to the rooms they light; and even the heights of stories will be found to vary in parts to suit internal convenience.
The informal disposition of windows and minor elements is particularly apparent on the west facade where a large bay containing the reception rooms   projects at the north end, and rose windows in the dormers of the south wing are balanced by conventional dormers on the north wing.
Perhaps the retention of the State Paper Office and its adjacent houses led Scott to this asymmetrical composition, but he seems to have made little attempt to relate the design of his central tower to Soane's Italianate structure even though it would have been only approximately 20 feet (6.096 m) away.
Fig. 10 The final Gothic design, 1859.
The Foreign Office from the east.
(Reproduced by courtesy of the British Architectural Library, RIBA, London)
Scott's personal involvement in all stages of the design is clear from his Recollections , and his staff merely made the drawings.
The illustrations in the periodicals are inscribed as having been drawn by John Drayton Wyatt, who prepared many plates of Scott's work for publication and also regularly exhibited drawings of designs by Scott and others at the Royal Academy.
He joined Scott and Moffatt as an assistant in 1841, but by the time of the Foreign and India Office commission, he was probably working on a freelance basis, as he was not mentioned by Jackson, nor was he included in a list of members of the office sketch club in 1866.
This would help to explain Scott's ability to produce the vast quantity of work displayed in the House of Commons and still carry on with his normal office work.
Palmerston and Scott
Palmerston's Intervention
Justification for Scott's impressive display in the House of Commons became apparent within a few days of his drawings being hung.
He later wrote:
Lord Palmerston sent for me and told me in a jaunty way that he would have nothing to do with this Gothic style, and that though he did not want to disturb my appointment he must insist on my making a design in the Italian style which he felt sure I could do as well as the other.
That he heard I was so tremendously successful in the Gothic style that if he let me alone I should Gothicize the whole country, &c., &c., & c .
Perhaps unnerved by the suddenness of his summons to the Prime Minister and the vigour of Palmerston's attack, Scott felt that his case had to be presented in a ‘more consecutive manner’, and on 23rd July, 1859, he wrote a long letter to Palmerston explaining how much effort he had put into the design and what a loss it would be to the country if it was not adopted.
He claimed that there had been a bona-fide revival of Gothic architecture during the reign of Queen Victoria, that there was with those who loved architecture and made it the subject of special study,
a growing dissatisfaction with the more recent productions (or the majority of them) of that form of Classic Architecture Vernacularized amongst us, and a most earnest desire to see some variety introduced among our public buildings.
This desire has shewn itself in some minds in the advocacy of the introduction of some new style especially marking our own age, in others in the wish to see the Architecture which so especially belongs to our own and  immediately neighbouring Countries,— and which for some classes of buildings has already been so completely revived,— adapted to the especial requirements of our own times and all the inventions habits and comforts incident to them.
He told Palmerston about a design he had submitted for the Senate House at Hamburg and about his ideas contained in Remarks and ‘hearing of the probability of the Competition, and feeling that the genius loci of the proposed site’ was particularly favourable to his ideas, he had given his ‘undisturbed attention’to the subject.
Hall had assured the architects before the competition that there was no bias towards a particular style, and the Select Committee had no preference of style.
Since he had been commissioned in November 1858, he had ‘almost wholly devoted’ himself to the building, and tenders were expected in a few days.
He went on to say that he realized that Hall's larger scheme might not materialize, but he thought that Government Offices in a similar style to his building would eventually extend to Great George Street where they would be seen in relation to the Abbey and the Houses of Parliament.
The change of style at the corner of Downing Street, on the other hand, would provide no greater contrast ‘than occurs at every turn in the Grand Canal at Venice where Gothic and renaissance palaces constantly alternate to the great satisfaction of the artist’ and would avoid the ‘stereotyped monotony of a single style’.
His design should not be compared with that of the Houses of Parliament, which was ‘not in the best and purest phase of Pointed architecture’.
He concluded by stating that an abandonment of his scheme would involve the public in much expenditure.
Scott's letter was long, rambling and almost cringing in tone; nevertheless, Palmerston read it and replied five days later with a not unfriendly letter in his own hand.
If Gothic is the national style, Palmerston asked, could Scott tell him where in the country there are public buildings in that style.
He pointed out that Scott's argument that his building would harmonize with the Abbey and contrast with Downing Street could be as easily turned the other way, and continued:
I could not contemplate without alarm the idea of filling up with gloomy looking Buildings in the Gothic style,[the]whole of the space between Downing Street and Great George Street.
With regard to the change to be made in the style of the elevations, I cannot entertain the smallest doubt that an architect of your known talent and ability will find it an easy task to design an elevation in the Italian or Classic style…
He concluded by telling Scott that there was no need to hurry with the revised elevations as he would only be asking Parliament to vote sufficient for the foundations during the present session.
Palmerston was clearly satisfied with Scott's plan and layout and regarded the provision of classical elevations as only a minor revision.
Scott, however, was intent on adhering to his stated principles and effectively told Palmerston that a Gothic building was the only solution.
On the same day that he received Palmerston's letter, he replied that he had not intended to say that Gothic was re-established as the leading English architecture of the day, but rather its history and origin made a strong case for its revival in those countries where it had first flourished.
Its appropriateness for the Foreign Office area was on grounds of association and sentiment, rather than visual harmony, as on one side there were buildings of ‘predominating importance’, and no local association to conflict with them on the other side.
As to Palmerston's comment about gloomy buildings, Scott said:
I am absolutely certain that such would be the very reverse of being the case, and that it would prove to be a particularly cheerful looking building.
Erected of fresh-coloured Portland Stone interspersed with shafts of polished granite; the walls pierced with windows larger and more numerous than is usual on our public buildings in other styles — and glazed with plate glass,— and the whole moderately relieved with architectural detail which would produce bright contrasts of light and shade…
He was convinced that if executed, it would meet Palmerston's wish for a bright and cheerful building.
During the week that this correspondence was taking place, tenders for the Foreign Office were received from thirteen of the fifteen builders and, as arranged, they were displayed alongside Scott's drawings.
The lowest price submitted for the work, £232,024, was from John Kelk of No. 13 South Street, Grosvenor Square, who had already carried out some work for the Government, but is better known as a railway contractor.
The arrangement whereby builders in competition with each other were invited to quote a price for which they would carry out all the work indicated on drawings and a specification, and to sign a contract to that effect, was introduced as a standard procedure by Hunt into the Office of Works as a means of controlling expenditure.
‘Contracts in gross’, as they were called, had been considered by the Office as early as 1812, but only very occasionally used and never for a project the size of the Foreign Office.
Consequently Hunt earned the thanks of The Civil Engineer and Architects' Journal for his innovation, and a few days later in the House, Gladstone was able to say with satisfaction that ‘for the first time in the history of public edifices in the metropolis’, it was possible to state what the real cost would be.
The Delegation to support Scott
MPs soon heard about Palmerston's attempt to change the design, and over  forty of them, led by Elcho, called on Palmerston on 29th July, 1859, the day after Scott's second letter, to say that they thought Scott's design should be adopted.
Elcho explained that there were many others, such as Stirling and Buxton, who felt the same, but were unable to attend.
He thought that Tite and other MPs considered Gothic to be dull, expensive, incongruous and associated with ‘a peculiar religious sentiment’, and reminded Palmerston that originally Gothic was used for all building, not just churches.
He pointed out that the Select Committee had found no material difference between Gothic and Classic and with regard to the incongruity of the styles:
Anybody who had been to Venice must, he thought, confess that much of the beauty of that city consisted in the fact that at every turn the eye met with different kinds and styles of buildings,— at one moment Palladian and at another Gothic.
Congruity as found in Berlin was monotonous and although Paris had magnificence and splendour, it lacked beauty and variety.
He was sure that the Houses of Parliament were ‘at the bottom of the whole thing’, as having once burnt its fingers, the country was unwilling to embark on another building in the Gothic style.
The points made, the order of delivery and even some of the phrases used so closely resemble Scott's first letter to Palmerston that it seems likely that Elcho had been briefed by Scott.
After this well-considered plea for Gothic, everyone present must have been astonished by the next speaker.
Edward Ellice, an MP for Coventry, said that he had been asked to accompany his friend Lord Elcho, and although he seems to have been a political ally of Elcho's his view of Scott's design was very different.
He said that he had examined the plans with Sir Joseph Paxton, the other member for Coventry, and ‘had never in his life seen a building which appeared so confused in its internal arrangements’.
He alleged that when he asked Scott about the planning, he received only an off-hand reply.
The Houses of Parliament were ‘a disgrace to the country’ and he could bring Palmerston another delegation supporting a ‘Grecian building’.
Scott later said that Ellice was a ‘worthy vain old busy-body…who had been trying to make himself look clever in the tea room by finding mare's-nests in the form of non-existent errors in the arrangement of my plans’.
He felt that Ellice had damaged his cause among the delegation as nobody there appreciated the amount of thought and consultation that had gone into his planning.
However, Baillie Cochrane explained that Scott's first scheme had reception rooms ‘on a magnificent scale’, but on the recommendation of the Select Committee they were omitted and reintroduced at the suggestion of Foreign Office officials as normal rooms which could be used for special occasions.
The  ‘minutest details of public convenience had been studied’ and the planning was supported by all authorities in the Foreign Office.
Further support for Scott came from Henry Austin Bruce and the Hon Dudley Fortescue.
But Palmerston remained unmoved.
He said that with Scott's abilities and talents, he would produce a very good building, but this design ‘instead of being an ornament’ would disfigure the Metropolis, it is a ‘frightful structure’.
Gothic he stated was not the national style its exponents claimed, but a foreign importation and as if to counter his own question to Scott, he recited a long list of classical public buildings in Britain and Ireland.
By comparison with Scott's design, the French Foreign Ministry had more accommodation, cost less and was ‘a greater ornament’ than that proposed for England.
As Scott later pointed out, he then reversed his usual argument that Gothic did not provide enough light, by explaining how difficult it was for the Speaker to control the sunlight coming through the windows of his house in the Houses of Parliament.
He wound up his reply to the delegation by saying that he had only put the £30,000 for the foundations into the estimates for the present session and would ask Scott for elevations in a different style.
He knew this would be ‘a great mortification’ to Scott, but ‘the personal feeling of an architect ought not to enter into competition with what is best adapted for the public service and what is most compatible with the ornament of the town’.
The Reaction in Parliament
On the Monday after the delegation, 1st August, 1859, Manners raised the matter in the House of Commons.
He stated that, ‘it was not well for a Government succeeding to power to reverse without very good reasons the decisions of their predecessors, especially with respect to matters of art and the construction of public buildings’.
He said that if the design of the Foreign Office were changed, the India Office would also have to be changed and urged Palmerston and Wood to do nothing during the recess that would prejudice the adoption of the designs on display.
In a Supply Debate on the following Thursday, 4th August, the House sitting as a Committee were asked by the Government to vote the £30,000 required for foundations, and £100,000 to purchase land authorized under Manners' Act.
This gave MPs an opportunity to express their views at some length.
Gladstone pointed out the closeness of Hunt's estimate of £230,000 to the tender figure of £232,000 and on that basis confidently predicted that the cost including fittings and furnishings and architects' fees would be approximately £310,000.
With £100,000 to £120,000 for the site, the total cost of the new Foreign Office, including a residence for the Foreign Secretary and a suite of reception rooms for the use of any minister, would be £430,000.
In view of this high cost, he  wondered if Members would consider omitting the residence and replacing it with the Colonial Office.
Scott had told him that this would be possible.
Elcho told the House about Palmerston's reaction to the delegation and, pointing to the Government's slender majority, asked them to ensure that the subject would not become a ‘see-saw’.
He accused Tite of inconsistency by advocating Pennethorne to the Select Committee and now saying that the competitors should be taken in order of precedence, and repeated the main arguments that he had used in the delegation, with the New Town of Edinburgh as an additional example of the monotony of classical architecture.
He declared that Scott's design would be ‘a great ornament to the metropolis’ and believed that ‘it would be as convenient, or perhaps more so, than any Italian building that could be erected’.
The Building News and The Architects' Journal and ‘gentlemen who had devoted their lives to the study of architecture’ favoured Scott's design.
Tite then attempted to explain his attitude.
He had supported Pennethorne's design because it was the cheapest and did not encroach on the park, but if they abandoned that design they were bound to take the first prize design, ‘but as there was some difficulty about that’, it should go to the second prize-winners.
The third prize-winner had, however, been chosen because his was a Gothic design.
This was a style suitable for churches and perhaps for domestic buildings, but not for public offices.
It was not a national style, but derived from Louvain, Sienna and Milan.
Various other members spoke, including Coningham who congratulated Palmerston ‘on his spirited resistance to any further invasion of the Goths and Vandals’.
Stirling said that he liked both styles of architecture, but with the ‘sacrifice of convenience to a constant repetition of insipid ornament’ in the Houses of Parliament, the House had a natural prejudice against Gothic.
True Gothic would not waste money and he quoted Scott's Remarks that a ‘tissue of costly ornament over the entire building…is destructive of true dignity’.
To make Scott design a building in the classical style was the worst possible course.
Buxton declared with enthusiasm that Scott's design would be ‘one of the most beautiful buildings in the country’.
The Italian style was becoming effete and in an allusion to Waterhouse's Assize Courts, said that even the business men of Manchester with a Quaker chairman had recently selected a Gothic design.
Palmerston, with the longest speech of the debate, started by saying that Members would not be committed by the present vote to any style, as nothing would be decided until next session, and attacked Manners for approving ‘the erection of so frightful a building’, involving expenses and perhaps disappointment to the architect without consulting the House.
The main part of his speech was largely a repetition of his reply to the delegation.
He claimed that as only  thirty architects had submitted Gothic designs in the competition and there were 200 other designs, his views were endorsed by the majority of architects.
He concluded with a promise that before the next session he would obtain a less expensive plan probably providing accommodation for the Foreign Colonial and India Offices, and although reception rooms should be included, the residence could be omitted.
Manners, defending his actions, said that the Select Committee left it to the executive Government to select the style and the architects, and he had only acted accordingly.
Palmerston then interrupted, saying that he ought to have consulted the House first.
Manners retorted that this had taken place in February and Palmerston was in no position to criticize him for acting independently as he had heard that Palmerston himself had instructed the architect to prepare designs in a different style without consulting the House.
He thought that there was no need for a new Colonial Office as it could be accommodated in Pembroke House, when vacated by the War Office department at present occupying it.
He then quoted Hunt's estimates for the first and second prizewinning schemes and pointed out the saving achieved with Scott's modified scheme.
He had great respect for Palmerston, but ‘after the speeches he had heard him deliver on this subject, he would be extremely sorry to obey his edicts on matters of taste’.
If the House were to follow Palmerston blindly, they ‘might as well give up talking about science and art and the beautification of the metropolis’.
Paxton then made his only contribution to the controversy when, contrary to what Ellice had said, he strongly supported Scott's design.
He assured the House that the ventilation system,
was as perfect as for any building that he ever saw erected; and as for the light he thought it was rather overdone than otherwise.
Mr. Scott was at the head of his art in Europe, and he (Sir Joseph Paxton) said, that the building he had designed was a beautiful building.
Coningham spoke again at the end of the debate.
He elaborated the point he first made in the February that Gothic architecture expressed a spirit ‘opposed to liberty and the true interests and prosperity of a Protestant country’.
Manners briefly countered that Dr Newman had said that Italian was more in accordance with the true Jesuit spirit than Gothic.
But it was now three o'clock in the morning and the debate was quickly wound up with the money being voted for the site and foundations.
According to the Saturday , the debate elicited a strong feeling in favour of Scott's design, and Manners ‘was more than a match’ for Palmerston.
But whatever satisfaction Scott may have gained from the debate and the fact that he had been given six months to prepare a new design, it must have soon been  dispelled by the public press and the action of some of his professional colleagues.
Reaction in the Press
Two days after the debate, on 6th August, 1859, a leader appeared in The Times which not only questioned Scott's suitability for the appointment, but also the new attitude of the professional architect towards his client.
It claimed that the tyranny of architectural principles often impeded the functioning of a building, as it was an ‘Art which thinks man made for it, not itself for man’.
Gothic architecture was the most pliant of styles, which makes it particularly susceptible to the whims of an architect.
‘Put yourself into the hands of a Gothic architect, tell him what you want, let him invoke his muse and his clerks, and know the result.
You will not have what you want, but what he wants.’
However, to conform to architectural principles, whether Classic or Gothic, extravagances such as the towers of Colney Hatch Asylum, the portico of the British Museum, and even ‘the showy shell’ of St Paul's are produced.
The architect should be told exactly what is required and made to follow instructions.
Scott, it declared, ‘wants a tight rein, and we hope to see it in Lord Palmerston's hand’, but he should resign rather than undertake work in any other than that in which he has distinguished himself.
On the following Monday, a letter in The Times from ‘Foreign Office’ claimed that there was little support in the House of Commons for a classical design, to which Coningham replied on the Thursday that ‘the great majority of the architectural profession’have concluded that Gothic was not appropriate.
He pointed out that although the Select Committee had regretted that the opinion of the assessors was not taken into consideration in the outcome of the competition, they would probably not have chosen Scott.
They favoured Italian in their evidence and only said that Scott's scheme complied with the conditions.
He repeated the old argument about lighting, and concluded with the  extraordinary comment that as Portland stone was most suitable for London, but does not suit Gothic or Elizabethan architecture, the style would have to be Italian.
‘A Practical Revivalist’ wrote back on the same day.
He said that the predominance of classical entries in the competition came from the supposition that it was the favoured style, but the judges had awarded four out of the seven prizes to Gothic designs.
It was, however, Coningham's last comment which particularly provoked him.
Scott, he said, must have specified Portland stone for his Gothic scheme, ‘little knowing that he was fostering so deadly a foe to the architecture he was using’.
The liveliest defence of Scott's design came predictably from The Saturday Review .
Hope, temporarily out of Parliament, was still able to express his  opinions through this organ.
On 13th August, it declared that Palmerston was not qualified to comment on architecture: ‘Art tastes and musical tastes do not come by nature — they are the result of study and education and practice.’
Palmerston's proposal that Scott can put any elevation on a given plan only shows his ignorance; ‘ground-plan and elevation, outside and inside, construction and ornament, must express each other’.
He should also understand that Gothic developed with special characteristics to serve the needs of England, and it was not a foreign import.
The Delegation to Support Palmerston
It was about this time that Scott found out that Charles Barry junior had distributed a paper to MPs pressing his own claim to the Foreign Office.
Scott immediately sent a reply to all Members, along with copies of a paper he had already produced entitled The Gothic Renaissance , but with the parliamentary session closing on the following Saturday this was too late to have any effect.
He also found out that a delegation of architects was being organized to congratulate Palmerston on his classical stance.
Although Scott obviously thought that there was nothing wrong in MPs lobbying Palmerston on his behalf, he was upset at the idea of fellow architects criticizing his appointment.
He complained to Donaldson, who coolly said that he had not heard about the delegation, but if he was invited he would join it.
Scott then retired with his family on 12th August to the Oatlands Park Hotel, near Chertsey, for a few days respite.
Much to his surprise, he found Burn was already staying there but ‘laid up with a severe illness’, so he arranged to meet him on the following Monday.
When they met, Burn said that Donaldson had been to see him in the interim.
Burn said that when he praised the article in The Saturday Review and asked Donaldson who was briefing Palmerston, Donaldson abruptly left.
Scott told Burn about the proposed delegation and assumed, probably correctly, that Donaldson intended to enlist Burn's support for it.
Scott later said that although Burn was ‘a perfect stranger’, he was pleased to find he ‘approved distinctly of my appointment’.
On Wednesday, 17th August, twenty architects and, according to The Saturday Review , ‘surveyors and house builders’, went to see Palmerston.
The competitors included Banks, Barry, Brodrick, F. P. Cockerell, Garling, Kerr and Lamb, and others included Donaldson, Scoles and Sydney Smirke.
Among those who could not attend but said they agreed with the aims of the delegation were Owen Jones and Bellamy.
Tite introduced the delegation to Palmerston and said that neither he nor Coningham, who was also present, had organized the delegation which represented 200 of the 230 competitors.
He thought that the Foreign Office should  not be made the ‘opportunity for an experiment on a new Gothic style’.
They almost all knew Scott, and he was confident of his ability to change his style.
Sydney Smirke said that he had a great regard for Scott, but the profession should resist ‘the attempts of a certain set of mediaeval dilettanti to force on us their thirteenth-century style’.
He compared London to other European capitals, particularly Paris where, during the past eight or nine years, the capital has been enriched without erecting one public building in the Gothic style.
London would become the laughing-stock of Europe with a streaky, gable-ended style ‘occupying the greater part of Westminster’.
Donaldson condemned the efforts of some of the dilettanti to reverse the competition results and blamed Manners for attacking the integrity of the competition system.
Gothic was chosen ‘as a sort of advertisement’ in some cases, and in other cases such as the Houses of Parliament, because of tradition.
But the new Foreign Office, ‘if in contiguity with anything’, it was not Gothic buildings but ‘one of the gems of European architecture, the Banqueting House’.
Robert Kerr, on Donaldson's suggestion, explained that he thought that styles of architecture were associated with particular civilizations and the architecture of the day arose with modern civilization in fifteenth-century Italy.
Modern civilization was not now so decayed that the new style proposed by the Mediaevalists was justified.
As has been recently said, Kerr considered the argument about style to be distracting the course of nineteenth-century architecture.
Palmerston replied that he was glad to have the assurance of ‘trained men of science and judgement’, and although he felt that Gothic might be suitable in the country, he was determined to have Italian for the present purpose.
Tite and Donaldson closed the meeting with a half-hearted suggestion that a new competition could be organized among the prize-winners as had been done at the new library at Cambridge.
The Sequel to the Delegation
The delegation provoked a storm in the journals.
The Building News said that it was ‘the greatest scandal and disgrace that has ever been inflicted on the architectural profession’.
Scott was ‘the victim of a combination of envious rivals as selfish as it is ignoble’.
The Saturday Review attacked Palmerston for receiving the delegation, having said that the question of style was to be left open for the next session.
Some of its members, namely Barry, Brodrick, Ashpitel, Jones and Lamb, must have been motivated by pure self-interest, as they themselves produce buildings in what they were saying was the hated Gothic style.
It was ‘unprofessional, unartistic, and, we had nearly said, ungentlemanly’.
Even The Builder's apparently factual report was criticized by ‘One who had peeped  behind the scenes’ for having implied that the earlier delegation of MPs supporting Scott had a lower status because it consisted of amateurs rather than professionals.
Scott seems to have been badly hurt by Donaldson's involvement in the delegation.
He claimed that he had been ‘the master of ceremonies’, but The Builder report indicates that this role was carried out by Tite, although if Scott's previous conclusion was correct, Donaldson did organize the delegation.
However, of all those present, he was probably the least likely to have been attempting to secure the work for himself.
He was Professor of Architecture at University College London and had himself built only a handful of buildings.
In spite of his Gothic Holy Trinity Church, Brompton, of 1826, and his Tudor Halls of Residence for University College in 1848, he was a firm supporter of classical architecture.
The internationalism of architecture particularly interested him, for as well as being considered as the founder of the Institute of Architects, he served for twenty-four years as its Honorary Secretary for Foreign Correspondence.
It is difficult to understand how Donaldson, with his interest in professionalism, could become involved in such a questionable enterprise as the delegation.
Clearly he was against setting aside the international competition and had no particular liking for Gothic, but the chief reason was probably his relationship with Palmerston.
He had carried out work for Palmerston at Broadlands in 1856, and in the dedication of his book,Architecture Numismatica , published in 1859, he described Palmerston as ‘the enlightened advocate of classical architecture’.
He later built a chapel for him at Lee on the edge of the Broadlands estate.
On 4th August, during the Supply Debate, he sent Palmerston two papers on architecture.
One of these, headed ‘Aphorisms’, was by Lamb, which explains the inclusion of this ‘rogue’ architect among the classicists.
It favours neither Classic nor Gothic and attempts to explain Lamb's eclectic approach with such comments as:
Architecture is a progressive art, and there is no instance on record, in Ancient times, of a retrogression, or a reproduction of the works of  preceeding periods…
The advance in the interest, and in the improvements, customs and conveniences of society, necessitated advance or change in Architecture to meet those circumstances…
Convenience, scientific construction and durable materials should be considered before style or ornament…
Style is the mere vehicle by which architectural beauty is obtained; but, is not necessarily beautiful in itself:— it is the proper application of style which constitutes aesthetic beauty…
The other paper, ‘by a practical man’, was an attack on the Gothic Revival.
Among the points it made was that the Revival was ‘simply the fruit of dilettante and antiquarian study’, and ‘if thirteenth century architecture was so  perfectly adapted to the circumstances of the day’, it cannot therefore be so for the nineteenth.
In what building, the paper asked, has the Revival been satisfactory for the present day; ‘are Government Offices to form one of this series of costly and unpromising experiments?’
It seems likely that when he received these papers, Palmerston, to forestall those critics who said that he was out of touch with current architectural ideas, instructed Donaldson to arrange for him to meet Lamb and other architects who agreed with his views.
Donaldson would have had no option but to make arrangements for the delegation, even though he may have been well aware of what the reaction would be.
He would also have known that Palmerston, having let it be known that he had asked Scott to submit a new design, was very unlikely to change his mind, and it was perhaps to give the appearance of some purpose to the delegation that he and Tite made their request for another competition.
The delegation continued to be the subject of a heated correspondence in the journals for some weeks after the event.
Sir Henry Cole thought that the answer to the problem was simple: Scott should  remodel his proposals on the lines of Inigo Jones' scheme for Whitehall Palace, and eventually Street asked in The Builder what was to be gained from changing the architect; a Gothic building was appropriate, and Scott should be allowed to get on with the work.
Scott tried to arrange a counter address to Palmerston and obtained eighteen or nineteen names, but ‘the Gothic architects did not come forward in sufficient force to make it worth while’.
The End of the Gothic Scheme
Five days after the delegation, on Monday, 22nd August, 1859, Palmerston summoned Scott to another meeting.
According to Scott, ‘in the most cosy, fatherly way’, he said:
I want to talk to you quietly, Mr. Scott, about this business.
I have been thinking a great deal about it, and I really think there was much force in what your friends said…
I really do think that there is a degree of inconsistency in compelling a Gothic architect to erect a classical building — and so I have been thinking of appointing you a coadjutor, who would in fact make the design!
Scott was so taken aback that Palmerston immediately withdrew his suggestion of a collaborator.
Nevertheless, Scott felt again he had not expressed his views adequately and returned to his office and wrote a reply.
He did not think that a ‘good artistic work can be the joint production of two minds’.
He had worked most assiduously on the design but on finding that his style was not to Palmerston's taste he would, in conformity with the statement  made in Parliament, make another design, which he trusted ‘would be more fortunate’.
He said that he would devote his ‘best exertions and abilities’ to the work, and concluded by asking for ‘proper time for a work of such importance’.
The situation must now have been clear to Scott.
Palmerston was adamant and either he had to produce a design which would accord with Palmerston's idea of ‘Italian’ architecture or resign.
The attitude of Charles Barry and the classical delegation hardened Scott's resolve not to throw away over three years' work and play into their hands by resigning.
He therefore decided to produce a design which would not only satisfy Palmerston, but also be true to his stated architectural principles.
He was by now so ‘thoroughly out of health’ that he retired to Scarborough for two months with his family to recuperate and consider what to do next.
Ruskin's Involvement
Scott's abandonment of the Gothic design seems to have been generally unknown, as efforts continued throughout the autumn of 1859 to advocate its merits.
The most interesting of these eventually elicited Ruskin's only comment on the controversy.
In August the Northampton Society were continuing their advocacy of Scott, and the 17th Freeman wrote to Scott.
It seems that Scott had persuaded Freeman to write an apparently unsolicited letter supporting his design in The Times .
Freeman said that he did not ‘like begging a place again in that beastly Times, but do as you think best’.
It was obviously important to Scott to have his case well stated in what was the most widely read of London newspapers and particularly after the damaging leader on 6th August.
But bearing in mind the unfortunate consequences of his earlier correspondence, he was probably anxious not to appear to be supporting his own cause.
Freeman was clearly an enthusiastic advocate of Scott, having in 1849 described St Nicholas's at Hamburg in his History of Architecture as ‘the noblest work that three generations have produced’.
The letter, which finally appeared on 19th October over the initials ‘E.A.F.’, was a clearly stated argument why Gothic was more suitable for the Foreign Office than Classic.
It was more adaptable and was less expensive as it had the quality of being effective, whether richly ornamented or not.
It had nothing to do with Goths and Vandals, and was not exclusively a church architecture, nor was it ‘the badge of some particular ecclesiastical party’.
It was a national architecture formed in the thirteenth century,
alongside our laws, language, and political institutions.
It comes to us from the age which gave us the Great Charter, and founded the House of Commons.
It is the native growth of that free Plantagenet England which  produced the germs of everything we prize most dearly.
It reminds us of the heroes of our infant liberty, the Langtons, Grossetestes, and De Montforts, who bridled the tyranny of king and pope alike.
Although, by now, many of the arguments it used had been well aired, the letter created a great impression.
The Building News, The Gentleman's Magazine and The Ecclesiologist all reprinted it in full.
‘L.W.’
in the following issue of The Building News asked if ‘E.A.F.’ had ever heard of an astylar composition, but another reply, from ‘A.’in The Times on 1st November, was to be almost the last comment in that newspaper on the controversy.
Ruskin wrote to The Times on ‘The Turner Gallery’, the day after Freeman's letter and, as a  postscript , said: ‘I wish the writer of the admirable and exhaustive letter which appeared in your columns yesterday on the subject of Mr Scott's design for the Foreign Office would allow me to know his name’.
According to Jackson, the editor must have disclosed Freeman's name, ‘for a day or two later appeared a raving letter from Freeman accusing the editor of breach of confidence, abusing Ruskin and all his works and scorning his offer of intimacy’.
The editor then closed the correspondence on the Foreign Office and Jackson thought that though Ruskin's intervention, Scott had lost in Freeman ‘the best champion of his cause’.
Ruskin may have been stung into action by an article which appeared in The Daily Telegraph on 31st August.
This declared that the whole affair was ‘a godsend, a windfall, an apocalypse for Mr. Ruskin.
That architectural Imperator who claims the championship of English art.’
But the reaction against the Gothic tyranny was now setting in, it said, and the Government were to be congratulated ‘on repudiating the ecclesiastical sympathies of the late First Commissioner’.
Up to the time of this article, Ruskin had largely remained aloof from the controversy.
He had made some fragmentary notes on some of the competition entries, and had commented on the recent Parliamentary debate at the meeting of the Architectural Photographic Association in February 1859, at which Street was the main speaker.
But clearly Ruskin felt little inclination to help Scott.
It seems that relations between the two men were at one time good, as on his tour of northern Italy in 1851, Scott saw Ruskin in Venice, whom he had met previously, ‘and spent a most delightful evening with him’.
Scott also worked with Ruskin in 1854, when he added the chancel to the Camden Church at Camberwell, but as Ruskin turned his attention away from architecture he became scornful of Scott's efforts.
On 18th August, 1859, Ruskin sent a letter from Switzerland to E. S. Dallas, a leader writer to The Times .
He said:
What a goose poor Scott (who will get his liver fit for pâté de Strasburg with  vexation) must be, not to say at once he'll build anything.
If I were he, I'd build Lord P[almerston] an office with all the capitals upside down; and tell him it was the Greek style, inverted, to express typically Government by Party: Up today, down tomorrow.
Scott was told of the effect of Ruskin's intervention over Freeman's letter in The Times by George Dasent, the assistant editor, which coupled with the tone of the letter to Dallas ensured that by late 1859 there was a complete breach between Scott and Ruskin.
Scott gave Ruskin little praise in his later writings and held him responsible for the introduction of the ‘Italian mania’ into the Gothic Revival.
Nevertheless, Scott drew heavily on the Byzantine palaces of Venice, which Ruskin had popularized in The Stones of Venice , for inspiration in the revised Foreign Office design that he was preparing for Palmerston in the autumn of 1859.