

Principles
Life in urban Britain
A. Today, in Britain, most people live in towns or cities — in urban areas.
About 20% live in the country, or rural areas, but less than 2% actually make a living by farming.
B. Life in Britain is changing and it is changing more and more quickly.
It is becoming busier and faster, with more and more travel, more and more people, and more and more wealth.
In particular there are increasing numbers of houses, offices, factories and roads.
Towns are growing in size and villages are becoming towns or cities.
How far across, in diameter, was the city of Truro in 1880?
Roughly how long would it have taken, walking at 4 km per hour, to cross from the fields on one side to the fields on the other side?
How far across was the city in 1980 and how long does it take to walk across the city now?
A person probably knows, by sight or name, about 200 other people in his or her town or city.
In 1880 that person would have known one person in every 20.
But in 1980 it would be only one person in every…(how many)?
C. If you ask the people on a housing estate what they do for a living — what their occupations are — you probably will get answers like those in the drawing.
It is similar in most towns, though the details vary a little.
Some have more factory workers and others have more civil servants, and so on.
The pie graph shows the average of occupations for the whole of Britain.
Which is the main occupation and which is the second largest?
What percentage of people are in each of these two largest groups?
Into which group does each of the people in the drawing fit?
Judging from the people you know locally, is the pattern of occupations similar in your street or district?
D. Some people are the workers who actively make money, which is also called wealth or capital .
Many others are either too young, as babies or school children, or too old, as retired pensioners.
The adult workers have to provide the money to support the young and the old, either directly or through Government taxes, allowances and services.
Assume the picture is a typical sample of the British people.
Add up how many adult workers there are and how many people they have to support.
Draw the result as a bar graph , with two columns, for ‘workers’ and for ‘ dependants ’.
E. The age-sex pyramid shows how the British people are divided by age groups.
Beneath it, in a pale colour, is the age-sex pyramid for a country in another part of the world — Brazil.
How does the population of Britain differ from that of Brazil?
Consider young, middle-aged and old people separately.
How does your ten-year age group (that of your class) compare with the group before you (older) and, if the graph shows it, the group after you (younger)?
Remember that the graph shows the age groups as they were in 1981.
As you get older, and your age group moves up the pyramid, getting slightly smaller, do you think that your group will need more, less, or about the same number of houses, hospitals and other services as those who go before you?
The choices
A. How do people in Britain choose to live?
We cannot do just as we like because we are limited, or constrained , by (i) the amount of money, or capital , we have;(ii) the inventions, or technology , available;(iii) the space, or land, available;(iv) the resources , such as fuel or timber, or existing roads and buildings;(v) the desires of other human beings which may conflict with ours.
The drawings and the divided bar graph show some of the choices of the British people in 1980.
Business people are trying to provide these things which we want.
They have organised our industries, our occupations and the landscapes of our towns and country to produce these things, and to distribute them to the people.
If we had made different choices, we might have different industries, different types of towns and a different countryside.
About how much of every £100 is spent on each item shown in the divided bar graph?
Which of the consumer goods in the drawings is most common?
Which is likely to have the most rapidly increasing sales and production in the future?
What might Mrs Hopeful say to describe the reasons which prevent, or constrain, her from having her dream house and her luxury standard of living ?
It is said that Britain has become a country of High Mass Consumption .
What do you think this means?
In what ways is the landscape on the map arranged in order to provide people with the things they want to spend their money on?
B. In Britain we use large amounts of goods some of which are shown by the bar graphs.
By contrast, the average quantities for the world are shown.
Much has to be brought from abroad, mainly in exchange for some of our manufactured goods, such as cars, clothes and chemicals.
To move these goods between ports and factories, factories and shops, and then to people's houses requires a great deal of transport .
It also requires much trading in markets and in shops .
We were once called ‘a nation of shop-keepers’.
Many people and a lot of space in every town are devoted to trade and transport.
What suggests that we have High Mass Consumption, compared with the average for the world's people?
What features in the photograph indicate that trade and transport are important in our towns?
C. For a country such as Britain, which has most of its people living in towns and working in industry and trade, it is necessary to have good communications (roads, railways, air transport, ports, post and telephones).
Also power supplies (particularly electricity, gas and oil), water supplies and sewerage need to be easily available in every town.
Together these are called the infrastructure on which all towns, industries and trade depend.
About two million workers are busy providing this infrastructure.
Almost everywhere in Britain the infrastructure is well developed and so new factories, shops and housing estates can spread almost wherever business people and planners choose.
What parts, or types, of infrastructure are shown in the photograph?
What percentage of workers are employed in providing the infrastructure?
Why is it much easier for a business person to start a new factory in the area shown in the upper photograph, than in many other parts of the world such as that shown in the lower photograph?
D. The features of Britain mentioned on pages 4–7 are present in all regions of the country.
They are an important part of the geography of Britain.
The later chapters on the regions of Britain describe particular local features but for each region you should remember that many of the people are engaged in the activities indicated on these pages.
There is a summary below.
Wherever possible, try to provide a figure, or statistic , to show exactly what the words ‘most’, ‘more’ and ‘many’, in the summary, really mean.
Summary
In Britain most people live in towns.
The towns are growing in size.
As they do so we tend to know fewer of the people we see in them.
More people are occupied in providing services than in manufacturing.
Many old people and young people depend on the middle-aged workers.
People are seeking more consumer goods and business is trying to supply these.
What can be provided depends on many constraints, such as money, fuel and land.
Because we use more products than most of the world, many people are involved in trade and transport.
Many others provide the basic infrastructure on which towns and industries depend.
Britain on the move
A. The nature of work is changing.
Washing clothes is an example.
Simple tools needed many people to work them.
Now complex machines, which need money and technical inventions, have replaced them.
Industry is changing from being labour intensive to being capital intensive .
Also it is changing from having tools made in many small workshops all over the country, to having machines made in just a few large factories .
The new system needs more transport and more people and money involved in selling the products.
What are the differences between the old and new workshops and factories?
How many?
How much land is needed?
How many workers?
What transport is involved?
B. As the nature of industry changes, so also people's occupations change.
The drawings show some common occupations for women in 1880 and what their great-grand-daughters may have been doing in 1980.
Which of the four common jobs in 1980 may almost have disappeared by 1990 or at least by the year 2000?
C. For many centuries parents had a great many children.
But disease was common, particularly among babies and young children.
Also wars and accidents killed many older people.
A person did well to reach the age of 45.
On balance, the large families left just enough people alive to keep the total population at a steady size.
About a century ago, fresh clean piped water was made available to houses and sewage was removed via the water closet (W.C.).
Disease became much less common.
Medical services, skills and drugs improved rapidly, particularly due to vaccination .
Fewer deaths meant that more children grew up to become parents.
The population increased rapidly.
Then parents found that they did not need to have so many babies.
The birth rate fell.
The speed of population growth became slower.
It dropped from an annual increase of 15 people per 1000 until now, when the increase is about 3 people per year for every 1000 already in Britain.
What diseases used to be common but now are hardly ever heard of?
What have you been vaccinated against?
What is done to make tap water safe to drink?
The drawings show the average sizes of families.
How many children were there at each period?
How many extra people are there in Britain each year, at the present rate of natural increase? 56 000 000 × 3 ÷ 1000 =…?
About how many extra houses are needed each year for this natural increase of people, assuming 3 people per house?
D. At the time when the population started to increase rapidly, most people lived in small villages and worked on farms.
But within a century a great change took place.
Workers were needed in the new factories, most of which were set up where coal was available.
People migrated from the country mainly to the new industrial towns on the coalfields.
The loss of people in the country areas is called rural depopulation .
In what ways do you think that daily life was more pleasant in the time before this migration to the towns than it was afterwards?
E. Just recently, since about 1970, the migration from the country to the towns has started to reverse.
More people are leaving the large cities than are arriving in them.
Today there is a different type of migration.
With easy transport, high wages, better education and training, people are more free to choose where they wish to live and work.
Many are changing jobs and moving from one town to another and from large cities to smaller towns.
The population is being mixed .
A similar change is occurring in and out of Britain.
How many in your class have lived in some other town, or part of the country, or abroad, before coming to your present area?
F. In almost every part of Britain, you can see landscapes like those in the five photographs.
They are arranged in a pattern centred on the main towns or urban areas.
The townscapes , the farmscapes and the wildscapes have not changed much, except in small details.
For instance, in the townscapes buildings are being made taller.
In the farmscapes some hedges are being bulldozed away.
In the rurban fringe the use of the land has been changing rapidly.
Now there is a mixture of land uses.
Farmland is being changed into housing estates, into factory sites and into roads, motorways and airfields.
This is happening because
(i)
we are changing to industries which need new large factories and a transport system to sell their goods (section A);
(ii)
the population is increasing in size (section C);
(iii)
people have been migrating towards towns (section D); and
(iv)
people want more mobility to travel from one place to another.
In the marginal fringe , where farmland meets wild moorland, woodland or marshland, there are several changes.
In some places marshes are being drained in order to farm the land.
In other places farms on the edges of high moorland are being abandoned, or the land is being used for water reservoirs , or for recreation , where tourists can picnic or camp with their caravans and tents.
What changes do you know of in the landscape or the use of land in your area?
In which of the five types of landscape is each of these local changes?
Look at an O.S. map (1: 50 000 scale) and try to find one or two grid squares which show each type of landscape.
G. Britain has been occupied by people for a long, long time.
In each age they had different demands and made different choices for the use of the land.
The pattern today includes most of the features which people created in the past.
For each stage shown in the drawings, describe any new features and any changes in the older features.
What sort of changes do you think will come next?
The value of land
A. The value of any piece of land depends on how many people want it and how rich they are.
In Britain there are a great many people and large business companies.
Together they have a lot of money, so land values are high in most parts of the country.
B. More people desire to live and work in southern England and around London than in the Midlands.
Fewer people desire to live in the north of England and even fewer in northern Scotland.
The value of similar property in four different areas of England in 1981 is shown opposite.
There is a gradient of values which increases from north to south.
Suggest several reasons why you think many people prefer to live in southern England and near London.
Because there are more people in the south there are larger markets for goods.
Business people — manufacturers, farmers and traders expect to produce and sell more goods in the south, so making enough profit to pay for the more expensive land.
However,cheaper land in the north attracts some large businesses, particularly those which do not have high costs of transport for goods going to the southern market.
How might managers of industries describe some of the advantages and the disadvantages of being in south east England?
C. Each separate city and town in Britain is like a magnet attracting people and industries towards it.
Large cities are powerful magnets attracting a great many people.
Small towns are weaker magnets.
Near a town there is much competition for land and so values are high.
Further away there is less competition for land and so values are lower.
Farmers who have land near to large cities often produce goods of high value, such as fresh vegetables and flowers.
Their land is farmed very intensively .
In this way they can afford the   high prices for the land.
Further away, where land values are lower, they have larger farms producing cash crops, such as wheat, barley and sugarbeet, and livestock products, such as milk, beef, mutton and wool.
Their land is used less intensively.
What other reason is there for growing fresh vegetables and flowers near to large cities?
D. There is a similar pattern of values within each city and town.
There is great competition by businesses, especially shops and offices, for the best sites in the city centre.
Land prices there are very high and so the land is used intensively.
Often buildings are many storeys high.
Further out there are closely-packed houses.
Even further out the houses are spread out on estates with gardens.
And finally plots of houses or factories overlap with farmers' fields.
Describe each of the zones 1–4 shown on the photograph.
Which zone is the rurban fringe?
(See page 11.)
Describe the gradient on the graph of land values.
How does the gradient of population density for residents differ from that of land values?
Why is this?
E. Generally people are attracted towards the south of Britain, but locally they are attracted towards the towns.
And within the towns they are attracted towards their centres.
Explain the general trend (a), the humps (b), and the peaks (c), in the graph of land values.
F. The photograph shows that there are some barriers , or sudden changes , in land values.
Farmers can make good use of some land while other areas nearby are less attractive , or even repel them.
Sudden changes in the type of rock affect the richness of the soil and the amount of water held in it (the drainage).
They affect the steepness of slopes, and the height of the land.
In southern Britain there are many such sudden changes mainly between clay lowlands and escarpments of chalk or oolitic limestone.
Suggest some reasons why the land in the background in the photograph is less valuable to farmers than that in the foreground.
The industrial system
A. The people in the bus queue are going to work.
Others may go by car or by rail.
A century ago most people walked to work.
Their houses were near their factories or offices.
Now in Britain most people travel many kilometres between their homes and their work, often from one town to another.
These people are commuters .
Modern industry needs to be in places where there are many transport links to bring workers together from places spread over a wide area.
How many in the class have a parent who normally travels to work by car, bus or train to another town, or several kilometres across a city?
Can you find the average distance they travel to work each day?
B. The people in the bus queue work in different types of industries.
The table shows the categories and sub-divisions.
Primary industries are those which produce things directly from the ground, the water, or the air; e.g. farming.
Secondary industries turn these products into other, more useful, forms by manufacturing ; e.g. turning wool into cloth or into clothes.
The heavy type uses large amounts of raw material ; e.g. steel making, or bridge building.
The light type uses only small quantities of raw materials; e.g. for television, or for biscuits.
Tertiary industries do not make any product but provide services for people or for other industries; e.g. milk delivery, taxi drivers and librarians.
In which category of industry does each person in the bus queue belong?
What other jobs or industries can you suggest for each category in this table?
C. The way in which an everyday object, like a tin of Heinz baked beans, is made and provided for you is shown in the drawings.
Most industries in Britain work in a similar way.
Many things have to be put in to make a factory work.
These are called inputs , shown in colour on the diagram.
There must be money, or capital , and many decisions on how to use the money.
These decisions are made by the managers and directors of the company.
They must provide some land and factory buildings .
They need machinery .
They need workers, or labour .
They need power for the machinery.
They need beans, tomatoes, cans and labels.
These are raw materials .
The finished cans of baked beans come out of the factory, as outputs .
But before they can be used they must go through a market process through the shops.
In this process the cans of beans are exchanged for money.
Most of the money goes back — called a feedback — to provide more capital to keep the factory working.
Suppose you were the manager who had to organise an industry producing furniture.
Describe the inputs, outputs and feedback for this industry.
D. In our industrial system much transport is used.
Raw materials and labour come by ship, rail or road.
Power comes by cables, pipelines or lorries.
The cans of beans go to market by road.
The feedback of money comes through computers, telephone lines or the post.
Altogether the cost of transport may be one of the main expenses for an industry.
Hence managers choose carefully a position for their factory, so that transport costs are kept low.
Why is the factory in the drawing in a suitable position ‘?
E. Industries depend on one another.
To make your can of baked beans many industries have been involved.
They tend to be organised in chains of industries .
For instance, the outputs of forestry become the inputs of raw materials for the paper industry.
Their outputs become inputs for the printers, and the printers' outputs of labels become inputs for the Heinz factory making tins of baked beans.
What other chains of industries are there leading to the Heinz baked bean factory?
Suggest a chain of industries involved in providing your shirt, blouse or pullover.
F. Because transport is needed between the factories in a chain, it is more profitable for them to be close to one another.
Thus industries in Britain today tend to be clustered together.
The clusters occur at growth points , usually where there are suitable transport links, often at ports.
When a new factory starts it is usually a part of a chain of industries and so usually it is placed near others in the chain.
In this way existing industrial areas increase in size.
This is called ‘snowballing ‘.
G. Many of the industries linked with the baked bean factory use much power , in the form of electricity, gas, oil or coal.
So managers seek positions where power is plentiful or cheap.
Many also use raw materials which are imported by sea.
In order to save transport costs they seek to have factories in positions near to the major ports of Britain.
These are called trans-shipment points, where extra costs are involved if goods have to be loaded on to other types of transport, such as from ships on to lorries, or on to railway waggons to go further inland.
Other products are sold directly to shops and so many factories seek positions near to very large markets .
In parts of Britain, two, or even all three, of these types of suitable positions occur in the same area.
Such places have become very popular growth points for industries which cluster together at them.
For each of the three clusters of industries shown on the map, suggest what has attracted managers to concentrate their factories together in these places.
The agricultural system
A. Farmers in all parts of Britain are business people.
They think about how much it will cost them to pay for their land and their buildings, their seeds and young livestock, their machinery and the wages of their farm labourers.
These are all inputs which they can control.
Some farmers spend more on workers and some more on machinery.
Some choose to spend money mainly on seeds and others mainly on buying young store cattle or young lambs at market.
Then they calculate how much they hope to produce — their outputs — and what price they will get for their outputs of grain, or vegetables, milk, beef, wool or mutton in the markets .
They work out how much money to feed back to pay for the inputs for the next year, and the remainder is profit.
At each point shown by a diamond on the diagram, the farmers have to make a decision on what to do with their money.
Farming like this is commercial.
The aim is to sell the products at markets.
Many people in other parts of the world grow crops for their own use.
They are subsistence farmers.
But throughout Britain the system is one of commercial farming .
B. The graph shows that the wages of farm labourers have been increasing.
This has made farmers think about changing the amount of money they spend on the first two inputs, shown at X on the diagram.
What changes have they made, according to the graphs?
C. A few years ago, a group of farmers in eastern Britain decided that the market price they were offered for milk, from dairy cows fed on grass, was not as good as the price they could get for beef cattle, which are fattened in pens by being fed with crops of barley.
Judging by the two photographs, describe what changes one farmer has made in the system of inputs and outputs, shown at the three points marked Y on the systems diagram.
D. Because a farmer's business depends on growing things, the farmer has to consider the climate .
How many months will there be when it is warm enough for a crop of wheat, or potatoes or grass?
Will there be enough rain?
Will the rain come at the time the crops need it?
Also the farmer has to consider the soil .
He will ask these questions.
Is it deep enough?
Does it drain well?
Does it dry out too quickly?
Is it rich enough in chemicals , particularly nitrogen?
And the farmer must consider the shape of the land — called the relief .
Are the slopes too steep to plough?
Is the land flat and low and so liable to be flooded ?
Or is it so high that it is too cool for crops to ripen?
How does the climate seem to affect the choice of farmers in deciding where in Britain to grow wheat?
How does the height of land seem to affect the choice of areas for wheat?
How do rainfall and the height of land seem to affect the choice of areas where farmers grow grass?
What differences are there in the two farms, shown on the detailed maps?
On these two farms, how does the shape of the land — the relief — affect the farmers' choice of how to use each area?
E. The climate, the soil and the land are all natural inputs , which affect the size of farmers' crops or the amount of milk, beef or wool they can produce.
Now in Britain farmers can buy scientific aids which help them to control these inputs.
Artificial fertilisers and lime are used to improve the soils.
By spreading nitrates it is possible to obtain good yields of wheat or barley, which take nitrogen from the soil.
With fertilisers the same crops can be grown year after year on the same fields and still they give high yields.
Lime is spread to help to break up heavy wet clay soils.
These then drain better and hold chemicals more easily.
Machinery and money are available to lay drains in fields or to provide irrigation water so that crops grow successfully.
Silos are used to store fresh grass which is fed to cattle in the cool winter months when grass stops growing.
This   fresh fodder is used as well as root crops of turnips and swedes and the cabbage-like crops of kale and rape.
Because they have money and because there is a good transport system, farmers also buy concentrated feedstuffs, called concentrates .
These are made mainly of grain, much of which is imported from other parts of the world.
With these aids, farmers in Britain obtain high yields of crops, and large outputs of milk, beef, mutton or lamb.
Farming is intensive as well as commercial .
Are yields of wheat and the use of fertilisers increasing equally fast?
Is there perhaps some additional reason for the increase in wheat yields?
What does each picture, on pages 19–20, tell about the costs of the inputs for farmers?
F. Because farmers in Britain have money they can buy the services of scientists and vets (veterinary surgeons) and the products of the chemical industry from ICI, Fisons and Boots.
These provide weedkillers, insecticides and fungicides to control weeds, pests and diseases which otherwise would damage crops and reduce   their size by at least a third.
Inoculations, crossbreeding of animals and the use of hormones are producing better livestock, which resist diseases, which fatten faster, and which give more milk, wool or eggs.
In this way also farming is becoming more intensive .
G. To be successful farmers need to be sure of being able to sell their outputs at reasonable prices.
To help them the government of the EEC , in Brussels, fixes the lowest, or minimum, price for each product each year.
This is called the support price , or intervention price.
For instance, in 1982 the support price for wheat was £126 per tonne.
If there was a very large output, perhaps from some other part of the world, and buyers would offer only a lower price, such as £110 per tonne, the EEC either paid their farmers the difference, of £16, or bought the surplus grain and stored it for future use.
An example in the past was that too much butter had been produced.
The surplus was bought and stored by the EEC.
It was known as the ‘butter mountain’.
The farmers received a good price even though there was too much butter for the market.
This type of government aid, which controls the market price, helps farmers to decide which crops or livestock to produce each year and it prevents sudden, unexpected disasters.
Other grants are offered to help farmers produce the most suitable products.
For instance, there are payments to destroy unwanted, surplus, apple trees.
There are subsidies for keeping sheep on farms where there is poor grazing in the hills.
H. Most farmers in almost all parts of Britain keep some dairy cows, usually black and white Friesians.
They do this because the Milk Marketing Board , set up by the government, collects the milk from farms, wherever they are, and pays a fixed price for it.
The farmers are paid every month.
which is useful when they may have to wait a whole year for payment for their wheat harvest, or for the sale of fat cattle.
Each dairy cow needs to produce a calf each year if it is to continue producing milk.
Thus many farmers have young store cattle which they either sell at market or fatten on fodder crops on their own farms.
For these reasons the common system of farming in Britain is one of mixed farming, with several different outputs, as well as being intensive farming and commercial farming.
In what ways does the government affect the choices and decisions of farmers in Britain?
Amenities
A. What do people see, smell and hear in the environment around them?
It may be pleasant or it may be unpleasant.
Also what opportunities are there for people to have fun, to keep physically fit, to play games or to discover things of interest?
The pictures show some of the ways in which people have spoiled the environments around them.
In what ways is each unpleasant?
Which senses or activities may suffer because of the way each landscape is being used?
B. Most of the spoliation of our landscapes, coastlines and rivers has been due to the activities of business people during the last 100 years or so.
The waste from one small factory, or the sewage from one small town, being dumped in a river such as the Mersey did little harm.
But in time many factories and many sewers emptied their waste into the Mersey.
By 1980 the river stank, the beaches nearby were covered at times by blobs of grease, fat and oils, and thousands of sea birds were poisoned by lead compounds released from a chemical works.
Now the Government is to construct, at vast cost, two large new sewers to collect and process all the waste before it enters the river.
The waterfront areas of the towns, the beaches and the river itself will again become pleasant places.
At Hull, unsightly old derelict warehouses and docks are being converted into yachting marinas in the heart of the city.
Industrial use is changing to use of the area for recreational enjoyment .
The photographs show another example of changing an old, unplanned industrial area, with its derelict factories and waste tips, into a pleasant local recreation area for the people living in a city.
In what ways was this landscape unpleasant and in what ways may people get greater pleasure from it now?
Why do changes like those mentioned above require Government or Local Council action and the work of county planning officers rather than that of individual business people?
Amenity groups:
National Trust — historic buildings and beautiful country
Civic Trust — urban areas and buildings
CPRE (Council for the Preservation of Rural England)— villages and countryside
CPRW (in Wales)
Nature Conservancy — study of wild plants and animals
Ramblers Association
Wildfowl Trust
Botanical Society of the British Isles
C. The British Government normally does only those things which they believe large sections of the public want.
The demand for control of our landscapes, or environment, in order to preserve or create pleasant amenities has been due to the work of many people organised in groups.
What is the special interest of each of the groups in the list?
D. With modern machinery and techniques of building we are capable of making vast changes in a landscape within a very short time and some of these changes may affect the lives of people over large areas or in many different parts of the UK.
Public opinion on proposals for change is made known at public enquiries.
Three examples in the early 1980s were
(i)
to create a large international airport at Stansted in Essex;
(ii)
to extend coal mining into the unspoilt countryside of the Vale of Belvoir (pronounced ‘beaver’) in Nottinghamshire; and
(iii)
to dam and raise the level of two of the lakes in the beautiful, peaceful scenery of the Lake District National Park in order to obtain extra water mainly for industry.
At all these enquiries many groups protested that amenities would be spoiled.
As a result, in each instance, the harm that might have been done to the environment was at least delayed or controlled.
In what ways might each of these proposed developments reduce the pleasures of people who live in or visit the area?
South West England
A distance to travel
A. In 1840 a great engineer, Isambard Kingdom Brunel, was making plans for the route of the main railway into South West England.
He had problems.
To get business he wanted the line to reach the towns and particularly the ports.
They were attractions .
But the high moorlands, the deep valleys and the long sea inlets, or rias , were obstacles.
They repelled railway building.
The map shows his solution — the present railways — in one area of Cornwall.
Describe the features Brunel avoided in this area.
How did his choice of lines overcome the problems of the landforms and of reaching towns and ports?
B. Railway building in Devon and Cornwall was expensive because the main rivers and valleys lay across the east-west route along which most people wanted to travel.
Despite many bridges, viaducts, embankments, cuttings and tunnels the lines twist and turn in detours around the hills.
These make travelling times slow.
The two small maps show how the detours can be measured.
Measure and calculate the detour index for the route between Plymouth and Exeter.
Why is there this major detour?
C. Across most of Devon and Cornwall the landforms are like those shown in the last of the three diagrams on the next page.
The blocks of high land are masses of granite, called batholiths , except Exmoor which is made of sandstone.
The granite does not weather, or break into smaller pieces, easily.
And so it is not easily worn away or eroded.
By contrast, most other areas are made of shale, or hardened mud, with thin bands of sandstone between the shales.
Together these are called killas .
The killas was baked, or heated, and twisted in folds when the molten rock, which had cooled to become granite, was injected long ago.
The killas weathers and crumbles easily and so it is easily eroded by rivers and the sea.
About 10 million years ago the sea was at a higher level.
Probably the waves cut the cliffs of weak killas far back inland, over a period of a few million years.
Then the granite uplands, or batholiths, were left as islands, just like the Scilly Isles are today (see page 26).
Sea level fell gradually to -20 m in the cold periods of the Ice Ages, about 100 000 years ago.
The almost flat surface cut by the sea at the older high level was left as a plateau.
Rivers eroded deep, steep-sided,V-shaped valleys into the plateau.
The plateau was dissected .
In the last 10 000 years the sea rose slightly to its present level.
It drowned the lower deeper valleys, so forming rias which provide excellent sheltered harbours.
Why is the landscape difficult to travel across, both by rail and road transport, even though most of it is not very high?
D. For a long time South West England has been remote from the main population of England.
It is getting nearer as measured by time distance .
But still today this remoteness is the main problem for industry.
The time taken and the cost of transport for raw materials and for sending finished goods to the main markets in England cause many managers to choose to place their factories elsewhere.
How far away from London was Penzance, in time distance, in (i) 1880,(ii) 1930, and (iii) 1980?
For what reason has it always been relatively far away in time distance and in cost distance?
Changes in the older industries
A. Thousands of men in the last century were miners in the west of Cornwall.
They dug and blasted out the ores from thin, but rich,mineral veins .
The veins are often only a metre or two wide.
They were formed where gases and liquids from the deep molten rock — the magma of the earth — escaped and cooled in long thin cracks in and around the granite batholiths.
As the liquid cooled in the veins, the crystals of tin ores were formed at greater depths than those of copper ores.
So the miners found copper first and later tin .
The deeper mines filled easily with water but, unlike coal mines, they were safe from roof collapse.
B. The mine owners found that the cost of pumping water was expensive , particularly when the easiest deposits near the surface had been extracted and the mines had to be sunk deeper.
At the same time the market price of tin fell sharply because it was being extracted much more cheaply from river gravels in Malaya.
So by 1920 most mines were forced to close.
Thousands of miners in Cornwall were unemployed .
Only two mines survived.
Now this is being reversed.
The alluvial tin, from the Malayan river gravels, is almost exhausted.
The world price for tin is high and so companies have been opening new larger mines in Cornwall.
These are mainly for tin but also for zinc, lead and silver which occur in the same veins, and for wolfram and tungsten , which are used in making special steels.
Why were most of the tin mines in Cornwall closed earlier this century?
How many tin mines on the map are shown to be working today? *
Around which town is there most tin mining?
C. On some granite batholiths the granite rock is quarried for building stones , especially for use in sea defences, docks, stone bridges and monuments.
But this industry is declining as new methods of building with steel and concrete are being used.
D. The quarrying of china clay is an industry which is growing.
The white clay is formed where some granite masses have been changed chemically.
The felspar crystals in some granite have become weak clay, called kaolin , which remains mixed with the gritty but loose crystals of quartz and mica.
This is hosed down from the sides of the open pits.
The grit settles in the quarries and the milk-white water is pumped up into tanks where the china clay settles slowly.
The waste grit from the quarry floors is piled in tips nearby.
Much of the china clay went to the Potteries of Staffordshire to be made into crockery — cups, saucers and plates.
Now most is used in the making of paper.
It gives the paper its smooth, glossy surface.
Scientists, are finding other uses for it, in paints, drugs and fertilisers.
Most is exported through the small port of Par, to Europe and the USA.
It is worth about 3% of all Britain's exports.
Which of the granite moorlands have china clay pits and tips?
Even though it is a valuable export, some people want to stop the industry spreading with more and larger pits and waste tips.
Study the photograph and suggest why they may want to stop this.
E. In Devon,ball clay is quarried from open pits and gently sloping shafts, or adits.
It is a clay used for making glazed tiles, wash basins and lavatory pans.
It is called ball clay because it was cut in cubes, about a spade size, and these were called ‘balls’ of clay!
Some goes to the Staffordshire potteries, some is used in local potteries, but most is exported.
Near which towns are the ball clay quarries?
F. The high moorlands and the steep low hills inland repel many people from them.
But the coasts and especially the ports attract people.
Fishing has been an important industry.
Each sheltered bay and drowned valley, or ria, was a harbour with from 10 to 100 fishing boats.
Most fishermen worked full-time from small boats with crews of 2 to 5 men but some did this as a second job, with farming or quarrying.
They tracked down large shoals of pilchards, herring and mackerel, which were caught near the surface with drift nets, often at night.
In the last fifty years there have been problems for the fishermen and most have become unemployed or moved to other jobs.
The market for pilchards declined when foreign tinned sardines and pilchards came to the shops.
The high cost of rail transport made it difficult to sell fresh fish to the main English market.
The shoals of fish became scarce and unreliable from one year to another, probably because of overfishing when the power of modern engines made it possible for foreign boats to fish in the same waters.
Today most ports have only a few fishing boats but large fleets still work from three of the ports.
EEC government regulations limit the size of catches and so aim to prevent overfishing.
Recently new markets have been found in foreign factory ships , mainly from the USSR and Poland, which have bought much of the catch at sea, or it has been sold to French canneries which take it by road and the cross-Channel ferry from Plymouth.
Which are the important fishing ports today?
Oyster beds, on the mud flats, are a form of fish farming in the ria of the River Fal and lobsters are caught in pots in many coves along the coast.
Why did a fishing industry start in this region?
Why did it decline?
How many fishing ports are there?
How many large ones?
For what reasons has the price of fish from South West England risen sharply?
How has foreign trade caused changes in (i) mining,(ii) quarrying,(iii) fishing in South West England?
G. The rias of the River Tamar at Plymouth and the River Fal at Falmouth have attracted many workers for their shipyards .
Plymouth is a base for the Royal Navy, making, repairing and servicing warships and training their crews.
Recently it has become a port for a cross-Channel ferry service
Falmouth has dockyards which now are used mainly for the repair of oil tankers and naval ships.
(See the photograph on page 35.)
Why are Falmouth and Plymouth in suitable positions for ship repairing?
What two reasons are there for the Plymouth-Roscoff ferry route being less busy than other cross-Channel ferry routes?
The new industries
A. Earlier this century tin mining declined.
Fishing has also declined.
But china clay production has increased.
And there has been a rapid growth in three types of industry: light factory industry, services and tourism.
B. Each town has a few factories, most of which were set up during the last 40 years.
To assist them the Government has made the west of the region a Development Area in which special grants are given to industries.
Mrs Pearce is a manager in an electronics business, making printed circuits.
She considers whether or not to start a small factory in the region.
The main disadvantage is normally the cost of transport for bulky raw materials, or fuel or finished goods.
But her industry handles only small amounts and they have a high value to cover this cost.
The power supply will come easily from the electricity grid.
There are many advantages in the South West.
The local labour is mainly in small factories of 20–300 people which has led to a reputation for good relations between workers and managers.
Because of unemployment in the region, both men and women are available.
Housing in pleasant surrounds, near the coast, will attract the few skilled workers needed from other parts of the country.
Land is fairly cheap and, as she decides to go to the Development Area in Cornwall, the government grants will help to pay for the factory building and its machinery.
C. Besides electronics firms, there are factories making clothes, shoes, gloves, luggage and many engineering products such as pumps, switches and generators.
Boat building, mainly for yachts and motor launches, is done in many small yards.
Bakeries and dairies provide for the local market.
Dairies, cider presses and meat packing stations process local raw materials from the farmers.
Suppose you had to choose whether or not to place a factory making (i) lamp posts, and (ii) swim suits, in South West England.
What choice would you make for each and why?
Why might you prefer to have a factory at Exeter or Taunton rather than at Bodmin or Redruth?
Why might you prefer to place it in Cornwall rather than in east Devon or Somerset?
D. Although jobs in light industry are increasing, with a few in each town, the region still has only a small proportion of its workers in manufacturing.
How does it compare with the country as a whole?
E. Often people dream about where they would like to live.
When they retire from work, many people can make this choice freely, and a popular choice is along or near the south coast of England.
From the map and the photograph, what reasons can you suggest for this choice?
Which towns are popular for retired people?
The large numbers of retired people, the tourists, the workers in the primary industries (mining, quarrying, fishing and farming) and the workers in the secondary industries (manufacturing)— all of them together need a great many services , or tertiary industries.
Many people have work in shops, cafes, and transport services.
The proportion , or percentage, is high because there are fewer people in manufacturing industries in this region than in other parts of Britain.
What other service jobs can you think of, particularly those which retired people or tourists may need?
How would you describe the percentage of workers in service industries in South West England: ‘about average’, ‘above average’, ‘well above average’, or ‘slightly above average’?
F. These are some things most people think about when they are choosing where to go for a holiday .
Is the climate warm and sunny?
Is there suitable accommodation?
Is the landscape pleasant?
Is it far away in time and cost?
In what order of importance do you place them'?
What different activities do people do as a major part of their holidays?
What landscape features do they seek?
G. The tourist industry of the South West has been growing since the railways were built in the last century.
However, most people now come by road.
They have been attracted by features such as those shown in this photograph and those on pages 28(F) and 35(A).
Some of the attractions are due simply to the landforms and some due to the features made by people .
From the photographs on pages 24–35, what landform features attract people to this region?
And what human features attract them?
Refer to the maps on pages 31 and 34.
What features of the climate attract people to the South West?
H. So that people may continue to enjoy the scenery, many parts of the land, mainly near the coast, have been classified as Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty .
In these areas there are strict controls to prevent new buildings spoiling the landscape.
A Cornish Coastal Footpath has been opened to give the public access to walk along the cliffs.
Some small but particularly beautiful areas of woods, cliffs and islands are preserved and cared for by the National Trust .
Dartmoor and Exmoor, with their wild moorland, some farm land and villages, are National Parks .
In these areas most changes in the use of land are strictly controlled even though the land is privately owned.
Where possible the public are given access to enjoy the land for recreation.
Recently some areas which used to be moorland have been enclosed and ploughed, mainly on Exmoor.
I. People have conflicts of opinion on how the land should be used in these and the other National Parks of Britain.
The map shows one small part of the Dartmoor National Park in which there are some conflicts.
Which features may tourists find attractive?
Which features or activities may reduce the value of land for tourists?
Which of the people engaged in work there may consider that tourists are a nuisance, or damaging to their activities?
For each permanent activity shown on the map, how may it conflict with the use of land for any other purpose?
J. In some popular places tourists may spoil the landscape for themselves, usually by overuse , or by their cars or caravans spoiling the scenery.
What damage are tourists doing to the scene shown in the photograph?
K. The motorways are helping tourists to reach the holiday resorts of the South West quickly.
The number of visitors is increasing from year to year but at the peak of the holiday season this is causing more congestion and overuse of the landscape.
How many come from places within
(i)
2 hours driving time,
(ii)
2–4 hours,
(iii)
4–6 hours, and
(iv)
over 6 hours?
L. On 31 August there are about 500 000 tourists in the region.
By 15 September there are only about 10 000.
It is a seasonal business .
Although many part-time workers are used, and others migrate into the region to work during the holiday season, many become unemployed for over half the year.
Owners of hotels, guest houses, caravan parks and shops have to make most of their profit in a very short time.
In which months will they make most of their profit?
In which months is there most unemployment?
Name the larger resorts shown on the map.
Agriculture
A. On many farms in this region a married couple alone can manage without any extra labour.
They can do this because the farms are usually small , about 30 hectares, and they have many small fields.
Also the farmers have decided to keep most of the fields in grass for livestock .
The grass is either permanent or it remains for several years as a long ley .
Some is cut for hay.
The other fields, which are arable, or ploughed, are usually for barley and sometimes for oats or kale.
These are grown as fodder crops .
In making their choice for the use of land, farmers have thought like this.
The many steep slopes of the valley sides make ploughing difficult and even dangerous.
Each year one or two farmers are killed and others seriously injured when their tractors roll over.
The climate in winter is mild, since the air almost always blows from the sea, which is warm due to the North Atlantic Drift.
The grass continues to grow almost all year, so only a little winter fodder is needed.
The fixed prices and monthly payments by the Milk Marketing Board encourage farmers to keep dairy cows, usually in small herds of about 15–20 cows each.
The cows are mainly black and white Friesians but some are Jerseys which give less, but richer, milk.
Some of the young calves are fattened on the farms but many are reared for a few months and then sold for fattening in central or eastern Britain.
Fat lambs and pigs are sold to local  abattoirs and bacon factories.
Why do farmers have so much grassland?
How long does the grass grow
(i)
near Truro,
(ii)
near Taunton,
(iii)
near Warwick in the Midlands of England?
B. Farmers in the valleys and on the edges of Dartmoor and Exmoor concentrate more on rearing young cattle, sheep and lambs, which graze on the rough moorland pasture.
But here the winters are colder and more hay and fodder are needed.
C. On the low flat plain of the Somerset Levels there is rich grass, growing in damp clay and peat soils.
Dairying is the only form of farming.
Farmers have the extra cost of paying for the upkeep of many drainage ditches to control flooding.
D. Some farmers have decided to produce special crops of high value , such as flowers, fruits and early potatoes.
In a few good sites, close to the sea or along the rias, frosts are rare.
The warm spring climate makes it possible to produce early market garden crops before those in other parts of Britain.
People in the cities will pay high prices for these and this covers the cost of transport.
What are the problems and advantages for a daffodil grower in the Scilly Isles?
Where are the main orchards of apples for cider?
Where are the main areas for early strawberries?
Towns
A. Each town has several functions.
The photograph shows those for Falmouth.
Normally one of a town's functions is more important than the others.
For instance, Falmouth may be called a tourist resort, although it is also a shopping centre for local residents, and it has dockyards, a fishing industry and some light industry.
B. Some towns have attracted more people than others, so there is a hierarchy of sizes, with just a few large towns and many smaller ones.
Mentioning their names, how may you describe the hierarchy of resort towns ?
Which are the county towns , where many people are employed in administration?
Which are the market towns , for farm products and local shopping?
If you were asked to select the towns for two new large department stores, which two would you choose and why?
C. Study the pie graph for Plymouth and the information in the text and maps on pages 29, 30 and 33.
What jobs do the people of Plymouth do?
The growth of a city: Bristol
A. The centre of Bristol is shown in the photograph.
People have lived and worked here for about 1000 years.
Long ago they called it Bricgstow , meaning ‘the bridging place’.
Here they could cross two rivers, the Frome and the Avon, just before these joined to make one larger river which was too difficult to cross.
They built a town on a small mound between the two rivers.
This was easy to defend since the rivers were like a moat on three sides.
B. Sailing ships could carry their cargoes far inland (12 km) up the river, helped by the very high tides .
The water rises 12 metres as the tide is forced into the funnel of the Severn estuary and into the Avon river.
The drawing shows what the city and port was like in about 1200 AD.
Notice the street names in the centre of Bristol.
What do they indicate about the defence of the old city and about the trade of the old port?
What have the citizens done now with the old port and its quays?
C. As a port, Bristol has been growing in size and trade.
The merchants and sailors have brought back the raw materials for the city's industries.
And to work these industries the population has increased.
Where did the ships sail and what cargoes did they carry in 1500 AD?
What change was there in trade by 1750?
How have the ships and the trade changed between 1750 and today?
Which parts of the trade remain the same?
D. When ships became larger, the merchants had to have new docks for them.
By 1800 the larger ships grounded on the river bed at low tide, so lock gates were made to trap the tide water.
For navigation the worst meanders of the river in the Avon Gorge were straightened.
Warehouses were built beside these new docks.
But by 1870 even larger ships and cargoes made it necessary to create a new port, or outport , at    Avonmouth.
This grew while the city docks declined and finally were closed a few years ago.
Why did (i) the sailors,(ii) the merchants who store and distribute goods, and (iii) the manufacturers, each decide that the new outport was needed?
E. The merchants of Bristol have made much money from trading.
They have used this as the input of capital to develop industries (see page 16).
Many of the industries are placed close to the docks; they are port oriented .
They use imported raw materials.
At which period of trading were the raw materials first imported for each of the industries shown in the picture?
F. Some new port oriented industries have been started at the outport of Avonmouth.
These make products from imported oil and grain.
They are capital intensive industries because they have a lot of money invested in machinery and equipment but relatively few workers.
G. Engineering is a third type of industry in which the merchants have invested money, or capital.
But the factories are not concentrated near the docks.
H. Some factory owners decide to move the positions of their factories when conditions change.
Fry's chocolates were made in the old centre of the city but as the business expanded they needed a large space for a modern factory and also easy ways of distributing the goods.
A new site was found on a main road and railway beyond the margin of the city.
Similarly Dalgety Spillers moved their flour mills to the outport of Avonmouth when shipping to the city docks became difficult.
Some other factory owners decide to stay on their old sites, even though transport is changing.
This is called industrial inertia .
Many of the paper and board mills remain along the river near the old docks.
When new factories and industries are started managers choose sites where there are good transport links and space to develop their factories.
The furniture industry (4 on the map) was on the city outskirts when it was started in the last century.
The new frozen foods factory (5) is near the present city outskirts.
What were the advantages of placing the British Aerospace factories where they are on the map?
Why do you think ICI decided on the site at   Avonmouth for their very large new chemical works?
Why is the new Aztec West ‘science park’, with its modern factories for computers, electronics and similar industries, placed where it is?
I. Of all the workers in Bristol, and also in many other cities, about 60% are in the service industries.
The early wealth of the merchants made Bristol a banking centre and a centre for insurance business.
Modern rail and motorway links have made many firms choose it as a place for their wholesale warehouses either in or around Bristol.
From these they can distribute goods easily to many parts of the country.
Some firms use old abandoned factories near the city centre for their warehouses but most prefer better sites.
What does the map show about Bristol being a suitable place for managers to have their wholesale warehouses?
Which two places on map H do you think are best for new warehouses and distribution?
Why do you choose these places?
J. Many of the service workers are in transport and retail shops.
Also some are in the police force, some in…
What other forms of service work are there?
K. With the growth of trade and work in factories, more and more people have been attracted to cities like Bristol which now has a population of 388 000.
At each period new houses and streets have been added on the margins of the built-up area.
The richer people, who could afford it, built large houses surrounded by gardens , mostly on the pleasanter side of the city (K1).
For the poorer workers, the industrialists built closely packed rows of terraced houses with very little open space.
These they added in areas near the factories (K2).
Modern streets and houses, often on council-built estates , have been placed beyond the older terraced housing (K3).
Besides providing homes for the newcomers to the city, these estates have been occupied by people moving out of the old city centre and out of some of the older terraced houses.
The city centre has few residents left.
Because the land here is valuable most of it has been bought for shops and offices , many rebuilt in high multi-storey blocks.
This is the CBD, or Central Business District (K4).
As large cities, like Bristol, have grown outwards they have surrounded some old villages .
These have smaller shopping centres for the use of the people in the suburbs.
In what ways do the types of houses differ?
In what ways do the street plans differ?
How can you explain the differences between points (a),(b) and (c) on the graph for population across a city?
L. The diagram is a model, or general pattern, to show this outward growth, which varies in different directions.
Which way round and how far would you turn this model so that it roughly fits map H for industrial sectors of Bristol?
What difference is there between the sizes of the industrial sectors of Bristol and those on the general model?
Assuming the model is similar to the form of Bristol, in which direction do you expect most of the low density, richer housing to be?
East Anglia and the Fens
The agribusiness
A. All the machinery in the picture is owned by one farmer in East Anglia.
Farmers here are doing big business.
Many have large farms and some have formed companies owning three or four scattered farms which are managed as one unit.
At times other workers and firms are hired on contract to do special tasks, such as lime spreading and harvesting of peas, beans and potatoes.
Although there are many different sizes of farms in each region, roughly how much larger are the East Anglian farms than those in South West England?
What are the costs of the machinery and labour inputs per year?
B. Some farmers own their land but nearly half are tenants who rent it.
At £50 per hectare per year, how much will the input of land cost?
And there are buildings to be paid for also.
C. John Wills will inherit one of these large farms when his father dies.
It has been in the family for over 200 years.
In the future he will have to decide what crops and livestock to produce.
His choice may be a little different from his father's present choice.
It will depend on the prices for crops and livestock, as well as on the climate and the soils .
From the map, make a list of the crops, including grass, in 1980 and the area for each.
Which are the more important crops?
Which are less important?
D. From long experience the Wills family know that cereal crops (wheat and barley) normally grow better in this region than in other parts of Britain.
This is mainly because in the summer months there is less rainfall and cloud and so the grain ripens well and can be harvested easily.
See the map of wheat on page 19.
From the graph, contrast the rainfall in East Anglia and in South West England.
How do the total amounts differ?
What is the difference between the winter rainfall and the summer rainfall at Plymouth?
What is the difference between winter and summer at Cambridge?
How much rain falls at Cambridge and at Plymouth in the harvesting month of August?
E. The choice of the main crops twenty years ago was barley first, wheat second and sugarbeet third.
But prices and methods have changed.
Now the order is
wheat
1st
barley
2nd
sugarbeet
3rd
Some of the barley is used for malting to make beer but about two-thirds is fed to beef cattle which are fattened quickly and slaughtered at about 1½ years old.
When the price for beef was high, barley was a more important crop.
Wheat is mainly a cash crop , sold for making biscuits or for mixing with harder foreign wheat for bread but some is also fed to cattle.
About fifty years ago the price of sugar increased, and so the farmers changed from turnips as a fodder crop to sugarbeet.
This is a dual purpose crop.
The green tops are eaten by cattle.
The roots are crushed in the local sugar factory to extract the sugary juice.
The pulp is sold back to the farmers for feeding to their cattle.
Thus it is both a cash crop and a fodder crop .
Where on the map are the main markets for each of the products?
Why are (i) wheat,(ii) barley and (iii) sugarbeet grown in large quantities by East Anglian farmers?
F. The sugar content of sugarbeet is highest where there is plentiful sunshine and moderate rainfall.
Where there is more rain and cloud the beet grows larger but it has less sugar content.
The harvested roots are bulky and heavy to transport and they must be crushed within a few hours after harvest to avoid loss of the sugary Juice.
Why are the farmers in eastern England almost the only ones who choose to grow sugarbeet?
What is the longest distance that farmers have to take to get their beet to a factory?
Where are the main sugar refineries and why are they in these places?
G. The farmers know that by growing much wheat and barley the soil is losing nitrogen.
Also insect pests and diseases increase when the same crops are grown year after year.
So some farmers make the decision to change the crops in each field from one year to another, by rotation .
Root crops, such as sugarbeet, are hoed between the rows several times.
This helps to control weeds.
Peas and beans put nitrogen into the soil.
Grass, which is sown with clover , provides rich pasture for cattle in summer and the clover is another plant which puts nitrogen into the soil.
The cattle droppings provide manure to enrich the soil.
Some of the grass is cut for hay .
Some is cut and stored in silos by being packed tightly to exclude air.
This is called silage .
Both are used for winter fodder .
In the choice of rotation by one farmer in East Anglia in 1970, why did he decide to spread fertiliser at the start of Year 5?
Why did he expect a good crop of sugarbeet?
Why did he plant peas or beans between his two barley crops?
H. Now the pests, diseases and chemicals in the soil can be controlled quite well by using chemical insecticides, fungicides and various artificial fertilisers .
But these are expensive inputs and they need some skilled workers to control their use.
Recent high prices for wheat have tempted farmers to grow much more of this crop, using more insecticides and fertilisers and less rotation of crops.
They keep fewer beef cattle and many of these are stall-fed rather than grazing in the fields.
In addition, they have many stall-fed pigs.
What changes has the farmer made in recent years to the seven year plan for the use of one field and the application of fertiliser to it?
I. Big business requires good use of the costly machinery, sometimes even at night with lights blazing.
The almost flat or gently undulating land of the region is suitable for large machines but to assist their use farmers have removed many hedges.
On this new open landscape some cattle grazing is controlled by electric fences which are easily moved.
But for many stall-fed cattle and pigs the crops are brought to them from the fields.
How do electric fences help to ensure (i) that the right amount of grass is had by the cattle.
and (ii) that the soil is manured evenly?
Many birds nest and sleep in hedges and eat insect pests.
What are (i) the disadvantages and (ii) the advantages of removing hedges?
How may this affect a farmer's input costs?
J. To get better crops, farmers are watering some of them from hoses and sprinklers.
This is irrigation .
It is mainly used for vegetables and for grass.
It adds to the cost of the farmer's inputs.
Why is there more irrigation in East Anglia and the Fens than in other parts of Britain?
K. The East Anglian Heights are only a low ridge of chalk hills which dip gently to the east.
There are some shallow dry valleys where water seeps through the porous chalk.
But most of the surface is covered by a thin sheet of boulder clay .
This was dumped when an ice sheet melted long ago.
It makes a fertile soil for crops since here it is a mixture of clay and small particles of chalk.
Where the soil is different there are abrupt changes in the use which people have made of the land.
In Breckland there is coarse sand which is very porous and poor for crops.
Much of this is planted with coniferous forest .
In the area of the Broads , large pits were dug about 500 years ago to obtain peat for fuel.
The pits have become lakes and the land around them is damp or waterlogged.
There is much permanent grass and more dairy cattle than in other parts of East Anglia.
Farms on the Fens today have all the crops grown in East Anglia, but the Fens was once a vast marshland .
Its soils and drainage make it a quite distinct area, described on pages 46 and 47.
The Fens: from wasteland to farmland
A. Woburn Abbey, now with a private zoo, is a stately home visited by thousands of people each year.
It is just outside this area but it is the home of the Duke of Bedford, whose ancestors put their wealth, or capital , into a vast scheme to drain the marshland of the Fens.
This was done in about 1650 by cutting straight canals to bypass some of the river meanders and so allow the flood waters of the rivers to reach the sea more easily.
Embankments were built along the rivers and their bypass canals.
Now when there is excess flood water it is held between them and let out slowly later.
B. Layers of peat had formed in the marshes and between them there were layers of mud or silt.
Nearer the sea and along the rivers the soils were all fine silt.
When the marshes were drained the peat slowly shrank .
The inland areas became lower than the silty areas near the coast and lower than the river channels.
Pumps were needed to lift the water from the field drains into the rivers and canals.
At first wind pumps were used, then steam pumps which used coal brought in barges along the rivers and canals.
As the peat shrank further, more powerful electric pumps and diesel pumps became available.
How much has the peat shrunk, as shown in the block diagram?
Recently a major new canal has been made to cut off some of the tributary rivers.
It also speeds the flow across the silty land.
New sluice gates hold out the sea water at high tides.
The farmers have the cost of regularly cleaning out the ditches and renewing the drain pipes which lie beneath the fields.
In addition they must pay heavy rates for the major drainage schemes.
C. The extra costs of the inputs for drainage are balanced by the extra value of the outputs.
The peat and silt are rich soils on which farmers obtain high yields without using as much expensive artificial fertiliser as elsewhere.
They also specialise in some crops of high value.
Peas and beans are specialist crops grown mainly for freezing in local Birds Eye, Findus and Ross factories.
These crops are grown on a system of contract farming , with fixed prices and outside specialists contracted to spray and harvest them.
The Fens is the most important area in Britain for main crop potatoes.
Early potatoes are also grown, particularly near Boston, on the silty and sandy soils near the coast where the soil warms quickly in the spring.
Other vegetables are carrots, onions, celery and cabbages.
Strawberries are grown near Wisbech and tulip bulbs near Spalding.
D. Farms are smaller than those of East Anglia but they use more labour.
Almost all the crops are cash crops and there are only a few cattle in the area.
Where in the Fens do farmers keep their few dairy cows?
From the maps, what differences are there between farms on the Fens and those in East Anglia?
Central places
A. The villages of East Anglia are marked by beautiful churches with fine towers.
For hundreds of years the farmers clustered together in these villages.
They were spaced fairly regularly , about 6 km apart.
This was because the landscape is flat, or gently undulating, and so there were few places which specially attracted people.
Also there were few places which were unsuitable, or repelled people.
B. When trade started, people walked or rode on horseback or in waggons to those villages which were chosen to have weekly markets.
These market villages were at roughly regular intervals, about 12 km apart.
To travel 6 km there and another 6 km back was far enough for most people in one day.
Other people came to live in the market villages to provide services , like inns and later hotels, doctors and dentists, lawyers and bankers, and many traders and craftsmen making furniture, tools, clothes and leather goods.
Thus these villages grew in size to become market towns .
With the extra wealth from trade the townsfolk enlarged their churches and often added hand some spires.
What is the furthest distance you can find between neighbouring market towns?
What is the least distance?
C. A few of the market towns became especially popular.
They attracted people from a greater distance on their major market days and fair days.
And they attracted people who provided special services, such as jewellers and clocksmiths, toymakers and printers, as well as many more of the ordinary traders.
They had special courts and some had a university or a cathedral.
These places became larger towns or cities .
They were spaced well apart.
How far apart were these larger market towns and cities in 1800?
D. The maps next to the photographs show the main roads, now called Class A roads, which lead people to each settlement.
How many main roads lead
(i)
to the village;
(ii)
to the market town;
(iii)
to the city?
As road transport has improved, changing from horse-drawn waggons to motorcars and lorries, the larger market towns and cities have grown in size much faster than the small ones.
Why is this?
E. People have some choice of where to shop, but normally they go to the nearest place which has the type of goods they want.
For things they want daily or several times a week they go to the local village, or in a town they go to the local suburban shops, or the ‘corner’ shop.
For those things they buy only occasionally, and wish to choose carefully, they go to a larger central place, usually in the centre of a market town or a city.
For what other goods is Mr Smith likely to go to the local village?
For what other goods is Mrs Smith likely to make a trip to a large city centre?
The area from which people come to each centre, or the area with which it trades, is called its sphere of influence .
The map shows roughly how the spheres of influence of different sizes of towns are arranged.
Because people have freedom of choice where to shop there is some overlap between these spheres of influence.
What connection is there between the size of a town and the size of its sphere of influence?
Where would the people from each of the points A-E be most likely to shop for (i) everyday household goods, such as groceries;(ii) more lasting and expensive goods, such as clothes or furniture?
F. There are many ways to record the sphere of influence of a town.
The map shows one way.
Another way is to plot the area from which people go to school in the town.
And another is to show the area where a local newspaper is distributed.
What does the map tell you about the strength or power of the town's attraction at different distances within its sphere of influence?
G. Although the positions and sizes of most settlements in this region were due almost solely to the way in which people organised themselves, or in other words due to human factors, a few depended on the landforms,or physical factors .
When the Fens was mainly marshland, people clustered on the small humps or islands of boulder clay which were dry point sites .
Ely, March, Wisbech and Spalding are examples.
They were places which were easy to defend .
When the marshes were drained the new farmers chose to live on the embankments beside the canals and rivers.
Here they developed long thin linear villages .
Changes in the port towns
A. Long ago sailing ships carried cargoes inland up the estuaries and rivers, as far as the bridge points of Boston, King's Lynn, Norwich and Ipswich.
These towns started to grow as ports.
But as ships have become larger and the rivers have filled with mud and silt, their functions as ports have declined.
Norwich has become an inland town, but Ipswich still has some sea trade.
B. The bridge at Norwich is the only one across the River Yare for 32 km down to Yarmouth on the coast.
Thus it is a major focus for roads, bringing extra trade to the city.
On the higher land between the rivers a castle stronghold was built and a cathedral .
Now Norwich is a centre for shops and offices , including business, county council and regional government offices.
Its factory workers are nearly all in light industry .
Much of this started by using local agricultural products as the raw materials.
From the list of industries, which of them are connected with agriculture?
C. Along the coast Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft became major fishing ports but recently this industry has declined.
At Great Yarmouth fishing by drifters for herring has ended since the shoals of these fish are scarce now.
But Lowestoft still has a trawler fleet , mainly fishing on the shallow bed of the North Sea for plaice and haddock.
D. Now Great Yarmouth is mainly a tourist resort with fine beaches on a sand spit.
Many other tourists are attracted to the lakes and rivers of the Broads.
Other seaside resorts are at Cromer and Clacton on Sea.
They are popular since they are close to the large population of London.
How far is it from London to (i) Clacton and (ii) Great Yarmouth — in kilometres, and in time distance?
E. Harwich has become a ferry port, or packet station , mainly for passengers to the Hook of Holland and on to northern Europe and West Germany.
Felixstowe is growing rapidly as a new container port with special equipment to handle the containers of manufactured goods and parts going mainly to and from other countries of the EEC.
Already it handles nearly half the UK's trade with the EEC.
Light industries
A. People have started factories for light industries, like those at Norwich, in most of the towns.
Many of the older industries are connected with farming.
These include sugarbeet factories, breweries, abattoirs , flour mills and agricultural engineering.
At Lowestoft a Birds Eye freezing factory processes fish, peas and beans.
Other new industries include electrical engineering, especially making Japanese video tape recorders, plastics and the construction of caravans.
B. The towns are growing rapidly by taking some of London's overspill of population.
This provides the labour for extra new industries.
Transport to the large London market is cheap.
Some managers are starting new industries in these towns while others have moved their factories into the region from older, more expensive and congested sites in London.
Cambridge , besides its university, has much electrical engineering, especially for radios, television sets and computers.
Peterborough is expanding rapidly as a New Town .
It has large brick works, engineering works and freezing factories.
The hierarchy of towns
A. In most regions the towns can be arranged in order, according to their Rank (1st, 2nd, 3rd, etc.) and their Size .
People are attracted more by the larger towns which ‘take off’, growing rapidly in size.
What is the size of each of the four largest towns?
Why has each grown rapidly?
How many small market towns are there?
Refer to map E on page 49.
What are the names of some of these small market towns?
Northern England
The growth of a coalfield
A. Jimmy Horsley is a miner.
His father was a miner who as a young man had started mining in a different coal pit which is closed now.
Jimmy's grandfather and his great-grandfather were also miners.
But his great-great-grandfather, Thomas Horsley, had been a farm worker.
During Thomas's life (1810 70) there were vast changes in the region.
For centuries small amounts of coal had been mined from shallow pits.
These were mainly near the rivers, which were used to transport the coal easily and cheaply.
Thomas Horsley saw railway lines, with engines such as George Stephenson's ‘Rocket’, being built across the farmland to places where new coal mines were opened.
The farmland remained but pit villages, with rows of terraced houses for the miners, were scattered throughout the region.
The area covered by these coal mines, with the farmland between them, is called the Northumberland and Durham coalfield , or the North East coalfield.
With plentiful coal, which could be moved easily on the railways, steam power could be used to drive machinery.
Business people opened factories in the towns and started new industries.
The demand for coal grew and grew.
This was the Industrial Revolution in progress.
How might Thomas Horsley have described the changes in the landscape during his lifetime?
Roughly how many coal pits were there in 1820?
Where were most of these?
How many were there by 190()?
How far was the coalfield from north to south in 1900?
There was another coalfield on the west coast the Cumberland coalfield — but this had only 16 mines and now it has only one mine but several opencast workings.
B. If you had been a young person in 1860, like Jimmy Horsley's great-grandfather, you might easily have been out of work.
Old lead mines in the Pennine Hills were being closed.
Farm labourers were being sacked as farmers started to use machinery.
People were being repelled from the rural, country areas.
But on the coalfield and in the factories of the towns there was an increasing demand for labour.
Here you would have seen a great attraction and opportunities to do well in expanding industries.
People migrated into the villages and towns of the coalfield where business was booming.
Walk down a row of houses in a pit village today, and ask where the people's ancestors came from.
The drawing shows a sample.
What would you find from this sample?
Refer to the change in population shown on page 10.
Describe this change.
C. Most of the pits sunk about a hundred years ago were to mine the coal which was near the surface, within about 20 fathoms (40 m) depth or so.
The mines were small.
Each had about 500 men and produced 100 000 tonnes per year.
By about 1950 the miners had removed most of the coal.
The mines were exhausted .
One by one they were closed, and again many people were out of work —unemployed .
Some stayed, some moved to new mines nearer the coast, and some migrated from the region to more prosperous mines in Yorkshire and the Midlands.
D. From 1900 onwards there was new mining machinery , particularly powerful pumps to remove water and to blow air deep into the mines.
The profits of industry provided capital (money) to pay for the machinery.
Companies decided to dig deeper.
Shafts of 200 fathoms (400 m) were sunk near the coast through porous rocks which contained a lot of water.
Long underground galleries of 3 km or more made it possible to mine under the sea.
These new mines were large, each with 2000 men or more and with an output of about 1 000 000 tonnes of coal per year.
From the map, find how many new coal pits there were between 1900 and 1980.
Why did these large pits near the coast not exist in the last century?
How many older pits were exhausted and closed by 1980?
E. The diagrams form a model of the changes in the life of a coalfield.
Other coalfields have changed in similar ways.
Changing industries
A. Engineers needed steel for railways and bridges, for ships and machinery, for tubes, pipes and wires.
The market for steel increased rapidly from 1880 to 1930.
It was needed in Britain and it was needed right across the British Empire.
Canada, Australia, Africa and India were all using British steel.
Roughly how many kilometres of steel rails, besides engines and rolling stock, do you think were needed for building the Indian railways?
B. Managers tried to find the best places for iron and steel works, in order to keep transport costs as low as possible.
But conditions changed.
Supplies of the raw material , iron ore, changed.
Methods, or techniques , of smelting changed.
Concern for the welfare of the workers, or labour supply, changed.
The diagrams show the problems of managers in different ages.
Study the diagrams and maps for each period in turn.
How has the pattern changed?
Why was each change (growth in some areas and decline in others) made?
C. Wooden sailing ships were built in many small shipyards along the rivers Tyne and Wear.
Some were small colliers, to carry coal to London.
Others were large naval warships or East India tea clippers.
By 1850 steel ships with steam engines and propellers had been invented.
The shipyards along the Tyne, the Wear and later the Tees, were excellent places to build these larger, more powerful ships because the region had plenty of steel, the main raw material , and skilled labour , expert in shipbuilding.
In the west, shipbuilding was done at Barrow-in-Furness , again using local steel.
There the shipyards made mainly naval ships and submarines.
From the photograph, what problems are there now for building really large ships, such as supertankers?
D. Ships needed engines, cranes, sometimes guns, and later electrical equipment, including radar and refrigeration.
Mines needed winding gear and pumps.
Railways needed locomotives, rolling stock and signalling equipment, besides rails and bridges.
Thus large engineering companies grew in towns such as Newcastle, Sunderland, Hartlepool and Middlesbrough .
Their managers and owners saw the advantages:
plentiful raw materials — steel
plentiful fuel and power — coal
skilled labour
markets in other local industries.
Roughly how many engineering workers are there in the region shown on the map?
How many of these are on Tyneside (along the river Tyne from Newcastle and Gateshead to Tynemouth and South Shields)?
E. A new industry —chemicals — has grown rapidly since 1920, as scientists invented new technical ways of making things, firstly from salt and coal, and later from oil and natural gas.
ICI started a works at Billingham.
There they could easily obtain coal which was used as fuel and as a raw material, various salts from a mine below the works and from brine wells, and large amounts of water from the River Tees.
The main products now are artificial fertilisers and carbon dioxide which is sold to other industries, particularly to put the ‘fizz’ into drinks and as a cooling agent for nuclear power stations.
From 1950 the chemical industry expanded quickly with the use of oil both as raw material and as fuel.
ICI needed a large flat site with access for ocean-going oil tankers .
This was found at Wilton.
Now all production at both Wilton and Billingham is based on oil and natural gas.
Besides petrol, fertilisers and carbon dioxide, the works produce many substances moved mainly by pipeline and lorries for making plastics, nylon-type fibres, paints and glues in other factories in Britain and overseas.
Animal feedstuffs, specially rich in protein, are a new product for sale to farmers.
F. Just five large industries employed most of the people engaged in production.
These five industries were linked closely together.
Products of one became raw materials or fuel for another, as shown in the diagram.
At the start they used local supplies.
Now they depend heavily on imports, so the industries are concentrated mainly along the rivers near the sea, on Tyneside, Wearside and Teesside.
What percentage of the workers are now in the five main industries?
What percentage are in shops and services?
What jobs may the people in services do?
How are coal, steel, shipbuilding and engineering linked?
What products pass from one to another and why?
Why are the industries on the map on page 58 clustered near the estuary of the River Tees?
G. Thomas Horsley (page 52) saw industry starting to grow in the region.
The people in the photograph in the I ‘–3()s saw the start of another great change which is still happening today.
They were unemployed skilled workers, such as welders, furnacemen and miners.
Suddenly in the 1930s the demand for their goods had become much less.
There was a world recession in trade.
Fewer goods were bought or sold, and so there was a surplus of ships for trading.
There were fewer ships to be built, less engineering, less steel, less coal, and so less money for shopkeepers and for other goods.
Today there are other causes for a decline but when it happens unemployment spreads in the same way, from one industry to another.
H. The Government tries to avoid unemployment.
It has made this a Special Development Area .
It gives grants of money (about 20–25 %) for any new factory buildings, new machinery and some of the wages for new jobs.
It has built empty factories which it lets out free of rent for up to five years.
Many of these factories are   built in new areas between towns or on the edges of towns.
These are called trading estates .
1.
In most of the factories on trading estates people are making small products using special skills, such as clothes, televisions, sports goods and packaged foods.
This is light industry .
Many women are employed.
The industries do not depend on one another, nor on the larger five basic industries.
How do trading estates differ from the older industrial areas?
Consider places, products and workers.
Why are managers from all over Britain and sometimes from abroad, even from Japan,attracted to start industries on these trading estates?
How may these new industries help many people when the older industries decline or close?
J. Three of the trading estates have had New Towns built with them to house workers and their families who come from the larger towns or from villages where there is no more work.
These three are Newton Aycliffe, Peterlee and Washington.
(See also pages 75, 76 (C and D), and the index under New Towns.)
The countryside
Agriculture
A. Much of the area is high moorland.
Farmers can use it only to graze sheep, in flocks of 200 or so ewes with their lambs in spring.
In the snow of winter, for a few weeks, they need fodder .
For this turnips and grass for hay are grown on the fields in the valleys which are below 250 m in height.
Other valley fields have a few dairy cows on grass.
Thus farmers sell milk and young calves, as well as wool and lambs which are fattened on nearby lowland farms.
Government subsidies of money, based on the number of sheep, are needed to keep the farmers in business.
(Refer to pages 92– (A-E) to find more details of this system of hill sheep farming.)
B. On the lowland plains more fodder crops, including barley, oats, turnips and swedes are grown and much hay is made from grass grown in rotation with these arable crops.
Many of the fodder crops are sold to the hill farmers and some are used to fatten the lambs.
Dairy cows are kept to supply the dairies which provide milk to the large industrial towns.
Forestry and water
A. The price, or value, of the moorlands is fairly low.
Since 1920 the Forestry Commission has bought some large areas, drained them and planted then with coniferous trees.
These grow rapidly and now some of the forests are ready for cutting and replanting.
Many of the upland landscapes today are like patch-work quilts of forest and open moorland , with a few areas of upland bogs preserved for their rare, wild, moorland plants.
B. There has been a growing demand for water for the cities and industries nearby.
Most of this is obtained from the lakes of the Lake District (see page 134) but the largest reservoir in Britain, Kielder Water, has been formed since 1980 by flooding low value farmland in the northern Pennines.
Kielder Water with the surrounding Border Forest Park is a tourist attraction for sailing, fishing, walking and camping.
Leisure
A. Friday night, work over, money in the pocket.
Many people spend this on the leisure industries of the towns, such as the races and football.
Others go to the seaside resorts , such as Alnmouth, Whitley Bay, South Shields, Redcar and Saltburn.
What other leisure industries are there in towns?
B. Some others drive to the countryside of the National Parks .
Four National Parks are within 100 km, or about 2 hours driving time.
The Lake District National Park is filled to capacity for much of the summer.
It is popular for its special scenery of lakes, hills, woods and forests and because the M6 motorway makes it easy to get to from many parts of England.
What activities are visitors likely to do in these National Parks?
How do the residents of the National Parks, especially those in the towns, make a profitable industry from the visitors?
C. Long ago a Roman army , far from home, had to defend this land against wild tribes to the north.
They built Hadrian's Wall and several fortresses which now attract visitors.
Centuries later, the powerful bishops of Durham and other lords built and defended castles to control the lowland routes into England.
Durham , with its cathedral and castle, is a popular tourist centre, and so also is Carlisle.
Settlements
A. Along the river Tyne there is one of Britain's conurbations — now called Tyneside .
850 000 people live there.
In 1900 there were seven separate towns but as their populations increased the fields around them were covered by housing estates, making one vast urban area.
B. Within this urban area there are distinct zones around each centre.
At Newcastle an old stone bridge with low arches was the lowest bridging point on the Tyne.
Roads from many directions were attracted to this point.
The low arches and shallow water stopped sailing ships going further inland.
It became the head of navigation where they unloaded their cargoes.
Two small valleys left an isolated hill where a castle was built to defend the river crossing.
The old walled town around the castle has become the CBD with shops, banks and offices.
C. An industrial zone of factories, warehouses and shipyards extends along the river.
Closely packed terraces of Victorian houses were spread outwards as the population grew.
After 1945 vast new estates, mainly of semi-detached houses , began to extend further out.
These engulfed some older villages , such as Gosforth, which are now smaller shopping centres within the conurbation.
Why did our ancestors decide to have a town at the site which is now the centre of Newcastle?
Suggest several reasons why first this town and then the whole conurbation have grown in size ?
Does Newcastle fit the model for a town, on page 41, or is it different?
D. Each morning and evening thousands of workers travel between their homes in one part of the conurbation and their work in offices, shops or factories in another part.
They are commuters .
Besides the four bridges at Newcastle and a tunnel under the river near Tynemouth, there is a new fast railway system from Tynemouth to Newcastle to carry the commuters.
E. Other commuters who travel daily by car have chosen to live outside the conurbation in more desirable , smaller towns and villages, away from the noise, the smoke and the scenes of concrete and brick buildings.
Thus the sphere of influence of Tyneside spreads far out into the surrounding countryside and along the coast.
From an atlas find the names of the towns marked on the map as the more desirable dormitory towns .
How far does the sphere of influence spread from north to south and from west to east?
F. People have chosen to live in clusters, or towns, of different sizes.
In some places there are very strong attractions .
In other places the attraction is weaker.
The diagram shows how the towns can be arranged in a Rank-Size order from large to small — a hierarchy .
They can also be put into groups to show the reasons why they attract people, or what their functions are.
Roughly how far apart on the map are the market towns ?
Roughly how large are they?
How large are the mining towns?
How large are the New Towns?
Which are the seaside resorts?
Scotland
The Highlands and Uplands
A. Can you understand what Iain MacNeil is saying?
To his friends he may speak in Gaelic rather than in English.
His life is remote and rather isolated from the rest of Britain.
Although many other Scots have stopped speaking Gaelic they too have rather poor communications with the rest of Britain.
About how much of Scotland is more than 10 km from a railway?
How do the Central Lowlands differ from the Highlands and the Southern Uplands in this respect?
B. Transport difficulties can be measured by a detour index .
Some distances by rail are:
Glasgow to Edinburgh
75 km
Glasgow to Wick
538 km
Glasgow to Kyle of Lochalsh
418 km
Measure the direct distances and calculate the detour index for each route.
(See page 24.)
C. For a long time many people in the highlands and uplands of Scotland have disliked being so remote.
The problems of these rural areas have ‘pushed’ or repelled people away from the country, while the towns and cities of central Scotland and England have ‘pulled’or attracted them.
The movement away from the hills and valleys of the countryside is called rural depopulation .
When they leave school many of the young people depart to find work in factories or in trade in central Scotland, near Glasgow and 
Edinburgh, or in England or overseas.
In the cities also they find exciting shops and entertainments.
Managers do not want to start factories, shops, or entertainments in the rural areas because there are few workers there and the old and very young have little money to spend.
Also transport costs to markets are high.
So a cycle of decline occurs.
What are the stages in this cycle?
D. The rural areas have little income but a great need for services, such as hospitals for the old and schools for the young.
What percentage of the people in Scotland as a whole are (i) non-workers (roughly over 60 and under 15 years old);(ii) workers (16 60 years old)?
How does the island of Barra in the Hebrides compare with this?
What is likely to happen in the future to the number of children in the Hebrides?
E. The Government has been trying to help people in these country areas, particularly in the north.
It has set up the Highlands and Islands Development Board .
The members of the Board have to decide on the best methods of bringing work and money into the region.
First they consider the landscape.
Then they assess the problems.
Finally they suggest how better use can be made of the resources.
F. The landscape .
This has been glaciated.
About 20 000 years ago the last of several great ice sheets covered all but the highest mountains, mainly in the Cairngorms and Grampians.
Ben Nevis (1347 m), near Fort William, stood well above the ice.
Snow falling on the mountain sides gathered in hollows and was compressed into ice.
Freezing and thawing cracked the rocks of the hillsides.
The loose rocks were carried away in the ice as it slipped downhill into the valleys.
In this way hollows, called corries , were formed.
Some are filled now with water, as tarns .
Sharp ridges, or   arêtes , were formed between the corries and some of the mountains have pyramidal peaks .
On the lower slopes the ice scraped away much of the surface leaving smooth rounded hills, particularly in the Southern Uplands.
‘Fast moving’ glaciers slid forwards in the valleys at 50 m or so per year.
The sharp rocks, or moraine , which were stuck in the glaciers caused them to scrape out the valleys much deeper.
They have become U-shaped valleys .
These valleys were cut most easily and deeply where fault lines had weakened and shattered the rocks.
The Great Glen, or Glen Mor, from Fort William to Inverness, is an example.
Small side valleys, or tributary valleys , were cut less deeply and they remain as hanging valleys above the main U-shaped troughs.
The streams of some hanging valleys drop down over waterfalls to the main valley.
When the ice melted the moraine was dumped as sheets of boulder clay (clay mixed with sand, stones and boulders) on the floors of valleys.
Where the snout, or end, of a glacier stayed in one place for many years — which was when the ice was advancing at the same rate as it was melting — more and more boulder clay was dumped at the glacier snout.
It formed a ridge called a terminal moraine .
Behind some terminal moraines parts of valleys are filled now with water.
Long thin ribbon lakes have formed.
Near the sea the glaciers scraped out their valleys well below sea level.
When the ice melted the valleys were drowned, forming deep water inlets, or fjords .
Mostly these were on the west coast where glaciers moved faster since the snowfall was heavier near the Atlantic Ocean.
What examples of fjords, and ribbon lakes, can you find on an atlas map of Scotland?
Which seems to be the longest of these Scottish fjords, and of the ribbon lakes?
How long is the valley cut by the ice along the fault line of Glen Mor?
G. Now all the ice sheets have melted but snow is common on the higher land in winter.
For how many months is there snow on the higher areas of the Cairngorms and Grampian mountains?
Why does the snow settle for only a short time on the north west coast?
(See the map on page 34.)
G. The problems .
The members of the Highlands and Islands Development Board consider how the landscape and the climate make it difficult for people (i) to farm successfully;(ii) to manage profitable industries , which use raw materials and fuel and sell goods to the large cities;(iii) to obtain adequate services , such as hospitals, schools, and electricity or gas.
How do you think each of these-may be made difficult by the landforms and by the climate?
The Board also noted other problems.
The shoals of herring which were caught by part-time fishermen-farmers along the west coast have almost all gone.
The deep sea trawlers from Aberdeen, Fraserburgh, Peterhead and Lerwick have problems getting their fish to the markets, as well as with foreign competition at sea.
All fuel , for homes and for industry, has to be brought to the towns and villages which are isolated and small.
In addition, what problems did they note about the labour supply for industries?
See pages 62 and 63 (C and D).
What problems are there in collecting sufficient rates, or taxes, to pay for the public services which are needed?
I. Use of resources .
The Board have made four suggestions of ways in which the landscape can be used better and so attract more people:
(i)
by producing hydro-electric power (H.E.P.) for industries and for homes;
(ii)
by planting large areas of forest;
(iii)
by attracting tourists;
(iv)
by encouraging people to cluster in towns.
J. H.E.P. is cheap to produce, once the cost of the dam, the power station and the cables for distribution of the electricity have been paid for.
Engineers saw the advantages of the landscape and of the climate and so they created many H.E.P. schemes, similar to the one shown in the diagrams.
What advantage is there in the rainfall and run-off in the Highlands of Scotland, compared with that in much of southern England?
Why is there only a small need for storage of water in the reservoirs?
Why are the U-shaped glaciated valleys suitable for water storage and for the building of dams?
What was the advantage of linking the two valleys and reservoirs by a tunnel?
K. Some of the H.E.P. is used in people's homes, but much was used for two new industries —smelting aluminium and making paper pulp .
These provided work which for a time helped to stop young people leaving the Highlands.
There is also a surplus of H.E.P. which is transmitted to the industries and towns of Central Scotland.
Roughly how much of Scotland's electricity is H.E.P?
Where are the large aluminium smelting works?
Where do they get their partly refined alumina from?
Where do they send their aluminium for making into wire and sheets of metal?
L. The large areas of open moorland are used for deer stalking, grouse shooting and rough grazing for sheep.
These provide work for about 1 person per km&sup2;.
Where coniferous forests have been planted on the moorland there is work for 3 people per km&sup2;.
Another 12 people can be employed, for each km&sup2; of forest, in saw mills and pulp mills in the towns.
How many large areas of coniferous forest have been planted?
What is the length and breadth of the largest forest area?
Why do you think it was in this region, rather than in some other part of the world, that an aluminium smelter and a paper pulp mill, shown on maps K and L, were closed when world demand decreased recently?
M. The Board made a list of features which can attract tourists :
snow on mountains;
local crafts, such as hand-woven tweed cloth;
beautiful lakes;
sea inlets and islands;
open moorlands and mountains;
forests;
legends and castles;
salmon fishing, deer stalking and grouse shooting.
In what order would you place these as attractions for tourists?
A large sports centre has been made at Aviemore, mainly for winter skiing but also for the use of summer tourists.
The people in many isolated farms and villages also benefit from the tourists.
How may the tourists boost the incomes and employment of people in remote places?
Why is there a special need for such extra income on the west coast?
N. Electricity is carried now to most isolated houses but, with improved roads and cars, more families are choosing to live in the towns.
Here they have shops and many public services.
Most towns are small ports, with only about 5000–10 000 people each.
New settlements have grown recently alongside the giant oil terminal at Sullom Voe in the Shetlands and by the oil rig construction sites and new chemical works based on natural gas at Nigg Bay.
Inverness (30 000 people) has grown because it is a suitable route centre for administration and for tourists.
It has factories making woollen goods, whisky and engineering products.
Aberdeen (200 000 people) has attracted over a quarter of all the people living in the Highlands.
Some are employed in processing fish, such as canning and freezing, while others are manning and servicing the trawlers.
Some build small ships.
Some work in paper factories and in engineering.
Many more work in offices and in shops.
Aberdeen has been nick-named the ‘Granite City’, since the local granite rock is quarried and shipped for buildings, bridges and harbour works in many towns of Britain.
Now it should be re-named the ‘Oil City’, since its shops and industries are booming as the main base for the many services supplying the oil wells of the North Sea and their workers.
O. In the Southern Uplands there is also a movement of people into a few towns.
Stranraer (9000 people) is a ferry port for the shortest crossing to Northern Ireland.
Dumfries (27 000 people) is a market centre for farmers, with dairies, agricultural machinery and knitwear industries.
Galashiels (12 000 people) is becoming a growth point for workers in the Tweed Valley .
Several towns in the valley have textile industries which started when water wheels were used for power and local sheep provided the raw wool.
Now electricity is used and most of the wool is imported from Australia.
Even though the local advantages for power and raw materials have gone, the industry remains in the same place.
This is called industrial inertia .
The industry depends on the skills of 12 000 workers, who compete with factories in more suitable places, mainly in Yorkshire and abroad, by producing high quality knitted goods, hosiery and tweed.
Half of these are exported.
The Central Lowlands
The four business managers, living at different times, were faced with different problems and opportunities.
So they made different decisions about the best places for their industries.
There were different growth points for new industries.
Today, the pattern of industry in Central Scotland has some features remaining from each of these periods.
1 Early growth in the east
A. Edinburgh is on the main lowland route, along the coast, between Scotland and England.
This routeway position was defended by the Kings of Scotland against the English.
The chosen spot, or site , for the castle and the city was a sheer crag of hard igneous rock.
It was the worn-down plug of an old volcano which stood   out from the lowland plain.
Traders and craftsmen, who provided goods for the troops and the King's Court, built their houses on the sloping tail of rock which had been protected from erosion when slowly passing ice sheets had scraped at the valley floor.
The main street, along this tail between the castle and Holyrood Palace, is known as the ‘Royal Mile’.
Bankers, churchmen and scholars gathered here to serve the King's Court.
The city became the first major growth point of the Central Lowlands.
What other group or profession would have gathered in the Royal Mile?
B. The attraction of living in this capital city has brought more and more people to it.
Its growth reached 450 000 people.
First, the old walled city on the crag and tail was built upwards.
Now this is the centre for the government offices of the civil service, the law courts and the cathedral.
By 1800 a new town was built on the lowlands next to the old city.
This new town became the main shopping and business office centre .
By 1900 the city had spread further outwards with housing estates and industrial areas which surrounded many older villages and included the port of Leith.
Study the photograph.
Why was the castle easy to defend?
What differences in street plans and buildings are there between the old city on the crag and tail and the area which was new in 1800?
What use has been made of the formerly marshy area between these two parts of the city?
C. The functions of Edinburgh today are much as they were long ago.
Most people are employed in providing public and private services, which include banks, offices, the university, the law, transport and shops.
Recently Edinburgh has become a tourist centre famous for its history and arts.
Manufacturers concentrate on printing and publishing, including newspapers, and on producing food and drink, particularly biscuits and bread, beer and whisky, mainly for the large market of 450 000 people in Edinburgh.
There are many small engineering firms, some specialising in scientific instruments.
Roughly what percentage of the workers in Edinburgh are (i) in the service industries;(ii) producing food and drink;(iii) in printing and publishing?
D. Stirling (30 000 people) is a place which long ago was chosen as a position and a site for a town.
The reasons were similar to those for Edinburgh.
However, Stirling has grown only slowly, mainly as a market town providing services and products for the farmers, though a new computer industry is starting there.
Perth (43 000 people) has a similar type of position to Stirling.
It has become a market-town and a tourist centre as the ‘gateway to the Highlands’.
Why were both Stirling and Perth in suitable and similar positions to be market towns?
Refer in your answer to places named on the map.
In what ways is the site of Stirling similar to that of Edinburgh?
2 Traders and their industries
A. Long ago Glasgow was a small market town with a cathedral at the lowest bridging point of a shallow River Clyde.
Few sailing ships could reach the town, so by 1670 the merchants created a new port.
This was 30 km down river at Port Glasgow .
From there they sailed to America, their ships competing for trade with those from Bristol and Liverpool (see map C (ii) on page 37).
They imported tobacco, sugar and cotton as raw materials for their factories.
B. Cotton spinning and weaving was done in mills using water power from the rivers.
It attracted many workers to Glasgow from all parts of Scotland.
The town grew rapidly.
Then local coal was used for steam power in the same factories.
By 1850 over half the workers had jobs in the cotton textile industry.
C. Today there are only a few cotton mills left but there are many firms making clothing and some making textile machinery .
The clothing firms have the advantage now of a large local market and a large local labour supply.
In Paisley (85 000 people) the industry is kept going by specialising in making sewing thread .
Other firms have specialised by making carpets in Glasgow and in Kilmarnock (52 000 people).
Glasgow still has several cigarette factories.
Greenock (57 000 people) has sugar refineries .
D. The merchants of Dundee (175 000 people), on the east coast, traded with Europe for flax to make linen cloth.
But by 1850 some of them saw that the linen trade, and particularly the demand for sailcloth, might decline.
They decided to use the skills of their workers in making cloth and sacking from jute , which they imported from East Bengal, now Bangladesh.
Dundee grew as a port and as a centre for the only jute industry in Britain.
Later, when other countries wanted to make their own cloth from jute, the workers of Dundee made and sold them the textile machinery .
Also, now that plastic is replacing sacking, workers are changing to other more varied and light industries such as electrical goods, including Sinclair computers, and canning fruit and vegetables.
Some of the earlier industries remain but on a much smaller scale.
How have the factory managers in Dundee considered (i) markets and (ii) labour in deciding how to keep industry profitable?
3 Growth with the power of coal
A. Two great inventions , about 1800, caused a massive rapid expansion of industry and of housing for extra workers.
They were steam engines using coal power to drive factory machinery, and blast furnaces using coke to make large quantities of iron.
Both were much less efficient than they are today; they used much more coal.
Also transport of coal was slow and expensive, so the owners decided to concentrate industries close to the coal mines.
Refer to the graph on page 71.
How many extra people were attracted to Glasgow between 1800 and 1900?
Assuming they lived six to a house, how many houses were built in this short period?
B. The shipping merchants and the owners of cotton mills and tobacco factories had money, or capital , to invest in the new inventions and industries.
They sank coal pits.
They made iron and later steel.
They expanded the shipyards and started engineering works.
To supply the power and the raw materials to factories, and to send the goods to markets, they built an infrastructure of railways, roads and canals.
In particular they dredged the River Clyde to bring large ocean-going ships up to Glasgow, and they cut the Forth-Clyde Canal.
However, with modern means of transport, this canal is no longer in use.
If you had been an out-of-work farm hand near Inverness, or near Dumfries, why might you have been one of many who moved to Glasgow in the last century?
If you had been a small shopkeeper with some money why might you have done the same?
C. The Central Lowlands is a rift valley which sank about 320 million years ago.
For the next 100 million years parts of it were under the sea and it was covered with layers of sandstone, then limestone, and swampy forests which were buried between layers of mud and sand.
The buried forests became seams of coal and the strata of mud and sand hardened into shale and sandstone.
While forests were being buried there was volcanic activity .
Sheets of lava poured out in places.
These formed hard igneous rocks which have resisted erosion.
They remain as isolated upland masses.
Which are these hills of igneous rocks?
How large are they?
The sedimentary rocks, with their coal seams, have been folded and faulted.
After erosion the coal has remained only in the three major downfolds, or synclines .
In the last one million years the ice sheets spread a layer of boulder clay across the lowlands.
What problems are there for the coal miners?
When was the peak period for coal production?
What changes have taken place in the numbers and positions of the mines?
Why do you think the National Coal Board had to decide on these changes?
D. In the coal pits nodules of blackband iron ore were mined.
This iron ore, together with the coal , the invention of the hot blast furnace, and the capital from the traders and factory owners, made Central Scotland a suitable place for an iron industry and, by a later invention, for a steel industry.
Most of this industry was on the coalfield at Coatbridge and in the Clyde valley from Motherwell to Glasgow.
Shipbuilding and engineering, also in the Clyde valley, provided the companies with a large local market for the iron and steel.
Now the local iron ore is exhausted.
High grade imported ores are used.
Scrap metal is added to the steel furnaces.
Production is concentrated at Ravenscraig, in Motherwell, where the rolling mills produce thin sheets of steel for car bodies and for domestic appliances such as washing machines.
How many iron works were there in 1860?
On which coalfield were most of these?
How has the industry changed?
What differences are there between the occupations of workers in Motherwell and in Edinburgh (page 70)?
E. John Brown started what became a famous shipyard, now called Govan Shipbuilders, at Clydebank, in Glasgow.
There the Queen Mary, the Queen Elizabeth, and the QE2 were built, as well as many other liners, warships, oil tankers and bulk carriers.
Another large shipyard on the Clyde is at Greenock.
Success was due to local steel and a reputation for skilled work.
The shipworkers of Britain used to make most of the world's ships.
But now other countries, particularly Korea and Japan, are competing successfully with the result that Britain and Clydeside have fewer orders.
Many shipworkers have become unemployed and the government has paid large subsidies of money to keep some shipyards open.
How much smaller is the Clydeside shipbuilding industry now, than it was in the period 191–19?
F. Many skilled workmen and parts are needed in fitting out a ship, particularly a passenger liner.
Besides engines and boilers, the ships need many pipes, pumps, nuts and bolts, furnishings, cranes, electrical parts, ventilators, cooking equipment, and sometimes large refrigerators.
To supply these, business people started engineering industries .
These also make machines and parts for the textile factories, the iron and steel works, the coal mines and the transport systems.
These engineering industries are clustered in the Glasgow, Coatbridge, Motherwell triangle.
Here the owners saw the advantages of being close to their raw material of steel, their power supply from coal, and their markets in Glasgow and along the Clyde valley.
When a shipyard closed many more workers soon became unemployed besides those in the shipyard.
Why was this?
4 The new spread
A. Look back at the information in sections 2 and 3, pages 71–74.
Which industries have been declining?
Why has there been much unemployment in Glasgow and Clydeside during the last 50 years?
Why is there a large twilight zone in Glasgow — the area where many buildings are being demolished and new ones erected?
Why is much work needed now to repair and renew the infrastructure of central Scotland, by building new docks, airports, motorways, pipelines, electricity lines and sewage systems?
B. In 1850 industries were growing fast, profits were high, and people in business had money to invest in new industries.
Recently, with declining industries and unemployment, there has been less spare money, or capital , but at the same time many new industries are needed for the workers.
The Government has made Clydeside a Special Development Area where it is helping to provide the capital for these new industries, new housing and a new infrastructure.
In central Glasgow 16 km&sup2; are being rebuilt as an Enterprise Zone with special grants for new industries.
C. There is an overspill of workers and their families from Glasgow.
Many are attracted to more pleasant housing in the New Towns which are being built.
Each has 30 000–70 000 people and its own industrial estates.
Why are some people repelled from the twilight zone of a city and attracted to a New Town, as shown in the photographs?
D. In the new factories of the New Towns and the outskirts of Glasgow the products are mainly of small size and high value.
They depend on skilled workers, modern machinery and electric power, rather than on being near to raw materials, coal mines or markets.
Light engineering , electrical engineering, computers, clothing and food processing are common industries, including whisky, beer, biscuits and bread in Glasgow.
Aeroengines (Rolls Royce) are made in East Kilbride and Glasgow.
Lorries (British Leyland) are made at Bathgate near Livingston.
For these industries steel from Motherwell is an important local raw material.
Most of the New Towns are also dormitories for many commuters who work in Glasgow.
What else, besides work, attracts many people to travel to Glasgow fairly frequently?
Using the information above, for what purposes would you expect particular lorries and cars to be travelling on the M8, either way between Glasgow and Livingston?
E. Some directors of industries have chosen Falkirk and nearby Grangemouth as suitable places for industrial growth.
At Falkirk there are many skilled metal workers in iron, brass and copper.
Now there are also large mills producing aluminium sheeting (see the map on page 66).
At Grangemouth docks were dug out of the mud flats.
Goods were trans-shipped to and from the old Forth-Clyde Canal and industrial Glasgow.
When oil was first imported this was the place chosen for an oil refinery.
Now the larger giant supertankers bring their oil to the deep water terminal at Finnart , on the western fjord coast, and a new pipeline carries it to Grangemouth.
The oil refinery is being expanded into one of the largest in Europe with a vast petro-chemical industry.
This makes the basic substances for plastics, artificial fibres, synthetic rubber, drugs, dyes, paints and detergents.
Near Irvine and the port of Ardrossan , on the west coast, there is another large oil refinery.
Nearby a new chemical industry makes explosives, fertilisers, and nylon fibres.
Suppose you have to choose where to start a new factory for the ‘Easishop’ carrier.
Possible sites are (i) at East Kilbride,(ii) at Edinburgh,(iii) at Falkirk,(iv) at Dundee.
What are the advantages and disadvantages of each?
Which would you choose?
Agriculture in Scotland
Farmers in Scotland ask themselves four main questions:
1
Is the land — the slopes and the soils — suitable for ploughing and growing crops, or just for grazing animals?
2
How long will the warm growing season last?
3
How much rain and cloud, or sunshine, will there be?
4
Will it be possible to sell the goods to the markets at a satisfying profit?
In answering the first question, the farmers divide into two groups:(i) those who have most of their land as upland;(ii) those who farm the lowlands.
The map shows the areas where there are upland farmers .
Besides the large areas in the Highlands and the Southern Uplands, there are several smaller upland areas within the Central Lowlands.
What are the names of these smaller areas of upland?
Why do they stand out, high above the lower land of Central Scotland?
(See pages 72–73.)
Upland farms
A. Farmers in the uplands know that the climate is cooler than on the lowlands.
From the two examples for January and July, how fast does the temperature change from lowland to higher land?(1°C for every…metres of altitude.)
The hill masses of Central Scotland, such as the Ochil Hills in the photograph, are mainly over 500 m high.
How much cooler are they than the low land?
From the graph, how much shorter on the uplands is the normal growing season, which is above 6°C for most crops?
Why is it not normally possible to ripen wheat or barley on the uplands?
The farmers also know that there is more rain, cloud and sometimes mist or fog, over the uplands, and therefore less sunshine.
This is because the damp air is forced to rise.
As it rises it cools and the invisible water vapour in the air is changed into visible water droplets , which make clouds.
When these droplets grow large enough, by colliding together or by sticking to ice crystals, they fall as rain.
Why do some clouds, especially those which are of only a small height, fail to produce rain?
B. The farmers have found that the soils of the uplands are leached .
The heavy rain, for hundreds of years, has washed the rich chemicals, such as nitrogen and calcium, down from the top layer, or A horizon, into the lower layer, or B horizon.
There, few plants can reach them.
Also the humus from decaying plants is washed down.
The leached A horizon is ash-grey in colour.
The B horizon is yellow-brown.
These leached soils are called podsols .
Why do many upland farmers spread fertiliser of nitrogen and calcium (nitro-chalk) even on their grassland fields?
On some moorlands the chemicals which were washed down have solidified into a thin ‘cement-like’ layer, or iron pan .
Above this the soil has become waterlogged.
Dead plants cannot rot properly in the waterlogged soil.
Instead they form squelchy peat, which gradually builds up on the surface.
For a long time the peat has been used as fuel by the more isolated farmers, or crofters, in the north-west.
Some areas of moorland have been ploughed deeply to break the iron pan and so make the soil suitable for ‘crops’ of coniferous trees.
These may be ‘harvested’ after about 60 80 years.
C. The uplands have other problems for the farmers in these areas, as shown in the photograph on page 77.
What problems do the upland areas present for (i) ploughing and harvesting with machinery,(ii) transport to and from the farms?
D. The upland farmers concentrate on keeping livestock , mainly on large areas of land which the farmers have left as rough grazing.
Their choice of livestock depends on how much winter fodder , such as hay, oats and roots, they need and how much of these they can grow.
Compare this map of sheep with that for snow, on page 64.
What difference is there in the extent of sheep farming between the Central  
Highlands and the Western Isles?
Why is this?
What difference is there between the Southern Uplands and the northern areas?
Why is this?
Some farmers rear sheep and cattle.
For this they grow large amounts of fodder crops on fields in the main valleys or on the lower margins of the uplands.
In which areas is most of this mixed sheep and cattle rearing?
The income of these farmers is partly from wool, but mainly from lambs or young store cattle which are sold for fattening on the farms of the lowlands.
The farmers are also helped by a Government subsidy for the number of livestock they keep on the uplands.
E. The crofters of the north west coast and the islands have small farms, usually less than 2 hectares.
Only small machines can be used and much work is done by hand.
Hay is important for their sheep.
Oats and potatoes are grown for themselves and for a few cattle.
Most grazing is on the moorland which is common land shared between the crofters.
For a sufficient income they depend also on some fishing and the sale to tourists of vegetables, milk and craft products.
Lowland farms
A. On the lowlands there is a longer growing season, with higher summer temperatures.
The farmers know that normally their crops of barley and wheat will ripen.
(See graph A on page 77.)
The soils on the lowlands have formed on boulder clay which in many places is a fine mixture of clay and sand.
These lowland soils are called Brown Earths because there has been only a small amount of leaching which leaves the humus and chemicals fairly evenly spread between the A and B horizons of the soil.
How do Brown Earths differ from podsols?
Why are Brown Earths more fertile for crops?
B. The lowland farmers choose to have a mixture of crops and livestock.
Some are cash crops , particularly wheat which the farmers sell to the flour mills in Leith and Glasgow, and barley , about half of which is sold for making beer and whisky in Glasgow and Edinburgh.
They also grow potatoes for the city markets.
Other crops, and some of the barley, are fodder crops which the farmers use to fatten lambs and beef cattle, and to provide extra feed for dairy cows in winter.
Also the farmers plant crops of grass (ley grass) which they use to provide rich grazing for the livestock in summer and hay and silage for the winter.
Normally the grass is sown with clover and it is planted in rotation with the cash crops.
Sometimes farmers decide to leave their sown grass to grow for several years — called a long ley .
Which crops do these lowland farmers use to feed their livestock?
Why do they plant clover with the grass?
In which area do the farmers have the most ley grass?
By adding animal manure and artificial fertilisers to the already fertile soils, and by using much machinery and insecticides, the farmers obtain very high yields of crops.
Why is the system of farming on the lowlands of Scotland a good example of intensive mixed commercial farming ?
C. The choice of crops and livestock greatly depends on current prices, but to get the best results the farmers consider carefully the amount of rainfall and of sunshine their farms are likely to receive.
According to these factors they decide just how much land to use for each crop and   just how many sheep, beef cattle or dairy cows to keep.
The map and the diagrams show how their decisions vary from one area to another.
What difference in rainfall, and therefore also of cloud and sunshine, is there between the western and eastern lowlands?
What major differences are there in land use and in livestock between the western lowlands of Strathclyde, Galloway and Dumfries and the eastern lowlands of Fife, Lothian and the lower Tweed valley?
How does farming on the north eastern lowlands of Buchan differ from that further south in Lothian and Fife?
D. A few farmers specialise by growing crops of high value.
Early potatoes grow well on light sandy soils which warm quickly in the spring.
Near the coast also the sea air reduces the cold of late winter and spring.
Farmers near Girvan and Dunbar use these advantages to provide early potatoes for the large markets of Glasgow and Edinburgh.
Market gardening for fresh vegetables and glasshouses for tomatoes and flowers are common near Glasgow and Edinburgh.
Orchards and small fruits , mainly raspberries, are favoured by growers in the Clyde valley near Lanark, near Dundee, along the coast of the Firth of Tay, and in the Vale of Strathmore.
Northern Ireland
Barriers and links
A. The British Rail Sealink ferry is just one of the many ships which frequently cross the Irish Sea.
The sea is a barrier , and often a stormy one, which separates the people of Northern Ireland from the rest of the UK.
But by land the roads and the one railway to Dublin provide many easier links between people who are Irish on either side of the frontier.
This frontier was fixed in 1920 in order to form a distinct territory of Northern Ireland which contains all the areas where quite large numbers of Irish Protestants live alongside the Irish Catholics.
Most of the Irish Protestants are people whose ancestors came to this area several centuries ago from Scotland, England and even France.
Which UK ports on either side of the Irish Sea are linked by ferry services?
At an average speed of 25 k.p.h. roughly how long does each crossing take?
How far is it from Belfast to the nearest and furthest points on the frontier with Eire?
About how long would each of these two journeys to the frontier take by car, at about 60 k.p.h.?
B. Since the start of the Industrial Revolution, about 200 years ago, the way most of the people in Northern Ireland make their living has depended on the links that business managers and factory owners have made with the mainland, especially with Scotland and England.
Most raw materials for industry and almost all the fuel have come from the mainland.
The main market for industrial and farm products is on the mainland.
English and Scottish banks and business people provided much of the original money, or capital , for industry and the machinery for factories.
Now also the UK Government and the EEC are investing in Northern Ireland by providing money in subsidies and by building factories.
Refer to the systems diagram for industry on page 16.
If you were starting a large factory in Northern Ireland, which features would you expect to depend mainly on links with the UK mainland and which would you expect to obtain easily from within Northern Ireland?
C. Managers chose to place most industry near the main point where goods are unloaded and loaded — the trans-shipment point of Belfast.
Workers were attracted to these industries and to the docks and so the city grew rapidly.
The railways and roads were also made to focus on this point, making the area even more attractive for new industries.
Now 700 000 people, nearly half of the population of Northern Ireland, live within 20 km of central Belfast.
At Londonderry there has been a similar type of growth around a trans-shipment point but because it is further from the mainland it is a smaller centre, of about 90 000 people.
What features on the map show that Belfast is a more attractive centre than Londonderry for people and industry?
The industrial workers
A. In the first factories, about two centuries ago, the managers employed workers to weave cotton cloth, using yarn, machinery and coal, all imported from Scotland.
Thus factories were placed in or near the port of Belfast .
Industry was like that in Glasgow, but with disadvantages in everything except the local labour supply.
Managers found that it was difficult to compete with the Scottish factories.
Soon the Belfast factory owners changed to making linen cloth.
For this they used flax grown in Northern Ireland and so they were able to cut their costs.
Also linen is a more valuable product for which they charged a higher sale price.
Now they import flax, mainly from Scandinavia, and much of the cloth they weave is made from mixtures of flax or cotton and artificial fibres such as nylon, Terylene and Acrilan.
The electricity for the factories still depends on imported fuel and the markets are still overseas but the   skills of the workers and the quality of the cloth help to keep some of the industry alive.
B. New industries have grown from the textile business.
For a brief period artificial fibres were produced in chemical works.
Now value is added to the textiles in clothing factories , especially for shirts and pyjamas, and in knitwear and carpet factories.
Where are the two main centres for the clothing industry?
What over the years have been the main disadvantages for textile manufacturers?
How have they tried to overcome their difficulties?
C. Under the guidance of the two men shown on the left, the skills of the Belfast shipbuilders made the shipyard of Harland and Wolff the greatest in the world, even though the steel had to come from Scotland.
Now, with Government aid as a part of the national British Shipbuilders, modern equipment has been installed but there is less work due to foreign competition.
Some oil rigs, as well as supertankers and naval ships, are constructed and much ship-repair work is done.
D. The skills learned in the shipyards have been used in Belfast for allied engineering industries, making marine engines, electrical generators and switch gear.
An aircraft industry, which was started by Short Bros. and Harland, now has Government aid.
Their success is with a short-haul freight plane called Skyvan, which is used in many remote areas of the world, with the Shorts 330 small airliner, and with parts for export to Boeing and Lockheed in the USA.
Also with Government loans, another company is building the Lear-Fan light executive aircraft near Belfast.
E. New electrical engineering industries have been started in Belfast and some other towns.
Because they produce high value products from small amounts of raw material, managers consider that they are particularly suitable industries for this island region.
F. When firms in the UK and the EEC want to expand their businesses with extra new branch factories they consider carefully the special advantages which there are in Northern Ireland.
These are largely due to high levels of Government aid .
But also they consider the problems and realise that when business is bad these problems may force them to close their Northern Ireland factories.
Thus in the period 1950–70 new businesses provided 70 000 new jobs but at the same time other factory closures caused 50 000 people to lose their jobs.
What do business directors consider to be the problems which have caused many factories to close?
What do they see as the advantages when they want to expand their manufacturing?
Would you open a new factory there now?
If so, what type of goods would you make?
Craigavon: New City
A. People in Northern Ireland have larger families than in the rest of the UK.
The birth rate is 21 per 1000, rather than the 16 per 1000 in other parts of the UK.
So the population is growing fairly rapidly even though about 8000 people emigrate from the region each year.
Also fewer farm workers are needed in the rural areas and so some move to the towns.
Thus there is a pressure of population on housing and jobs in urban areas.
The New City of Craigavon is taking many of these extra people, as well as some who are moving out from the older areas of Belfast which are being rebuilt.
B. Craigavon is being built as a linear city which joins together two older towns, Portadown and Lurgan.
One large shopping, sports and entertainments centre can give better services to the 100 000 people than the two old smaller centres.
What features of the city plan make it a pleasant place for outdoor recreation?
Why are many of the industrial areas placed to the north of the city?
Why is this New City needed?
Farmscapes and wildscapes
A. There are many more people living in the countryside and many more farmers per km&sup2; in Northern Ireland than in other parts of Britain.
Most of the farms are small, each with about 1–15 small fields, totalling 15 hectares or so.
The farmhouses are scattered, or dispersed across the landscape just a few fields apart from one another.
Village clusters are fewer than on the mainland.
How many separate, dispersed, farmhouses can you see on the photograph?
B. Mr O'Rea owns one of these scattered farmhouses in the valley of the River Bann, north of Lough Neagh.
His small farm is like many others on the lower land of Northern Ireland.
He and his neighbours have decided that grass is the best crop to grow.
They use this to feed livestock mainly for dairy products such as milk, eggs and bacon.
They also use the grass to rear calves and, when prices are high, to fatten them for beef.
C. Both the climate and the soils have guided Mr O'Rea and other farmers in their decision to use most fields for grass.
In what ways are the temperatures and the rainfall better suited for the successful growth of grass rather than for cash crops of wheat?
The lowlands of Northern Ireland were covered by slow-moving ice sheets which had spread out across them from faster-moving glaciers in the mountains.
On the lowlands the ice deposited its load of rock debris, or moraine.
As a result the solid rocks are covered by various mixtures of loose clays, sands and boulders — called boulder clay .
Much of the boulder clay appears in humps, called drumlins , with damp, peaty hollows or marshes between them.
The farmers use the fields on the better-drained soils of the drumlin hillsides normally for sown grass but sometimes for barley or potatoes, especially where the clay is mixed with sand.
Where do the farmers leave some fields as permanent grass ?
On the map, roughly how much of Mr O'Rea's farm is used for (i) permanent grass;(ii) ley grass (specially sown);(iii) barley;(iv) potatoes?
D. Each year the farmers plough only a few of their fields, but they do this in a slow rotation , leaving the sown grass for several years, as a long ley .
This grass is cut for hay or for silage and sometimes for two crops of silage.
The hay, silage and barley provide extra feed which farmers use mainly in the winter when the grass stops growing.
The barley is also used to fatten pigs.
Potatoes are the only cash crop though even some of these are used for fodder.
Why do you think many of the farmers prefer to have a long ley in each field rather than changing from arable crops to grass every one or two years?
Why is Mrs O'Rea able to say that they do not need to hire labour to work on the farm?
E. The farmers note carefully the market prices .
Because the Milk Marketing Board agrees to pay a fixed price regularly every month, most farmers keep a herd of dairy cows .
Mr O'Rea, like many other farmers, has about 20 cows which produce calves as well as milk.
In the past, the young store cattle were sold after a few months to farmers on the UK mainland but recently the EEC has guaranteed high prices for beef and so many farmers have fattened their calves on their own farms.
A quarter of the income of these small farms comes from pigs and poultry, both of which multiply easily and can be intensively fed in small areas.
Local dairies, bacon factories and packing stations produce butter, cheese, dried milk, bacon, eggs and chickens mostly for shipment   across the Irish Sea to the large mainland markets .
What changes would you expect the farmers to make if (i) the price of milk fell considerably,(ii) the EEC guaranteed price for beef fell sharply?
F. The structure of the land in Northern Ireland is an extension of that in Scotland.
Upland masses exist on either side of a central rift valley.
But there are two major differences.
(i) Vast sheets of lava , which have hardened into basalt, were spread over the north-eastern part, called the Antrim plateau.
This basalt plateau has been tilted and parts have been faulted downwards to form the low land around Lough Neagh and in the River Bann valley.
(ii) More recently boulder clay has been spread over almost all the lower land below 200 metres, covering whatever rocks are below it.
The uplands, except those of Antrim, are made of old resistant rocks with some granite batholiths forming the highest land, as in the Mountains of Mourne.
G. On all the boulder clay lowlands farming is similar to that done by Mr O'Rea (sections A-E), but the land of the uplands is used differently.
The farmers have decided to leave much of the uplands as wildscape of open moorland.
They have found that the soils are thin and leached and in places covered by boggy upland peat (see page 78).
With cooler air, more cloud, and so less sunshine, even grass grows less well than on the lowlands.
The farmers keep sheep on the open moorlands.
Some cattle are reared on permanent pasture on the lower slopes and a few fodder crops of grass, oats and potatoes are grown in the lower valleys.
H. The land on the edge of the wildscape is marginal for farming, even with the subsidies paid by the Government.
Large areas have been planted by the Government as coniferous forest , some of which is about ready now for harvesting after 50 60 years of growth.
If the Government subsidy for these upland farmers was withdrawn, what change would be suitable for the use of their marginal land?
I. On all types of land within about 20 km of Belfast the farmers want to take advantage of the large market in the city.
The land is used intensively mainly for dairy herds producing fresh milk .
In the Lagan valley potatoes and fresh vegetables are special crops.
J. The most famous scene which attracts tourists to Northern Ireland is the Giant's Causeway, a mass of pillars of basalt rock on the northern coast of the Antrim plateau.
On parts of this coast the National Trust preserves the fine coastal scenery of black basalts which lie on top of a layer of white chalk rock.
The granite tors of the Mountains of Mourne and the open moorland wildscape of the Sperrin Mountains also attract tourists.
Lough Neagh, Lough Erne and the sea inlets are popular for boating activities.
In what ways may it become possible to create greater use of the recreational advantages and so to boost the tourist industry of Northern Ireland?
K. The main problem in the rural areas of Northern Ireland is that most farms are small with too many people living on them.
For instance, Mr and Mrs O'Rea (page 88) with their elder son Patrick, can manage their farm by themselves without hired labour.
In fact even Patrick's labour is not really needed but he stays mainly to learn how to manage the farm later.
Their daughter, Shelagh, has moved to Belfast where she has a job in an office but her younger brother, Sean helps here and there on the farm while he is looking for some other work, sadly without too much hope, since there is already much unemployment in the towns.
As in this family, there is some migration of young people from the rural areas to the towns of Northern Ireland but this movement is less than it has been in Scotland or England during the last 40 years.
Why is there this movement?
Why do many people stay on the farms, with the result that this migration has been less than normal for the UK?
Why are many farms over-staffed, creating over-population of the farmland and thus low incomes per person?
Wales
The London telephone directories list thousands of people of Welsh origin.
There are more Welsh people living in England than there are in Wales!
If you have a telephone directory for somewhere in England, roughly how many people can you find in it with Welsh-sounding names like those of the famous Welsh rugby players?
In this century many Welsh people have had to leave Wales to find work.
The map of population shows the areas where there has been a loss of people —depopulation — or only a very small, less than average gain.
In these areas some houses were abandoned and slowly became derelict.
Also the map shows just two small areas where there was a steady growth until quite recently, with people arriving and moving into new homes and jobs.
However, since 1970 the large cities and industrial towns in parts of South Wales have been losing rather than gaining people, as the traditional industries linked with mining and metal smelting have declined.
By contrast small market towns in rural mid-Wales are starting to gain people, particularly in places which have easy access to the English lowlands.
How would you describe the distribution of people in Wales, mentioning each of the areas on the map?
What is the density of population per km&sup2; in the three separate areas marked by squares?
(The average for Britain is 227 per km&sup2;.)
What recent changes are there in the movements of people?
Rural mid-Wales
A. Once a week farmers gather in their local market town.
Most of these market towns are at the junctions of valleys.
The farmers may be selling or buying sheep and cattle, and buying   fencing, feedstuffs or machinery.
They and their families are doing their main weekly shopping and meeting to gossip with their friends.
How many of these small market towns are there in mid-Wales?
What do you think is the reason for Welshpool and Builth Wells having larger markets?
B. Most of the farmers meeting at the markets keep large numbers of sheep, often as many as 500 each.
For most of the year the farmers allow the sheep to roam freely on common land on the moorlands which generally are over 300 m high.
This is a wildscape which is too rugged, cool and wet for cultivation.
When the land was covered by ice sheets , about 20 000 years ago, the highest peaks, such as Snowdon, Cader Idris and the Brecon Beacons, stood out above the ice.
These had corries and tarns, arêtes and some pyramidal peaks.
(See pages 63 64 for similar scenery in the Highlands of Scotland.)
The valleys were cut deeply by glaciers.
They are U-shaped glaciated valleys.
The slopes of the valley sides are often too steep to cultivate.
Their floors are covered by sheets of boulder clay.
Terminal moraines have blocked some rivers, producing long ribbon lakes.
Which of these landscape features, produced by glaciation, are shown on the photograph or on the map?
Roughly how much of mid-Wales is over 300 m high — mostly wildscape which the farmers can use only for rough grazing for sheep?
C. The system of hill sheep farming depends on the farmers being able to feed the sheep with some fodder crops , particularly in the winter and in the lambing season of spring.
Below the moorlands of the wildscape there is a marginal fringe of farms, generally between 150 m and 300 m altitude.
Here the ewes (female sheep) are gathered for lambing and later for shearing wool and for dipping to control insect pests.
On the fields the farmers can grow some roots, mainly swedes and mangolds, and cut and store   a crop of hay.
A few of these fields are specially sown in ley grass but most are permanent grass.
This zone of farms is called the marginal fringe because it is at the upper margin for agriculture.
With much cloud, mist and rain, and little sunshine, cereal crops seldom ripen and so the farmers avoid planting them.
Also the grass grows for only a short-season , and the amount of hay which can be cut and dried varies from one year to the next.
The income from lambs, a few older sheep and wool is hardly enough to pay the wages for a shepherd.
Without a Government subsidy , based on the number of sheep, many of these farmers would go out of business.
D. Rearing lambs is the main business of the hill sheep farmers but, for fattening, the lambs must be sold in the autumn to the lowland farmers.
Many ewes also are moved to the lowlands for the winter.
The lower parts of the valleys and the coastal plains are a more prosperous farmscape .
Here the farmers grow barley, oats and roots, and they have more land in rotation grass which yields larger crops of hay and silage.
Most lowland farmers keep some dairy cattle and rear calves as well as wintering and fattening sheep and lambs.
What sales and movements of sheep and lambs are made through the market towns in the autumn?
What are the farmers in the drawing likely to be saying to one another when they meet at market?
E. Changes are taking place in the marginal fringe.
Some farm houses are being abandoned.
With cars, tractors and lorries, farmers can travel daily from the lowlands to the hills.
Farm machinery is used better on larger farms and needs fewer workers.
As a result some of the hill farms are being joined together —amalgamated — and farm labourers are becoming unemployed.
Other hill farms are owned and worked as a unit linked with a lowland farm.
Piped water , sewerage and electricity, and therefore television, are expensive to provide to remote isolated farms, and many of these have only rough tracks for access.
So they are being abandoned and their land is becoming moorland again.
Slowly people are moving away from the marginal fringe.
Why do many young people think of leaving the valleys of mid-Wales?
F. Rows of terraced houses, like those in the photograph, are scattered in places in the hills.
They were the homes of lead miners or slate workers in the last century.
Now most of them are abandoned.
Slate is a metamorphic rock .
It was formed by the heating and crushing of shale, a sedimentary rock which has hardened from mud.
This heating and crushing was due to nearby igneous volcanic activity about 400 million years ago.
The minute particles in the rock have been flattened with the result that the slate splits easily into thin sheets.
The giant slate quarries and tips of waste rock at Llanberis and Bethesda are great scars on the landscape.
They and their disused railway lines remind us of wealth in the last century — but unemployment during the last 50 years.
In which parts of almost any town can you see many roofs made of slate?
In which parts are most roofs made of brick tiles or artificial asbestos ‘slates’?
How does this explain high unemployment in the slate industry?
G. The large areas of wildscape attract tourists , particularly to the Snowdonia National Park where climbing is popular.
Llanberis has changed from being a slate quarrying town to being a tourist centre.
Parts of the wildscape and of the marginal fringe have been planted as forests which also can be used by tourists.
What on map B, page 93, suggests that tourists visit that area?
What features may attract them?
How large is the main forest in the wildscape on map B?
How large is that in the marginal fringe?
H. Plentiful rainfall, hard impervious rocks, glaciated corries and U-shaped valleys, few people: together these make the area valuable for water storage, for hydro-electric power and for nuclear power.
At Dolgarrog the H.E.P. is used in an aluminium rolling mill, but most of the electricity from the H.E.P. stations and from the nuclear power stations goes into the national grid mainly for use in England.
Welsh water is also piped from the reservoirs to English cities.
Which reservoirs supply which English cities?
What are the various things which mid-Wales provides for the English?
What do the English provide for the people of mid-Wales?
Coal from the valleys
A. 6 a.m., before dawn on a dark morning in 1910.
Thousands of miners are leaving their small terraced houses and tramping down the street to one or another of the 20 coal mines in the Rhondda valleys.
Over the hill in the next valley, and the next and the next, the same is happening.
Each mine employed 200–300 workers.
The mine owners filled the bottoms of the valleys with rows of terraced houses, mine buildings, railways, roads and canals.
Tramways and overhead cableways were built to tip the waste rock high up on the moorland hillsides since the valley floors had little spare space.
B. Below ground the miners work coal seams most of which are quite thick and contain coal of high quality .
But the seams dip steeply in places and there are many faults which bring some workings to an abrupt end.
This has made it expensive to use machinery in the mines of South Wales and many pits have been closed.
Just a few remain but these have been enlarged and each employs more men than before.
How many mines have closed in the two valleys of the Rhondda?
Roughly how many miners in these two valleys have lost their jobs in the local mines since 1930?
If you were the mine captain, how would you describe the problems of working the coal from the pit shown in the diagram?
C. When most ships used steam for power, the mine owners and traders sold large quantities of the high quality coal from South Wales as exports .
The coal was stocked for bunkering ships in the ports in many parts of the world.
At Cardiff, Newport and Swansea, docks and railway sidings were constructed for this export trade.
Many traders, dockers and railwaymen came into these towns which grew rapidly at this time.
Why was Cardiff in a good position to grow as a port for coal exports?
Now that oil is the main fuel for ships and other transport, the export of coal has almost ended but it was the reason for the early growth of Cardiff and for the long ribbons of terraced houses in the valleys of the coalfield.
D. Coal which has a specially high carbon content is called anthracite .
It is found in only a few places in the world.
In which part of the South Wales coalfield do they mine anthracite?
How large is the whole coalfield (i) in kilometres from north to south and from east to west,(ii) in the number of mines, and (iii) in the output of coal?
Where are most of the shallow mines?
Why is mining difficult in the south?
Who now are the main buyers of coal from the National Coal Board in South Wales?
E. Much of the coal from South Wales is used in making iron and steel.
About how much of Britain's steel is made in South Wales?
The pictures show the founder of one of the great steel works and his modern successor, who in 1982 controlled all the large iron and steel works in Britain.
These two men, and many between, have had to make the same type of decisions about the positions of their steel works.
The only difference has been that the old decisions were about small sums of money and fewer workers, while the decisions today involve vast sums of money and thousands of workers, and also the welfare of their families and other townsfolk.
F. By 1880 the decisions had produced the pattern of iron works and steel works shown on the map.
Then the technique of smelting was in two separate processes.
In the first process coal and iron ore, which were mined from the same rocks, were fed into small blast-furnaces to produce bars of pig iron.
Most of this local iron ore was mined from shallow pits and from adits dug into the valley sides.
Much of the iron was sent down the valleys for export through Cardiff and Newport.
Considering (i) the rock structures, then the several transport costs —(ii) for fuel,(iii) for raw materials, and (iv) to markets, why did the owners decide to place their blast-furnaces mainly in the north east, far up the valleys, as at Merthyr Tydfil and Ebbw Vale?
The second process was putting cold pig iron and scrap metal into steel furnaces and hammering or rolling the steel ingots into sheets and rods.
Some steel furnaces were placed next to the blast furnaces and some near to tinplate works, which use thin steel sheets which are covered in a veneer of tin.
Considering transport costs (i) for fuel,(ii) for raw materials, and (iii) to markets, why did the owners decide to place their steel works (a) in the north east of the coalfield and (b) in the south west of the coalfield near Swansea and Llanelli?
G. Gradually bigger blast furnaces were used, which could be integrated with larger steel furnaces with the metal passing still hot from one to the other.
As the local iron ores were being exhausted and the works used larger quantities, these local supplies were not enough.
Most iron ore had to be imported, from Spain.
What arguments, or reasons, would the directors have put forward for closing a dozen old works far up the valleys, at 300 m altitude, and building two new ones on the coast, at Port Talbot and, perhaps, at Cardiff?
H. At Ebbw Vale the separate blast furnaces and steel mills were closed in 1929.
But the Government was concerned about the amount of unemployment in the valleys where both coal miners and steel workers were without jobs.
Richard Thomas and Co., with Government grants of money, rebuilt the works, as one large integrated iron and steel works, from which much of the steel went into a new modern tinplate mill.
The industry remained in the same place even though the conditions had changed.
This lack of movement is called industrial inertia .
Soon the skilled steel workers and the coal miners were back at work and there was money in the valleys for traders, services and shop keepers.
What arguments must the directors have put forward (i) for moving from Ebbw Vale, perhaps to the coast, and (ii) for staying in Ebbw Vale?
I. Recently four decisions have been made:(i) to have another new integrated iron and steel works at Newport (Llanwern);(ii) to enlarge the blast furnaces and steel mills at Port Talbot;(iii) to close the iron and steel works at Ebbw  
Vale;(iv) to continue to make tinplate at Ebbw Vale using steel from Newport.
Considering techniques of smelting, fuel and raw materials, workers and their families, why were each of these recent decisions made?
J. Tinplate , mainly for tin cans and boxes, is sold to industries in many parts of Britain.
Almost all of it is made in South Wales, where there is a large labour supply skilled in this type of work.
There are also large exports to firms canning fruit and vegetables in Africa, South America and the Mediterranean countries.
When tinplate was made from separate sheets or plates of thin steel there were many small tinplate works, mainly in and around Llanelli and Swansea (see map F).
They were near the ports where the tin was imported.
The technical invention of rolling long continuous sheets of steel caused about 70 small works to close.
Now even more tinplate is made, but from just three giant works.
Which steel mills are linked with each tinplate works?
Why do you think the tinplate works at Ebbw Vale exists in this isolated position?
K. Galvanised sheets , usually known as ‘corrugated iron’, are made by covering thin sheets of steel with zinc , to prevent rusting.
The zinc ores are smelted in Swansea and the sheets are made at Port Talbot and Ebbw Vale.
Much is exported for cheap roofing, used in Africa and Asia.
L. In the valleys of South Wales coal mines have been closing, iron and steel works have been closing, tinplate works have been closing.
So the Government has made the valleys a Special Development Area where grants are made to help to start new industries.
Hoover washing machines are being made on the site of the old steel works at Merthyr Tydfil.
Nylon thread has been made at Pontypool, and many smaller light industries have started on new trading estates, particularly at Hirwaun near Aberdare and Treforest near Pontypridd.
But still there is not enough work.
Each year several thousand people leave the valleys and few arrive.
There is depopulation at a rate of about 1 –o each year.
Many others now are commuting daily from the valleys to new industries nearer the coast.
Although houses can be bought cheaply in the valleys, few people desire to move there.
Why might you choose not to move there?
Growth in the coastal areas
A. Some managers have decided recently that they should start new industries near the coast in South Wales.
They have considered the subjects shown on the plan of an industrial system and decided what advantages the area has for each, as shown on the map.
B. The managers consider that the ports are an advantage for transport.
At Cardiff, Newport and Swansea the docks were built to export coal from the valleys and metal sheets from the tinplate and zinc works.
Now coal exports are smaller and these docks are less busy.
Some raw materials are imported, especially iron ore, tin and zinc.
Metal products and refined oil are exported or moved by coastal shipping.
C. The managers consider that fuel is plentiful.
Coal from the valleys is used in furnaces and converted to electricity in four power stations in the area.
An oil refinery at Llandarcy (Swansea) was started when smaller tankers were used than the modern supertankers which dock in the deeper water of the ria, or drowned valley, of Milford Haven.
An oil pipeline links Milford Haven and Swansea and four new refineries have been built along the coast of Milford Haven.
Here there is plenty of land, safely remote from towns, and so suitable for the large size of refineries.
About how much larger are the modern supertankers compared with the tankers of 20 years ago?
Why do you think some people opposed the building of oil refineries near Milford Haven?
D. The managers know that labour is available locally for new industries.
Some workers commute daily from the mining valleys.
Most live in the three large towns of Cardiff (274 000 people),Swansea (168 000 people) and Newport (105 000 people).
Because of their size these towns have been like magnets attracting more businesses and people.
Some people come to work in factories and many others come to supply services , including shops, transport, schools and hospitals.
Many workers are employed in making steel bodies and other parts for cars — British Leyland at Llanelli and Cardiff, Ford at Swansea.
E. An industrial trading estate at Treforest uses labour from the mining valleys and from the south.
New Towns at Cwmbran and Llantrisant house some of the overspill of people from Newport and Cardiff.
They also have new light industries.
The Government has moved some of their business into the area, including the Royal Mint at Llantrisant, the computerised Driver Vehicle and Licensing Authority at Swansea, and regional government offices at Cardiff, which is the capital city of Wales.
In which group, or category, of industry are most of the factories on the Treforest industrial estate?
(See the table on page 15.)
Why do many buses, cars and trains go in and out of Treforest each weekday?
Refer to the industrial systems plan and the map on page 100.
What two features may be causing managers to bring new industries to this area, besides the ports for transport of raw materials and finished goods, the fuel supplies and the labour supply from the large towns and the mining valleys?
In what order of importance do you place the various advantages of this area for new industries?
F. In North Wales a small coalfield near Wrexham has been declining from 24 pits in 1930 to just 2 in 1983.
Iron and steel works on the coast of the coalfield have also been closed.
But these industries brought workers to this area.
Now, with Government aid, most of them are employed in new light industries.
Others make tinplate, chemicals and rayon.
A new smelter at Shotton produces titanium metal for use in aircraft production elsewhere.
G. The coasts are an attraction for tourists , particularly as access becomes easier by car and motorcoach.
Butlin's and Pontin's have used the opportunities to develop holiday camps.
Many smaller businesses provide caravan parks.
In the older centres, such as Llandudno, there are hotels, guest houses and conference halls.
Which are the main tourist towns and areas marked on the map?
Which are likely to have most weekend tourist trade throughout much of the year?
H. Farmers on the lowlands near the coasts concentrate on keeping dairy cattle.
Their fields are a mixture, some in permanent grass, some in fodder crops, and some in ley grass grown in rotation.
The Milk Marketing Board sells much of the milk to the industrial towns of South Wales and to the tourist resorts.
Astride the Central Pennines
The landscape
A. A great many people live on either side of the central part of the Pennines.
They share similar landscapes and they share a similar history of ways in which they have worked to make a living.
What features on the map and section are similar on either side of the Pennines, starting from the hilltops and moving outwards to the seas?
What are the names of the main cities marked on the map?
What major difference is there between the Yorkshire and Lancashire coalfields?
B. Your mind is a ‘time machine’.
It can travel back to a time 200 million years ago, long before human beings existed.
Great big and fearsome Dimetrodon, a species of dinosaur, was the most powerful creature.
Unlike most dinosaurs it had sharp teeth with which it ate smaller creatures.
It prowled across the lower slopes of the Pennine Hills which had been formed a few million years earlier and along the coast of the seas which covered what now are the lowlands on either side of the Pennines (Diagram 4 ).
Before this, in a period called the Carboniferous, the whole region was under the sea.
Then thick layers, or strata, of limestone (Carboniferous Limestone ) were deposited (Diagram 1 ).
Next, the region became the delta of a great river.
Sand was deposited which hardened into strata of sandstone, now called Millstone Grit (Diagram 2 ).
Later, forests grew on the delta.
At intervals these were swamped and buried in mud and sand.
The buried trees became coal seams and the mud and sands turned to shale and sandstone.
Together these layers are called the Coal Measures (Diagram 3 ).
Dimetrodon and other dinosaurs padded about on the surface of the Coal Measures which were bent up into the great hump-like structure, or anticline , of the Pennines (Diagram 4 ).
Far below ground in the anticline were the Millstone Grits   and even deeper were the Carboniferous Limestones.
Examine the diagram of rocks from a bore hole near Sheffield.
What were the conditions like when each of the rock series A, B and C were being formed?
What detailed changes were there during the period when D was formed?
C. For nearly 200 million years it has rained on the Pennines.
The rain has fed plants and their roots have grown into the rocks and split them apart.
Water has frozen on cold nights in the cracks or joints of rocks and this has split them apart.
Also, the rain water has been a very weak acid because it links with carbon dioxide in the air.
It has slowly dissolved some rocks, especially the limestones.
In all these ways the surface has been broken into fine particles.
The solid rocks have been weathered to form loose soil.
As each layer of weathered rock, or soil, has formed it has been washed away, or eroded , by the rain water running off the surface in streams and rivers.
All the time, for nearly 200 million years, soil was forming and being washed away.
If you climb a high peak of the Pennines, such as Ingleborough Hill, imagine Dimetrodon long ago walking on a surface which was far above you.
The top of the anticline has been worn away, down to the Millstone Grit in some places and down to the Carboniferous Limestone in others.
For us it means that millions of tonnes of coal have been lost by erosion.
Which rocks form the lower slopes of Ingleborough Hill?
Which form the upper part?
Roughly how many kilometres width of coal seams have been eroded away between the Lancashire and Yorkshire coalfields?
(See map A.)
D. Far back, in Dimetrodon's time, the rivers deposited the soil into the Triassic seas on either side of the Pennines.
It was spread as layers of mud and sand on the beds of these seas.
Now the mud and sand have formed strata of clay and sandstone.
These make the lowlands.
Beneath them the coal seams are buried and preserved for our miners today.
People, their rivers and their valleys
A. Many people in the industrial towns around the Pennines enjoy getting out into the country and walking along a part, or along all 370 km, of the Pennine Way.
This is a public long distance footpath which mainly follows the watershed , or divide, between the rivers.
The walkers must go well prepared with anoraks and boots, since much of the rain which falls on the Pennines is absorbed into layers of squelchy peat on the high moorlands.
(See the diagram on page 78.
) Some of the water evaporates, some is used by the plants, some seeps into the ground, but most eventually flows downhill into streams.
Study the diagram of a water cycle.
What features may reduce the flow of water in rivers?
Study the graph.
How much greater is the river flow in January compared with that in June?
Study the graph and the diagram together.
Why is the flow of the River Trent so small in summer?
Why does it increase so very much in January and February?
What are the names of the rivers marked by initials on the map?
B. At weekends, especially in the summer, thousands of workers from Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield and other towns, choose to drive into the National Parks in the Pennine Hills.
These visitors provide a new source of income for the small shopkeepers of the villages.
Favourite spots for the visitors are by the rivers and bridges.
Why is a place like that in the photograph crowded with people at weekends in the summer?
How do the locals benefit?
Why may some local people dislike this?
Should the Council, and perhaps the local landowners, provide large car parks?
Should they charge for car parking?
Why, long ago, did the local people decide to build their bridges with such high arches?
C. The flow of water, or discharge , in rivers varies from summer to winter, and from day to day.
It also varies from place to place.
The small streams are called 1st Order .
Where two join, the larger stream or river is called 2nd Order .
When two 2nd Order rivers join (not a 1st and a 2nd) the much larger river is 3rd Order, and so on in a hierarchy of sizes .
What size, or order, is the River Swale at Richmond?
The other rivers from the Pennines are roughly the same size.
What order is the River Ouse at York?
(See map A.)
D. In places in the Pennines where there are streams and small rivers (1st and 2nd Order), there are steep sided, V-shaped valleys.
In these the small rivers flow down quite steep channels, or gradients (e.g. 1: 40).
Stones and earth (weathered rocks) slowly slip down the slopes, by soil creep , into the channels.
The earth is rapidly carried away by the water but the larger stones are moved only occasionally when the rivers are in flood.
Then the load of stones bounces and trundles down the channel, thus eroding it deeper.
E. Farmers have difficulty in using the land in these upper course valleys .
Most of it they have left as moorland on which they keep sheep.
They are used to having a lot of rain, mist and cloud.
Being high up, they know that the temperatures are lower than elsewhere.
They expect the growing season for crops to be short.
So they choose to plant grass and root crops in the few fields on the lower slopes.
These crops provide winter fodder.
Because the upper course valleys twist and turn — they have interlocking spurs — travelling along the valley roads is slow and the farmers live far, in time distance, from the markets and shops of the towns.
But even so, many farmers choose to keep small herds of dairy cows, for milk and for rearing young cattle.
Why do these farmers choose to produce some milk, when it can be produced more easily on the lowlands?
Why is much of the soil poor for crops?
(See page 78.)
What modern aid do some farmers use to improve the soil for their grass crops?
(See page 78.)
Roughly what is the upper limit for the enclosed cultivated land?
What is the detour index (see page 24) for the valley roads (i) along the valley, and (ii) across the valley at bottom right on map E?
What change in land use has been happening on this marginal fringe between farmscape and wildscape, as shown on the map?
Why are some farm houses being abandoned or becoming holiday homes?
F. Further down the main valleys the rivers have become larger (3rd and 4th Order).
The water flows easily in wider, deeper channels but down less steep gradients (e.g. 1: 600).
Here the load of a river is mainly mud and sand which is almost all that remains of the larger stones and boulders which have bounced and trundled many kilometres down river.
In places there are gravel deposits —; small smoothly rounded pebbles and sand — usually on the insides of the meander curves where the water flows less swiftly.
On the outer curves the river is deeper, the water flows more easily, and the banks are eroded .
In this way the river channel is slowly changing its position.
The gravels, sand and mud which are deposited form a floodplain .
When the river channel fills and then overflows more mud is spread right across the floodplain.
In which months are these rivers most likely to flood?
(See page 104.)
What is the most likely cause of a sudden flood?
The middle course valleys are broader and the valley sides are less steep than in the upper course.
Soil creep is still moving the weathered rocks down the slopes but it is not often that the changing river channel is directly below a slope to remove this rock debris.
So for long periods a deep soil gathers at the foot of most slopes.
G. In these larger parts of the valleys there are more farms, richer soils and a longer growing season.
The farmers can produce more winter fodder, including barley, oats, rape and kale, as well as hay, silage and root crops.
On the floodplains there is rich grass which the farmers use for dairy cows and young beef cattle.
Why do the farmers normally leave the floodplain fields in permanent grass rather than rotating crops on them?
H. For centuries, groups of farmers have lived together in villages and worked the land around each village to a distance of about 1.5–2.0 km.
So the villages are spaced at 3 or 4 km intervals along the middle courses of the valleys.
Travel has been easier than in the upper course valleys and so a few villages have grown to become market towns.
As central places they have attracted shops and services and a few small industries.
What is the detour index for the main valley route on the map?
How wide are the parishes of Arthington and Weeton?
How wide is the floodplain of the River Wharfe in this middle course of the valley?
Which places have grown to be major market towns in the central Pennines, and which river is each on?
I. In their lower courses the larger 5th Order rivers flow in very wide valleys across the lowland plains.
The river meanders have changed position often and so wide floodplains have formed from gravel, sand and mud which has been deposited on the inside edge of each meander.
In the broad channels the water flows easily and swiftly down very gentle gradients (e.g. 1: 2000).
When there are sudden floods over the banks, more sand and mud are deposited, mainly near the river channel.
These deposits raise the level of the banks slightly.
These raised banks are called levées.
Often the farmers, and more recently the Water Boards and Councils, have dredged the rivers and built the levées even higher to try to reduce the frequency of flooding.
In what ways do lower course valleys differ from middle course valleys?
In what ways are they similar?
Across the lowlands
A. For people who live in the hills of Britain the lowland plains seem flat, dull and uninteresting.
But the local people know that there are many small differences in height and in soils which affect the way they use the land.
These differences were caused first by ice sheets and later by rivers.
Glaciers or vast sheets of ice were moving slowly across the lowlands, just 20 000 years ago, at a time when there were only a few primitive humans living in caves in southern Britain.
Where the ice started, in the uplands, much weathered rock — boulders, clay and sand — sunk into it.
Many years later, when the ice reached the lowlands, most of this rock debris, or moraine , had sunk down through the ice to the ground.
It was deposited as sheets of boulder clay which are 20–0 m thick, covering all the rocks of the lowlands on the Lancashire and Cheshire side of the Pennines and in the Vale of York.
When the ice melted some shallow lakes remained where boulder clay blocked old river courses.
Slowly these hollows filled with mud to become marshes and then lowland peat .
This peat is rich in chemicals, unlike the peaty soils of the uplands which are leached and infertile (see page 78).
B. In the Vale of York the melting of the ice front was equal to the slow forward movement of the ice from behind the front, for a period of many centuries.
Thus the ice front stayed in the same place.
Where it was melting a huge pile of boulder clay was built up, as a terminal moraine .
South of the terminal moraine many powerful meltwater streams were moving some of the loose stones, sand and mud of the older sheets of boulder clay.
As the flow of water changed rapidly from summer to winter the streams and rivers deposited their loads again, leaving thin sheets of gravel or sand in some places and fine   mud in other places.
Would the streams have been flowing most rapidly in summer or in winter?
Now the areas of sands and gravels have dry soils with few chemicals for crops.
The muds or clays form heavy sticky soils which are richer in chemicals.
C. Also the rivers such as the Ouse and Trent have changed their level.
Now they are forming new floodplains about –8 m below their old floodplains.
Patches of the old floodplains remain as dry river terraces .
D. 20 000 B.C. — with ice sheets and meltwater streams — the lowlands were cold, bleak and empty, like the tundra of northern Canada and Russia.
2000 B.C. — it was warmer.
Dense, frightening forests covered the clays.
Thinner woods and heaths covered the sandy areas.
The peaty lowlands were still mainly marshland.
Small families or tribes hunted and hid in huts in the forest.
Later they cleared isolated patches of trees to grow crops and keep animals.
A.D. 850—a calm morning with mist hanging over the river and through the forest.
From the distance the eerie blast of a horn strikes sudden terror.
Soon there is a splash of many oars and the ghastly sight of a Viking ship filled with strong men armed for war and pillaging.
The invaders came by river.
In time they made new villages, cleared more land for crops and traded with the older inhabitants.
E. The Vikings, or Danes, chose the places for their settlements-with great care.
These have continued as prosperous farming villages right through the centuries to the farmers who live in them today.
The place names given to the villages show which ones were started by the Danes.
How many of the villages in the part of the Vale of York shown on the map are Danish in origin?
How many of these are on the floodplain of the river?
How many of them are on the drier river terraces?
How many of them are away from the river and its terraces?
Often the Viking chiefs decided that their villages should be built on the river terraces.
A similar choice was made by people at other times in different parts of Britain.
If you had been Chief Onlaf, in which order of importance would you have placed the seven requirements for a suitable village site?
What is there about the river terrace site in the drawing which met each of Chief Onlaf's requirements?
F. The Vikings had a central place at York .
It was a fortress town and a trading centre, as it had been for the Romans 800 years earlier.
People travelled to and from the town and the villages along the river.
Others crossed the low–and on the old Roman road which had been made on the ridge of the terminal moraine.
They met at York.
In time other tracks or roads developed from this central market to smaller towns and villages in the area, and so York grew in trade and importance.
The ridge of the terminal moraine was a fine site for a later, Norman, castle to guard the crossing of the river.
The cathedral of York Minster became the centre from which the rich and powerful Archbishops of York helped to control the lives of the people all over northern England.
Now, as a central place, York is a city with 100 000 people.
It has the largest cattle market in the north of England.
It has many shops, banks and services.
It has law courts, government offices and a university.
Some of the people work in manufacturing, particularly in chocolate factories, railway works and printing.
A tourist industry is based on the city's historical building  
G. On the western lowlands Chester (58 000 people) is a central place where the Romans and the Normans defended what was once the lowest bridging point over the River Dee and so also the route into northern Wales.
It used to be an important port for small sailing ships but now the sea trade in large ships has moved to Liverpool.
Like York, the old walled city centre attracts many tourists, and it has a large cattle market and a cathedral.
H. Crewe (48 000 people) is a modern central place.
When the directors of the London and North Western Railway organised their company in the last century they decided to build an engineering works, for locomotives and rolling stock, near the centre of their network, and this point was in the countryside at Crewe.
For the workers they built a ‘new town’.
People started shops and services.
Soon a large cattle market attracted farmers and their families.
Some other companies employed female workers in clothing factories.
The engineering skills of the men attracted manufacturers of parts for motor cars.
I. If you took a farm somewhere on the lowlands on either side of the Pennines, the way you would choose your crops and livestock would depend largely on four things:(i) the soils;(ii) the rainfall;(iii) the urban markets;(iv) what your neighbours did.
On the heavy sticky clays farmers have chosen to keep livestock.
They use their fields to grow fodder.
In the west there is more rain (about 800 mm per year), more cloud and therefore less sunshine than in the east (600 mm rain per year).
So the farmers on the boulder clays of the Cheshire Plain and in the Fylde keep most of their land as permanent grass, though some barley is grown for fodder.
For over a century the presence of large urban markets, which need much fresh milk, has encouraged the farmers to keep dairy cows .
On the clays –n the east , in the Vale of York and the Trent Valley, where there is more sunshine, the farmers can also succeed with cash crops.
Barley, for malting, and wheat are common, with some sugarbeet.
Since most farmers also fatten beef cattle and keep dairy cows, their farming is mixed .
The cattle are fed on barley, grass and rape.
The grass is grown as a ley, in rotation.
On the floodplains the grass is permanent.
Many young stock for fattening are bought in the market at York from the upland farmers of Ireland, Wales, Scotland and the Pennines.
Farming is different in the areas where the soils are formed by (i)lowland peat , and (ii) the fine mud and silt of river alluvium .
Both these soils are rich in plant foods.
At much expense the farmers have drained these soils.
Now they use them for arable cash crops and special market garden crops .
A similar system of farming is done on the sandy parts of the Lancashire Plain but here the land has been improved by mixing the wind-blown sand with the clay beneath it.
In all these areas barley and potatoes are common crops, but in the east wheat and sugarbeet are grown also.
Lettuces, cabbages and cauliflowers, carrots and celery are grown for the urban markets nearby.
There are many glasshouses where tomatoes, flowers and pot plants are grown, also for the urban markets.
By copying their neighbours' success and concentrating on one particular product, three areas have become noted for their specialities.
On the peat of Chat Moss near Manchester celery is a special crop.
South of Leeds it is rhubarb.
In the Fylde poultry farming is a speciality.
Refer to an atlas and the map opposite.
If you had a farm near (i) Northallerton (North Yorkshire);(ii) Goole (Humberside);(iii) Ormskirk (Lancashire);(iv) Crewe (Cheshire), what crops or livestock would you be likely to have?
Why would you choose these?
Power and organisation in the Pennine valleys
A. In the period around A.D. 1700 some people with ideas, with the desire to get ahead, and with money for industry, found that the older craftsmen in the lowland towns were opposed, through their organised guilds, to any changes in methods of making cloth.
So these people moved away into the Pennine valleys.
There they were able to organise the farming families, and many new arrivals, to spin and weave in their homes in many scattered cottages and hamlets.
They controlled this cottage industry by buying, selling, transporting and exchanging raw wool, spun yam and woven cloth.
The valleys began to fill rapidly with people who became skilled in the textile industry.
Mr John Kay invented a ‘flying’ shuttle which made weaving more rapid.
Mr Hargreaves, Mr Crompton and Sir Richard Arkwright made hand-operated machines which could spin many threads at the same time.
This mechanisation helped the skilled workers to increase production rapidly and to produce the cloth more cheaply.
Why do you think the masters of the old guilds and crafts in the lowland towns opposed new inventions and ideas?
Did they make a mistake by their decision to oppose changes?
B. Soon Sir Richard Arkwright and others in business discovered how to drive their machines by water power .
For this the workers had to be brought together in factories .
These were placed in the upper course, tributary valleys where the steep gradients of the rivers made it easy to divert the water for only short distances to allow a sufficient fall to drive the water wheels.
Rows of terraced houses for the workers, and later shops, were built near the factories.
Thus many new towns were started in the valleys of the hills in Lancashire and Yorkshire.
C. All these factories were using wool, most of which came from other parts of Britain.
To wash the wool, pure soft water , which drained steadily from the peaty moorlands of the Millstone Grit and Coal Measures, was much better than the hard water from the areas of Carboniferous Limestone.
So most of the factories, or ‘mills’, were placed in the central Pennines away from the limestone areas of the north and south.
Refer to the area shown on map B2.
Why did the factory owners avoid the main valley of the River Aire for their woollen mills and towns?
D. About 1800 the Boulton and Watt steam engine was available.
Factory owners added chimneys and extra workshops to their factories as they replaced water power by steam power .
Since coal could be taken anywhere, some factories were built also in the older towns, such as Manchester, Preston and Leeds.
There was an especially rapid growth of the textile industry in these towns which happened to be on the coalfield where the cost of transporting fuel was small.
Compare maps D and B1.
What are the names of the towns which increased in size rapidly when steam power was used?
E. Groups of workers skilled in spinning and weaving; rich mill owners; machinery; water power, later steam power and local coal — these together made the Pennines of Lancashire and Yorkshire the centre of the textile industry in Britain.
Only two major features of a successful industrial system were missing.
Which were these missing features?
While the textile industry was growing, the port of Chester was being blocked by river mud.
But Liverpool started to grow where there was a ‘pool’ of deep water scoured by the tides.
Liverpool merchants became rich as their ships sailed on the Trade Triangle, with trinkets, slaves and then cotton (see page 37).
Later, wool was imported from Australia and the Americas.
Hull was another port for wool imports.
For all this industry canals were built and rivers dredged to link the ports with the industrial towns.
Thus the raw materials of cotton and wool and the power of coal could be moved freely and cheaply.
Much of the finished cloth and tailored clothes were exported to worldwide markets.
Which are the main canals and which ports and towns do they link?
F. At an early stage the mill owners specialised in particular types of yarn and cloth.
In Lancashire they soon changed from wool, to mixed wool and cotton, and then purely to cotton .
Manchester became the main market for the cotton trade.
Yorkshire kept to woollen textiles with a major market in Leeds.
Recently many artificial fibres , such as nylon, made in chemical factories, have replaced cotton or wool, or they are mixed with them in the spinning or weaving process.
Although the materials have been changing the industry has stayed in the same places.
What different mixtures of fibres can you find by looking at the labels on your clothes?
G. Manchester and Leeds (700 000 people) became two of the greatest centres in Britain for using the cloth to make clothes .
This is done in both large factories and small workshops.
For instance, a Mr Montague Burton started a one-man tailoring shop in 1901.
By 1960 the company had a factory for 10 000 workers in Leeds and a chain of shops nationwide.
Most of the textile towns and the ports also employ some men or women in these industries.
*  
H. What can you discover from the labels about the places where many of your clothes are made today?
In the last fifty years there has been increasing competition from foreign textile and clothing firms for markets in all parts of the world.
Very many mills in Lancashire and Yorkshire have had to close.
The industry is being concentrated into fewer but larger factories using new modern machinery and making high value, special cloths and clothes.
I. If you wanted to start a new firm for any product you might be attracted by the empty factories and the source of unemployed workers.
Many engineers in Leeds and the textile towns have used these advantages to make textile machinery , much of which is exported.
Other engineering and light industries are filling many of the old mills and clothing factories.
Most people still find work in the same towns but in a greater variety of industries.
This change is called diversification of industry.
Is it fair comment today, still to describe Halifax as a ‘textile’ town?
What are the three largest forms of employment for the people of Halifax?
Which are the industries which employ large numbers of women?
J. The growth of the textile industry was the cause of many industrial towns being created on either side of the Pennines.
It created a factory system which has spread to other industries.
It formed urban areas, with their large pools of labour, shopping centres and transport networks.
Now the smaller, modern textile industry is just one among many new industries in these same towns.
Steel masters
A. The high reputation of Sheffield cutlery is known all over the world.
The master cutlers and their craftsmen developed methods and skills of making special steels for sharp cutting tools, such as knives, saws, chisels, scythes, razors, drills, scissors and surgical instruments.
They started in small workshops in the upper course valleys of the River Don and its tributaries, such as the River Sheaf.
There they used the water power to drive large hammers and grinding wheels made of the local Millstone Grit.
Under these the craftsmen skilfully handled their special steels.
Later they changed to steam power , using the coal which was mined locally.
Some of the raw material, bars of high quality iron, was made locally but most was brought by ship, canal and pack horse from Europe.
Today most of the cutlery works remain in the same part of modern Sheffield.
In what ways was the start of the cutlery industry of Sheffield similar to that of the textile industry?
Consider power, raw materials, labour and transport.
What is the name of the canal to Sheffield?
(See map E, page 116.)
B. Some great industrialists and business people in Sheffield in the last century developed special skills in steel making and made huge profits which provided the capital for larger works.
Sir Henry Bessemer discovered how to make steel faster and cheaper.
John Brown looked over the wall at his neighbour's invention and did the same.
Cammell, Vickers, Firth and Hadfield copied their lead and added new methods.
These men also bought shipbuilding yards in other parts of Britain.
In Sheffield they made steel plates and armoured plates for their ships.
They made guns and shells — and much money — in the   two World Wars.
They made boilers for ships and locomotives, railway lines, and all manner of springs, wires and tools.
Where was John Brown's shipyard?
(See page 74.)
C. For this new ‘heavy’ steel industry large works were built along the Don valley in its broader middle course, below the centre of Sheffield, in the districts of Attercliffe and Brightside.
Pig iron is brought by rail or canal.
Electric furnaces smelt the pig iron, together with much scrap metal.
The local coal mines supply the fuel for electricity power stations.
Special steel alloys, such as stainless steel (chrome-iron), make the steel of high value , which offsets the cost of transport to this inland position.
And the workers' skills in the giant rolling mills and small cutlery works add even more to the value of the products.
Large quantities of water are taken from the River Don for use in the power stations and the rolling mills.
Why were the large new steelworks and rolling mills built in a different part of Sheffield from the old cutlery works?
D. Near the steelworks there are many engineering works, making such things as crankshafts for car engines, turbines for power stations, jet engines for aircraft and the tools and parts for other industrial machinery, i.e. machine tools.
About twice as many people have jobs in engineering as in steel making.
As Sheffield has grown into a city of about 500 000 people– many jobs have been created to provide services, especially shops and transport, and to make processed foods, beer, sweets, clothing, furniture and printing.
How far has the city grown outwards since 1900?
Why was this expansion only possible when trams, buses and cars were invented?
What features are similar to those of the urban model (on page 41)?
What features are different?
In which direction is a rurban fringe (see page 11) most obvious?
E. A little further down the Don valley at Rotherham there are blast furnaces , changing iron ore into pig iron, and also more steel mills.
These started when iron ore was mined with the local coal, but now the iron ore has to be brought by rail and canal.
The blast furnaces remain at Rotherham due to(i)industrial inertia (see O page 67);(ii) the large local market for steel;(iii) the local fuel supply.
F. The steel industry of Sheffield exists today mainly because of the skills of the workers.
The iron and steel industry of Rotherham exists because long ago iron ore was mined locally as well as coal.
Mr MacGregor, the Chairman of British Steel in 1980, would not have chosen either place if he were starting a new industry today.
But until recently British Steel decided that their iron and steel works at Scunthorpe was in a suitable position and they enlarged it.
Here there are thick deposits of iron ore near the base of some rocks of oolitic limestone which are of Jurassic age.
The iron ore is easily extracted by quarrying with giant excavators.
It is low grade , about 25–o iron content.
Therefore much of the rock, or ore, is needed and the directors of British Steel do not wish to pay the cost of carrying it any great distance.
Rather, they prefer to bring coal to Scunthorpe by rail from the new deep coal mines about 25 km to the west.
*
G. Scunthorpe (66 000 people) is a town which was created solely for the iron and steel industry and for heavy engineering , using the steel to build such things as cranes and sections for bridges.
Also much pig iron is sent to Sheffield.
Steel goes by rail to engineering works all over the country.
Gas, from the coke ovens, and waste slag from the blast furnaces are used in making fertilisers.
A few clothing factories provide work for the women of Scunthorpe.
What major differences are there in the choices made at various times for starting steel works at Sheffield, Rotherham and Scunthorpe?
Energy for modern industry and homes
A. There are many obvious ways in which we use energy, or fuel.
What are these?
Some ways are less obvious.
Consider a plateful of baked beans on toast.
Electricity was used to mill the flour, to bake the bread, for driving milking machines and then butter churns, to cook the beans in the factory, to mould the tin can, to make the paper for the label and to print it, and finally to heat the beans and make the toast.
Coal was used to smelt the steel for the tinplate and petrol to transport all the parts and goods.
Altogether a lot of energy has been put into it.
What energy went into each of these: the chair and table, the knife and fork, the plate and the saucepan?
When you buy almost any product, you also are buying the use of some fuel or energy as well as the actual material.
B. In these ways the 12 000 000 people in this region use a vast amount of power for their homes, factories and transport.
On average each person (which includes babies) uses an amount of energy equal to that from 6 tonnes of coal each year.
This comes from various sources, shown in the graph for the UK on page 122.
Which is the main source of fuel and which is the next largest?
About how much is turned into electricity?
C. In many small towns (10 000–50 000 people each) and in villages, along the eastern edge of the Pennines, about half the workers have jobs in coal mines .
Now there are 117 active  collieries in the Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire coalfield, each employing about 1000 men.
Together these men produce more than half of all Britain's coal.
And to the east there are vast reserves of coal to supply fuel for at least the next 200 years.
Here the National Coal Board is investing Government money to sink new deep mines, each costing about £50 million.
Mining near Selby has started and there are plans for three new large pits for the 1990s in the Vale of Belvoir (see also page 148).
The NCB has spent much also on machinery for all the mines.
Machines are easy to use in this coalfield because the seams are fairly thick; at seven different levels in the pits they vary from 1 m to 2 m in thickness.
Also the seams dip only gently and there are few faults.
These advantages make it possible for the miners to produce a high output, of about 3 tonnes per man per shift.
The coalfield is changing, in a way similar to that in North East England.
In which parts of the coalfield are most of the old shallow pits which have been closed?
Why are the new large mines much deeper?
Near which river will the NCB probably decide to sink future pits?
Why is this coalfield likely to have a better future than that in North East England?
What are the names of some of the main mining towns?
D. On the Lancashire side of the Pennines much of the coal which was in places where it was easy to mine has been extracted, and so mining is becoming more expensive.
Also, the seams are more intensely faulted and folded than those in Yorkshire (see map A on page 102).
The NCB have decided to close many of the mines, leaving only 8 large pits.
Which are the main mining towns today?
E. At present most coal is used in power stations to make electricity which can be transported and used more easily and cleanly.
The power stations need much water for their boilers and cooling towers.
Also canals, rivers or the sea are routeways for cheap transport of the bulky fuel to the power stations, though some comes by rail.
Thus most power stations are built alongside rivers, canals or the sea, while some are also adjacent to coal mines.
The directors of the Central Electricity Generating Board (CEGB) have decided to build several new, giant power stations along the rivers Trent, Aire and Ouse.
Here they expect that coal will be available nearby for long into the future.
This area is becoming the ‘power house’ of Britain.
What are the names of the main power stations using coal?
Where is the electricity sent?
What major differences are there between Yorkshire and Lancashire regarding electricity supplies?
F. Rejoice in your luck.
Just for your lifetime, or a little less, there is a natural gas bonanza for Britain.
From 1963 tankers brought natural gas (methane) from the Middle East to Canvey Island.
Some was piped through the Midlands to the industrial towns on either side of the Pennines.
Now our oil men are operating drilling rigs and gas wells in the North Sea.
For some 20–50 years there will be plenty of British natural gas fed into the pipeline for use in homes and industry.
After that the ‘pools’ of gas will be exhausted.
Is the natural gas found in rocks which are younger, older or about the same age as the Coal Measures?
What features in the rocks do geologists look for when they hope to find natural gas deposits?
Where is the natural gas brought ashore by pipelines?
Why is it unlikely that industrialists will choose to build factories at these places?
G. One of the largest sources of energy, at present, in Britain and in the industrial areas astride the Pennines is oil.
Its use is helping to create a change in the nature and pattern of industries, as shown in the next chapter.
From the old to the new
1 The ports
A. Each day, in the Mersey estuary, some twenty or thirty ships are arriving or going to sea.
Some are giant oil tankers.
Some are general cargo boats, often carrying goods in containers.
There are grain ships, ore carriers, and many smaller ships trading with Ireland and Europe or taking refined oil or chemicals around the coast of Britain.
B. The activity of Liverpool centres on the busy office buildings, particularly those of the major shipping companies, such as Cunard and P & O. Many clerks have jobs taking orders for shipment of goods or quoting prices for months ahead.
Most of these orders come from business managers in the industrial towns of Lancashire, Yorkshire and the Midlands.
This is the main hinterland which the port serves, although some orders come from as far as London, South Wales or Scotland.
From the sample shipping list, with which countries does Liverpool do much trade?
What types of goods do the clerks record (i) as imports and (ii) as exports?
C. Along the shores of the Mersey there are mud flats.
These have been dug out easily to make docks, with lock gates which retain the depth of water when the tide is low.
Here the tide level changes by 9 or 10 m up or down each six hours or so.
On the Liverpool side, the docks, which handle general cargoes, are continuous for 10 km, though some of the older basins have been closed as the size of ships has increased.
New container docks have been added nearer the sea at Seaford and new lifting machinery everywhere has reduced the number of dock workers from 16 000 to 4 000 in the last twenty years.
How do the docks on the west side of the Mersey estuary differ from those on the Liverpool side?
From where, in the past, did the Cammell Laird shipyards at Birkenhead obtain much steel and parts for their ships?
(See page 118.)
D. Many merchants have seen the advantages of using the raw materials which are unloaded at a port — often called a trans-shipment point .
Rank-Hovis-McDougall use imported wheat for their flour mills.
Unilever process imported vegetable oils, such as palm oil from West Africa, to make soap and margarine in their factories at Port Sunlight .
Shell have a large oil refinery at Stanlow near Ellesmere Port and with it a petrochemical works producing plastics.
E. Shipping merchants need the services of other forms of commerce , particularly insurance and banking.
Central Liverpool has become a district with many offices and some of the insurance companies have grown to do general insurance business in all parts of the country.
F. For seven years at the end of the last century thousands of navvies dug a canal 8.5 m deep for ocean ships to reach Manchester .
The city became a major port as well as being the business centre for the cotton textile industry, with clothing factories and engineering works, especially those making textile machinery.
Alongside the Manchester Ship Canal there were open spaces suitable for large modern factories using imported raw materials.
At Trafford Park, near the docks on the west side of Manchester, there are food processing industries, and makers of rubber products, paper, cardboard and plastic packaging, brewers, several timber merchants, and sheet metal factories.
Much oil and petrol is unloaded at docks along the canal, particularly for a petrochemical works at Carrington.
G. As a port Manchester has less trade now due to the use of larger ships and the change to trade eastwards with the EEC.
But because of its size as a market it has snowballed and grown outwards to join surrounding towns to form the conurbation of Greater Manchester.
Now it is a major shopping centre and a centre for professional services and newspaper printing.
H. On the fish docks at Hull a retired trawler skipper, Mr Grant, tells how he has seen the port change in his lifetime.
His ancestors saw other changes.
Long ago the Vikings had a village where their ships' crews rested and sheltered in the inlet of the River Hull.
Then King Edward I had it fortified with walls and a moat.
In 1293 he called it Kingston-upon-Hull.
Later when there were large sailing ships they used the deep water channel as far as Kingston-upon-Hull but they docked in the River Hull to unload their cargoes and the goods were carried inland by barges on the rivers to Selby, York, Beverley and Gainsborough.
Hull was a transshipment point .
In the last century there were big changes in the hinterland , part of which became an industrial area with coal, textiles, steel and engineering industries.
Canals were made into this rapidly growing hinterland (see map E page 116).
Hull imported raw materials and later food for the industrial towns.
It exported their manufactured goods.
Which were the main industrial towns in the hinterland created by the canal links?
After 1800 the railways increased this trade and docks were built out of the mudflats along the waterfront of the Humber itself.
Mr Grant's grandfather was one of the many skippers who used the railway to sell fresh fish to the industrial markets in the hinterland and to London.
Hull became one of the main fishing ports of Britain.
10 000 people worked in this industry, as fishermen, dockers and ship-repairers or in processing the fish for market.
Now this industry has declined to about 2000 people.
Since 1960 new docks and an oil terminal have been built down river to handle larger ships and a growing trade, which is mainly with Europe.
There is a ferry service to Rotterdam.
When I was a boy there were hundreds of fishing boats.
Now there are just a few but they are large modern deep-sea trawlers, with more comfortable quarters — and some can freeze the fish at sea off Iceland, Canada or Norway.
We used to send fresh fish by rail but now most goes into the new freezing factories.
And down river now they have made vast new docks and an oil terminal.
I. Industrialists use the advantage of the transshipment of goods at Hull for a number of flour mills and also oil-seed mills which make cattle cake.
Birds Eye and Ross have frozen fish factories.
There are many timber yards and a chemical industry using the imported oil.
J. The port of Hull has a large rich industrial hinterland but the city has had a different sphere of influence, or market area.
This was mainly rural farmland with a few market towns and small coastal resorts.
Apart from the 270 000 people of Hull there were only another 300 000 in the whole area who were likely to travel to the   city for its shops and services.
The Humber has been a barrier which cut off trade to the south.
Now, since 1981, a road bridge has been constructed to cross the estuary.
The sphere of influence has suddenly been increased and another 300 000 people are likely to be attracted towards Hull.
Also workers are able to commute daily across the river.
The whole area has become one county, called Humberside.
On either side of the river there is plenty of open flat land for factories, such as the aircraft works at Brough and the petrochemical plant which is expanding to the east of Hull, where there are new factories making paints and plastics.
Docks are plentiful.
Trade with the EEC is growing.
Many shopkeepers in Hull had falling profits as the fishing industry declined.
Why may they expect a better future?
K. Other ports on the Humber are newer and smaller.
Goole (17 000 people) was created in 1825 with docks to transfer coal from the canal barges to small ships for transport to London.
Now this port also handles some general cargoes to and from Europe.
Which canals meet near Goole?
L. Immingham was an idea of the directors of a railway company in 1912.
The docks were built where the deep water channel of the Humber touches the southern coast.
It exports coal and imports iron ore.
Sulphur and phosphates are also imported for Fison's chemical works making fertilisers.
Recently the main import has become oil for the refinery and chemical works nearby at Killingholme.
This uses North Sea natural gas as well as oil.
How far does the iron ore have to be taken inland to the nearest blast furnaces?
M. Grimsby (92 000 people) was also started by a railway company but as the water is shallower it specialises in deep sea fishing trawlers rather than giant oil tankers.
Three fish docks were built and now it is Britain's leading fishing port, though the number of boats has declined rapidly in recent years.
Many people are employed in the freezing factories of Birds Eye, Findus and Ross where they process peas, beans and sprouts as well as fish and ready-cooked meals.
What advantage did Grimsby have over Hull for the distribution of fresh fish?
Refer to diagram A-E, for an industrial system, on page 100.
Why do some business people consider that the whole of Humberside may now become a ‘growth point’ for industry?
N. In Lancashire,Fleetwood (29 000 people) is an important fishing port developed by the railways mainly to serve the Lancashire market.
2 The infrastructure
A. Not long ago the owners of industries in the ports and towns on either side of the Pennines relied on a transport system, or distribution system, which had been built gradually by individual businessmen.
These were people who saw local opportunities to improve transport for fuel, raw materials and goods and so to make profits for themselves.
In which places do you think the industrialists who put their money into building the Manchester Ship Canal lived?
(See page 125.)
Why did a railway company build a railway to Immingham and docks there?
(See page 127.)
B. Until recently power for industry and homes was produced locally by separate companies.
Only coal was moved long distances by canals, railways and roads.
Each town had its own gas works and each area its own electricity power station.
From each the pipes and cables supplied only a small area.
People were attracted to place their factories and homes in the urban clusters near these ‘power points’.
C. Now there is a vast change taking place in the infrastructure.
Government money has been used to make a super-grid of power cables to switch electricity from one town to another and form one part of Britain to another.
Much less coal has to be moved and so factory owners have a freer choice of position.
Housing estates for their workers can be built wherever they are needed.
Industries with this freedom from having to be near power supplies, or bulky raw materials, are called foot loose.
Similarly, local gas works are being closed as the new natural gas pipelines are connected to the old urban networks (see page 123).
Whereabouts is most electric power generated to feed the grid for industry in this region?
(See map E page 122.)
Why is it only recently that Humberside has become a more attractive growth point for industries?
D. The Government is putting large amounts of public money into building new networks for transport and new docks.
To take a lorry load of goods from Leeds, it took 4 hours to Liverpool docks and 2½ hours to Hull docks before the motorways were opened — and ‘time is money’.
At an average of 50 m.p.h. (80 k.p.h.) how long does it take now, using the motorways ?
Where are there new docks for container cargoes ?
E. Government money is being used also to develop a large airport , for international and UK flights, at Manchester.
There are smaller airports at Liverpool, Blackpool and Leeds.
In this way business links are being made easier with markets in Europe and America.
3 Growth industries
A. Almost all the manufactured goods you see around you have some part or other which has been made by people in the chemical industry , or which has used chemicals in its production.
Study the diagram.
Which parts, for instance, of a car, a television, a house, are based on chemical products?
Which things in the classroom, and in a kitchen, are largely made by the chemical industry?
B. When people want to know how well the whole of British industry is doing, they use the success or failure of ICI (Imperial Chemical Industries) as a guide, since its products are used by most other firms.
This giant company has been formed by many smaller companies joining together to share their money , or capital,and their skills .
For each worker, they have invested about £20 000 in machinery, equipment and research.
Thus it is called a capital intensive industry.
And it is a growth industry because its products, such as plastics, are being used more and more to replace raw materials such as wood, steel or natural fibres.
What objects do you know which are now made of plastic but which used to be made from wood or steel?
C. In Cheshire and Merseyside the directors of ICI and Shell Oil have found all the advantages to build the main chemical industries of Britain.
(i) Salt is dissolved from the rocks beneath the Cheshire Plain.
It is pumped up from brine wells.
(ii) The Lancashire coal provides fuel from which gas is obtained for use in making acids. (iii) The port of Liverpool is used to import other raw materials for the heavy chemical industry, and recently oil, both as raw material and fuel for the petrochemical industry.
(iv) The canals made it easy to bring these materials together.
But now the infrastructure of pipelines and motorways is used more often.
(v) A local market started with the demand for soda for the glass and soap industries, and bleaching powder for the textile industry.
The market has grown to include almost all the industries of the region and also exports through the port.
Which towns with chemical industries fit each of these categories:
based on the salt field based on the coalfield
based at a port
based near to a canal?
Where are there chemical works in the region east of the Pennines?
(See I, J and L, pages 126–7.)
D. St Helens (99 000 people) is a town where the workers in the factories use some of the products of the chemical industry.
They make many different types of glass — plate glass and frosted glass for windows, safety glass for cars, plain and coloured bottles of all shapes and sizes.
About how many people in St Helens work in the glass industry?
What is similar and what is different about the jobs of people in Northwich?
Glass making prospered in St Helens when it was found that there were suitable local sands which are the main raw material.
What advantages have encouraged Pilkington and other glass makers to continue and expand their industry here?
E. Making motor vehicles — cars, lorries and buses — is largely a job of assembling many different parts together.
Body panels may come from one part of Britain, engines from another, and electrical parts, tyres and glass from others.
The modern factories are largely footloose , now that electric power comes through the grid and there is a network of motorways to transport the parts and the finished vehicles.
At Leyland, Preston and Chorley a skilled workforce has built up a reputation over many years for producing lorries and buses.
Many of these are exported world-wide.
But the managers of British Leyland (BL), Ford and Vauxhall started new car assembly works in the region between 1960 and 1970.
They wanted to have these factories in other parts of Britain but the Government persuaded them to place their new works in this region to help to reduce unemployment.
The region around Liverpool is a Special Development Area.
Recently the BL works closed and the Vauxhall output was reduced, but Ford is expanding with large Government and EEC subsidies.
What have been the reasons for unemployment in Lancashire, Merseyside and Greater Manchester?
(See H page 117, D page 122, C pages 12–5.)
How does the Government encourage managers to start industries in Special Development Areas?
(See H page 56.)
What other advantages may the managers have seen for a car assembly industry near Liverpool?
F. Some managers of other modern footloose industries, which use only small amounts of raw materials, are attracted to the region.
They like the advantages of plentiful labour, large markets and good roads.
In the region they make electrical goods, including computers in Manchester, canned, bottled and processed foods such as biscuits, cat food and sauces, including Heinz baked beans in Wigan; all manner of packaging and printing; shoes, cigarettes and furniture.
Most of these are consumer goods to be distributed to shops locally and nation-wide.
If you had to choose a place for a factory making some similar consumer goods, perhaps pop records, which city, on either side of the Pennines, do you think would be best, and why?
Use the systems diagram on page 116 as a guide.
G. Recently many older industries and some newer ones have closed in this region.
Unemployment has been considerable.
The older buildings near the centres of the major cities have been demolished.
Large Government grants are being offered to attract industries to the Enterprise Zones within Liverpool and Manchester but, with an uncertain future, most managers are being cautious over investing money for new industries in the region.
4 Moving home
A. In Lancashire, Merseyside and Greater Manchester in the last 10 years about 2 000 000 people have moved house; that is about one third of all families.
Many left the region altogether — they migrated — but, until recently, as many more newcomers have moved in.
Others have moved from the older, nineteenth century houses of the twilight zones around the centres of the towns to new estates on the edges of the towns or to other towns in the region.
Demolition firms and builders are busy changing the urban landscapes.
What reasons are there for individual people or Councils to want this movement of families within towns?
Consider repairs, room space, light, play areas and gardens, scenery and the use of motor cars.
Why are property developers replacing many of the older terraced houses in the twilight zones by much taller buildings, either for flats or offices?
B. The photographs show what changes are happening in the rurban fringes of the towns and cities.
What has happened to the farm land?
Why may farmers wish to sell the remaining farm land?
About how much more land does a family in the rurban fringe use compared with one near a city centre?
For most families who move out to the rurban fringe, what new problems do they have for going shopping or to work?
Do you approve of these changes happening all around the edges of our towns, or should something different be done?
C. In the old industrial towns on the coalfield, where textiles and mining were the main industries, there is much unemployment.
Also these towns have large areas of old nineteenth century houses which had been built cheaply to house the workers near the mills and mines.
Now people are slowly moving away from these towns.
What are the names of some of these towns?
Where else is there a steady loss of residents?
D. The map on page 119 shows how Sheffield has grown larger and larger.
Manchester and Liverpool are doing the same, as more and more houses are being built on vast estates, with   their own shopping centres and with factories which are built on industrial trading estates.
How far outwards has Sheffield grown since 1900?
Manchester and Liverpool have three zones:
(i)
where there is a loss of residents;
(ii)
where there is an increase of residents;
(iii)
where the numbers remain about even.
In what pattern, or positions, are these zones arranged?
E. Some smaller towns are growing in size as people use them as dormitories in which to live, while many commute to work in the cities.
In particular, many people have moved to the Wirral peninsula and they commute to Liverpool through the Mersey tunnel or by ferry.
What are the names of some of the older towns which are growing as dormitories?
F. Four New Towns have been growing rapidly as they attract some of the population to better housing and new jobs in their own footloose industries.
What feature has helped planners to decide where to place these New Towns?
Why is this important?
From which places do you think most of the people in the New Towns will have come?
G. Southport (90 000 people) and Blackpool (148 000 people) grew as seaside resorts when the railways were built.
They were popular with workers taking holidays from the industrial towns.
Blackpool now specialises in business conferences and both have many day trippers coming by car and coach.
Now, in Southport, about a quarter of the residents are commuters .
On the east coast,Scarborough (45 000 people) functions like Blackpool.
Smaller resorts are Whitby, Bridlington, Hornsea, Cleethorpes and Skegness.
H. Many of the older people, who have retired from work, decide to move.
They are attracted towards the sea where there is more sunshine and pleasant housing and public gardens.
Thus the mixture of people in the coastal resorts is different from that in the industrial towns.
Which age group do the New Towns attract most strongly?
Which towns will need more than the average number of (i) schools and (ii) hospitals and nursing homes?
Conurbations, water and wildscapes
A. The number of people in the larger cities has been growing rapidly during the last 50 years.
But most recently people have moved from the city centres to new houses in the suburbs, or to dormitory towns.
The result is that the townscape of houses has been spreading further outwards and now, in places, the rurban fringe of one town meets that of another.
Where towns have been joined in this way the whole built-up area is called a conurbation .
Which is the largest conurbation in this area?
Study an atlas.
Which towns have become merged to form one of the other conurbations?
B. One of the problems for the masses of people who live in conurbations is to get sufficient water.
In Greater Manchester each person, on average, uses 0.5 m&sup3; of water each day and in the factories they use as much again.
Roughly how much water (in m&sup3;) does the Water Board have to supply to this one conurbation each day?
C. The photograph shows two of the storage reservoirs in the Pennines.
These two supply about 1% of Manchester's needs.
A large number of these small dams and reservoirs have been built on the Millstone Grit rocks.
They supply many towns in the region besides Manchester (see the map of a similar area on page 114).
But to obtain enough water Manchester also uses 150 km&sup2; of wildscape in the Lake District where there is much heavier rainfall and few people.
This catchment area is around the lakes of Ullswater and Hawes Water from both of which water is piped to Manchester.
How is it that about one third of the rainfall is lost?
(See page 104.)
Where do the people of Liverpool get their ‘main water supply from?
(See page 95.)
Why is that area a suitable one to supply water to Merseyside?
D. At weekends many people want to get out of their conurbations into open countryside, or wildscape.
The Peak District National Park attracts more people than any other in Britain.
What features might repel you from a city and attract you to the countryside?
How many people live within one hour's driving time of the centre of the Peak District National Park?
How many more live within two hours’ driving time?
E. About 40 000 people live and work in the area of the Peak District National Park.
Some are farmers, gamekeepers, foresters and quarry-workers.
Some provide services in the market towns and villages, such as Bakewell, Castleton and Eyam.
About 16 000 000 visits are made each year by town and city folk who come to use the same landscape.
The members of the Peak Park Planning Board, and elsewhere other National Park planners, are trying to allow people to use National Park land for as many purposes as possible.
They want to encourage multiple land use , but some uses conflict with others.
What are the uses for land shown on the map?
About what proportion of the National Park is used for each purpose?
What main differences are there between the northern and southern parts?
How is each item of the Country Code intended to reduce conflict between locals and visitors?
How may the use of land for reservoirs sometimes help and sometimes hinder the needs of townsfolk?
Which towns use the water from the reservoirs on the River Derwent?
Country Code Guard against all risk of fire Fasten all gates Keep dogs under close control Keep to public paths across farmland Use gates and styles to cross fences, hedges and walls Leave livestock, crops and machinery alone Take your litter home Help to keep all water clean Protect wildlife, plants and trees Take special care on country roads Make no unnecessary noise Enjoy the countryside and respect its life and work
F. Limestone is quarried for use in blast furnaces and in chemical works.
In which towns nearby are there industries which may use this limestone for the purposes stated?
Why do many people want to stop further quarrying in the National Park?
Caves and gorges
A. A speleologist is a person who studies caves.
Usually this is done as a weekend hobby.
They find their underground caves, or caverns, in the areas where there is Carboniferous Limestone at the surface.
One such area is in the south of the Peak District National Park.
Where is there another large area of Carboniferous Limestone?
(See C page 103.)
B. The limestone is in hard solid blocks with clearly marked joints.
Rain water, which is a very weak acid, passes down through the joints, slowly dissolving the rocks and so making the joints wider.
Where a stream flows off the higher rocks (the Millstone Grit) on to the limestone, a large flow of water passes down the joints at that one place.
In time so much rock is dissolved that a hole is formed, called a swallow hole , and beneath it there is an underground pipe , as at Gaping Gill in Yorkshire and Eldon Hole in Derbyshire.
C. Follow Mr and Mrs Spencer on a rope ladder down one of these swallow holes and pipes and you may come to a narrow passage .
Squeeze along on your hands and knees, then wriggle flat on your stomach, and you may reach an underground cavern .
The passage and the cavern were formed where a stream of water used to flow along a bedding plane between layers of limestone.
Erosion was caused by solution of the rocks and by the mud and pebbles moving in the underground stream.
How is it that a large cavern with a high roof may be formed underground?
D. Often you will find another vertical pipe down to more caverns at a lower level.
Here the water may be flowing along the cavern floor, perhaps with a small underground lake .
This is the level of the watertable and all the joints in the rocks below are filled with water — they are saturated .
Be careful if you stay at this level for long.
The watertable may rise when there is very heavy rain, perhaps to the height of the upper passage and its cavern where the stream will flow for a short time, making that passage just a little larger.
What other reason may there be for the watertable sometimes rising rapidly?
E. On the surface hikers will find patches of limestone pavement , like that on Scales Moor or above Malham in Yorkshire.
Normally the soil in the limestone rock is thin, since most of the rock is dissolved and removed in solution rather than crumbling into fine soil particles.
But in places the bare rock is showing and the joints have been enlarged by chemical solution.
The deep joints, or cracks, are called grykes and the solid slabs of rock are called clints .
Roughly how large are the clints and how wide are the grykes?
F. Tourists flock to see the steep valleys and limestone gorges , such as Dovedale in the Peak District and Cheddar Gorge in the Mendips.
Some gorges may once have been underground caverns, the roofs of which have collapsed.
Other limestone gorges may be valleys which were cut very deep by old rivers but whose sides have remained almost vertical.
Why are the valley sides not worn back to more gentle slopes as in normal valleys?