

NOT SO LOUSY ADVICE
THE NOT SO LAZY LIFE OF LARRY & LILY
BORED, BORED, BORED!
WHAT'S UP WITH YOU LILY.
I'M FED UP LARRY I THINK I'LL GO WALKABOUT.
WELL LAY A FEW MORE RECRUITS BEFORE YE GO…
EH?
Lice don't jump.
They walk and are passed by head to head contact.
Their eggs (nits) are camouflaged and glued close to the root.
THERE'S A NICE CLEAN HEAD OF HAIR.
MM SHORT TOO.
HERE I GO WHILE I'VE GOT THE CHANCE.
I THINK I'LL JOIN YOU.
THIS ONE'S GETTING MUCH TOO CLEVER WITH THE COMB!
They love short, clean hair so don't be embarrassed to tell your school, friends and relatives.
YEH, I NEARLY LOST A LEG LAST NIGHT…
AND YOU KNOW WHAT THAT MEANS.
YOUR MATING DAYS ARE OVER.
LET'S WALK.
WELL LILY, SETTLED IN ALRIGHT?
I hope THAT SOAKING LAST NIGHT DIDN'T BOTHER YOU?
BEEN TO GRANNY AND BACK AGAIN…
LAYING ALL THE WAY.
Ordinary washing won't damage the louse but regular brushing will.
This will prevent further breeding.
HEY LARRY!
YOU SMELL SOMETHING NASTY?
OH NO IT'S THE LOTION.
QUICK.
LAY SOME EGGS OR IT'LL BE THE END OF US.
Use a LOTION.
Your Pharmacist will advise you of the CURRENT treatment.
Remember, treat all contacts to prevent spread.
THERE'S NO POINT.
WE'LL NEVER LAST OUT.
IT'S THE END LARRY.
OUR WALKING DAYS ARE OVER…
AH HA!
ONLY IF THEY TREAT GRANNY TOO!
LET'S WALK!
THE END?
IMPORTANT POINTS
1.
Don't panic.
It's easy to get rid of lice.
2.
Brush and comb the hair regularly.
It injures the lice and prevents breeding.
3.
Check the family's hair weekly for eggs close to the scalp.
4.
If discovered, treat the whole family with the CORRECT lotion at the same time.
5.
Inform friends, relatives and schools to ensure early inspection and treatment of ALL contacts.
6.
Don't be embarrassed to talk about lice.
They like living in clean hair.
SPREAD THE ADVICE NOT LICE
TREATMENT
1.
Apply lotion liberally to dry hair: Protect eyes.
2.
Pay particular attention to scalp and base of hair.
3.
Allow hair to dry without heat.
4.
Leave for 2 hours.
Shampoo normally.
Lotion is available on prescription.
It is important to use the CURRENT recommended lotion.
This is changed every 3 years to prevent the lice becoming resistant.
Shampoos are available for those with allergies and sensitive skin.
Ask your pharmacist or local Health Clinic for the CORRECT treatment for your family.
Remember to treat ALL contacts.
For general advice and information contact your GP, School Nurse or Health Visitor.
NITTY GRITTY FACTS
Lice are insects which cannot fly or hop.
They crawl from hair to hair and look rather like brown greenfly.
They shed black faeces much like grit and can cause severe itching.
ACTUAL SIZE: *
They especially like clean, short hair and lay 6–8 eggs per day which are glued to the hair.
ACTUAL SIZE:.
About a week later the eggs hatch leaving behind paler coloured shells which remain glued.
Lice themselves are best found by combing the hair with a detector comb.
The first line of defence is regular brushing and combing.
This damages the lice and prevents breeding.
The second is to treat the infection promptly when discovered.
SPREAD THE ADVICE NOT LICE
KEEP WARM…
KEEP WELL
HELPING YOU TO HELP YOURSELF
Keeping warm is a vital part of keeping yourself well this winter.
No one enjoys cold weather but for elderly people it can be uncomfortable and even dangerous.
This leaflet has been produced to help you help yourself.
It also tells you where you can get advice if you need it.
Keeping Yourself Warm — A Few Tips
Food — your body's winter fuel
The right food and drink are vitally important to keeping warm and healthy in the long winter days.
During cold weather, hot meals and plenty of hot drinks will make you feel warmer inside.
Try if possible to have:
a hot breakfast
plenty of hot drinks
at least one hot main meal each day
a hot drink before going to bed
Keeping Active
As we get older our bodies are not as good at keeping warm as they once were.
This is why it is so important to keep ‘on the move’.
Try if possible to:
keep as active as you safely can
avoid sitting down for long periods
Wrapping up warmly
Do not underestimate just how cold it can be outside.
Try to avoid going outdoors in very cold or icy weather.
If you have to go out always wear:
a cap or hat and
several layers of light clothing, rather than one layer of heavy clothing
When indoors:
try to arrange to live and sleep in the same room
avoid sitting in a draughty room
do not sleep overnight in an easy chair
always wear several layers of light clothing, rather than one layer of heavy clothing
hot water bottles are useful for keeping you warm at any time of the day or night.
An electric blanket is also useful for keeping you warm at night
Safety
put a guard on all open fires and never sit too close
do not dry wet clothes on or near to heaters
do not fill hot water bottles with water that is too hot and ensure that they are covered
follow the manufacturer's instructions on all electric blankets
never use a hot water bottle and an electric blanket together
ensure enough ventilation to keep the air fresh in rooms where heating appliances are in use
Keeping your home warm
All the heat inside your house will eventually escape to the outside, through windows, walls, ceilings, floors and so on.
But just how long it takes for the heat to flow out will depend on how well your home is insulated and draught proofed.
You can take a few simple steps to help keep your home warmer in winter time.
Try if possible to:
keep doors and windows closed, but remember to ensure enough ventilation to keep the air fresh in rooms where heating appliances are in use
close curtains earlier in the evening but do not allow them to cover radiators
How to get practical help with keeping your home warm
Throughout Northern Ireland there are energy projects which give practical help to keep your home warm.
These projects have trained staff who will install loft insulation and fit draughtproofing for people on low-income, at little or no cost.
If you are receiving income support, family credit or housing benefit, then your local energy project should be able to help you.
Project staff will help you to apply for the available grants and carry out practical work.
Simply complete the FREEPOST card accompanying this booklet, send it to Neighbourhood Energy Action, and someone will contact you.
By completing the card you can also receive advice or help with the following:
‘Your Heating in Retirement’—(a free booklet from Age Concern)
information on how to save energy in your home
information on home insulation grants
information on how to make the most of your heating system
How to get cash help with the costs of keeping your home warm
SOCIAL SECURITY
Income Support — You may be able to get income support if you are not in full-time work and are finding it difficult to manage.
For further information ask for leaflet ‘IS1 Income Support — Cash Help’ at your local social security office or Citizens Advice Bureau.
The Social Fund — You may also be able to get a loan or a grant from the social fund to help you with expenses which are difficult to meet from your regular income.
The loans and grants available are —
Budgeting Loans — these interest free loans may be able to help you with costs over £30 which are difficult to budget for on your income support, for example a new gas or electric fire.
They cannot help you with fuel bills.
Crisis Loans — these interest free loans may be made if it is the only way of avoiding serious risk to the health and safety of you or your family.
You do not have to be getting income support to apply and in exceptional circumstances they may be given for fuel costs.
Community Care Grants — are to help people, such as elderly and disabled people, lead independent lives in the community.
They do not have to be repaid and may be awarded to those leaving hospital or residential care, or to help people to continue to live in the community rather than enter such care.
To claim income support or a payment from the social fund contact your local social security office.
The address is in the phone book under ‘Government of Northern Ireland — Department of Health and Social Services’.
Cold weather payments — During periods of very cold weather, you may be able to claim an additional £5 for every very cold week.
Look out for announcements on cold weather payments and a claim form in your local paper.
For further information ask for DHSS leaflet CWP1 at your local social security office or Citizens Advice.
If you want any further information about social security benefits ring 0800 616 757.
Your call is free.
Home Insulation Grants
If you are receiving income support, family credit or housing benefit you may be able to get a grant towards the cost of insulating your house.
You may also be able to have your house draughtproofed at little or no cost.
For more information complete the card accompanying this booklet.
Home Improvement Grants
The Housing Executive can make a grant towards improving or repairing your home.
For example, you may be able to get a grant to help with putting in a hot water system if you do not have one.
Ask for details at your local Housing Executive Office.
Paying the fuel bills
Budget Schemes
Northern Ireland Electricity has a number of schemes to help you pay for your electricity more easily.
These are:
slot and token meters
weekly or monthly budget schemes
savings stamps
flexible payment schemes
Ask for details of what is available at your local electricity shop.
Disconnections
If you are finding it hard to pay your electricity bill get in touch with your local electricity shop straight away.
If you delay and then fail to pay your bill, you run the risk of having your electricity supply cut off.
Staff are available in all electricity shops to give advice to anyone in difficulty.
A code of practice has been drawn up by the fuel industries to protect you.
It states that all pensioner households should not normally be disconnected between 1st October and 31st March.
If you are likely to be disconnected contact your local electricity shop and tell them you are a pensioner.
For further information ask for a leaflet ‘Your Electricity Bill and How to Cope’ which is available free from electricity shops.
If you would like further advice on what to do, contact your Citizens Advice Bureau.
Full details of welfare benefits for elderly people are also published each April by Age Concern in ‘Your Rights’, price £1.95 — available from your local Age Concern Branch.
If you cannot get the leaflet you want you should call or write to:
About Meningitis
This leaflet has been produced by the National Meningitis Trust in association with Gloucester Health Authority.
It answers some of the questions commonly asked about meningitis.
WHAT IS MENINGITIS?
Meningitis means inflammation of the brain lining.
It can be caused by several different germs.
Some are bacteria and some are viruses.
Bacterial meningitis is quite a rare disease but it can be very serious and requires urgent treatment with antibiotics.
Viral meningitis is generally more common but less serious and cannot be helped by antibiotic treatment.
The symptoms are similar so hospital tests may be needed to tell the difference between bacterial and viral meningitis.
If you are concerned, seek medical advice.
HOW SERIOUS IS IT?
If bacterial meningitis is diagnosed early and treated promptly, most people make a complete recovery.
However, in some cases it can be fatal, or may lead to permanent handicap such as deafness or brain damage.
(A leaflet is available from the National Meningitis Trust which explains the after-effects of the disease, and lists other sources of help and advice.)
Over the last few years there has been an increase throughout the UK in cases of bacterial meningitis, though it is still relatively rare.
There are three main forms: meningococcal, pneumococcal and Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib).
HOW CAN YOU TELL IF SOMEONE HAS MENINGITIS?
Someone with meningitis will become very ill.
The illness may progress over one or two days, but it can develop very rapidly, sometimes in a matter of hours.
The signs and symptoms are shown below.
Not all these symptoms may show at once.
Headache
Fever
Vomiting
Neck stiffness, joint pains
Drowsiness or confusion — coma
Dislike of bright lights
Rash of red-purple spots or bruises
WHAT SHOULD YOU LOOK FOR IN BABIES?
Fever
Refusing feeds or vomiting
Fretfulness
Child is difficult to wake
High-pitched/moaning cry
Pale or blotchy skin
Rash of red-purple spots or bruises
In both children and adults there may be a rash of tiny red-purple spots or bruises caused by bleeding under the skin.
It can occur anywhere on the body.
It is due to blood poisoning (septicaemia) which sometimes goes with meningitis, particularly the meningococcal strain.
WHAT SHOULD YOU DO IF YOU THINK IF MIGHT BE MENINGITIS?
Call your GP immediately.
Explain why you are concerned, describing the patient's symptoms carefully, and ask for advice.
If your GP is not available, go straight to the nearest casualty department.
Be prepared to insist: if it is bacterial meningitis early treatment with antibiotics is vital.
HOW IS BACTERIAL MENINGITIS SPREAD?
The germs that cause bacterial meningitis are very common and live naturally in the back of the nose and throat.
They spread between people by coughing, sneezing and kissing but they cannot live for more than a few seconds outside the body.
Therefore they cannot be picked up from water supplied, swimming pools, buildings or factories.
The incubation period is between 2 and 10 days.
People of any age can carry the germs for days, weeks or months without becoming ill.
In fact being a carrier helps to boost natural immunity.
Only on rare occasions do the bacteria overcome the body's defences and cause meningitis.
IS THERE A VACCINE?
There is as yet no vaccine to protect against all strains of meningitis.
Research continues in the UK and abroad to develop vaccines against the most common strains and to find better ways of controlling the disease.
There is a vaccine against the A and C strains meningococcal meningitis.
these forms are less common than the B strain in the UK, but have been the cause of epidemics in other areas such as Sub-Saharan Africa.
If someone becomes ill with the A or C strain, household contacts of the patient should be offered this vaccine.
Vaccines against Haemophilus influenzae meningitis are used in some countries and are currently undergoing extensive trials in the UK.
Vaccines against pneumococcal meningitis are recommended for those at particularly high risk, for example people with sickle cell disease or whose spleen has been removed.
THERE HAS BEEN A CASE OF MENINGITIS IN MY COMMUNITY.
CAN ANYTHING BE DONE TO PREVENT SOMEONE ELSE GETTING IT?
No, apart from vaccines there is no known way to protect against meningitis.
However, only very close family contacts of the patient are at an increased risk of contracting the disease.
With meningococcal meningitis and sometimes with Haemophilus influenzae, antibiotics are offered to these close contacts.
They reduce, but cannot eliminate, the risk of family members also becoming ill.
Other contacts such as schoolfriends and workmates are only very rarely at higher risk and do not normally need special treatment or investigation.
Stopping smoking helps your own and your children's health, and research has indicated that it may reduce the chances of getting meningitis in your family.
IS THERE ANYTHING I CAN DO?
Yes!
The National Meningitis Trust needs your help.
We are a charity entirely funded by voluntary donations.
We are fighting meningitis by raising money for medical research, distributing free information, and offering support to sufferers.
If you can help us, in whatever way, please contact us at the address overleaf.
TOGETHER WE CAN CONQUER MENINGITIS
This leaflet was produced by the National Meningitis Trust.
The Trust is a charity which:
raises money for medical research
provides free information about meningitis
supports sufferers and their families
Can Cosmetic Surgery Help You?
Can cosmetic surgery help you?
Your surgeon's consultation can now include — on screen — a strong indication of what improvement surgery could do for you, personally.
Our revolutionary new imaging system automatically puts you on screen.
Working with you, in confidence, the surgeon can show you what improvements could be made.
It does not replace your comprehensive consultation with a caring and highly experienced surgeon.
Nothing can.
But it could do your confidence the world of good.
For your free colour brochure please telephone or send the coupon, today.
SAINSBURY'S
living TODAY
Food Labelling
New guidelines on nutrition labelling
What must the food label tell you?
packing in the information
Food packets are becoming more and more crowded with facts and figures about the contents.
Some shoppers welcome this.
Others find it very confusing.
But, with a little guidance, it's possible to get quite a lot of information about the contents and the nutritional value of the food inside.
Before the 1940s, most food law was concerned with ensuring that people were not given short measure or food that was adulterated.
In the 19th century, milk was frequently diluted with water, brick dust was added to chocolate and white bread made whiter by the addition of dangerous alum.
Comprehensive food labelling is a fairly recent phenomenon.
One of the first major pieces of legislation controlling what information went on packets was passed as recently as 1953.
It was an extension of the war-time requirement to give people details of ingredients, who the producer was and proper descriptions of foods.
But even the 1953 laws were not very detailed.
They didn't have to be.
At that time most food was bought loose and as readily-identifiable ingredients from which recipe dishes were made at home.
Only when a significant amount of food preparation moved from the home to food factories and when people became considerably more interested in what they were eating in the 1960s was there pressure to have more informative labels.
These changes, and the need for Britain to conform with EC legislation, gave rise to ever more comprehensive labelling regulations.
Bare essentials
Although food labelling law is now very complex, the gist of it may be summarised fairly simply.
The labels on most pre-packed food must tell you:
the name of the food
its weight or volume
the ingredients that have been used to make it — if there is more than one
the maximum length of time for which you should store it — and the conditions of storage
how to prepare or cook it
the name and address of the manufacturer or packer or EC seller
sometimes, the country or place of origin has to be stated, too
for alcoholic drinks with more than 1.2% alcohol, the alcoholic strength by volume
Once the statutory information has been given, a food producer may print almost anything he likes provided, of course, it's true!
Over the past 20 years, more and more food producers and retailers have included nutrition information on the food label, although there is no legal requirement for them to do so.
You'll find more information about nutrition labelling on pages 6 and 7.
What's in a name?
If you buy a food labelled ‘wholemeal bread’, ‘beef stew and dumpling’ or ‘fish fingers’you've a pretty good idea what's inside.
These names are either prescribed by law (wholemeal bread) or clearly descriptive (beef stew and dumpling) or, in the case of fish fingers, the name has been used for so long that everyone knows what they are.
Not too many people would argue that ‘fish fingers’ is misleading because fish don't have fingers!
This is one of the ‘customary’ names which may be used.
Some food names are less illuminating.
For example, would you know what ‘Soufflé Napolitana’ is?
It could be sweet or savoury and could contain almost any ingredient.
If names such as this are used, they must be accompanied by a suitable description.
In this case, ‘cheese soufflé with spaghetti and tomato filling’ would be suitable.
In legal terms, this is an ‘indication of the true nature of the food’.
A taste of mistaken identity
Some food names tell you quite a lot about what's in the food, provided you know a lot about food law!
Did you know, for example, that there is a difference between raspberry flavoured yogurt and raspberry flavour yogurt?
If a product is described as ‘raspberry’ or ‘raspberry flavoured’most or all of the raspberry taste must come from real raspberries.
But a ‘raspberry flavour’ food need never have been within sniffing distance of a raspberry.
Its raspberry taste may be derived from a suitable combination of flavourings added to the food.
A report on food labelling and advertising published by the Food Advisory Committee in 1990 drew attention to the confusing nature of this part of the legislation.
It suggested that the word ‘flavour’ should not be permitted and that ‘taste’might be less confusing.
The recommendation may be incorporated into food law eventually, but at the moment it pays to be aware of the difference between ‘flavoured’ and ‘flavour’.
In the 1950s few foods were sold pre-packed and those that were carried very little information about the contents.
Now, the range of pre-packed foods available is huge and most labels give a lot of information about the contents.
weighing up the evidence
Rapid production in modern food factories usually means that food has to be weighted into packets, cans and jars automatically.
Automatic weighing machines are very accurate and sample packs are taken regularly and weighed as a check.
But no machine can be guaranteed to dispense, say, 200g of stew into every single packet.
Some will contain more and some less.
So, what should the label declare as the weight of the contents?
Until the late 1970s, manufacturers had to print the minimum weight or volume likely to be present.
This meant that nearly all packs would contain more than the declared weight.
Now, for most foods, legislation allows the average weight to be stated.
But that's not such a bad deal for customers because the law doesn't allow any pack to be underweight by more than a small amount.
In addition to the weight or volume, many labels have a letter e printed close by.
There are several reasons why this may be present, but the main one is that it ‘guarantees’ that the manufacturer has conformed with EC weight regulations and it enables foods to move easily between EC countries without having to go through lengthy weight checks in the importing country.
What's it made of?
Some people need to know what's in food for health reasons.
Coeliacs, for example, have to avoid wheat, rye, oats and barley.
Others are just interested to know what they are eating.
Because of this growing interest, current food labelling regulations require nearly all foods composed of more than one ingredient to carry a list of ingredients.
These must be listed in descending order of weight.
In other words, if a manufacturer makes pastry by using more flour than any other ingredient, ‘flour’ appears first in the list of ingredients.
If added water constitutes more than 5% of total product weight, that, too, must be included in the appropriate place in the list of ingredients.
Often you won't know how much of any ingredient is present.
But on many meat and spreadable fish products manufacturers have to declare the amount of meat or fish as a percentage of the total product weight.
It is likely that, in the near future, the requirement to state the percentage of ‘the characterising ingredient’ will be extended to other foods.
Special emphasis
If the label draws special attention to one particular ingredient, the minimum amount of that ingredient must be shown, usually in the list of ingredients.
For example, if an apple pie pack states, ‘Now with even more apple’, the percentage of apple must be shown.
Weight fixing
Most foods may be packed in any weight the food producer chooses.
But some have to be sold in specified amounts.
For example, bread loaves have to be either less than 300g (in which case a weight does not have to be declared) or multiples of 400g) when the weight does have to be shown).
Milk must be packed in one of the following volumes: 200ml, 250ml, 500ml, 750ml, 1 litre, 2 litre and then in multiples of 500ml; one-third of a pint, or any multiple of ½ pint.
Tea, biscuits and butter are other foods for which there are specified weights.
Because so many different weights may be used, it is sometimes difficult to compare product prices.
For this reason, Sainsbury's has shelf markers showing the price per standard weight.
So, for example, if a tea is packed in two different weights, the price per 100g is shown in each case.
What the eye doesn't see…
If a manufacturer buys in pepperoni to use as part of the topping for this pizza, he does not have to list the ingredients in that pepperoni as long as the pepperoni constitutes less than 25% of the weight of the total pizza.
But any additives in the pepperoni do have to be declared.
However, there are some products where small amounts of additives may be present in foods but, quite legally, not declared in the list of ingredients.
If an additive is present in one of the ingredients but serves no real function in the final product, it need not be declared.
So, for example, a preservative may be used in fruit which is used to make jam.
If the amount of preservatives in the final jam is very low — too low to have any preservative effect on the product — jam, it need not be included in the ingredients list.
For most people, this omission doesn't matter, but it could be important for some who are very sensitive to certain additives.
The only solution for them is to seek information from the manufacturer or retailer.
Keeping date with freshness
Being sure they are buying fresh food is important to most people.
That's why most foods now are datemarked.
The majority of foods carry a ‘best before’ date but some short-life foods which are microbiologically highly perishable are marked with a ‘use by’date.
For more information about food storage, see Living Today leaflet ‘Keeping Food Safe’.
knowing what's good for you!
Many people know they should be cutting down on fat and eating more fibre.
And, despite a thousand excuses, most know that the only sure way to lose excess weight is to eat fewer calories.
That's the easy part.
The difficult bit is knowing how to achieve those goals.
Some people just want to be told what to eat.
Others want to know which foods are low in fat and which are good for fibre so that they can select their own meals.
Many are highly adept at adding up their calorie intake.
And some like to keep a check on fat or other nutrients.
Just how much nutrition information should be put on a food label is a much-debated subject and different manufacturers have different views.
Up until now there has been no uniformity of presentation of nutrition information; a manufacturer has been free to give what information he wants in the way he chooses to express it.
Now, the EC has produced a Directive which will mean that, if nutrition information is given, it is presented in a standard way on all food labels.
There is no legal requirement to give nutrition information unless a manufacturer makes a claim about some nutritional aspect of a food.
But many Sainsbury's products will carry nutrition information — even though no special nutrition claim is made for them.
Sainsbury's has just begun introducing products with the new format for presenting nutrition information, this change must be completed by October 1993.
According to the EC Directive, when nutrition information is given, it must be given in one of two ways:
(This is the form that will be used on Sainsbury's packs if there is not enough room for the ‘extended’(Group 2) list.)
If a manufacturer wishes to give even more nutrition information, he must state all the nutrients in Group 2 and as many of the following as he chooses polyols (such as sorbitol) and starch, monounsaturates, polyunsaturates and cholesterol, minerals such as iron and calcium, any vitamin(s).
All this information must be based on the amount of energy or nutrients in 100g or 100ml of food either ‘as sold’ or after preparation eg. in the case of a cake mix after adding egg/water and baking.
In addition, it is permissible to give the amounts of nutrients in a stated portion or serving of the food.
How high is high?
At first glance, seeing that a food is ‘high in fibre’ is easy to understand.
But what does it really mean?
All the descriptions used on Sainsbury's packs have specific meanings.
Nutrition highlights — The Sainsbury's System
As well as giving nutrition information in a form which complies with the EC Directive, Sainsbury's has devised a simple way of highlighting some of the more important attributes of its own label products.
From now, on the front of some foods you'll begin to see a blue triangle containing a statement such as‘high fibre’ or ‘reduced calorie’or ‘reduced fat’.
This is intended to draw your attention to an important piece of nutrition information about the product.
In addition if ‘comparative’ statements are made such as‘reduced calorie’the pack also gives you information about the calorie content of the standard food so that you can see by how much the calories are reduced.
Usually in the bottom right corner there is a ‘ladder’ of information including pack weight, storage instructions and some nutrition information eg. ‘high in polyunsaturates’, ‘naturally low in fat’, ‘no added sugar’or rich in a particular vitamin.
Putting information to good use
If all this sounds a bit complicated, it may help to start using just a small amount of the nutrition information.
If you need to lose weight, look at the energy information.
If you are, like most people, not very active, restrict energy intake to about 1100kcal a day if you're a woman, 1400kcal for a man.
If you are especially concerned about cutting fat intake but don't need to lose weight, you should look at the figures for fat and aim to eat no more than 93g a day (for a man) and 70g a day (for a woman).
If you are physically active at work or in leisure time, you can eat slightly more fat.
Many people need to increase the amount of fibre they eat.
A good average intake is about 20g per day.
Sodium is part of salt (sodium chloride).
There is no doubt that most people in Britain eat far more than they need, and probably more than is good for them.
If you think you are eating too much salt, the first thing to do is to go easy on the amount you sprinkle on food and use in cooking.
After that, go easy on salty foods such as crisps, bacon, cheese and salted nuts.
A reasonable sodium intake to aim at is 1.6g (or less) a day for an adult.
Description
Criteria
High Fibre
at least 5g fibre/100g food
Reduced Fat
less than 75% of the fat in standard equivalent food — some products have only half the fat.
High in Polyunsaturates
at least 35% of the food must be fat and at least 45% of that fat must be polyunsaturates
Low in Saturates
at least 35% of the food must be fat and no more than 25% of the fat may be saturates
Rich in (a vitamin or mineral)
amount of the food likely to be eaten in a day must contain at least half the recommended daily intake
On larger packets there is information about why we need certain nutrients
Where space permits, Sainsbury's nutrition labels include information on energy, protein, carbohydrate and sugars, fat and saturates, fibre and sodium.
In most cases this is set out in tabular form.
On small packs with more limited space the information may be set out in linear form.
Information per 100g or 100 ml of product enables you to compare, for example, the fat content of two products.
Where vitamins and minerals are shown, the proportion of the Recommended Daily Allowance supplied by 100g or 100ml or by a serving of the food is shown.
Each pack must also show the number of servings it contains.
Good healthy food costs less at SAINSBURY'S
SAINSBURY'S LIVING TODAY
THE ENVIRONMENT
ENERGY EFFICIENCY
THE MOST EFFECTIVE MEANS OF COMBATING THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT
CLIMATE OF CHANGE
The Earth's atmosphere is getting warmer.
That's the overwhelming consensus of the majority of the world's experts who study the climate.
Some refer to this change in the climate as global warming, others as the greenhouse effect.
Either way, it represents the greatest environmental threat the world now faces.
As yet, it is not possible to predict exactly what the impact on the UK will be.
Some people are looking forward to less harsh winters and longer, hotter summers.
But there may also be more extremes in the weather such as severe storms, droughts and floods.
And for the Earth as a whole, it's certainly not good news.
It could mean permanent coastal flooding in some countries and widespread famine in others.
WHY IS THE CLIMATE GETTING WARMER?
Energy from the sun arrives on the Earth as short wave radiation, some of which is absorbed to warm the air, land and sea.
But much of it is reflected back off the Earth's surface — at a different wavelength — not as short wave, but as long wave radiation.
A layer of gases, including those which are known as the greenhouse gases, surrounds the Earth.
It allows the short wave radiation to pass through but traps some of the long wave radiation, just as a greenhouse does.
Without the greenhouse effect warming the environment there would be no life on Earth.
But the more these greenhouse gases build up in the atmosphere, the more heat is trapped and the more the Earth warms.
Quite simply, we have now arrived at a stage where too much heat is being trapped.
THE CHALLENGE
It's all too easy to think that whatever we do here in Britain can't possibly have any effect on people in countries thousands of miles away.
But it does, and the remedy lies partly in the hands of each one of us as well as in the hands of governments and large industries throughout the world.
You'll find some ideas on page 5 about what you can do.
HOW THE GREENHOUSE WORKS
The sun's short wave radiation can penetrate even large amounts of CO&sub2; and CFCs in the troposphere — the part of the atmosphere nearest the Earth.
These rays are reflected from the Earth as long wave ‘heat’ radiation, much of which is trapped by the carbon dioxide and CFCs.
So the climate gets warmer.
SMALL CHANGES, BIG DIFFERENCES
The average temperature of the Earth has risen by 0.5°C since the beginning of this century.
And it is predicted by the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change that, if things go on as they are today, average temperatures will increase by a further 1°C by 2025 and 3°C by the end of the next century.
It may not sound very dramatic.
After all, a change in temperature from 15°C to 20°C from one day to the next is nothing to get too excited about.
But, in terms of global averages, such changes in temperature are highly significant, and are at least 100 times more than would be occurring naturally.
ICE CAPS AND DUST BOWLS
Averages can, of course, conceal enormous variations in what is happening.
The worst fear is that temperatures will rise most dramatically a t the poles, with a very real possibility that the huge ice caps at the North and South Poles wills tart breaking up and melting.
They would produce more water so the oceans would get fuller.
Unless expensive sea defences were built, low-lying coastal regions would be permanently submerged.
Estimates are that sea levels could rise by as much as 1.65m (4½feet) by the middle of the next century.
Another consequence may be that wet countries will have more rain and already dry countries will have less.
The already hot, dry countries of the world tend to be the ones with poor crop production and troubled economies.
Several of them already suffer from frequent famines.
The consequences of global warming for them could be very serious indeed.
GREENHOUSE GASES
There are several greenhouse gases.
The most important ones are carbon dioxide, methane, CFCs and low-level ozone.
Carbon Dioxide
An increase in the amount of carbon dioxide is responsible for about half the total warming.
Most of that carbon dioxide has come from burning fossil fuels (coal, gas and oil).
Fossil fuels are made largely of carbon.
When they are burned, their carbon combines with oxygen from the atmosphere to form carbon dioxide gas.
As more and more nations have become industrialised, their need for energy to run machines and cars, and to heat homes has increased.
So more and more coal, gas and oil are burned producing more carbon dioxide.
The amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has gone up by 25% over the past 150 years.
Again, that may not sound much but it's more than enough to disrupt the delicate balance of different gases.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
A great deal of publicity has been given to CFCs, not just because they are destroying the stratospheric ozone layer but because many are extremely powerful heat trappers as well.
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) have two major uses — as coolants in fridges and freezers and as foam-blowing agents.
(CFCs used to be used in aerosols but, because of pressure from consumers and environmentalists, few aerosols in Britain now employ CFCs.)
Less-damaging coolants than CFCs are being developed, and an international agreement signed in June 1990 will ensure that all CFCs are progressively phased out over the next few years.
Low Level Ozone
The layer of gases near the Earth contains ozone — another greenhouse gas.
It comes from the action of sunlight on vehicle exhaust gases.
Methane
Less publicity has been given to this gas than to carbon dioxide.
And what publicity there has been has revolved around the fact that methane is generated in the guts of ruminants, such as cows, and then belched into the atmosphere!
But, in fact, most methane comes from the action of bacteria on organic waste in swamps, rice paddy fields and refuse tips.
FEWER TREES REMOVE LESS CARBON DIOXIDE
Green plants and trees need to take in carbon dioxide (in a process called ‘photosynthesis’) so that they can manufacture carbohydrates and other materials.
And they produce oxygen which animals need to breathe, and which helps to replace that lost by burning fossil fuels.
One way of absorbing the extra carbon dioxide would be to plant more trees.
Sadly, the reverse is happening.
Trees are being cut down at such a rate that the total forest cover of the Earth is decreasing rather than increasing.
The burning of vast areas of rainforest, particularly in Brazil, is of particular concern.
WHAT IS THE SOLUTION?
Total world production of greenhouse gases, especially carbon dioxide, needs to be reduced dramatically.
It has been estimated that, just to prevent any further warming of the Earth's atmosphere, we need to reduce carbon dioxide production — by 50% according to Government estimates and by 80% according to environmental organisations.
A major effort needs to be made to generate and to use energy more efficiently.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
Insulate and draught-proof your home and lag your hot water cylinder — you'll save on heating costs, too.
Reduce thermostat settings on central heating.
A 1°C reduction will save nearly 8% in cost and energy too.
Save newspapers, glass and metal for recycling.
Use public transport more or walk or cycle whenever possible.
Support tree planting schemes, the development of wind power and other renewable sources of energy.
Buy CFC-free aerosols or alternatives to aerosols.
WHAT IS SAINSBURY'S DOING?
Energy savings of 40% are being achieved in new stores.
Computers are used to control the environment and optimise energy consumption in all stores built since 1984.
Lighting is now more energy efficient and the heat that it produces can be used to heat stores in winter.
Heat extracted from refrigeration plant is used to warm stores and water, so no new Sainsbury's supermarket needs a boiler.
Refrigerated display cabinets are micro-processor controlled to ensure that they run at exactly the correct temperature — cold enough to preserve food properly, not so cold that they waste energy.
Recycling facilities are provided in conjunction with Local Council schemes wherever possible.
Many stores sell recycled paper and plastic products.
No aerosols containing CFCs are sold.
Vehicles use main roads and deliver at night to ease congestion and to save fuel.
WHY IS THE OZONE LAYER IMPORTANT?
WHAT IS THE OZONE LAYER?
Ozone is an oxygen-based gas, most of which is found about 20–30km above the Earth's surface in the zone known as the ‘stratosphere’.
Here it performs a crucial function.
It acts as a barrier against ultra-violet (UV) rays from the sun.
Some of these ultraviolet rays (UVB) are extremely dangerous to human beings.
They increase the risk of skin cancer and cause eye damage.
They are also a severe threat to other species, particularly marine organisms.
Without the Ozone Layer, life on Earth would be quite different.
For a start, we wouldn't be here!
An intact Ozone Layer prevents about 99% of the sun's UV rays from reaching the Earth.
If, for any reason, the stratospheric Ozone Layer becomes thin, its effectiveness as a barrier to UV rays decreases.
And that's exactly what's happening today.
It's important not to get confused between ozone up there in the stratosphere, and ozone down here at ground level.
Although it is the same gas, the two ‘ozones’ behave differently.
High-level ozone is a life saver because it screens out the UVB; but low-level ozone is a serious pollutant, causing respiratory and other health problems for many people.
‘Ozone smogs’ have become a regular feature of the hot and sunny summers we've been having recently.
Ozone is also a greenhouse gas (see page 4).
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION ESSENTIAL
Britain and several other Western countries are making good progress in curbing CFC usage.
But, as developing countries such as China and India become wealthier, more and more homes there are being equipped with fridges and freezers.
It is essential that these countries, too, adopt policies that will help to protect the Ozone Layer.
In June 1990, 70 nations signed an agreement — the Montreal Protocol — agreeing to phase out the use of all CFCs.
Both China and India were signatories, but only on condition that they received substantial assistance from the West (both financial and technological) to ensure that they were not penalized economically for having to use the more expensive alternatives to CFCs.
HOW CFCs DAMAGE THE OZONE LAYER
a) Only a small proportion of the sun's UV rays can penetrate the ozone layer in the stratosphere. b) Some CFCs destroy ozone making a hole and also thinning the ozone layer so large amounts of UV radiation can get through to the Earth.
The UVB component may cause an increase in the incidence of skin cancer.
WHY IS THE OZONE LAYER BEING DESTROYED?
In the early 1960s, scientists began to predict that ozone would be destroyed by the presence of chlorine-based gases in the atmosphere.
They were laughed at then, but we now know that they were correct.
Today there is general agreement that ozone is destroyed by chlorine.
Most of that chlorine gets up into the atmosphere because of our activities, particularly our use of CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons), and other chlorine-based gases.
Sunlight causes these gases to break down, which releases the chlorine.
This chlorine, in turn, reacts with the ozone.
The only answer is to stop putting these CFCs into the atmosphere.
REFRIGERATION PROBLEM
CFCs have two major uses: as foam-blowing agents in plastics used for insulation and as refrigerants.
The use of CFCs as propellants in aerosols has now largely been eliminated, but the other two uses remain a problem.
Using CFCs in refrigeration units doesn't become a problem (apart from the leakage from breakdown or badly-maintained units) until the units are redundant.
Then the CFCs may be released into the atmosphere.
It's possible, but expensive, to recycle them, and it's not that easy for ordinary consumers to organise.
However, it is possible for large companies to arrange to recycle coolants.
The long-term solution is to find alternative coolants, but that is proving difficult.
So far, compounds with less chlorine have been developed for use in commercial and domestic refrigeration units.
It's a help, but not a complete solution to the problem because  once chlorine has been released in the stratosphere, it persists for many years and goes on destroying ozone.
We need to find refrigerants that are completely free from chlorine and do not cause other environmental problems such as contributing to global warming.
SOLVING THE PROBLEM
Like so many environmental issues, reducing the usage of CFCs to protect the Ozone Layer must involve every country in the world.
Equally, it must involve every individual, as well as industries and governments, in each of those countries.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
Buy aerosols with non-CFC propellants or, better still, use pump-action sprays or roll-on stick deodorants.
WHAT IS SAINSBURY'S DOING?
Sainsbury's was the first retailer to eliminate CFCs from its own brand aerosols.
Now, no CFC-containing aerosol is sold in any of its stores.
New refrigeration and air conditioning plants utilise HCFC22 refrigerant which has only 5% of the ozone depleting potential of other commonly-used CFCs.
As chlorine-free alternatives become commercially available they will be used in appropriate units.
Insulation in new stores no longer uses CFCs.
All insulation in new cold stores and display cabinets is CFC-free.
Sainsbury's pioneered a scheme to recycle CFC coolants from redundant refrigeration units.
ORGANIC FOODS — SHOULD YOU BUY THEM?
WHAT DOES ORGANIC MEAN?
‘When I use a word’, Humpty Dumpty said, ‘…it means just what I choose it to mean, neither more nor less’(Lewis Carroll — Alice Through the Looking Glass).
That's pretty much the way a lot of people now talk about ‘organic’ products or wine.
It's a fashionable phrase, but often people have no clear idea what the word really means.
To the chemist, ‘organic’ refers to the thousands of compounds based on the carbon atom.
In that sense, carbohydrates, proteins, fats and alcohol are all organic compounds.
Present day popular usage is not so precise.
Because there is no authoritative definition of organic farming, the European Commission is seeking to harmonise definitions and control over organic food production.
The Soil Association and the UK Register of Organic Food Standards (UKROFS) are the best known organisations covering organic produce int his country.
They have drawn up lists of criteria that producers must meet before they, or retailers, can display the Soil Association or UKROFS symbol.
In essence, organic production systems are designed to produce food using management practices which avoid the use of agrochemicals and which minimise damage to the environment and to wildlife.
Organic farmers build up natural soil fertility by crop rotation — not growing the same crop on any land two years running — and by using farmyard manure and natural composts.
BETTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT…
AND YOU
Some chemicals which are specifically designed to kill crop pests may also be dangerous to other animals.
Just how dangerous they are depends on the particular chemical and how much is  used.
Very small amounts can be dealt with by the body causing no long term harm.
However, the objective must be to reduce the intake of all pesticides to the absolute minimum.
Years ago, pests were controlled naturally, by one animal species feeding off another — the ‘pest’— or by plants developing their own disease resistance.
As agriculture became more intensive, with larger amounts of the same crop grown on the same land year after year, farmers came to rely more and more on chemical pesticides.
But in many cases, these chemicals also affected the pest's natural predators, making life easier for the pest rather than harder!
And many pests have developed resistance to the most commonly used pesticides.
It is these concerns which have encouraged a move back towards biological or organic methods of pest control.
For instance, the re-introduction of natural predators to feed off the ‘pest’.
MORE THAN FRUIT AND VEGETABLES
The movement towards organic production has not been confined to fruit and vegetables.
Organic beef and lamb, milk, yogurt and cheese are available.
So are cereals, teas and coffee.
The number of wines produced using traditional cultivation methods is increasing and standards governing these are being introduced in several countries.
Research in Britain is finding ways of getting good crop yields without the need for high levels of nitrate fertiliser
APPEARANCE
Pesticides are often used to make produce look better by reducing blemishes and rots and the damage done by pests.
The consumer must accept that, with organic systems, some fruits and vegetables will not look perfect and they will continue to be more expensive because organic farming is more labour intensive and the land usually produces lower yields than conventionally farmed land.
NUTRITIONAL VALUE
There is no evidence that the nutritional value of organically grown produce is any higher or any lower than that of the conventionally grown equivalent food.
While there is no evidence that conventionally grown fruit and vegetables produced under approved conditions are harmful, some people feel happier to subscribe to the organic philosophy, and many people say they prefer the flavour of organic food to that of conventionally grown food.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
Choose to buy fruits and vegetables which are organically grown — the ones which carry, for example, the Soil Association's symbol, or a statement that they are grown and packed under UKROFS standards.
It is always prudent to wash any foodstuffs before cooking or eating them and to wash your hands to reduce the amount of residues adhering to the skin.
Discard the outer leaves of vegetables such as cabbage and lettuce.
IF YOU ARE A KEEN GARDENER, THERE ARE OTHER THINGS YOU CAN DO
Have a compost heap of suitable garden and kitchen waste to return organic matter to the soil
Keep weeds down by hoeing and mulching.
Use weed killers very selectively, for spot rather than general treatment.
If you need to use chemicals to kill a really troublesome pest, choose one which kills only that pest and does not harm bees etc.
Encourage wildlife in the garden, e.g. birds and frogs to eat insect pests or hedgehogs to eat slugs.
Rotate crops and use green manures, ie leafy crops which can be dug back into the soil.
WHAT IS SAINSBURY'S DOING?
An increasingly wide range of organically grown fruits and vegetables which carry the Soil Association or UKROFS symbol is being stocked.
Samples of all fruits and vegetables are tested for pesticide residues.
Sainsbury's works with suppliers to find ways of reducing the use of pesticides to a minimum.
Biological methods of pest control are encouraged and are gaining widespread usage, particularly with glasshouse crops.
Potatoes stored for sale out of season are normally sprayed after harvest to delay sprouting and breakdown.
Sainsbury's is experimenting with ways of storing fruit and vegetables which eliminate the need for such treatment.
Organically grown produce is packaged so that it can be identified and so that it may be distinguished from other produce.
But packaging is kept to a minimum.
RECYCLING PACKAGING CAN HELP SAVE MANY OF THE EARTH'S INCREASINGLY SCARCE RESOURCES
Every household in the UK produces, on average, almost 1 tonne of refuse every year.
Sixty per cent is collected from people's homes, the rest is taken to a Civic Amenity Site (‘the Tip’), or removed by special collection.
Put another way, every week, the dustmen collect 12kg (261lb) of waste from each house.
At present 90% of this is simply put into holes in the ground, landfill sties, and covered over.
10% of household waste (by weight) is newspapers and magazines.
Another third is packaging from the products we buy.
Nearly 20% is organic matter such as waste food.
While the weight of the waste we all throw away has been going down slightly over the last twenty years,(because things like glass, plastic bottles and cans have become thinner), the volume of waste has been rising.
This causes problems in finding enough suitable landfill sites.
But much of what we throw away can be recycled and used again.
THE VALUE OF RECYCLING
Using things again makes sense for several reasons.
For a start it reduces the volume of waste which goes into landfill sites and it also helps to make better use of the Earth's natural resources.
Even more importantly, it can achieve dramatic reductions in the amount of energy used.
Using less energy — either as heat or electricity — means that less coal, oil or gas has to be burned, and that means less carbon dioxide — a major greenhouse gas — is produced.
WHAT CAN BE RECYCLED?
Glass
We are all getting used to seeing bottle banks in our towns and at supermarkets.
Glass bottles and jars can be recycled very easily, provided the three colours are kept separate.
Recycled glass is called ‘cullet’ and for every tonne of cullet used in making new glass, 29 gallons of fuel oil and 1.2 tonnes of raw materials are saved.
Cullet can be used over and over again to make new products.
Aluminium Cans
Huge savings of energy are made through recycling aluminium cans.
To make an aluminium can from recycled material uses only 5% of the energy required to make a ‘new’ can.
In other words, 20 recycled cans use the same energy as just 1 ‘new’ can.
As with glass, aluminium can be recycled over and over again.
Steel Cans
Steel or (as they are still called)‘tin’ cans account for about 10 billion of the 14 billion cans used in the UK every year.
Of these, nearly 10% are already recycled.
Steel is magnetic, so it can be recovered very easily from Council incinerators and returned for recycling.
We can also return any cans through the ‘Save-a-Can’ can banks which are becoming increasingly common.
Plastics
Many people think that plastic cannot be recycled.
This is not true.
For plastics to be recycled into worthwhile items, they must be separated out into the different types.
For instance, the PVC which is used in fruit squash bottles may be turned into drains and sewers.
Making these uses less energy, and they last longer than the cast iron drains and sewers they replace.
Fizzy drink bottles made of PET may be turned into fibre-fill for coats and duvets, while detergent bottles are now being re-used to make new non-food bottles.
Even plastic films and carrier bags can be re-used.
Many experiments are now taking place to re-use plastics.
Paper
Just as there are different types of plastic, so there are different types of paper.
Some types are more valuable than others.
Computer and office paper, for instance, is in demand and may be recycled into a lower quality, but still very good product.
Lower grade paper is presently in surplus and as yet there is not the mill capacity to deal with it all.
Already over 50% of the paper we produce in the UK is recycled.
But, unfortunately, we are also importing a great deal of paper so we produce more waste than we can cope with.
New mills which will use recycled paper are being built.
In the meantime it is worthwhile continuing to take newspapers and magazines to the paper banks which are close to us.
Energy for Waste
Ten per cent of domestic waste is currently being burned.
There is considerable controversy about the process of incineration, largely because, if incinerators are not working at the most efficient temperatures, the emissions may include small amounts of dioxins, a group of compounds containing some of the most dangerous pollutants.
European Community regulations for new incinerators are very much stricter.
They will increase incineration temperatures and so reduce emissions.
In fact, incineration can make sense if the energy generated is used to heat homes; less power will be needed from power stations, which means that less carbon dioxide will be released into the atmosphere.
THE FUTURE
Collecting waste is the responsibility of Local Councils and we pay for this through our taxes.
Some Local Councils are now beginning to recycle waste or positioning containers for recyclable materials in supermarket car parks and elsewhere.
A few Local Authorities are experimenting with new types of recycling schemes to encourage a greater reduction in the amount of refuse put into landfills.
These schemes involve the use of more than one dustbin and householders are asked to separate items such as glass, cans, newspaper and plastic from other refuse.
All this is then collected from their homes in the normal way and sent to be recycled.
If successful, more and more Local Councils will start similar schemes, for they represent the best ecological outcome.
As the costs of landfill go on rising, such an approach will become more and more attractive to those who have to pay for waste disposal.
However it is important to remember that recycling is not the answer to all our waste problems.
The first priority is to reduce the amount of waste created.
The second is to ensure that as many products as possible can be re-used or easily repaired instead of being thrown away after just ‘one trip’.
It is only when these things cannot be done (for economic, energy or other environmental reasons), that recycling comes into its own.
Many of the packaging materials we used to throw away may now be re-used to save energy and scarce raw materials
WHAT YOU CAN DO
Each of us can help to improve the quality of the environment, and do our bit towards conserving the world's resources.
All it takes is a little thought and organisation.
After a short while, taking paper, glass and metals for recycling becomes a habit.
In many areas the same will soon be possible for plastics.
Find out from your Local Council or recycling action group where your nearest collection points are for glass, metals and paper.
They may be in the car park of the supermarket or at a Local Council site.
If there is no collection point near you, press the Council to provide one which is convenient.
Remember, you should not have to make a special journey or travel extra distances to recycle, as this will waste energy.
Get into the habit of putting recyclable material into its own bag or box.
Avoid creating waste.
Reuse your carrier or shopping bags.
Sainsbury's encourage this by refunding 1p for each bag reused during your shopping trip.
Buy products made with recycled paper or plastic, such as bin liners, toilet tissue or kitchen paper.
Encourage your friends and work colleagues to do the same.
If you work in an office, check that the computer paper is being recycled.
In some offices, all paper is now being recycled.
For information on how to establish such a scheme write to Friends of the Earth , enclosing an s.a.e.
WHAT IS SAINSBURY'S DOING?
Sainsbury's works closely with Local Councils to provide recycling collection points on Sainsbury's car parks.
They are introduced wherever there is a council scheme and there is sufficient space available in the car park to have ‘banks’ and service them.
All Sainsbury's stores sell products which use recycled materials such as Sainsbury's own brand bin liners and carrier bags made with plastic recycled from Sainsbury's own waste, the Sainsbury's Revive range of paper products, Sainsbury's Greencare toilet tissue and notepaper and envelopes.
All Sainsbury's stores collect and recycle cardboard boxes, used in packaging, which are made into more packaging.
Sainsbury's recycles heat from the refrigeration units in the stores and uses this heat to keep stores at the correct temperature whatever the weather outside.
This saves a large amount of energy so a Sainsbury's supermarket today uses only 60% a similar store would have used ten years ago.
Recycling collection point at Sainsbury's Warrington with facilities (from l to r) for glass, paper, plastic and cans.
ARE THE CLEANING MATERIALS YOU USE DAMAGING THE ENVIRONMENT?
THE COST OF CLEANLINESS
‘Cleanliness is next to Godliness’— or so our Victorian ancestors used to argue!
It's a message this generation has taken to heart, and enormous sums of money are now spent every year on washing powders, bleaches, conditioners, washing-up-liquids, scouring creams, disinfectants, fresheners and so on.
But what is the environmental cost of all these products?
Via sink, bath or lavatory, all these cleaners disappear down the drain and that usually leads to the sewer, on to sewage treatment plant and from there to sea or river.
There are now serious environmental concerns about a whole range of chemicals that go into these cleaners, and the detrimental effect that some of them may be having on wildlife in rivers and shorelines.
WHAT'S IN DETERGENTS?
Now that voluntary agreements among manufacturers have been implemented, washing powders have lists of ingredients displayed on the packaging so one can see, just like foodstuffs, what they are made of.
The function of cleaning materials is, of course, to remove dirt and stains.
To this end, all washing powders contain one or more chemicals called ‘surfactants,’ designed to lift out dirt from fabric and ‘hold’it in the washing water.
Most are synthetic, rather than soap-based, because soap forms a scum in hard water.
For more than ten years, all surfactants in washing powders have been at least 80% biodegradable.
In other words, they can be broken down by bacteria and so removed from the environment.
ADDED INGREDIENTS
As well as the main ingredient, there are many other compounds.
For example, optical brightening agents for that ‘whiter than white look’, bleaches, perfumes for freshness, and fillers which add bulk and prevent other ingredients from sticking to each other .
Environmentalists remain  concerned about the use of these compounds and favour products that avoid their use altogether.
PHOSPHATES — CAUSE FOR CONCERN?
Nobody likes scum, it looks dirty, leaves a rim around bowls and sticks to clothes making them look dull.
Some people live in areas where the water is especially hard and prone to form scum.
So water softeners are added to washing powders to prevent its formation.
The most widely used softeners are phosphates.
Scientists are concerned that their increasing use may be having a damaging effect on river and animal life, although it is acknowledged that only a small proportion of the phosphate in our rivers and lakes comes from domestic sources.
Most comes from agricultural and industrial sources.
Even so, environmental experts agree that cutting phosphates in detergents is a step in the right direction and will help to reduce phosphate levels in the rivers.
ALGAL GROWTH EUTROPHICATION
The trouble is that phosphates act as nutrients for green plants and the minute algae that grow on the surface of slow-moving water.
The more phosphate that is available, the more algae grow and multiply, sometimes to such an extent that they form a dense mat over the surface of the water.
The consequence of this is that aquatic life below is seriously damaged and even destroyed.
The algae on the surface prevent sunlight from reaching deeper plants so they don't grow well.
When they eventually start decaying, they use up oxygen dissolved in the water.
This, of course, makes life for aquatic animals extremely difficult.
The whole process is known as ‘eutrophication’.
LONG TERM ACTION
There is an effective way of removing a large proportion of phosphates from waste water.
It consists of stripping these compounds out at sewage treatment works.
But at the moment only a few treatment plants in Britain have the equipment to do this.
If more of them have to install the equipment to comply with an EC directive, it may eventually be possible to collect large amounts of phosphates and recycle them.
If this does happen, it could remove the phosphates that come from non-agricultural sources — up to 50% of the total.
SOLVING THE PROBLEM
Although some of our rivers are cleaner now than they were 30 years ago, there is still room for considerable improvement.
Reducing the amount of phosphates that find their way into lakes and rivers may help, although far more serious problems are caused by effluents from factories, sewage works and some badly-managed farms.
As with so many of the environmental issues that face us now, every little helps.
So it is worthwhile finding cleaning materials that are phosphate free.
WHAT YOU CAN DO
Try a phosphate-free detergent such as Sainsbury's Greencare
Follow the instructions on the packets to be sure you don't use more detergent than you need
Go easy on chemicals in the kitchen and bathroom.
Try opening windows to freshen the air, rather than reaching for sprays and toilet blocks
Using a small amount of bleach to clean lavatories probably won't do any harm, but avoid using it at the same time as other materials; dangerous chlorine could be released.
WHAT IS SAINSBURY'S DOING?
Sainsbury's was the first company to develop a range of cleaning products — Greencare — specifically formulated with the environment in mind.
Greencare products include Automatic Washing Liquid and Powder without phosphates, Fabric Conditioner, Washing-Up Liquid, Chlorine-Free Bleach.
Some of Britain's rivers are now cleaner than they've been for years.
But a great many rivers are still too polluted for fish to live in them.
The leading alternative to private medicine.
16 healthcare cash benefits from around 17p a day.
16 generous cash benefits from around 17p a day.
Just one weekly payment protects all your family!
Return the coupon today and discover why nearly 2 million people now enjoy the protection of the UK's leading alternative to private medicine.
You'll see how HSA SuperPlan pays CASH direct to you to help towards your family's healthcare.
CASH if you — or any other member of your immediate family — have to go into hospital or a nursing home.
CASH for sight tests, dental check ups and treatment.
CASH when you have a baby.
All in all, you and your family will enjoy the full protection of 16 different cash benefits to cover almost every aspect of your family's health.
See how you, your partner and all your dependent children up to age 18 can enjoy real peace of mind for just one weekly payment from only £1.20 a week — around 17p a day!
Please return the coupon today.
Discover how HSA SuperPlan can help you meet the costs of your family's continued good health.
Here are just a few of your 16 health cash benefits.
Each time you claim, you'll receive a cheque made out to you, to spend as you wish, within days of making your claim.
NOT PRIVATE MEDICINE.
JUST CASH TO SPEND AS YOU WISH.
It pays to protect your family with HSA SuperPlan.
Think how much money you spend on your family's good health.
From routine check-ups and treatment at the dentist or optician, to occasional specialist care, to all the extra costs of a new baby, your family's continued good health costs you money.
But as well as the bills and routine costs, there are of course the hidden costs of good health — hidden costs which can soon become expensive indeed.
Take a spell in hospital.
Statistics tell us that every man, woman and child can expect to go into hospital a number of times during their lives.
In fact, over 5.7 million people spent time in hospital in 1989 alone.
But behind these statistics lie a million stories of worry and financial hardship.
The hidden costs of being in hospital — lost income, the cost of employing someone to look after the children, the cost of having someone to look after the home if your partner works, even your partner's lost income — can soon add up to become a severe financial burden during an already difficult time.
Not so with the protection of HSA SuperPlan.
HSA SuperPlan will pay cash to you — cash which will help you meet the hidden and routine costs of your family's good health.
Please take the time to return the coupon today and find out how easy it is to give yourself and your family the peace of mind and protection of HSA SuperPlan.
FIND OUT MORE — FREE!
Please complete, detach and return this coupon today.
You don't need to use a stamp.
Nor are you placing yourself under any obligation of any kind.
Only HSA SuperPlan gives you 16 healthcare cash benefits from around 17p a day.
Yes, 16 major healthcare cash benefits can be yours from around 17p a day.
Just one weekly payment gives you and your family the peace of mind and protection of HSA SuperPlan for as long as you want.
Once enrolled, your payments are guaranteed not to increase because of your age.
And the vast majority of the benefits offered by HSA SuperPlan are available to each and every person covered, each and every year — all for just one weekly payment.
There is no medical examination needed to join — even up to age 70.
So enrolling couldn't be easier.
Please return the coupon today.
Take this first step to the low cost, high benefit protection of the UK's leading alternative to private medicine — HSA SuperPlan.
FROM CASH FOR AN OPTICAL CHECK UP…
TO CASH FOR A NEW ARRIVAL…
TO CASH FOR THE UNEXPECTED