

RAMBLE TWO
Tuesday, August 4 — Monday, August 13
Glasgow •the Clyde •Arran •Bute •Ardrishaig Crinan Canal •Oban •Staffa •Iona •Mull •Coll •Tiree
JTR
A night of restless tossing, snatchings of brief seasons of sleep, and fitful wakings, preceded the morning of my departure for the West Coast.
I heard the clock strike each successive hour, and I fear my mother fared no better, for she had promised to wake her (in ordinary circumstances) sleepy-headed son.
At grey of dawn my place in Blanket Bay was vacant; the Rambler had left his moorings, and was scudding under full sail, with knapsack and umbrella, for the Caledonian Station at the west end of Princes Street.
Nor had he to wait long there for the train running in connection with the sailing of the ‘Iona’ steamship from Greenock.
My night had been restless too with humid city temperature.
The six a.m. news said that the heatwave was to go on.
I walked from Newington to Waverley with minimally packed rucksack — I was getting the hang of this backpacking.
I marvelled at my new found confidence and discovery — that of the anonymity of the walkers' uniform.
I was going places, thinking and doing things I would never dream of in city civvies.
Also, hot flushes are quite easily camouflaged with such exertion.
A young paper girl cycled past.
Bus stop queues were long with women of all shapes and sizes.
The city day starts as so many homes do with the bustle of women.
The sun was a red orange; burnt before the day had really begun.
In the station short-sleeved policemen were gently waking rumpled carpets of young people on the mock marble floors.
The train to Glasgow was quiet.
Does nobody go to work in Glasgow?
Does nobody work in Glasgow? 7.45 a.m.
August 3rd and the city centre seemed deserted.
Those women again but not so many.
The men stir earlier in Glasgow; and the women have more brassy outfits.
Edinburgh's style and ordered architectural vistas restraining sartorial individuality and voluptuous vowels.
‘Dud he naw?’
‘Come oan, get oaff’ as the Glasgow bus conductress said to the Bishop…
A beggar  rooted in a bin as I walked along the riverside.
Edinburgh has its beggars, too, make no mistake.
I remember the man with no legs, begging from his  wheelchair and the younger man sitting on the pavement with his sad looking dog and a  cardboard sign saying ‘Hungry and Homeless’.
Great drops of rain started to fall.
The West Coast.
Near to a seedy looking ship with a night club neon sign ‘Tuxedo Princess’ were a group of lags, lagerlags, with prematurely wizened faces and warped shoulders, toasting the new day.
A young well-spoken Englishwoman was in their midst.
She talked loudly about ‘last night’ and the millionaire that had slept with the group under the bridge.
Was she doing sociological research?
And who was the millionaire?
Another philanthropist?
Yet somehow she was very much part of the group and her loudness underlined yet another lost soul.
She aggressively took her turn when the can came round; the men's rheumy eyes watched her every move.
A mild incident compared to that of JTR's musings on alcohol abuse en route to the West Coast.
His port of departure was Greenock.
JTR
Greenock does not seem a very inviting place for the pleasure-seeker at any time; in rainy weather its attractions are not heightened.
It is ever associated in my mind with a scene I witnessed there many years ago.
It was the evening of a fortnightly pay Friday, and the working people, who had spent a percentage of their earnings in the public houses, were gathered en masse in front of the railway ticket office, to purchase tickets for the ‘stand-up carriages’(carriages in which there were not seats), to convey them to Glasgow; they hooted, yelled, swore, crushed, and fought like fiends, and the depraved look engraved on many faces made one shudder.
When we see sin unmasked now and again, and reigning even for a minutes unrestrained, we get a faint idea of its extreme hatefulness and loathsomeness.
Surely the way of transgressors is hard, and stands out in striking contrast to the ways of the Lord, which are experienced by those who walk therein to be pleasant and peaceful.
No wonder Salvation was a Blessed Thing…
Blessed indeed, dear John, given your own youthful misdemeanours…
Remember the incident of the ‘poisoned’ shepherd?
JTR
I had not in those days looked at the real aspects of the drink question — had not seen the responsibility that rests on each one to be guiltless in regard to that which is sapping our country of some of its brightest intellects, and killing numbers of her sons possessed of generous impulsive natures.
And so, a brother artist and myself, starting for a painting campaign, had in our store a bottle of Highland whiskey, labelled by my friend, who was a Highlander, as a precautionary measure —‘Turpentine.’
This bottle was the feeder of the pocket-flask, and the cup we used was sometimes used for real turpentine in cleaning brushes or like work.
When wandering over the hills we met a shepherd, exchanged courtesies, and offered him a glass.
He drank it gladly, asking no questions.
The factor, who was with us, asked him, in Gaelic, if he knew what he had taken.
He told him it was turpentine.
The shepherd grew pale and left us at once, and tried to rid his stomach of the dread stuff, and thereafter went home to his bed, expecting to die.
We called at the cottage at night, and found he was very ill, and it was not till the factor assured him he was joking, and that he had swallowed none other than the best of whiskey, that he rose from bed, and Donald was himself again.
John, your present temperance is admirable but, selfishly, I am comforted by your inclusion of that awful tale.
It somehow excuses my necessary but mild intemperance after one of your punishing walks.
Housing conditions in Greenock in JTR's day were some of the worst in Britain.
The Census of 1861 reported that ‘In Scotland there are 7,964 houses without windows and 226,723 houses of only one apartment, proving that nearly one million of the people of Scotland, or one third of the entire population, are living in houses of one room.’
The Smithston Poor House and Asylum was just being built in Greenock the very year that JTR rambled through.
Despite, or rather because of, the heyday of the shipbuilding on the Clyde and the ever increasing commercial traffic through the port of Greenock, the area had become a magnet for unemployed, and especially the ‘cleared’ peoples of the Highlands and Islands.
Conditions of work and accommodation were enough to drive anyone to drink.
The first Temperance Society in Scotland was founded in Greenock in 1829.
It obviously wasn't succeeding too well.
As I walked past my contemporary ‘transgressors’, cloaked in the anonymity of the backpack, I felt strangely more at one with the old lags' displaced condition than with the multi-hued raincoated and umbrella-ed Glaswegian families queuing to go aboard the Waverley paddle steamer for their day ‘doon the watter’ to Rothesay.
This was as far as I could get by water.
JTR went all the way in the Iona to Arran.
The Waverley is the last paddle steamer to be built on the Clyde.
1947 saw her launched from the Kelvin yard and she is now the last sea going paddle steamer in the world, faithfully paddling the old route down the Clyde and out to the islands of the west when there are enough tourists to cram her nostalgic upper decks and saloons.
A nearly full complement of 673 passengers cast off from the city dock this day, dark with continuous rain.
Lights were on on the Kingston road bridge soaring over the murky river.
She moved fast down river, the comforting throb of her engines arrowing out wash to be broken on each bank side.
The tree-lined city embankments, riverside walkways and yuppiefied warehouse flats soon gave way to deserted shipyards.
By the late sixties most of the grand old names in shipbuilding were no more.
Our guide could point out one ship just completed however in Yarrow's yard.
They had a Navy contract for F231 frigates.
‘That's whaur yer Uncle Wullie works,’ said a dad, proudly.
We all waved at Uncle Wullie, in spirit if not in the flesh.
The cold grey of the newly painted hull would soon be doing trials off the Isle of Arran.
Would Uncle Wullie go for the ride?
An Air Canada plane came low over the river in line for Glasgow airport.
I felt that the majority of the people on the Waverley were more familiar with that form of travel.
Uncle Wullie's uncles and great-uncles long since departed Clydeside for the New World ‘over the pond’ and many times visited for holidays, with maple leaf tea-towels pinned up on Govan kitchen walls to prove it.
The Waverley puttered down the still narrow river like a little terrier keen to get to the open fields of the Firth and the sea beyond.
Men on wharves waved, cranes flashed their lights, golfers on the port side, beyond the gold of corn beginning to catch the lightening sky, waved their clubs.
Opposite, to starboard, the blue cranes of John Brown's, nothing moored alongside the bleak piers but two swans.
But the  giant meccano structures further inland were two half finished oil rigs, the guide reassured.
The river banks, increasingly rural with grazing Friesian cows, were thick with yarrow, appropriately enough, and Michaelmas daisies.
Somewhat incongruously, an  accordion started playing ‘The Northern Lights of Old Aberdeen’ as we passed under the Erskine Bridge, thin and elegant as the still herons by the side of the now slowly widening river.
It had started to rain heavily.
‘Smashing Rothesay weather,’ said one of the crew.
The Glaswegians guffawed; the few odd American couples with see-through macs and dripping noses smiled politely.
In amongst Esso petroleum storage tanks on the north side of the river a high Cleopatra Needle by old fortifications marks the memorial to Henry Bell whose Comet , the first commercially successful steam ship, was launched on the Clyde in 1812.
What a dynasty of beautiful, beautiful ships he started.
The guide should have made us all stand to attention and salute.
A brisk wind was blowing up from the Tail of the Bank.
Down below in the engine room it would be warm.
I remember as a child growing up in Gourock almost living on ships like the Waverley ,Duchess of Hamilton ,Jeannie Deans ,Saint Columba .
In fact when older I was a snack bar attendant on the Duchess of Hamilton and fell in love with Harry, the student purser, as he with me.
He emigrated to New Zealand.
I still have his letters…
The engine rooms and engineers of the Waverley and the Jeannie Deans however were fatal attractions too.
And here I was, thirty odd years on, still hypnotised by the great shafts of power, the paddle portholes thrashing like demented washing machines, the engines so straightforwardly mechanical they are almost comprehensible.
As a small child my nose just tipped over the protective barriers.
The engineers quite terrified me; like angels in hell with their white overalls.
Then came embarrassing memories of adolescent elbow lounging over the self same barrier.
Now at last a brazen middle-aged hussy I  inveigled my way right into the engine room, sweating with delight as I sketched shining brass, ratcheted levers and big end bearings.
Through the communicating voice tube I was invited up to the bridge.
Thirty years worth waiting.
I had never had such elevation before.
JTR
The sail was only too short, and after rounding Toward Point, we steamed slowly into Rothesay Bay, whose shipping and surroundings brought to us manifold reminders of city life: it was a strong contrast to the quiet of the Arran hills towering heavenward above the encircling wreaths of mist.
All spoke here of man's work — his enterprise, his pleasure; stately hotels vied with one another, handsome shops displayed in their windows all the luxuries one might expect in the great cities of the realm.
There was considerable shipping traffic; many wheeled vehicles mingled with the throng of foot passengers.
There were untold numbers of pleasure boats: some skimming over the bay, while others were closely berthed within the harbour, waiting the evening hour, when they would be in great demand.
There was a museum on the southern shore, and the coast was lined by terraces of comfortable villas; a band-stand occupied a prominent place on a new promenade, and at dusk a large crowd thronged round to listen to the music ministered to them by a company of musicians, what some call in Scotland a ‘brass band.’
Near to the landing-pier were some of the older houses of the town, and by climbing a steep street, the old castle may be leisurely inspected, and it quite merits a visit.
The island abounds in pleasing scenes, and a season may be well spent there by those who desire to live near city comforts.
The ‘Iona’— D. Hutchison and Company's famed steamboat — calls each morning on her way to Ardrishaig via the Kyles of Bute and Loch Fyne.
JTR and I parted company at Rothesay; he to go on to Arran on the Iona and me to zigzag over there via Wemyss Bay and Ardrossan ferries.
He made his way to Bute a few days later.
Our approaches were from very different angles in time and geography but almost identical in impression.
After a disastrous period of neglect when Glaswegians preferred Costa del Sol to this island of Bute abounding ‘in pleasing scenes’, the ‘stately hotels’ and ‘comfortable villas’, though older and a bit worn, are sprucing themselves up as the visitors, still almost exclusively Glaswegian, are coming back.
Fleets of modern day replicas of those old boats might grace the waters of the Firth of Clyde yet.
The car ferry to Arran was full of tourists and, being Friday evening, city commuters who made a determined beeline for the bar before the weekend golf louts took all the elbow room.
It is a short crossing to Arran.
The queue stretched far out of the bar into the companionway and the mood and manners were reminiscent of the Greenock fiends JTR took such exception to.
He would have been quite appalled at the class of some of these ‘friends’ with city suits unbuttoned and slack ties askew.
How I hate these modern car ferries.
Everything is a conspiracy to deny that one is actually on a boat.
They are nought but floating cafeterias and car parks — floatels.
The only visible wood is in the cocktail sticks, decking is metal plating and cups are plastic.
The curtains —drapes — in the latest Hebridean ferries are floor to ceiling with tie-backs and the carpets are wall to wall.
On really wet stormy days panels of dog-eared hardboard are flung on top of the  carpeting at doorways.
And can you imagine what the Harris Tweed lounge covers look like after a free range toddler has snacked and sicked up its holiday treats?
A boat is a boat not an airport hotel.
We were enumerated off at Brodick which is still the ‘tourist centre for exploring the island, and is in daily communication with the mainland…’
A friend collected me and whisked me away to a quieter part of the island.
Her home nestles by the foot of a burn; and she is a Sister Brush and the weekend was full of her friends, music, long walks and talks.
But nothing could ever compare to the delights of JTR's landlady and accommodation…
JTR
As we neared Arran the clouds became denser, and in turn cast deep shadows over the Firth and the Arran coast, or were lit up with a glow of intensely bright sunlight; while the glory of Arran, its mountain-peaks, were lost amid the clouds that enshrouded them.
On landing I sought for the cottage occupied by the Duke of Hamilton's piper, in which some friends had found most comfortable quarters the season before.
I found it preoccupied by a little company of artists, either professional or amateur, who made use of the rainy day by camping in the coach-house to sketch from its shelter a fine group of trees, with some good foreground rock and bracken, all within a stone-throw of the cottage.
The piper's little girl was mounted on horseback, and dispatched to Brodick in quest of a lodging, and returned with the news that there was a spare room at the ‘Boat-house.’
The Boat-house became my roosting-place while under the shadow of the mighty mountain of the wind, ‘Goat Fell.’
The lady of the house loved to be called by her Christian name, Martha, and she was not without traits in her character we are prone  to associate with the name.
She was careful and troubled about many things.
In the summer season her troubles were born of her prosperity.
Like the woman famed in the bairns' rhyme, ‘who lived in a shoe, and had so many children she did not know what to do,’ Martha in her Boat-house kept so many lodgers — the cooking of meals, making of beds, and washing of linen for such a host made her often remark, ‘I have so much wark, I dinna know what to do first;’and then she had a husband to work for.
‘There's poor Archie, he canna dae a han's turn for himsel', and I've to earn every bite o' bread he eats.’
Yet Martha was a woman of courage, and she succeeded nobly in satisfying her  hungry lodgers with wholesome fare, and spreading for them sheets a prince might fold around him; and though the body was often weak, the spirit was lively, and soon found a way whereby to mount with ease over any difficulty that might arise in the government of her household or the entertainment of her hospices.
Her castle was quite unique in regard to construction, and the site was a novel one.
It was built so very near the sea that it had narrowly escaped being carried away in high tides, and doubtless would have been altogether afloat but for its having a foundation of some two feet and a half of stone.
Dear old Martha had much of the milk of human kindness about her; she had pensioners who shared with her such things as she had: one was a lame robin redbreast, who came and sat on a bush opposite the door till he was fed; another was a pigeon whose cot was quite a mile away: she too looked for a meal on every visit, and after gathering her crop-full, would wing her flight over the fields and houses home to her  cot.
From the sketch my reader will discover why this sea-cot was called the Boat-house: an upturned boat forms the roof, and under this roof is the but and the ben, the kitchen and the parlour, each boasting its own snug bed-box.
The kitchen had one small window, the parlour two, one looking out over Brodick Bay, the other inland; joined to this main building were various outhouses, each having a door, a window, a box-bed, a small deal table, a candlestick, and a wash-basin of its own: these were let for the most part to single gentlemen, though now and again she had also lady lodgers.
The surroundings were full of interest: in the foreground we had Martha's pig-store, where she kept a varied assortment of china and earthenware; it also was roofed by the remains of an old pleasure boat; Martha's cabbage garden and potato plot, and Martha's henhouse, where the roosters were alike honoured by having a boat-house of their own.
A bank of sand separated between the sea and an inner expanse of shore, in which the bed of Rossie Burn was pillowed among undulating slopes clad with a profusion of sea-grasses; at full tide it seemed like a fresh-water lake, at ebb tide but a marshy waste, only the stream meandering along its time-worn groove.
I tried and tried to find out who Martha was.
So often on this project even the oldest locals interested in what I was doing had no memory, actual or handed down, of the people mentioned by JTR.
Conversely their own recorded tales of well-known characters of that era, JTR makes no mention, like Muckle Kate in Brig o' Turk.
The Highlands and Islands were vastly more populated then and ‘characters’ must have been two a penny.
Martha certainly takes some beating.
I would have loved to have stayed in her Boathouse despite the eight inch snail with head and horns buried in a roll of butter in the larder in the morning and his relatives ‘who had a provoking way of paying nocturnal visits, and wandered between the wooden walls and the loosely fixed paper that decked the walls…’; the family of mice and the ‘sagacious hen’ that laid her eggs in the corner of the hole in the wall designated as a cupboard.
I found the site but only the snails were visible in the sandy dunes at the edge of the golf course.
An old trading smack hull showed its bones further down the beach.
Hamiltons built these boats here last century and my own Crawford forebears from Corrie worked one of them, the Betsy Crawford , back and forth to Ardrossan.
Did they know Martha?
By means best not mentioned I tracked down a living link with Martha.
I was asked to be discreet as the lady in question, a possible grand-daughter living on the island, was of affluent mien and might not like to be reminded of her origins.
She never replied to my letter with relevant copy pages from JTR's book enclosed.
Harvey Pitcher, doing research on nineteenth century Arran writers and painters and especially on the wealthy Muir family who rented houses for many years on Arran, has given me this delightful little gem.
‘Alice Muir,’ he writes, ‘was a homeopathist and in 1878 treated old Mrs McNeil at the Boathouse in Brodick so successfully that two years later the latter presented her with an engraved tumbler glass.’
It's got to be Martha!
Despite Harvey Pitcher's reservations as to Martha's ability to afford such a gift, I'm sure it is just the kind of thing she would have engineered as a token of thanks.
Possibly JTR got it for her in Edinburgh?
He might even have engraved it?
It is just as well that I am not a serious researcher of times past.
I got a bit carried away with Martha and dallied in the Arran Heritage centre over long —‘Everyone wants to know about the past and it is too late .’
The elderly female attendant almost shouted.
I thought she was angry with me.
But no.
‘If only I'd listened to the old folk telling their stories.’
Do we ever?
JTR
At the Boat-house again another ramble simmering.
I unfolded to Martha my design of starting at dead of night for a walk round the north of the island.
This she protested against very strongly, on the ground that she had known many missed and some murdered who essayed to travel round that way in the night; not that she thought such dark deeds as robbery would be perpetrated by any of the islanders, ‘But you see, sir, the island is very near the sea, and all sorts of men are sailing round about, an’ when they've spent all their own earnings on drink, it's hard to know what they'll no' do to try and get more.’
So I was persuaded, and planned a start at dawn.
I wasn't very faithful to JTR's timings and routes whilst on Arran as my own ‘landlady’ had powers of persuasion, too, in a different kind of way.
Fitting in with her hectic social agenda I was most conveniently dropped off and picked up by car.
Staying with friends on these kinds of wanders can be very disorientating.
Prior to Arran I had walked long days sometimes speaking to no one and moving through completely new landscapes.
Every impression sharply registered and the thread of my progress and purpose unbroken.
And that anonymity, that protective aura, intact.
Like the writing on the wall, the hand having writ moves on…
Arran I have known since childhood; my hostess not only a friend but a colleague.
No room for cyphers here.
And no early nights either.
But it is good to be reminded of who one is in relation to others who know a bit of one's past; where one ‘is coming from’.
After a while, travelling alone can lead to a loss of identity.
First meetings are not followed up, relationships not developed.
That of course can be one of the joys of travel.
But as in all things a balance gives the best of both worlds.
Are all travel writers but schizophrenics, indulging in their disease?
JTR
At corner Inn the ostlers were the only visible representatives, and the doors were still closed; but at the village a number of the natives were astir, and came to a little stone pier where a boat's crew were exchanging for the coin of the realm the sparkling treasure netted in the night season, and many of the lodgers would have the freshest of fresh herrings waiting them for breakfast.
It was early evening when we visited Corrie.
Alison was performing with the Inglewood String Players as part of Corrie Capers Week.
I had to come along.
I was glad that she was not taking part in the Mini Marathon though the Lantern Workshop looked fun.
The warm gold interior of the wood-lined church was the venue for a ‘Come and Bawl your Hearts Out’ hymn singing celebration.
The audience stood jam-packed.
The old familiar hymns from childhood comforted everybody.
In between the Players played — to give us a chance to get out breaths back.
There was a charming and I thought authentic baroque quality to the musicians' solos.
‘A scratch group, literally,’ apologised Alison afterwards to myself and her other house guest, a Dutchwoman, en route from a healing course on Iona.
As the Dutchwoman and I waited for the musicians to gather themselves up she commented on the sea symbols of fish and anchor in the nave.
‘Christ was a Pisces,’ she said, assuring us that she had read several books on the subject explaining the importance of the fish in Christian religion.
‘Well, all I can say is that there is a whole lot of bloody sheep as symbols as well in the Christian religion,’ said Alison as she packed up her ‘baroque’fiddle.
My hostess was not a believer, I'm afraid, John.
JTR
Loch Ranza opened to us a complete change of scene: there were houses, a church, an inn, and even the old castle was allowed to retain its site, and guide the fishers in their homeward course.
The fishing-boats had landed the catch of the night, and were spreading their nets on the tall masts erected for drying them over; a bridge spanned the mountain stream that bounded towards the bay in wild leaps; and all the glen, with its mountain girdling its steep precipices, its grass slopes, was veiled in mystery — only the  nearer shoulders of the hill revealed their naked rock, and the outflow of the rushing stream told of the heights we could not see.
My fifteen miles' walk had whetted my appetite, and therefore I looked with no angry gaze on Ranza Inn, and, despite the large company of tourists airing themselves outside, I made inquiries for breakfast, and was told it would not be ready for an hour (it was now nine o'clock).
This hour I spent in sketching Ranza Castle.
By this time the families staying there for summer quarters were out for a forenoon walk: mothers, nurses, playful youngsters — some with towels for the bathing, others with picnic baskets, making for the cliffs or the shore.
A lone grave, the resting-place of one who had died at sea, lay at a point of land under the shelter of a rugged knoll: the grassy mound was decked with a cross of white stones, and at either end an unhewn rock was placed to mark the spot as sacred; and on the taller stone was a square patch whereon the remains of an inscription that bore a roughly-drawn cross and an anchor, and the fact J. M ‘L. died at sea — all else defaced.
When JTR returned to the Boathouse that night he ‘had walked thirty-five miles, and had given a place in the sketchbook to eight subjects.’
I had been quite spoilt by now and anyway I had had my fill of walking alongside modern day roads, so I took the bus to Lochranza.
Arran buses have printed timetables but, as in all islands, clocks are set to boat times and we had a long wait, an identikit American family and myself.
The boat was late because the train was late…
The large loose pasty-skinned trio of Mother, Father and adult Son each took a window seat directly behind the other.
They passed their viewing comments up and down the line.
A coal lorry at a junction caused the young man to turn questioningly to his father.
‘What are in those bags?’
‘It is coal, son.
For fires.
What a mucky dirty thing is a coal cellar,’ was the reply, some awful memory triggered.
‘Quaint’ some Americans call our country and habits.
It could have been a bus going through Peru.
But it wasn't and soon the bus, like a bucking bronco, was careering down the hill to Lochranza, its horn blaring.
Now we were in Italy.
I was glad to be on the bus and not alongside it.
And realised for the first time that my lot as a walker was far safer than that of a cyclist.
Walkers can at least jump to the side.
At eighty-three, Miss Kerr is one of the oldest inhabitants in Lochranza.
The Post Office said that she wouldn't mind a visit.
I was wanting to identify JTR's cottage sketch.
Her parents would have been children when he wandered past their door.
She is cruelly twisted with arthritis but her spirit is livelier than a young lass's, more concerned for an old friend in Lamlash who has the same complaint — that dread West Coast damp — and is quite unable to move.
‘A terrible thing, that.
Living on her own and her such a great walker.’
She was quite unaware of any comparison to her own condition.
Old Ranza, a very large and mostly white collie, sighed by her chair as she hummed and hawed at the cottage sketch.
‘It's either Seaside Cottage ,Fair Dell or Braeside .’
We looked out over the bay to the houses directly opposite.
‘Now who you should speak to is…’
And she reeled off several names and exact addresses and sent me on my way: Kerr (‘Everyone is related to Kerrs’), MacMillan, Mackinnon, Lowe.
The whole afternoon was spent meandering in and out of the welcoming homes of Miss Kerr's ageing contemporaries.
All a ploy on her part, I'm sure, to help pass their day.
‘It must be Braeside,’ said Mrs MacMillan.
‘It was the only one to have the byre on the right side.’
They all remembered the days when Lochranza was daily  served by pleasure steamers and all the houses filled with ‘the gentry’, the locals decamping to huts and sheds in back gardens.
Lochranza has been ignored in recent years since the only crossing to Arran is now at Brodick.
But a ferry over to Claonaig on the mainland of Argyll runs from Lochranza in the summer and the tourists are coming back.
‘But we don't have many holiday houses lying empty for the better part of the year,’ said one local, proudly.
There is a kind of insularity at Lochranza cut off from the Corrie side by the great glens and hills of Sannox and on the other side by the long wild uninhabited coastal stretch to Catacol.
It is interesting that JTR noticed J. McL's graveyard on that wild shore road and that it was defaced.
There is only one tall stone standing now and no white cross on the cairn-like mound of loose stones.
A hand inscribed concrete block says ‘A Sailor's Grave.
Here lies JOHN McLEAN.
Died Aug. 1854’.
I met the middle-aged son-in-law of the man who, a generation ago, had carved the block.
Why so much effort so long after the event?
‘Don't know,’ he said dismissively, and turned to the tele on the wall in the Catacol pub.
End of story.
Sometimes you meet locals that are brimming with tales to tell the tourists.
Like well primed pumps — but in need of a ‘top up’, just a wee one, of course— they latch on to the wide-eyed visitor.
Others quite obviously can't stand the repeated and endless questioning.
J. McL died at sea of the plague.
He had made his best friend aboard promise that he would not be buried at sea — something he had a great fear of — but on land.
The ship steered into Lochranza; the inhabitants had heard of the boat with plague aboard and would not allow the body to be brought ashore.
Even the dead in the graveyard denied his soul peace for fear of infection.
Under cover of darkness, the friend took the body ashore and, on that lonely west facing beach far from human habitation, the shallow grave was dug.
I still wonder at the curt response to my query.
Is there still a residual guilt in Lochranza about J. McL?
The surrounding short-cropped grass with magnificent sunset views and easy vehicle access makes the spot a favourite stopover for campervanners and tenters.
Do they know who lies beside them the long night through, under the overhanging cliffs recorded in the Guinness Book of Records as having the only sunless spot in Britain, summer or winter?
JTR
Early in the day these westward-looking cliffs were in shadow, and a grateful shade it proved, for the sun's rays were exceedingly powerful.
Sandy bays invited the bather to plunge in the clear cool waters; boating parties found no breeze to fill the sail, and rowed lazily around the coast.
A solitary fern-gatherer was filling his basket with specimens.
A wooden mansion was quite an inviting residence: it consisted of the saloon of a large ship that must have been wrecked in the neighbourhood.
Of the wooden mansion there was no evidence and no folklore to confirm.
Neither are there any sandy bays on that coastline, the sand having been extracted for the development of the Sloy Hydro scheme on the mainland.
How transitory are the most apparently substantial things.
JTR travelled on to Bute on the Iona and thence through the Kyles of Bute to Ardrishaig on Loch Fyne where passengers transhipped for the continuing boat journey through the Crinan Canal to the open seas and islands of the West Coast of Argyll.
I hitched a lift on a Cal Mac van from Claonaig to Ardrishaig.
Well, it was a sort of a boat journey, the van belonging to the shipping company that monopolizes the western seaboard.
JTR
The goods are sent on by large waggons, and meet us at Loch Crinan; while the ‘Cygnet’ or the ‘Plover’puffs along right merrily, and we sit down to have a quiet look at the bonnie bits of scenery that are everywhere meeting us.
Just on the hill-side above the starting-point is a little cottage — one of the large family of rural homes that adorn the Highland hills.
The young kilted boys and tartan-dressed girls used to run a long distance on the canal bank in healthful rivalry, and were oftentimes rewarded by having money thrown to them.
There are fewer runners now: whether the halfpence have not flowed so freely from the pockets of the tourists, or the youthful population has decreased, I cannot tell.
A larger number of bigger girls and women were in waiting at one of the locks, where the passengers are politely informed they may walk for a mile; they had large pitchers and small jugs, and we are all favoured with pressing invitations to have ‘sweet milk.’
Sometimes a more matronly dame may preside at a table whereon is a large basin of curds, jugs of cream, a number of strong dessert-plates and horn spoons, and a goodly array of oaten cakes; so you may thus have curds and cream in the land of brown heath — and if lovely scenery lends a zest to wholesome fare, you should not fail to patronize this vendor of good things.
The little sketch of Crinan Canal shows the halting-place where passengers wait to re-embark on board the canal boat.
No passenger boats on the canal these days.
I decided to walk as far as Bellanoch where a friend would pick me up for that weakening hospitality again -a dear old Sister Brush who shames me with her eighty-year-old energy, integrity and artistic confidence.
I know that I will always be a dilettante by comparison.
I have a wee notion that JTR might fall into that category too.
There is something about the man that is familiar; his art and the apparent ease of getting his work printed seem somehow facile and presumptive.
Almost missionary in its zeal?
The passion to tell it as it strikes us , yet, if we are honest, in the knowledge that we are only passing through and it is easy to manipulate images having moved on.
Empirical.
A delicate silence accompanied me along the towpath.
It was one of those West Coast days where the damp drizzle dulls all sound and activity.
But I was light and free.
Early morning coffee in the Ardrishaig Hotel helped find the holiday people with car only too happy to take the big rucksack to Crinan.
Slowly the seaward houses sank below the level of the canal; to begin with parallel to bedroom windows, finally above roof level.
The path became more overgrown with honeysuckle, convolvulus , montbretia and brambles.
Hawthorn and lime trees thickly blocked the canal edge; every so often big iron rings set in stone lay half hidden, redundant in the long grass.
By Cairnbaan only three motor yachts had puttered by.
It always seem to be the yachtie women that walk in between the locks, their men seriously at the wheel.
Maybe they just like the exercise.
I wish they would buy all their groceries from the Cairnbaan Post Office as they meander past.
If they don't it will soon be another broken link with the past.
The old varnish-crinkled wood lining is very exposed as the shelves are sparsely filled.
The place has the feel of a museum.
Old cigarette and washing powder advertisements proclaim products long gone, their successors in limited supply.
The Postmaster, third generation, is well aware and proud of the uniqueness of his Post Office but wonders at its future.
The honeypot of Inveraray lures the car-based tourist past as the main road is on the opposite side of the canal.
The dwindling traffic of commercial boats spells further doom.
‘They go in there to Inveraray on a bicycle and come out in a Jaguar.’
The Postmaster was referring to his retailing competitors not the tourists.
By delightful coincidence I spent the evening in another wood-lined building but with more positive conversation.
Betty had met me at Bellanoch, whisking me off to a venison dinner at her friend's at Ford.
The little tin house had been built for the friend's father-in-law who had been the captain of the steamer based on inland Loch Awe.
The little house, its walls cosily cluttered with treasures of old photos and watercolours was perched up on a hill directly above the old pier, its verandah giving a Raj-like quality and view on life.
We talked of old days and new ways — and living alone.
And how we coped with the return to our homes at the end of a day or a trip away.
‘I come in the door and do something immediately ,’ said Sheila.
‘Just love coming in the door.
Silence!’ said Betty.
I said I hated it.
‘Maybe that's why you still have to wander,’ said Betty.
In my homeless state, I listened to these independent old ladies and vowed to remember both tactics when my time came.
For the time being there was no problem.
JTR and I had a new door to walk through practically every night.
The journey from Crinan to Oban was quite hair-raising.
Authentic reconstruction found me hitching a lift in the sea lock of the canal.
Sadly, the beautiful old yacht Honey Bee was only going to Cruibh Haven but they keenly solicited around the basin on my behalf.
They came up with a 230 horse power sports cruiser happy to have me aboard.
The Honey Bee had taken ten hours from Troon on the Clyde coast to Ardrishaig; the cruiser two hours.
‘The pencil could not go fast enough over the paper, so quickly changed the scenes.’
JTR wrote that as he was sailing through the Kyles of Bute on the solid Iona.
I don't think my boat even had a name.
‘The Gaz Guzzler’ said its cheery owners, David and Karen from Northumberland.
They had never been on Scottish waters before and planned to go round Skye.
Navigation seemed to be after the style of painting by numbers.
‘It's all great fun,’ said David burying her head in flapping charts.
Karen smiled with enthusiasm at the car-like steering wheel of the boat.
The previous day's drizzle had given way to sun and wind.
We scudded over the Dorus   Mhor which was conveniently quiescent, its frothing tidal step lurking in the depths.
The Northumberlanders hadn't heard of the Dorus Mhor.
Or maybe my accent was incomprehensible.
Conversation was limited by the roar of the engine and the thrash of the bow waves.
We flew to Oban, really.
Suddenly I was climbing up the long ladder of the North pier, the rucksack being roped afterwards.
Tourists clicked away with cameras as I hauled myself inelegantly over the top.
Feeling very scruffy and a little bereft, I watched the Gas Guzzler cream out of Oban Bay north and westwards.
‘He seems to know where he is going.’
They followed a large outgoing Cal Mac ferry.
It had all been too fast.
Oban was a different kind of noise and fat bare-armed people wearing far too much white and doing nothing but staring.
At me.
I later learned that David and Karen got no further than Tobermory.
Thank God -or the Mishnish Hotel.
Even the most experienced of sailors get waylaid in Tobermory.
JTR
When the steamboat touches the pier, you are met by a throng of canvassers from the hotels and private lodging-house keepers, and not a few of the holiday residents, who look out eagerly, in the hope of mayhap meeting friend or acquaintance or notable traveller.
The Oban Times of August 9th, 1876, faithfully recorded the comings and goings of any ‘notable’ travellers in the area.
‘Mr G W Wilson of Aberdeen, the celebrated photographer, is on a professional tour of the West.
There are many oil and watercolour artists busy at work in all parts of the Highlands just now — several of them being at Iona.’
You can read the actual old newspapers in the offices of the Oban Times , not a microfiche in sight.
A rare treat nowadays.
Shelves of leather bound copies (£300 each to bind) are accessible to all.
‘But the 1861 to 1865 papers are kept under lock and key,’ warned the owner, inferring that those that I freely but reverently leafed through might have to have similar protection one day.
A century ago the Oban Times was an international newspaper.
The copy that JTR must surely have bought contained careful if long winded analysis of world events as well as local news.
WAR IN THE EAST weirdly echoed the very headlines of a 114 years later.
I say ‘echoed’, as all history does repeat itself.
The circle ever full of wars and counter wars.
Servia, or Serbia, had been invaded by the big bully boy of the time, Turkey.
Austria and Russia were poised for intervention and the English Consul had ‘been instructed to inform the Servians that England (sic) will be glad to tender her services’.
Servia declared against mediation.
As I write Serbia's slow burning fuse of bitterness from the Second World War is soon to ignite in open war against Croatia.
Nearer to home, the London Letter reported the elevation of Disraeli to the peerage ‘for reasons of health’, also that ‘the number of lunatics in England and Wales on the first of January last was 64,619, being 1123 more than in the previous years.’
Scotland preferred to keep such private matters to herself, obviously.
There was typhoid fever in Croydon and demands for sewage system  improvements, a ‘great fire’ in Clerkenwell and the mysterious death of a French tailor in Tottenham.
Five thousand agricultural workers had met in Walsham in Norfolk demanding the vote on grounds of paying taxes.
All this English news in the Oban Times !
If the impoverished crofters of the Highlands and Islands and their ‘young kilted boys and tartan-dressed girls’ that ran alongside canals and coach routes ‘rewarded by having money thrown at them’had had the ability and opportunity to read that last item, the Victorians might not have travelled through their territory with such confidence…
But the natives were friendly except for a few incidents in Skye.
Another item assured us that ‘Mr Cook was personally conducting one of his Highland Tours’.
And just to prove further that things never change the Oban Town Council were arguing about a slipway and boat park and whether to set land aside for an Esplanade…
JTR
A steamer leaves Oban on certain days for Staffa and Iona: it goes by the Sound of Mull round the north of that island, and returns by the south.
to lovers of the sea it is a great treat, and affords scope for varied tastes.
The route has been described to death and there have been so many accounts of the leading objects, I am inclined to be silent till I reach some spots where fewer pens have essayed to give to the world their portraiture, allowing the sketches engraved to leave my mite of tribute alike to the noble natural architecture of the Isle of Caves and the art treasures in the Isle of Ionic Crosses.
Many artists are now drawn to it, and find that it has other attractions than the records of the burial of kings: they love to paint the children who come to meet the tourist with wave-worn pebbles from the sacred isle, and also the scenery of Mull, and the many lochs that indent that isle of bold headlands and rugged mountains masses, as they are seen from Iona.
Staffa, Iona and I never get on well together in the height of the tourist season, I know exactly what JTR meant in saying ‘the route has been described to death’.
His route is the exception to the rule nowadays.
Buses for Staffa and Iona wait at Craignure on Mull for independent foot passengers from Oban, bottlenecking with the tour buses that disgorge from the giant frogmouth of the Isle of Mull ferry.
An earlier ferry had got me a front seat in one of the waiting buses.
The bus driver washed the windows as a classical music tape played from his dashboard.
Four drivers smoked and gossiped in the neighbouring bus.
‘OUR BOYS GO IN’ front page headline in the Sun lying beside one of them.
On my driver's seat was a Telegraph with front page headed and devoted to the ‘Kuwait Crisis’.
How many times in the months ahead was that heading to coyly vacillate between ‘crisis’, ‘situation’ but never actually say ‘war’.
Inside the Telegraph was an advertisement for Sky Television ‘Watch History unfold with Live Bulletins on the Hour.’
A true theatre of war in every home.
How glad I was to be homeless.
The Oban Times was more preoccupied with a West Coast sickness scare and a photo of a policewoman with holiday stray dogs, Rusty and Scoobie.
Scoobie had found his way onto the Mull ferry but had not enjoyed the trip and was mightily relieved to be found by his owner.
Rusty looked out with a baleful eye from the front page.
Nobody had claimed him.
The tape on the bus was changed to ‘choochie’ accordion music just as the first streams of passengers jostled their way to the buses.
‘No photostops today,’ said Dave, the bus driver.
‘Boat late.’
Like the woman in Telephone Directories his English accent, jarring to a Scot, is understood by the greater number of people, especially foreigners.
Points of interest were indicated by Dave, accompanied by the usual wise cracks — and inaccuracies.
I pretended to be very foreign, ashamed to hear my country so misrepresented by an Englishman.
 Mendelssohn was seasick both ways on the trip by boat from Glasgow to Staffa.
Dave, waltzing us along the undulating peat based roads of Mull, said he was giving us wave action practice before embarkation at Ulva Ferry.
The intense blue sunshade strip at the top of the vast front windscreen gave a false impression of the day.
It was actually rather grey and windy outside.
Packed like sardines, the motley crowd of tourists, me included, masochist that I am, could not land on Staffa.
We circled several times in the over-laden boat.
One of the two crew, the braver, told us it was on account of the work being done on the new landing stage that access was impossible.
A large helicopter buzzed overhead, a cement mixer hanging like a spider from a dragonfly.
‘But you must have known this before we set off,’ said a very irate Italian.
The publicity material promised landing, weather permitting.
The weather was fine, if grey.
With deft mastery of the English language the Italian went on and on about misrepresentation.
The crew decided to go in by the entrance to Fingal's cave.
One jumped ashore onto the hexagonal   topped columns.
The ever present ubiquitous swell, even on the calmest of days, heaved the boat sickeningly up and down.
Like a voyeur I watched the land-based crew try to decide on the easiest ‘platform’ to land the now very silent Staffa baggers.
We were moored for a minute, then ‘Let's all get the hell out of here,’ said the man in the wheelhouse and like lightning the young lad untied the rope and jumped aboard as the boat reversed astern.
There was a six month old baby en papoose on board.
I'm continually amazed and yet secretly admiring of the intrepidness of travellers — or is it ignorance?
The Italian was demanding his money back.
Behind us the nearly finished landing jetty scarred the primeval lump of fantastic volcanic and sea-wrought basalt rearing out of the sea.
Like the opposite of cosmetic surgery it was a layering on of disfigurement, a wart.
And I always seem to have bizarre experiences on Iona.
At the height of the season…
Trying so hard not to weep at the demise of the old Post Office now replaced by a kit construction for other uses, I walked robotically to the cathedral like all the other tourists.
Sometimes I so hated JTR for putting me in this position.
I did not like retracing his dynastical tourist footsteps.
But in all dutifulness there is a bonus.
So Calvin said.
JTR would have admired my sense of duty.
The bonus was stunning.
A choir from Soweto was performing in the cathedral.
We sat in the packed aisles, the building's relative simplicity a delusion for what was to follow.
Shrieks and whoops heralded two loinclothed South Africans who rushed   in from the side cloisters with spears and animal skin tabards.
Women in a riot of beads, bandannas and provocative bustles followed to centre nave.
Rock Gospel vibrated through us all, the light from behind the altar silhouetting the blackness of the men's skins.
John, what would you have made of it — the tremendous celebration of beat and sound?
Not even John Knox or Ian Paisley could have competed.
I recognised Aaron in the audience.
He was working on the restoration of St. John's Cross in the Infirmary.
‘Much dissent as to reconstruction,’ he said, taking me beyond bounds.
I felt so privileged to see the semi-fractured religious edifice so beautifully linked together with sand blasted glass and aluminium supports.
In the seclusion and safety of the Infirmary, its potency is assured.
Mull does not feature large in JTR's text but there are several engravings in his book of the island.
During his round trip ‘described to death’ the boat would have called in at ports on the way and the passengers would have had time to wander whilst goods were unloaded and loaded.
There was no Honey Bee or Gas Guzzler to replicate the sea route for me, so buses and hitches and foot slog gave me more time on Mull than was strictly accurate.
But who was caring?
 Unfortunately it was classic summer weather.
And Sometimes It Rains , a tourist book of Mull in the Tobermory bookshop, said it all.
Sitting in the steaming restaurant the rain and condensation dribbles on the upper half of the window competed with the lace curtains on the bottom half.
Through both intricacies, bright yellow, blue and red-hooded anoraks, like monks en fete , wobbled along the sea front.
Somehow the visual jarring of primary coloured wet weather gear is less offensive in the brightly painted Main Street of Tobermory, especially in the rain.
A large extended family tribe, all brand new Barbour-outfitted from the boots to the hats, looked almost threateningly military and morose by comparison.
They were all Italian,(no, not related) and from the luxury cruise ship,Hebridean Princess , moored in the bay.
Some local retailer would rest easy in his bed that night.
It was the kind of day that worms deep down in the earth, drown and float to the surface.
Knowing the curator of the Mull Museum helped — and hindered — the tracking down of the spot for JTR's sketch of the ‘Fall near Tobermory’.
I was determined it was at the burn that came down by the distillery at the edge of the town.
He was sure that it was at Aros.
With so much tree growth over the years it is impossible to identify the bare rocks of the engraving.
As we tunnelled our way through the steep rhododendron-canopied paths at Aros, Alistair said the rain, the humidity and the terrain reminded him of his ‘spell in Assam during the War.
Just needs a string of natives bearing head bundles and brollies to come up the footpath.’
Maybe this is why so many ex-colonials retire to Mull, I thought.
We were both very wet and still not quite in agreement by the end of the day.
But curators have keys to museums after hours and a big deep bath of unlimited hot water back home where wives have dinner waiting.
By the end of the evening, Alistair and Hilary's enthusiasm and background knowledge had almost convinced me.
Alexander Allan, of the Allan Shipping Line, had inherited the Aros Estate on his father's death in 1874.
He became a permanent  resident and devoted his life, with time off for sailing, shooting and fishing, of course, to the improvement of the area.
In ‘Our Portrait Gallery’ from the Oban Telegraph of the times, his profile is exemplary.
‘With his business training and keen sense of duty, he makes an admirable country gentleman; on all Boards, on all Committees, on all Councils, in politics, and generally in affairs, he is to be counted on and  depended upon; he brings an admirable sense of rectitude and a very kindly heart to bear on public business.
He is a Conservative in politics and a Free Churchman in religion.’
Of course JTR would trot along the shore to have a peek at Aros — and maybe the great man.
He must have been the talk of the town.
In the Museum there is a little booklet published by the Tobermory Branch of the WRI on the occasion of its Golden Jubilee.
It records the memories of a Miss Marjory Mary MacKinnon of Rose Cottage, Tobermory, born there in 1864.
She would have been a young lass of twelve as JTR strode his way Arosward.
Her memory picture of Old Tobermory is dated 1874.
She describes a lively thriving community that would not always have necessarily kowtowed to Mr Allan.
There was a strong merchant class whose aspirations were no less than his.
Tobermory was not only a trading centre but an administrative ‘capital’.
The Crown officials of Sheriff and Procurator Fiscal were based there, as was the Courthouse.
The Mutual Improvement Society studied Shakespeare and the topics of the day.
Miss MacLean had a waist-length mannequin, ‘very beautiful’, in her shop window uncluttered with posters and advertisements of local events.
For the bellman still existed as the means of such communications.
There were concerts and balls.
Even the Poorhouse had an air of prosperity about it.
The inmates wore a uniform of pale blue, the girls with white pinafores.
Inland from the boom development of Tobermory there was real destitution in the crofting community, however.
In the Scotsman of December 8, 1877 there is a chillingly inhuman extract from a Special Commission report on the state of the Highlands which deals with conditions in Mull.
Torloisk is mentioned, where the estate had the irritating problem of the crofters that would not leave.
‘It is apparent that a step has been made in the right direction…the property will soon be entirely under comparatively well-to-do tenants.
In no season,’ continued the report, ‘were the crofters able to sustain themselves entirely by their land.
Never at best able to make both ends meet they have become very badly off indeed since the last rise in rents…
Of their own inclination the people will not apparently leave the place…they prefer to stay on, meeting calls upon them by small accommodation bills, thus gradually impoverishing themselves and making their prospects cheerless.’
I wonder how much JTR and his fellow Brother Brushes knew or understood of the genocide their land-owning peers were guilty of?
All that development and philanthropy disguised hard commercial policies.
Was that what all the passion for landscapes and pretty rural images was about —‘they love to paint the children who come to meet the tourist with wave-worn pebbles from the sacred isle…’
Looking the other way?
In blissful oblivion, I'm sure, JTR boarded the St Clair , ‘a Glasgow trader, that calls at many ports with merchandise and does a lively trade in the transport of cattle.’
The St Clair had been launched just five months previously and her spick and span shiny newness must have added to the air of wealth and progress.
JTR
Before she reached the precincts of Iona she made the round of the Sound of Mull, called at Tobermory, where she was unnecessarily detained by some shippers not having a lot of sheep waiting; she sailed up Loch Sunart, got on board part of a flock of sheep at Salen Pier, landed them at Croag in Mull; and now we made for the Isle of Coll,— the ‘Sandy Coll’ Sir Walter speaks of.
We had a bachelor party on board, who were out for a little merrymaking: an island marriage ball had wooed them from the desk of the counting-house, and having had a taste of the free air of these parts, and being good fellows well met, a few more days of healthful roving have a gleeful appendix to the gaieties of the wedding.
There was, as a matter of course, a clever punster and an old joker, and no end of reminiscences with a strong spicing of the comic element in them.
The steward was not left to mourn that his bottles found no custom: there was treating and return treating, and one humble Highlander who could sing Gaelic songs was made the sink into which was poured the spirits bought by sundry odd pence; and, to the satisfaction of those who deem it a noble accomplishment the filling a man drunk, this Celt was brought into that pitiable condition, and manifested the power of the spirits over his brain in rather a curious way,— he was for kissing all round.
We had in addition to this party,— a doctor coming to visit his mother, who lived in Coll; a young Englishman with a fishing-rod, who had left a medical practice for a few days, to whip the burns of Coll and breathe the fine air; a minister's wife; a retired minister and his wife, both in delicate health; the fiscal of Tobermory, who had a farm in Tiree; the Chief Constable and Sheriff Clerk from Mull, who came to investigate a case of suspected cattle poisoning; and a young Glasgow teacher, who came to be guest of the Fiscal aforementioned.
JTR did not land on Coll but sketched part of the village from the St Clair as she hove to in the bay for disembarking passengers and goods.
In 1876 the population of the village was 129.
It is now 85 and the population of the whole island a mere 179.
In 1841 numbers peaked at 1500.
The potato famine of 1846 and the clearances, slowing up but still grinding on, had the 1871 Census figure at 723.
These two-and-a-half room cottages built in 1820 by the Estate still stand.
The large house at the end is still the shop but with an added provision — the Coll Bistro.
Only three of the houses are permanent homes of locals, the rest holiday houses.
Not of incomers, though.
Each house has a living link with Collachs of the past.
The rellies (relatives) are proud to make the distinction.
Betty MacDougall, local historian and folklorist, was able to work out what families would have been living there in 1876.
MacKinnons, MacInnes and MacDonalds predominated.
The fifth house from the left belonged to the latter.
Katina MacDonald, widow of one of their  descendants lives there at the present time.
‘Aye, it's a dark street in winter,’ she says.
But the contrast of summer, with the street (the only thoroughfare from pier to shops, Post Office and hotel) filled with visitors, cars, yachties, locals, the odd sheep or two, and the rellies — all packed into the tiny cottages makes both seasons of the year worth waiting for.
Katina puts out her best potted plant on a stand on the pavement in the summer.
JTR
It was Saturday evening as we neared the low-lying reaches of sandy shore and the outlying rocks of Tiree, and the sun was setting peacefully as our steamer came alongside of the stone pier at Scaranish Harbour, and we saw a sand-environed bay with some veteran sloops fixed in the sand — no more to mount o'er the waves of ocean, and spread ample sails to the breeze of heaven — left there, I am told, because it would not be deemed lucky to break them up.
I got a room in the inn, and despite the windiness of the house and the army of earwigs that people it, I was very snug: a friend who has been there in winter gives amusing particulars regarding the draughts that are vocal as well as felt in this palace of the winds; he found it necessary to nail up his bed-room windows with many plies of blanket, and thus to allow day and night to glide unnoted past, for all was dark — yet were not the breathings of the winds hushed!
I love that wind of the Hebrides.
As I write this we have had four days of still sea fog.
It is May and fifty feet above there is scorching sun but down here it is damp, cold   and depressing.
The silence is tentatively broken by the skylarks but they soon give up.
A sheep might bleat but its lamb is too chilled to reply.
Housemartins like tremolo notes on the fence wire wait for heat and the fulmination of flies that lie numbed in crevices all around me.
A beetle hopefully tangents across the floor.
The cats have been asleep for days.
The life giving wind will come soon.
There were no earwigs in the Scarinish Hotel bedroom, just two flies and a moth.
And that wind nuzzling and whistling at the double-glazed window.
Scarinish hotel is certainly not ‘temperance’ these days.
In fact its main function seems to be based on intemperance.
The Gideon's Bible was on top of the wardrobe.
JTR
Sabbath!— a true Sabbath, a restful day, when all nature sweetly unfolded her beauty; while man, unless blinded, must admire, and if he has been taught to worship, each look at nature would a note of praise call forth, and pave the way for prayer.
There was so much of loveliness in every scene, my mind was surfeited with joys: how the far-spreading bay, with its expanse of white shell-sand, was girded by a sea which placidly reflected the blue of heaven; and how the seaweeds left their markings in curious lines just where the last outgoing wavelet left them; the grassy knolls girding the hollow of the bay, and the rock promontories, whose darker tones gave force to the silver lining of the breaking wavelet.
Oh God .
High on the tideline just below the hotel on my Sunday morning saunter before  breakfast were four pages of the Bible washed up.
The Book of Judges, pages 16 to 20, limp but clear.
‘Then went Samson to Gaza and saw there a harlot, and went in unto her.’
What a bizarre beachcomb…
I had hired a moped in Tiree, there being no bicycles left, and like a multicoloured Batman Snoopy in my Mary Quant cape arrived at the  Balemartine Baptist church for morning service.
The island had responded particularly to the fervent missionary work of the itinerant Baptist preachers in the early years of the century.
The young and kindly bearded Reverend had tissue creases of sad worry round his eyes.
Membership has dwindled from a peak of 160, and attendances of five to six hundred, at the time of the 1873 religious ‘Revival’.
And Balemartin was not the only Baptist church in the island; there was another at Baugh and ‘stations’ at Balevullin and Balephuil, many of the congregation having to stand outside.
JTR notes that ‘credible witnesses gave accounts of many marked cases of conversion’ during ‘the Revival’.
Ignorantly, I thought he was referring to the great Catholic/Protestant divide.
‘No,’ said Donald, son of Tiree Baptist cloth, ‘Conversion from Sinfulness to Godliness .’
It took a poet, John MacLean of Balemartine, to query the phenomenon.
Like the Brahan Seer who  prophesied that ‘two false preachers would come across the seas to revolutionise the religion of the land and the Highlands would be overrun by ministers without grace’, he was distrustful of this new religious energy.
Some recognised in the American evangelist Moody and his vocalist Sankey the manifestation of those ‘two false preachers’.
Despite minority reservations, Moody and Sankey were rapturously received in 1874 in Inverness, Campbeltown and Oban after international success in Edinburgh and Glasgow to mention but Scotland.
I have a cynical notion that all religious revivals spawn from times of extreme economic disparity.
As I write Billy Graham is back in Britain again preaching to crowds of thirty thousand.
Tiree, along with many other towns and places, is having tapes of the events played in Baugh and Balinoe Hall.
Meanwhile the number of beggars in our city streets increase.
JTR
Monday was spent among the people, sketching one of the bays, the fisherman's sea-side hut, the farmer's house, a Druid stone that is the only representative of what had been a Druid circle — the base of the others remain in the ground.
There are still very many families in Tiree who pay no rent, and these have a settlement of their own, called ‘The Moss,’ where some very poor creatures dwell, and must have but a miserable livelihood.
I was led thither by the fiscal, who knows them well and is kind to them.
The people of Tiree were very kind, and I had to take tea with a family who had good English, and invited me to come right away and remain their guest while I stayed on the island.
Other cottagers the teacher from Glasgow visited gave him a proof of their kindness; they presented him with a large basin of milk: he took a drink of it, and would have left the remainder, but they signalled to him to drink it all, and the old man stood opposite the door to prevent his getting away till he was obliged, in answer to Gaelic gesticulations, to drink all the milk that was in the basin.
The families that lived rent free on the Moss had a price to pay — infill of the boggy terrain for the Duke of Argyll who owned the whole island.
Nothing for nothing.
Old Sandy at Crossapol, with a fierce mane of white hair like Bertrand Russell, still ‘fumes’ when he remembers the eight innocent Tiree men arrested in 1886 at a Land League meeting at Balephuil.
A great number of crofters had gathered to discuss the partitioning of the good land of Green Hill but the Duke's factor and the police arbitrarily apprehended the first eight to hand.
They were not activists in the movement — some of them might have been from the Moss and come to watch the barney — but all were sent to the jail in Inveraray and then taken to Edinburgh for prosecution.
Most of them had no English and those that did could not possibly cope with the linguistic circles that no doubt would have been run round them.
All this head of steam must have been boiling up at the time of JTR's visit and yet he seems not to have been aware of it.
It was not until the twentieth century that visual artists started to look into the landscape of the Highlands and Islands and try to say something about the lives of the people that lived through those times.
Writers, poets and bards had been telling the stories for centuries but it was not until the  Victorians that a visual interpretation was recorded and that was essentially romantic and ill-informed.
We repeat these images of the Highlands and Islands to this very day.
Thankfully there is less Gothic exaggeration of the landscape but the images are too often limited to natural forms without any human comment.
Why, in a contemporary painting of Tiree, is a kithouse not in the foreground, only a thatched or blackfelter cottage?
JTR was sketching contemporary architecture.
Why don't we artists 114 years later?
I hated sketching those council houses at the foot of Stirling Castle but who knows, in another hundred odd years those houses could be as romantic as the tenements of Scotland Street in Glasgow or the crofthouses in Tiree.
After going to church I had a whole Sunday on Tiree, Snoopy-like with the moped.
The wind, most unusually, never got above Force 3.
Moped hire on Tiree is not a growth industry, I would think.
The waves slurped oilily as I sketched Balemartin.
A late puny lamb was tethered by a washing line and sparrows chirped peevishly.
Sunday silence.
Yet I knew big Sunday dinners and family get-togethers were behind the closed doors.
It was at times like this that I felt very small in the landscape.
Returning to Edinburgh after Ramble Two was to Festival City.
Coming in by train to Waverley I tried to identify with those tourists ‘seeing’ Edinburgh Castle for the first time.
This conquering by seeing — tourist empiricism.
I was getting tired.
I had lost the excitement of the first Ramble to the Trossachs which had all been new territory.
Ramble Two was over very familiar terrain.
But maybe JTR was making me look further into that familiar landscape…
RAMBLE THREE
Wednesday, August 22 — Friday, August 31
Oban •Ballachulish •Glencoe •Fort William Caledonian Canal •Invergarry •Fort Augustus •Loch Ness Inverness
JTR
Oban Pier is again the starting-point from which the ‘Clydesdale,’ the ‘Clansman,’or another of Hutchison and Company's well-equipped steamboats start to bear the traveller out of Kerrera Sound, past Dunolly, past Dunstaffnage, across the opening of Loch Etive, round Lochnell Head within sight of the Lady Rock, Duart Castle, and the mountains of Mull; having on the right the mountainland of Lorn, whose ever-changing forms fill the mind with admiring wonder; on our left the Isle of Lismore and the coast and far-stretching hills of Morven.
JTR was heading for Glencoe and the Caledonian Canal.
I'd decided to relax and just go along with the ‘package’ that he offered.
Oban was full of other packagers.
Two elderly Irish ladies, sisters, linked arm in arm, asked me where they were.
‘Oban?
Oh!’
Yes, they knew where their hotel was and the bus driver was a laugh but they were outraged that Irish money was not ‘taken here’.
Despite this they had a wonderful tranquillity in such a foreign place, so far from home.
No boats to Ballachulish for Glencoe but I island-hopped instead up Loch Linnhe and walked the roadless east coastline of Lismore pretending I was on a boat.
It was another still island day and I could hear the sounds of a motorbike and chainsaw on the mainland.
The coast was rough country and the big rucksack a burden in the muggy atmosphere.
Only the ferryman on the Oban/Lismore boat knew that I was aiming for the northern ferry to mainland Port Appin.
For once I was not travelling along a public road and here I was thinking about falling and having a broken ankle and nobody knowing to look for me.
I'd never thought like that before.
It was an uncomfortable feeling.
Set back, uncared for amongst bracken at the edge of an arable field, was a short-armed Iona cross, a monument to ‘Waverley Arthur Cameron of the Oban Times’ drowned in 1891 whilst his sailing boat foundered off the coast — erected by his sorrowing father.
Such graves, despite their isolation and neglect, are very touching.
J. McL on Arran — and there was another to come on another Ramble.
Of course I got the ferry to Appin and a lift to the very pier south of the narrows of Loch Leven where JTR landed.
JTR
An omnibus awaited us, and we got ourselves and our luggage stowed therein or thereon; but a place in the hotel omnibus does not guarantee that you will find a corner in the house.
An eager throng approached a lady who in great style bids you begone, for her hotel is full, while the ostler outside advises you to try again.
‘She is only a woman, you know, sir, and a little nervous.
Say you'll sleep on a sofa or a table, and you'll be all right.
You see, she is a little put about when so many come all of a heap.’
One old gentleman took the advice, pleaded his cause with the head maid, and got a place.
I preferred to cross the ferry to the hotel on the other side, and found there was a spare bed though not a spare room.
My room-mate happening to be a policeman, I was at a loss whether to look upon it as a special honour or a special precaution, mine host putting into my room a representative of the force.
I preferred to cross the bridge to the hotel on the other side on account of cost and no accommodation for singles at the Ballachulish Hotel.
A spare room with no room mate was available, thank goodness, at the Loch Leven Hotel.
Travelling accommodation seems to have been very casual and limited for JTR on occasion, more like hostelling.
I was soon to have my own experience of room mates, however.
All was silent down by the slipway.
The Ballachulish bridge overpowering above.
I can remember the swirl and flourish of the ferry boats at full tide race like young girls dancing coquettishly, flouncing their skirts to the side.
Breakfast and my book of the moment, Paul Theroux's Kingdom by the Sea — I  was now travelling with two male companions — was infiltrated by a monologuing female of middle years.
She sat bushy-tailed for the day at a table with two men, one her husband (‘You'd think I'd know by now after thirty-eight years what he likes for his breakfast’), the other a distant cousin, I decided.
Both had been dragged on a Highland holiday from leather-button cardiganed Surbiton, I also decided.
She was telling them what they had watched on the breakfast news.
‘Scottish Television News.
I mean, it is sort of local as well, isn't it?’
I think this was a redeeming feature.
Don't they have local TV news in Surbiton?
Saddam Hussein had just held a press conference with the hostages.
‘One woman,very articulate — from Jersey, I think — said how wonderful it was to see her husband!’
Mrs Surb gave a tinkly laugh.
What on earth was articulate about that?
‘They all looked very scared.’
‘Mmmm,’ mumbled the two men through their cornflakes.
‘Margaret’, the name said with loving intimacy, ‘used the words ‘disgusting’, ‘repulsive’, ‘revolting’.’
Another tinkly little laugh.
‘It's almost best to just forget about it all, isn't it?
Do you want marmalade on your toast?’
Did her husband know that this was his 13,870th breakfast with Mrs Surb?
The walk to Glencoe passes through the re-landscaped slate quarries of Ballachulish and St John's graveyard where many of the workers are buried, their beautifully copperplate-inscribed slate stones facing the site of their earthly toil.
‘This grave was earth's limit, Heaven is our home.’
The Ballachulish Slate Quarries were opened in 1693 and worked continuously till 1955.
Peak production time was in 1880: 16 million slates quarried by 600 men.
They worked in crews of four or six, striking a bargain with the quarrymaster for their own section of rock face.
They bought their own tools and powder, and were paid by the number of slates they made.
The quarry provided the heavy gear and engines.
Still embedded high on a rock is a tangle of telephone wires and a ceramic insulator.
What messages would have passed along those lines?
‘Summer must have come.
I see the artists making for Glencoe.
There's a tall one chatting up Flora and Morag.’
JTR
The extensive slate quarries, and the long rows of cottages occupied by those who work there, are a strongly-marked feature in the day's walk; while many of the walls are entirely composed of slates fixed into the ground and placed upright: in the churchyard many of the tombstones were slate slabs, with painted inscriptions.
As I walked along the road that skirts the southern shore of Loch Leven, I met two fair ones, a Minna and a Brenda, walking leisurely, having as companion a jackdaw.
He hopped close to my feet and waited till I presented him with a bun all to himself, and he had hard work nibbling it and taking it along with him to his home.
Many of the cottagers in the neighbourhood keep one or more of these quaint pets.
Oh, John, what a Highland Romantic you were!
And faithful seeker of Scott imagery.
Minna and Brenda are the two heroines in ‘The Pirate’ who had become fashionable shorthand reference for rural femininity.
During the subsequent break in Edinburgh from JTR and this Ramble, I, in a desultory yet pragmatic mood, went to see ‘Scotland's Pictures’, a National Gallery exhibition relating the history of Scotland's paintings.
There was Minna emphatically immortalised on canvas in Orchardson's ‘Queen of Swords’ telling me to keep going.
I saw no Minnas or Brendas in Ballachulish that day, maybe a Kylie Minogue in the supermarket, and nobody had any folk memories of tame jackdaws.
How sad such a general habit should have no other record.
Walking on up to Glencoe I saw a canary at a window with an ‘I Love Ballachulish’ sticker on the base of its cage.
JTR ‘did not see the glen to the greatest advantage; the weather was too fine.’
The weekend was under a heatwave according to the Oban Times of August 25th, 1876.
The same weekend in 1990 was identical and sketching was a tedium of narrowed eyes against the glare.
JTR
I met a man in the glen who seemed to know every spot, and gave me the Gaelic names of all the corries.
He described to me the glen in a storm — the darkness that mantles it, the springing into life of untold hosts of runlets, the careering in mad fury of the burns as they break through and tower above the channel wherein they are wont to flow; the showers, the careering of the clouds, the thunderings and the lightning-flashings, and the artillery of the winds, as the air-gusts meet the peaks and explode in the hollows of the darksome corries.
He pointed out to me the ‘Thief's Corrie’— a dismal place only accessible at one point -that point the apex of a rocky and almost perpendicular water-course; he said one man could hold the pass against five hundred, and I inclined to agree with him.
The Thief's Corrie is now popularly called Hidden Valley.
JTR's informant was translating from the Gaelic.
At least JTR did not then rename the spot as so many  others of his class and time did.
In Ballachulish an old man, who had no recollection of the jackdaws, told me, ‘We all have our names for these mountains but they call them different now.’
A slight exaggeration but I knew what he meant.
There is no one living in the Glen now to glean information from, save the  National Trust Rangers and a tenant farmer.
There are no slow-moving herdspeople, pedlars, travellers, tourists.
No working indigenous community linked with the wild landscape or the people who walked, warred or survived in its past.
Everyone is in fast-pressing cars with instant ‘Information’ to be had in an ugly Visitor Centre, a blight on the landscape, if ever there was.
I did meet a man in the Glen, the farmer, distraught with the number of sheep and lambs already killed on the road.
‘And the summer only half way through.’
Signs pleading for slower driving seemed to have no effect, he said.
He was truly considering hanging the next carcase from a gibbet at the side of the road.
‘But the environmental health would be on to me…’
JTR
I walked the glen many times, and looked back on the few trees, lying far in the hollow, that grow near the place where the massacre is said to have begun; while on either side were deep rock-lined, tree and fern-fringed chasms, leading into seclusions and bleak mountain summits, one could spend long hours exploring.
I then returned to the little inn where I had ordered dinner to be ready at an hour early enough to allow me to walk back to Ballachulish in time for the calling of the steamboat on its Fort William route.
The landlady was going out to see the workers among her hay some miles down the glen; her man-servant (the Hermit of Glencoe) drove, and she asked if I would come with them as far as they went.
The Hermit lives in a small slated cot, with a very tiny cottage window in it, in one of the loneliest corners of the glen.
He is about the inn all day, speaks broken English, and in acknowledgment of any kindness will show the suppleness of his old bones by standing on his head for a little time.
Sundowner time found me at the Clachaig Inn (JTR either went there or to the Temperance Hotel in Glencoe Village on the edge of Loch Leven) after twenty-odd miles wandering and walking.
It was the first place I was refused accommodation.
Not, I hasten to add, on account of my sweaty demeanour.
It was a Bank Holiday weekend, the hotel small.
And nowhere else till the village, three too-far-miles on  down the road.
There was a youth hostel but I have never joined and part of sticking with JTR was dependent on the extra comforts of hotels and B&Bs.
I ended up in a bunkhouse: ‘Women to the left at the top of the stairs, men to the right, if you're bothered about these kinds of things.’
The £4.50 ‘paid now’ included a blanket with the bed, cooking facilities and a shower.
I had no food with me and, exhausted by the day's walking and my mismanagement of the day's end (no sundowners that night), I went to bed early, in the room to the left, planning a stupendous breakfast the next morning in the first hotel en route for Fort William.
Nobody else was in the room.
Loud Clachaig Inn climber revellers woke me clambering up the stairs.
It was dark.
Happily drunk they tried to whisper when they saw ‘a body’ already in the room.
Wobbling torch lights sorted out packs and bedding and within seconds of lying down all three men were fast asleep.
And snoring.
Now if there is one thing I absolutely cannot stand, it is snoring.
I lay rigid, willing myself into the exhausted stupor that I knew was there waiting to engulf me again.
I tried to relax my tightening nerves with mind pictures of the most beautiful landscapes of the Rambles.
I tried to separate out the harmonies in the snoring.
I decided to sleep outside.
There was enough starlight coming in the window to make out the dim shapes of bunkbeds and rucksacks.
I had just stood up, fully clothed by the doorway, when one of the harmonisers stopped with a snort and a wakeful chomp of his lips.
I froze as he fumbled for his torch and, stark naked, staggered to the door.
‘Eh — just going for a pee,’ he said, shielding the necessary appendage for such an activity.
‘Eh, so am I. After you,’ said I. He nearly fell down the steep stairs.
I waited till I heard him go into the bathroom, grabbed all my gear and tiptoed out of the house.
His mates snored on, oblivious.
They would never believe his ghost story in the morning.
And I certainly would not be there to confirm or deny it.
In theory it should be an idyllic experience sleeping out on a still starlit night at the height of the summer.
For two reasons it is not: midges and numbing cold.
I had no sleeping bag but always carry an orange plastic survival bag in the rucksack.
Almost suffocating myself with a minimum breathing aperture on account of the midges, I also started to condense inside the bag.
Drops of freezing cold water soaked my twitching body.
It was a nightmare.
Or worse.
I was awake.
Above, the canopy of cruel brittle stars showed no indication of softening with a glow from the east for hours and hours.
Eventually I walked the night away, twice hiding in the ditch of the old Glencoe road as lagerlout cars — I could hear their maleficent approach down the glen — tyre-screeched past.
It was the only time I was ever frightened on any of the Rambles.
Dawn found me stretched out on the bench below the War Memorial in Glencoe Village soaking up the first warm rays of sun and waiting for the shop to open.
Of course primitive man was a sun worshipper.
His nights were hell.
‘Scandalous,’ the early bus party members must have thought as they swung past.
‘Sleeping rough by the War Memorial.
Shouldn't be allowed.’
I worked out that I had walked thirty-two miles the previous day and night.
After Glencoe JTR travelled to Fort William by boat than trans-shipped at Banavie to the Caledonian Canal steamboat.
He was heading for Inverness ultimately but made several sketching forays westward from Laggan Locks.
I knew that I would get a lift on a boat going up the canal.
Such optimism.
I had missed, early morning, the VIC 32 , one of the few working puffers kept afloat by an enthusiasts' club.
The Corpach lock keeper suggested a German yacht waiting to ascend Neptune's Staircase, the eight locks from sea to the first stretch of canal.
‘It'll take about an hour and a half.
Maybe longer because of maintenance.
And then they'll spend the night not much further on.’
The last lockings are at the ridiculously   early hour of 4.30 p.m. to give the lockkeepers time to finish duties before their tea.
I did not fancy approaching any of the holiday cruisers — a bit like knocking on a caravan door and asking for a bed.
No, I wanted a working boat, a fishing boat.
‘You're too late.
They all go through first thing in the morning.
They want to get through the canal in the one day.
Saves time and that's money.’
It costs about £187 to take a fishing boat through the canal — one way.
So I walked alongside the quiet, still canal.
Occasionally the cruisers, usually in twos, chugged past.
Trails of misty Lochaber rain came down from the Nevis mountain range and the round purple heather-clad hills of Glen Loy.
At Moy Bridge the young fat cheery lockkeeper — or rather bridgekeeper —‘Only one in the country’, was happy to chat.
The bridge is open most of the day as access is only for farm traffic.
Soon the canal was to be closed and emptied for repairs.
‘We try to save the fish.’
He'd noticed that the geese had just arrived in the back fields.
He was a nice young man bemused by the ‘city folks that go down the canal then back up again.
Seems stupid.’
As he talked a flying ant landed on his large beer belly.
It was delicately, unselfconsciously removed and set in flight again.
Next day it rained very hard and the leggings were worn for the first time.
No, there were no fishing boats coming through that day.
The canal men at Gairlochy advised me to keep to the south-east of Loch Lochy and follow the disused rail track to Laggan instead of the forestry road on the other side.
The track kept high above Loch Lochy.
Now the cruisers' engines abraded up and over the hills, their clackering drone in need of silencers.
The sun started to filter through and silver the loch.
A regatta of little boats fanned out behind the cruisers and yachts, one with a multi-coloured spinnaker.
How sun can instantly change mood and temperature.
The umbrella became a sun shade high on the hillside.
The green swarded track alternated between old military road and the disused railway track foundations to Fort Augustus.
Sometimes the track was exposed, other times tunnelled by rhododendrons and very overgrown.
A padlocked deer gate told me this was not a public path.
But it was.
Thousands of feet had tramped this route in times past before railways and military invasion.
All over Scotland — and the world -are tracks like these, conveyor belts of pedestrian history.
My boots were by each indent of pressure keeping the route and the spirit of those who walked before alive.
Padlocked gates sever the thread.
In confused, time-warp sympathy, the ghost roar of a train came up behind me.
It was a freak soundwave reverberation from the thrum of passing cars far below on the loch side.
The ghosts followed me on and off to Laggan Locks and into a liquid gold evening walk over to Invergarry, to the west of the canal and Loch Oich.
I broke off branches of deep purple cherries devouring enough vitamin C for the rest of the length of the canal if walked it had to be, waving their thick-leaved wands at the flies, as I plodded the day's last few solitary miles.
Next day it was rain.
Again.
Good for the fishing, though the River Garry is at its   best from February to May for the spring salmon.
So I met no one on the riverside path, soft-cushioned underfoot with years of leafmould.
Psychedelic green moss and bright yellow rhododendron leaves submerged in pools like goldfish reminded me of Aros on Mull.
A tiger, benign, would be pleasant to meet.
A rotting rustic hut gave shelter from the monsoon and there I decided to forget about JTR's sketches at the sheep farm by the Laddie Burn many a mile on.
Standing in the Invergarry pub with Scotch broth and whisky, I learned the sheep farm and shepherds were no more.
‘Just forestry.
Maggie Thatcher's fault.’
That woman has a lot to answer for.
There is a most delightful walk the full length of the south-east side of Loch Oich, parallel with the old railway line, shored up in parts.
Like in the Trossachs, the mountain bikes leave their marks but I did not meet any.
Towards Aberchalder the track goes up high into rocky grottoes; below, the railway duct is black, canopied by trees.
And always the edge of the loch and the lap, lap of its waves a stone's throw away.
The loch ends at Aberchalder and it was back to the canal for the last haul to Fort Augustus and Loch Ness.
The morning's rain had given way to a lush golden evening.
Walking back alongside the canal again was familiar and reassuring.
We would get there.
Each slow curve of the waterway showed another glittering stretch with no end, however.
Hazily cradled between the blue-ing mountains and hills of the Great Glen faultline, I was the canal flowing inexorably northwards.
During the day four low-flying military jets had blasted down the Glen.
A common practice.
Now in the special silence of summer dusk, sibilant with drowsy leaves and little waves, another ear-rending arrow of black flew past.
The Kuwait ‘Crisis’ was all of a month old; I had thought all our military might was in the Middle East.
The only thing that kept me going on the last lap of the journey was the rhythm of my steps.
I was very tired.
Too tired to even stop for a bramble.
That night on the television Saddam Hussein patted Western hostage children's heads.
One blonde-haired little girl was chucked under the chin; she winced.
JTR
On reaching Fort Augustus, when the steamer is being lowered in the locks towards the loch, tourists have time to look about them.
it will soon be known as a centre of Roman Catholic influence, for a large monastic institution is in course of erection on the site of the old fort.
It looked dismal enough when I saw it, as if given right over to darkness.
It seemed altogether deserted: no martial coat was seen, no sentry on guard, and many of the ancient walls were being pulled down.
A strong east wind crested the wavelets on the dark bosom of Loch Ness, rain-clouds gave to each hill a sombre tone; some rocky crags and woodland had deeper and richer hues; while the foreground of heather in full bloom, a corn-field, and potato and turnip rigs, gave other colourings.
The ‘large monastic institution’ is now a well-maintained Abbey and private school.
Watching boats being lowered in the locks is still the major tourist activity.
This tourist was watching too, from early morning.
All morning.
That fishing boat had to appear.
No tracks on either side of Loch Ness, just the main trunk road north on one side and a tourist road on the other.
The canal walk was over.
Unquestioning faith is not always rewarded.
But some things you just know will happen.
And there she was, a bit dented and definitely in need of a coat of paint, a Peterhead prawn fishing boat, nudging her way into the topmost lock.
‘You'll have to ask the skipper,’ said the young lad with a strong north-east accent, a gold earring and stud in one ear.
His hair was blond streaked, stylishly short at the back but with swinging forelocks.
The pale middle-aged skipper emerged from the bowels of the ship as the second mate, another young lad, ticked the engine over from the wheel house.
I do not know who was more apprehensive, them or me.
I know enough about men and boats to behave immaculately with them and stood where placed until the serious show business of the lock manoeuvres were completed and we were full straight ahead in the ruffled unconstrained waters of Loch Ness heading for Inverness.
Everyone relaxed for the two-hour journey.
The skipper showed me round.
We came to an agreement; sketches of his boat seemed fair barter.
And the bottle of whisky.
From the wheelhouse the high-railed bow made it impossible to see immediately ahead.
‘No use for canals or this kind of water.
At sea it is fine.’
I had an instant picture of this docile boat now chugging at nine knots with a following wind on a choppy but inland loch, far out in the North Sea bucking and corkscrewing, the bow sickeningly below the waves as often as not.
Two windsurfers, like rainbow-flashing kingfishers, cut dramatically and dangerously back and forth at right angles to the blind spot of the bow.
A taunting display of leisure time frivolity right in the face of a working man's day.
The boat had had no luck on the West coast.
‘Misjudgment on my part,’ confessed the skipper.
Tiredness stitched every worry line of his face.
He spoke and  looked like an end of term lecturer of some provincial college English Department.
This man was not the average prawn boat captain.
‘Talks funny,’ colluded the crew down below.
‘Not quite the two shillings, the skipper.’
The little blond Adonis was watching television.
Since school, which wasn't long ago, he'd worked as a butcher, ‘squeezed a heart in a sink and got blood all over -sickened me’, and latterly as a — guess it — hairdresser.
This was his first job at sea.
Naw, he would pack it in once they got back to Pee'erheed.
The second mate had just finished preparing breakfast.
It was well past one o'clock.
‘Never eat before now.
Especially when fishing.
Only eat when the work is over.’
Standard bacon, sausage, tomato and eggs were garnished with fried potato scones, beans and buttered white sliced bread.
I had to have my share as the two lads ate theirs and watched ‘Neighbours’.
I wondered which was the more incomprehensible, the Aussie or ‘Pee'erheed’ accent.
Or me in this unusual situation.
On cue with a bilge-induced queasiness — my second fried breakfast of the day or ‘Neighbours’?— the skipper called from the bridge on the intercom to come up.
A big splodge of blue, green and yellow dots was registering on the echo sounder.
‘Marine life,’ intoned the skipper.
‘Deep down.
Big lump.’
With a depth of 121 fathoms (726 ft) at this point it could hardly be a family of trout out for a finny stroll, he remarked.
His strange turn of phrase evoked no response from the lads; neither did the unusual image on the screen.
‘Your breakfast's ready,’ said the second mate taking over the helm.
Whatever it was on the bottom of the loch it was no more strange than the atmosphere on that boat.
Scuds of rain gave way to sun as we got near to the end of the loch.
I sat high by the bow like a proud salvaged mermaid as we entered the canal at Dochfour leading to Inverness.
What a way to return to the city I had lived in for ten too-long years and had left with but a rucksack on my back only a couple of months previously.
Couple of months ?
What a strange void-like thing time can sometimes be.
It seemed years.
For all that following wind the boat was stuck at Muirtown with only one lock and the sea gate between it, the Moray Firth, and home that night.
It was 4.30 and teatime for lockkeepers.
At least they had told me of their bad luck already or I might have succumbed to the old tales of women on ships and the bad omens they can bring.
As the skipper sashayed the boat into her overnight berth the young hairdresser cheekily tightroped along the taut stem rope, showing off.
The second mate was up front securing the temporarily slack bow rope.
The hairdresser's was a feat of great dexterity and he revelled in his prowess.
Maybe that was where his future lay…
Suddenly, in slow motion, the stern rope slackened and the hairdresser was teetering, valiantly to begin with, but inevitably out of control and doomed to a watery safety-netless future.
The stern of the boat continued to swing round to the spot where he had fallen in.
The second mate was shouting hysterically.
I was paralysed on the canalside, mid pen stroke, sketching the boat for the skipper, then running towards the stern where the young man was swimming for his life out of the narrowing gap.
He made it.
‘Fucking bastard!’ he shrieked at the wheelhouse as he dragged himself up the slimy wall, earrings gleaming.
I lowered my eyes once I knew he was all right.
There might be something about women on boats…
It was definitely time to say farewell and stepping down from the canal at that point I found myself on the very street of my son's house.
A short walk through urban Inverness and a knock at a familiar door.
‘Hi, Mum!’
Like as though I had never left…
JTR
There are many good hotels in Inverness, and also good private lodgings.
It has annually a very gay season during the days of the Highland games, when balls are held.
for at that time from far and near there is a gathering of the clans: the games were instituted with  that purpose, and have continued to draw together year by year Highland chieftains and men of note, and ladies of rank, accomplishments, and beauty.
Many notable marriages have been arranged at these meetings.
Inverness has also had of late years its annual Christian convention.
I arrived there during the last day of it, and heard Dr. Bernardo pleading eloquently on behalf of the children he labours so unweariedly to rescue from the streets of our great cities, and also saw a gathering of the colporteurs gathered from the north and west, to get a word of encouragement in their laborious work of carrying pure literature into the homes of those who in numbers of instances live beyond the reach of the minister and the bookseller.
The meetings were considered successful, and doubtless those who came to take part in them would get a double benefit from the fine air and the healthful scenes around that beautifully situated city.
The newly pedestrianised High Street was full of locals and tourists, the former proud of their new identity, the latter indulgently at ease.
‘A street party would be fun,’ said a Highland lady ‘of rank’in front of me to her companion who wore a dog collar.
‘All towns look the same nowadays until you look up at the buildings above and the scenery beyond,’ he grunted.
Yet he was right.
What price progress.
Instead of fights outside the Market Bar they are outside MacDonald's and the protagonists are years younger.
In the Inverness Courier (price 3d) of that early September week in 1876 the usual wide-ranging local and international topics were aired.
Rain had set in after the heatwave and there was an infestation of jelly fishes in the Moray Firth.
A thunderstorm in Cambridge had struck a public house, demolishing the upper portion of the chimney, splitting the rest down and finally striking the landlady and knocking out all her front teeth.
J. MacKenzie MD Inverness was counterblasting the efficacy of smallpox vaccinations, the disease ‘being beyond our control’.
Mr Melvin, Bookseller, Union St, had 2 public and 4 bedrooms to let in Academy St for Northern Meeting Week.
And a ‘Lady residing in a healthy part of Inverness near the school wishes a LITTLE GIRL to live with her.
Love of children more than remuneration is her object.
Good references required and given here and in the South.’
Imagine placing that kind of advertisement today.
The editorial dealt with the ‘Eastern Question’.
It noted an enlivened parliament during recess.
‘Everywhere meetings are held to discuss the Eastern Question…
The public is awakening to the fact that our Government has blundered in its treatment of Eastern affairs.’
Touché.
Meanwhile Dean Stanly is reported saying that ‘the settling of the rights and claims of the various races and creeds in Europe and Asia is a task too serious to become the monopoly of any one party in the State.’
JTR
Long I have lingered by the banks of the Ness, looking on the town clinging to and rising above its banks; often have I gone to the castle hill to trace the windings of the stream, which was ever smiling back or reflecting the sadder tones of the sky, and to gaze on the distant land of mountain and plain; and I have also spent many hours in rapt admiration of the sylvan pictures that render the walk through the islands on the Ness a walk of walks: it yielded a joy as deep as that I received from the walks on Goat Island, within hearing and seeing of the rapid-flowing waters of Niagara.
The rivers are widely different.
The Ness is shallow and peaceful, and the murmur of its flowing falls plaintively on the ear, in sympathy with the song of the birds, and the summer tintings of  the trees, and the musings of those who seem to love each turning in the paths; while the waters of the rapids of Niagara make the onlooker hold back his breath, and keep back as far as possible from the wild leaping of the swift-rushing waters.
In passing through Inverness, do not grudge to halt a night to visit the islands: if the night is moonlit, revisit the scene, and see it under the mellow beams.
Another place within easy reach is Culloden Moor; the railway will take you within a few miles.
You will have a real country walk and a fine view of Moray Firth and Loch Beauly by the way, and mayhap a little seven-year-old will lead you through curious windings among a forest of the future.
His ‘forest of the future’, bar a few outcrops, has been felled and logistics of the battle more comprehensible.
He gave a moody farewell to the scene which ‘left many of our kilted heroes on the field cold and stiff’.
I can't stand those kind of places.
I did not stay long.
JTR never referred to world events.
I suppose it was not the done thing for a book of Rambles.
Was he interested anyway?
I doubt it.
Religion, not politics, was his base line.
And a passion for ‘more national art: all our Highlands and islands are teeming with histories and traditions, manners and customs, and scenes worthy of the life-labours of our most gifted sons, yet few care to venture into this field.’
He was referring, of course, to his Brother Brushes, who exhibited annually, as did he, at the Royal Scottish Academy in Edinburgh.
One of its founders and fourth President in 1864 was Sir George Harvey, celebrated for his canvases depicting Covenanting times and scenes of everyday life in the Scottish landscape.
JTR was a devotee of his work and Art Rambles in the Highlands and Islands is indirectly dedicated to him.
Harvey died in the year of the Rambles.
‘It needs a born Highlander to understand aright our Scottish Highlanders’, goes on JTR, ‘and to gather from them all the lore they know, so as to give us pictures that will live on in after ages.
The Covenanting pictures of Sir George Harvey are the very near realization of that which I refer to.
His heart breathed alike in sympathy with the men and their land.’
Sir George was born in Perthshire.
Sir George's paintings are little known today except by those specially interested in the genre.
Poor old JTR's quite unknown.
The RSA's records lists forty-eight paintings and watercolours exhibited by JTR from 1865–1886.
I have still to find one.
Of all JTR's contemporary Brother Brushes the one that has stood the test of time in not just an historical context is William McTaggart.
He was the son of an Argyll crofter and although mainly concerned with landscape and seascape he was the first Scottish artist in the 1890s to place people in that landscape without sentimentality.
JTR was not around to see the beginnings of political comment in Scottish art; his life took a new path far removed from the galleries and drawing rooms of artistic Edinburgh.
His theory, misjudged with Harvie, has been proved correct, however, with McTaggart.
RAMBLE FOUR
Wednesday, September 17 — Saturday, September 22
Skye •Portree •Sligachan •Coruisk •Staffin
JTR chose to reminisce in his chapter on Skye on several sketching visits to the Misty Isle from the comforts of his Edinburgh home.
So I cheated too.
A house-sit on the island for the MacLachlans at Camus Lusta in the Waternish area, where The Book was first found, gave me the luxury of motorised instead of pedestrian pursuance of Mr Reid Esq, save one memorable walk and a few hill scrambles.
I became a car driver again widely overtaking walkers and cyclists, and made forays of comfortable detective work returning to my  cornucopian base, some of the victuallings within you will learn about in the Lewis section.
Portree has long been the commercial centre of the Isle of Skye.
The National Bank was built as early as 1830 and in JTR's time there was a comparable expansion of its administrative function just as today with all branches of government represented within a hand's throw of the Square.
A Telegraph Office was opened in 1872 and the Portree Hotel was all of one year old, though JTR stayed with the Postmaster and family.
The first Ordnance Surveys of the island were being undertaken in three sections: Portree/Dunvegan, Staffin/Quiraing, the Cuillins.
Maps however were not published till 1884/85 and JTR makes reference to the use of guides for mountain walkers.
In 1836 a Professor James Forbes made the first recorded ascent of Sgurr nan Gillean with Duncan MacIntyre, a local forester, as guide.
Duncan must have been the mountain man of the day, for the previous year he had been engaged by the Revd C. Lessingham Smith to take him from Sligachan to Loch Coruisk, climbing in Hata Corrie on the way.
And that was the beginning of Skye's climbing industry.
In 1882 one of the debates held in the YMCA in Portree was entitled ‘Are the visits of tourists as a whole beneficial to the Highlands?’
What a pity the local library did not have a record of the evening's discussion.
Word for word with today's arguments?
But maybe not, for on each side, one for, one against were ‘Mr Graham (merchant) and Mr J. Nicolson (merchant).’
I must say whilst scrambling about in the Quiraing the impression was of a giant stalagmite Disney World maze filled with wandering families in soft shoes and yet more babes in papooses.
The serious climbers would not be seen dead with such riff raff.
Munros are no longer the fashion.
Corbetts, if you must, but the new bagging fashion is to find mountains that only the  cognoscenti know and take at least a day's walk to get into.
And then they don't say where they have been, if they are wise.
JTR
The Coolin Mountains have a mighty power in drawing forth emotions of admiration and awe, and the appreciation of John MacWhirter's pictures of ‘Coiruisk’ in all its stern sublimity, by all classes of people, discovers a much more general appreciation of the grander aspects of nature than we would credit the ordinary picture-loving public to possess.
It was seeing his picture of ‘Mountain Silence’ made me long to see the darksome mountain-girt lake in its weird lonesomeness with an intense longing.
And here we artists, not only writers, must admit to part of the blame for the popularising of the wilderness areas.
MacWhirter, though settled in London from his middle years on, was a Scottish painter whose best work was in the tradition of landscape painting traced back to the early seventeenth century.
Landscape is not an old word in our language.
The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary lists it  originating about 1602.
The Russians had no word for landscape till the French arrived with ‘paysage’.
In our day it seems incredible that the landscape was at one time of no consideration to artists — and maybe the people in it.
Slowly the exterior background settings for religious paintings, the major activity of artists in the seventeenth century, took on more detailed contours and established geographic as well as topographic influences that we still see in some forms of landscape painting today.
The Italians, and the Dutch, surprisingly, were the first true landscape painters, the Italian countryside always their source of inspiration.
These  images behind religious, secular or allegorical subjects as the century moved on, greatly appealed to the English.
The Grand Tour of Italy was like what National Service used to be to the young men of our country.
Except that it was only the wealthy that did their two years.
By the end of the century landscape painting for its own sake was established.
Claude, the seventeenth-century French painter who spent much of his life in Italy, formulated a set of rules for landscape painting that became  de rigueur  .
His foregrounds were blue-ey dark, far distance hazy and atmospheric with light.
By the eighteenth century his fascinating contortion of viewing the English landscape was all the rage.
As though their own countryside let them down compared to that of Italy, the wealthy English had with them when travelling a Claude Glass through which they viewed the passing landscape from their carriages.
It even tinged the foreground with blue and in its distortion made the landscape look just like a Claude painting.
Nature imitating Art…
This style of painting was obviously very popular but thankfully the English developed landscape painting away from the picturesque reaching their apogee with Turner and Constable.
By the nineteenth century England had become the nation of landscape painters although a large proportion of her artists were Scots who, tempted like their lairds a century before, had moved to London for prestige and remuneration.
Landscape painting is flourishing in Scotland today, artists resident, their subject matter possibly more valued than it has ever been with so much ‘green’ and wilderness awareness.
Each age has its style.
We now look at the gothic exaggeration and moody drama of Victorian landscapes and we learn of their romantic yearnings.
I wonder what future generations will see in our contemporary landscape paintings.
A countryside that is no more?
We landscape painters might ‘sell’ the landscape but we also preserve it.
And often at great expense to ourselves.
I am thinking of all that walking again.
JTR
Our way led us out of sight of the bay,[Portree; JTR has picked up a ‘preacher of the Gospel’]and we were within hearing, and also could trace, the rocky stream that coursed seaward from the mighty mountains that form the Coolin range.
I endeavoured to paint a picture of this scene, but again and again legions of midges drove me from the spot: I got a phial of essence supposed to keep them away, but alas! in vain.
I have yet to learn an effectual protective against the midge.
I believe tobacco-smoke is the most effectual, but to one not a smoker it would require to be a case of hiring another to the office of smoking away the midges — a work many would gladly undertake, for tobacco is looked on in the Highlands as a very great good, almost as essential as the whiskey.
As we neared Sligachan the moon was shedding her mild beams over Glamaig and the other Bens, and gave great height to their massive forms.
We rested quietly and most comfortably in Sligachan Inn, than which I cannot imagine a better retreat in the early summer of late autumn, either before or after the great throng, who, coming from north and south to it in the height of the tourist season, make it a place of stir.
Its proximity to the crags of the mighty Scoor-nan-Gillean, or ‘Crag of the Young Men,’ and to the stream that is fed by the waters that gather on its massive ramparts, are a great attraction.
After breakfast we left the inn and got on the track, which, with care, need not be  lost sight of in good weather, except in haze or severe rain, when there is danger at one or two places, where a ceaseless flow of moisture over a rich soil keeps the grass so green and the ground so soft, no path is traceable now and again.
It is truly a sublime glen: you can scarcely allow the eye to leave for a minute the mighty mountain walls on either side (for some new scar, or crag, or corrie, or leaping cataract is ever being discovered), and their charming variegation of shade and tint among the mosses, rock, and grass, or among the heath and heather-bell.
On the westward side of Heart o' Corrie a path is traced winding up the hill; it is reached by fording the burn that flows through the glen.
This is the path generally chosen by visitors going to Coiruisg, and once the hill-top is reached, the guides are quite contented to allow the visitor to see a small comer of lake.
Those who know better will not rest contented with such a meagre peep of a lake so singularly grand, but will round the hill rather more than another mile to the west, and when the dark lake is full in view, sit down to drink a long look from that favourable point of view.
The more remotely JTR travelled the wilder became his place-name spellings.
‘Heart o' Corrie’ is Harta Corrie on the Ordnance Survey map.
A perfect example of anglicising.
‘Sorry, er, what did you say?
Ha-er? ta?
Oh, heart of the corrie.’
And a scribbled note eventually gets printed for posterity.
Nobody seems to have taken on JTR's corruption, however.
I walked to Coruisk from Sligachan and on to Camusunary and Kilmarie with a young American friend who had never been in this part of Scotland before.
Or done such a walk.
At the Bad Step above the sea beyond Coruisk I wondered at my lack of responsibility.
It was getting dark but in a beautiful silvery still way.
There was a long haul ahead.
It was the one shared walk of the Rambles and I had forgotten the golden rule when introducing someone to the hills, never to stretch them beyond their ability.
There were no Disneyland walkers over that part of Skye.
The nearest place to park a car was seven miles ahead or eleven miles behind.
Dianne was quite unaware of my sickening misgivings at the Bad Step and rightly so.
She was in awe of the mountains around.
‘I get the impression the landscape has suffered.
Ancient.
Wise.
Mature.’
Was she hearing, in the gentle wind, eddying along the purpling coastline, the ghost lamentations of the thousands of sgitheanachs that had ended up against their will in her country over the Big Water?
A heron scraiked below the steep slabs of stone that chuted down into the sea.
One false step and we would be down there too.
At  Camasunary the bothy for walkers by the sea had a driftwood firelight glow coming through the window.
We passed like wraiths gripping our anoraks against a colder night wind coming down from the deep indigo silhouetted mountains.
Stars were coming out.
The headtorch stumble down to Kilmarie and pies and Guinness back at the Sligachan Hotel on the way home ended Dianne's ‘Maimorable day’.
We had come back like the full circle of our route, intact.
The ‘Glamaig Water’ etching is in fact the Allt Daraich coming down from the corrie to the south of Glamaig and there I found one of the most reassuring sights of the  Rambles.
I could not see the ravine and its bald cliff edges on account of the trees and shrubs that had reached a confident maturity despite long years of unprotected infancy and adolescence.
My notebook list includes rowan, oak, birch, Caledonian  pine, hazel, holly, round-leaved willow, cherry (gean), aspen, dog rose, juniper, ivy, berberis, rhododendron.
And honeysuckle twining up the birch.
The day after the walk to Coruisk turned vicious with cold winds and icy rain -the Jekyll and Hyde of the Hebrides, one day Greece, next day the Falklands.
In Portree the locals in the shops were all saying ‘Well, that's it then.
Not long now.
Winter's coming.’
There was almost a note of relief in their voices.
Late visitors still rummaged for bargains in woollens and local atmosphere.
But the locals were having none of it.
Time to shut up shop and get to know each other again.
Enough's enough.
The wind whistled up round the corner past the supermarket to Stormy Hill.
There in a tiny traditional house flanked by council housing lives Mrs MacKenzie.
Skye, again, had given me a unique link with JTR.
JTR
There is a road on the brae-head, Portree, where you can see a number of very primitive cottages: it is known as ‘Stormy Hill.’
Certain it is, in stormy weather, from any point of the compass you will have a blow on Stormy Hill, and it does further seem as if it were tenanted by those who in the voyage of life have weathered storms quite as real,— long sickness, pinching poverty, and mayhap, in some cases, that very terrible malady when it becomes chronic, a disinclination to regular work; and their present lot is one of storms,— few comforts and short allowance even of the needs of life within doors, and the wintry blasts without; and failing health and increasing age give small prospect of much more of the sunshine or fewer of the blasts on this side of the dark River Jordan.
As they are for the most part Gaelic-speaking folk, it is difficult to learn from themselves much of their true circumstances; but there are friends in Portree who would gladly assist any soul who would like to be helpful to the dwellers on Stormy Hill.
You would marvel to know that even in that locality Sectarianism has raised its voice.
I am told there are two sisters who dwell under one roof, and cannot speak to one another, for the one is a Free Churcher and the other is a Baptist; and that one gave to the other cause of great offence, having put cream in the tea of the other when such kind office was not desired.
When I fought my way up the brae and saw all the council houses I almost turned back dismissing the possibility of there being any evidence of older architecture.
But there it was, The Cottage, its porch right over the pavement to the gutter, red reflectors for night traffic on its corners, pedestrians having to detour on to the road before regaining the pavement again.
‘I hear people passing and saying ‘How on earth do they allow a porch to be built on top of the pavement?’
Don't they realise the porch was there fifty years before the new road…’ said Mrs MacKenzie, a hint of exasperation in her voice.
The black tarred roof had been ‘like that for as long as I can remember.’
A widow, now in her eighties, her husband was brought up in the house by his grandparents.
In the late 1940s when council housing was planned, Lord MacDonald allowed the old houses with resident tenants a reprieve from the builder's bulldozer.
Only two of the originals survived, the other less incongruously surrounded and more ‘improved’ thus lacking such character, nearer the braehead.
‘If the council houses hadn't come, we'd not have had electricity, water or the phone for all these years.’
Mrs MacKenzie did not mind the houses so close.
‘Just get an awful downdraught in the chimney sometimes.’
She said she knew nothing of a sectarian feud in the old days of Stormy Hill but if she did it was not the kind of thing you discussed with strangers, I sensed.
Or dwell on the kind of poverty that JTR described.
We wondered at the ‘pinching poverty’ that could have cream for tea.
Mrs MacKenzie proudly showed me her minuscule immaculate palace, the walls almost thicker than the passageway.
A leg of something simmered in a pot on the stove, as tasty and traditional as her grandmother-in-law's, I'm sure.
And there certainly was cream and more for tea.
For all my love of landscape, nothing would induce me to spend weeks painting the Needle Rock in the Quiraing and certainly not in JTR's era when hazards were beyond mere midges.
I leave Skye returning to Inverness with his account very similar to my own experience barring the missiles and the guides and honestly think once again that the number of visitors to some ‘beauty spots’ in the Highlands and Islands were far in excess of those of today.
Maybe phenomena like the Needle, a pockmarked warty old erect penis with a tuft of grass on its tip, do not hold the same attraction these days.
I certainly have not met another Brother or Sister Brush that has been compelled to study it for weeks on end…
JTR
In company with an English artist, I climbed up the steep hill-side for many successive weeks to paint the Needle Rock.
It is not a desirable place to paint pictures in, inside the Cuiraing: the silence and the grandeur awes you; and the sheep above where we stood had an uncomfortable habit of loosening with their feet stones that came with an ominous crash near to us, and some shepherd lads, much less excusable, thought it good fun to threaten to, and likewise to perform, throwing stones near us.
I will not suppose them guilty of a direct intention of striking us, particularly if they had any idea of the danger of such a proceeding, for the cliff rose much more than a hundred feet above us, and even a very small stone would have fatal effect by striking the head.
We had tourist visitors of every age and family, and some quaint scenes were witnessed on the upgoing — many of the native children (and one who in a few years after might be called an old man) found it a profitable, and I doubt not, too, a pleasurable work, leading the tourists to the top.
We noted how shrewdly the man was found paying attention to the member of the party who looked most likely to be the paymaster.
RAMBLE FIVE
Wednesday, October 26 — Saturday, November 3
Dingwall •Kinlochewe •Torridon •Gairloch •Dundonnell •Ullapool
JTR
On our way from Inverness to the west we went out of the train at the Muir of Ord of cattle-market fame.
It was the day for the sale of sheep, and we saw many little lots under the guardianship of shepherds and collie dogs; eager buyers were going from group to group, judging their respective merits — now taking a hold of a sheep to feel his weight, and noting the quality of his fleece.
The market was principally composed of lambs of varied breed and from many diverse parts of the country.
By now it was October and the month of the sheep sales.
Some things never change.
Muir of Ord Mart is no more, but Dingwall serves the purpose almost identically.
Pens nestled alongside the wall of St Clement's Parish Church, carparks jammed with Landrovers and their brash modern progeny, Subarus and Toyotas.
The smell of sheep hung in the atmosphere soaking into sawdust and Harris Tweed alike.
Buyers from Oban, Skye and Ullapool, with gimlet eyes, hung over the railings marked with farm and estate names — Belmaduthy, Morvich, Torgormack, Glastullich, Lochrosqua, Kintradwell and Erribol.
Prices were not good for the tup sales.
‘Been too many good tups over the past few years.
There's a glut now,’ said one rueful farmer.
£20 was all he'd got for one beast.
The £30 subsidy per sheep would maybe keep the bank manager quiet for a while.
‘But the subsidy is being withdrawn next year.
Bloody EEC.’
Wives in good thick skirts chattered between auctions.
‘Are you getting on holiday?’ said one, relieved that the end of the farming year was at hand.
‘No,’ said her friend, ‘it's the sheepdog trials next.’
After Muir of Ord JTR got off the train at Conon Station as did I, and walked down by the river to sketch from the Telford bridge of 1809 now replaced by a modern version built in 1969.
The old tollhouse further upstream by the site of the totally removed old bridge is a very desirable residence with ubiquitous modern coachlamps at the door and surrounded by bungalows built ‘where groups of fine  cattle were grazing on the rich grass’, that made JTR ‘covet the power of the animal painter.’
Dingwall was the start for the journey into ‘the great western wilderness’.
Lochs Torridon and Maree were his next sketching locations.
JTR
Magnificent subjects they are; but how are they reached?
Fortunately, or unfortunately, that is easy work now: the iron horse speeds you along, you steam under the shades of Knockfarrel, which has on its summit a very fine vitrified fort; past Strathpeffer Wells, Castle Leod, Lochs Garve and Luichart, through Strath Bran, till you reach Auchnasheen, where you change steam for horse-power, and get a little exercise in patience, waiting in the drizzling rain till the horses are rested, re-yoked, and ready for starting.
One Highlander was in a fix regarding his dog: he would not pay the fare for his collie; the official threatened to take him — the dog — as a hostage; Dugald warned him Prince would ‘grip him’ if he dared.
The poor dog seemed to know all about it, for in fear and trembling he waited behind his master, hanging his tail most ignobly.
It ended in the fare being paid with a very bad grace.
Our mail gig party consisted of the Highlander who owned the dog, a woman with a very large bundle, a young man just home from his studies at a school in Germany, going to join a family party at Gairloch, and two men I would judge to be shepherds, possibly coming from Muir of Ord after selling their sheep.
Our driver got the mail bags stowed away, and made his horses strike out in good style.
We had ample occupation watching the play of the clouds over the sides of the hills, and the bits of rugged moor and moss and flowing stream that enlivened the way; but at a turning within some three miles of the inn of Kinlochewe, as we were about to pass the east-going mail gig with its complement of travellers, our driver jerked the horses into a ditch, which upset our machine and broke one of the springs.
Fortunately nobody was hurt.
After the horses were released from the machine and the ditch, we walked leisurely to the inn, only regretting that the clouds hung so heavily over Loch Maree that it was completely obscured.
In that week's Ross-shire Journal it is reported, amongst other items like the 1,522 soundings taken by the Channel Tunnel Company —‘Greater progress in the formation of the Company has been made in France than England’— that Sir Kenneth S. MacKenzie, proprietor of Gairloch, was promoting the welfare of his tenants by offering to defray the costs of mail delivery.
Sir Kenneth was the half  brother of Osgood MacKenzie who created the famous gardens in Inverewe.
Osgood was the same age as JTR and it is a pity that JTR did not continue northward from Gairloch and possibly meet this incredible man whose life and family chronicled in A Hundred Years in the Highlands gives such detailed insight into the times.
Suffice to say JTR was travelling through territory totally ruled by a very wealthy network of families who, politics aside, were more in touch with their peasantry than their less isolated land owning peers.
The railway only went as far as Achnasheen in 1876.
It goes all the way to Kyle of Lochalsh these days turning southwards from Achnasheen, leaving the wild vastness of Wester Ross accessible only by the motor car, a later and more threatening penetration.
My mail gig was the post bus from Achnasheen to Kinlochewe, horse power converted to cylinders and passing places obviating diversionary tactics with oncoming vehicles.
Well, most of the time.
I and the one other passenger viewed the landscape through the grill dividing us from the driver, the mail, bottles of milk and newspapers.
My fellow traveller was going to a reunion with school friends at Torridon.
Brought up in Kinlochewe, she had left thirty years ago and never been back even though she lived in Tain only sixty-odd miles to the east.
I could tell that this was a big event in her life.
‘My man said he wouldn't mind looking after the kids.’
I met her later in the pub, shiny-eyed with memories.
Things she had ‘never thought about until now!’
Like riding bareback on the ponies on the other side of Loch Maree and taking the boats out on the loch.
‘Nobody bothered where we were.’
How could she have forgotten?
She remembered helping in the hotel kitchen when she was ten but nowhere near the Bar.
The Aberdonian housekeeper was very strict.
Despite such professional guidance this plump middle-aged woman laughingly recalled ‘being legless at the Village Hall dances, all at the age of thirteen.
Best forgetting that and all the half bottles in the backs of cars but, you know, I never took to the drink in adult life.’
She sipped a coffee while I nursed a double brandy.
The sketchbook and notebook pages for the day are almost indecipherable with rain drop splodges.
Drifts of rain came up Loch Maree as I plowtered wet and chilled along the lochside to find the spot for JTR's ‘Loch Maree’.
By four o'clock car sidelights were on, small-eyed in the gathering gloom.
The season was over.
The visitor centre at Aultroy was closed.
Through cobwebby windows I saw a relief model of the surrounding mountains and a large vacant video screen hanging from the ceiling.
Redundant until next year's visitors.
Now I felt more in tune again with JTR's travels.
No gimmicks to explain the landscape.
At least he was spared that.
I love more than anything JTR's ‘fortunately or unfortunately’ reference to travel improvements in the area.
He must have understood what that meant.
What ambivalence that man had brought out in me…
At the Kinlochewe pub, all the talk was of the Countryside Commission's just  published report ‘The Mountain Areas of Scotland’ recommending that Wester Ross have National Park status.
Should it be so decided, the first thing under review will be the road system which just about copes with the present traffic.
Improve it and the door is open to summer invasions like that of the Lake District.
At least there is no M6 so near.
But who can tell of the future.
To date, Scotland has no National Parks.
Everyone I spoke to was against the widening of the roads especially the steep pass down into Kinlochewe.
‘They go fast enough as it is,’ said one local certainly not averse to the many material improvements in his lifestyle compared to that of his parents without electricity and all that that facilitates.
Crofters were very apprehensive of the possible changes.
‘National Parks are run by management boards that dictate the very colour of your window frames.’
They manage people in the environment, as well as colour schemes it seems.
Someone maintained that the land owners would be immediately involved in these management groups.
‘They don't want their hills covered with people.’
‘They are covered with too many stags, that's the problem.’
'Hinds must be culled in greater numbers,’ said someone else.
‘The clients only want the trophy heads of stags, you see.’
They all agreed it was better to make steps on the eroded paths scarring Beinn Eighe and keep everyone on the one track.
JTR
I cannot express to you the charm that hangs about a mountain like Ben Each as the mists swathe its rocky sides; they rise, they fall, they whirl, they soar as on wings of light, they cast shadows, they give grand mystery, and anon reveal some hidden dell, some great bare precipice, or perhaps display a glowing patch of verdure.
Now you have castles grim towering to heaven; again, a storm-beat wall of cliff, the mist surgings beneath imitating the motions of the waves of ocean; now you seem to get a peep of fairyland, and think you see the dwellers in a city of light: again, the veil seems as if hiding a very abode of woes, dark places of gloom.
I expect each one will take from these misty illusions, creations congenial to his own mind.
I do not envy those who only see in them the messengers of evil tidings, forebodings of rain, and who think the landscape is devoid of loveliness because the sun does not shine — because there is not an Italian sky overhead, and that the open car or gig he travels in is not a Pullman car.
We had not only the glories of the mist-workings on the sides of Bens Each and Leagach on our right; we had Ben Lair, which was now and again seen with the deep cloud-shapes falling over his rocky summit and his tree-lined base.
JTR was obviously in foreign territory.
His mountain spellings are very idiosyncratic but no doubt faithful attempts to transcribe local pronunciation.
For instance he wrote Leagach (more as it sounds) for Liathach; yet Each for Eighe (pronounced ay as in play) seems to have no phonetic parallel.
The warden's wife at the Beinn Eighe Nature Reserve told me the no doubt apocryphal tale of a traveller in Northern Canada laboriously taking down phonetic notes from an Inuit pointing to various landmarks in his territory.
Back in civilisation the explorer finds that the translation reads, ‘Don't know what that is called’ and ‘Don't know what that is called either’.
They better get the spelling right before the hordes arrive in Wester Ross.
Look what you started, JTR, with your Rambling.
And what I sustain with mine.
The changes they are a-coming.
Adaptation the name of the game.
Deer are no longer upset by bright red anoraks.
‘Khaki greens are the worry,’ advised a local, on the brandy as well.
Mrs Tain ex-Kinlochewe had long ago retired to bed.
It was left to us alcoholics to sort out the thorny problem.
FREEDOM TO ROAM MUST BE GUARANTEED was the headline in the West Highland Free Press the following day.
That was just what I had been doing for the past four months innocent of impending restrictions.
Will my rambles be as arcane as JTR's one day?
‘7.10 am on the dot and my husband will give you a lift to Torridon,’ the woman in the council house opposite the hotel had said.
I stood waiting in the pre-dawn dark watching house lights go on.
Garden birds roused themselves bravely, far off a cockerel said it was the new day and buzzards with peeinging whistle  arced over the slowly silhouetting mountains.
It was freezing cold.
The first sleety snows had capped Slioch and Ben Eighe.
At Torridon my fingers froze as I attempted to sketch Ben Alligin.
Gold-edged clouds sailed in a sea of cold blue sky, violently eclipsed by sleet-scudding showers slashing up Loch Torridon.
The pictures are in my head should they never end up on paper.
By eleven o'clock I had eaten the Kinlochewe Hotel's packed lunch (in lieu of breakfast) and was bereft of all nourishment which I was greatly in need of.
I stood for a long time in a telephone box just to keep out of the slicing rain.
At times like that I could not care a toss for JTR and wondered why the hell I was in such a situation.
I walked back to Kinlochewe having missed the postbus.
Not a car passed till nearly there.
The NCC warden kindly gave me a lift in his Landrover.
No, I did not raise the topics of the previous evening; some nurturing is better accepted without reservation.
At the shop it looked as if there would be no public transport to Gairloch until the next century.
‘No lorries?’
I queried.
And as if on cue in rolled a Chalmers Mace supply van.
The driver could take me all the way to Inverness if I wanted.
Ullapool was where I was heading there being no boats from Gairloch to Stornoway as in JTR's day.
‘Nae problem, I'll drop you off at Braemore junction.’
A mere twelve miles from Ullapool.
The last ferry to Stornoway was at 5.30 pm.
‘Nae problem.’
A. B. Chalmers of Inverness started out like the shopkeepers in Inveraray with a delivery barrow, graduating to a pony and trap for outlying districts and in 1907 introducing the first steam lorry to the Highlands.
Today the sixteen-and-a-half horse power Ford Cargo, one of a fleet of several serving the Highlands and Islands, is driven by Bill once a week to Gairloch, fortnightly to Kinlochewe and once a month to Applecross.
I asked him how he coped with the summer traffic on the twisting single track roads.
‘Ach, I've always got my newspaper for when they can't reverse.
I just sit and have a good read until they are done.
I've got all day and I'm being paid.’
Everything was ‘nae problem’ to Bill.
I settled in for a relaxed, warm overview  on the world high up in the comfy cab.
Beinn Eighe still dominated the landscape as we headed for Gairloch.
Streamers of snow blew from its sharp-toothed ridges.
At each de-veiling of sleeting showers more snow whitened the tops and yet there were still leaves on the trees at the roadside.
On Loch Maree the islands were dumpy, thick with Caledonian pines that would keep their blue black prickly leaves all winter.
The hillsides would have been covered like this a few centuries ago — genuine deer forests.
The names are still on the map — Flowerdale, Letterewe, Fisherfield.
In between the showers bright sun sparkled, the raindrops shivering on fence and electricity wires.
‘Priority bulk items are beans, catfood and dogfood.
And in that order,’ Bill informed me.
He was right.
I carried in tray after tray of Whiskas to the Gairloch store.
Storage seemed to be a problem.
Lemsip, liquid fairy, firelighters and deodorants nestled in the steeply-coombed attic.
Cereals were stacked under the stairs, toilet paper above the door and ‘thro' the back’ was the repository for every shape and size of bottle.
Leaving Gairloch, the pinky red beach and recharged store, the panoramic journey continued up over the hill by Loch Tollaidh to Poolewe, past Osgood MacKenzie's Inverewe gardens and along the bleak coast to the next drop at Aultbea.
There was a wild wind out to sea.
A solid wall of hailstones came up Loch Ewe, ricocheting off the windscreen as it swept by, hell bent on lacerating Loch Maree and final immolation on the flanks of Slioch.
At Laide the council gritter was getting petrol at the shop.
‘What's the forecast?’
I asked, thinking of the boat journey to the Outer Hebrides.
‘Frost tomorrow,’ said the orange overalled driver.
‘It's come quick, the winter.’
‘And it better not go quick.’
‘Why?’
‘This is our jam.’
He smiled cheerily, dreaming of drifts and sheet-ice and overtime.
Country and Western music blared from the cab.
Dundonnell Stores had not been in operation long.
It seemed to be operating from the back room of a house.
The steep track down to the gate gave the last trolley and Bill a stylish tango across the floor of the van.
The light was going as we headed inland from Little Loch Broom, An Teallach white-pinnacled to our right.
On the desolate stretch over to Braemore junction we passed a young woman walking at the side of the road.
She wore sensible walking gear but an air of not quite belonging.
I distinctly remember Bill and I making no comment.
He possibly through guilt at not stopping to give her a lift, though she hadn't asked.
For myself, I just saw me out there in the gathering dark — and cringed.
All those lonely main road trudges I had endured.
Had others pitied me as they flashed past.
Or worse, not even noticed me?
Did I, did she, exist?
I was dreading the inevitable hitching to Ullapool.
By then it was dark.
‘You could come into Inverness and get the early bus back out to Ullapool in the morning…’ offered Bill as I climbed down from my position of elevation and security.
No, that would be a false contrivance and anyway I still had a mad hope of catching that five-thirty ferry to Stornoway.
Twelve miles in an hour?
The thumb was out as I resolutely walked along the road shielding my eyes from oncoming lights and wistfully following the tails lights of cars that sailed by.
Not a house or steading light punctured the enveloping blackness in between.
It was the first time that I had openly, assertively hitched.
I wanted that boat.
As a car driver I have conflicting reactions to hitchers.
If I am in the mood, fine.
If not, it gets more complicated; guilt first at not being generous with my superior situation.
But then I might have a passenger whose company I am enjoying and do not want the intrusion.
If I give a hitcher a lift I expect social interaction and can't abide the ones that use me like a bus service, mute to the point of rudeness.
After the guilt comes the confusion and then the anger.
Anger at being put in this situation.
And who is the object of this anger?
The poor hitcher, of course.
I now know that the anger is reciprocal.
What angered me most was the Gulag searchlight exposure of oncoming vehicles.
I tried to compose my features into a combination of nonchalance and justification.
From behind I could have been a man with my hood up.
Women are more likely to get a lift?
With the hood down my summer sun bleached hair might give the wrong message?
Furious with myself for these creeping insidious thoughts I focussed on lengthening my stride and levitating the rucksack.
The hood stayed down.
After six miles and double that number of overtaking vehicles, a car drew up, patiently waiting for my embarrassing clumsy backpacking lurch to catch up with it.
A young couple, they had been out touring; she was driving and in charge.
Once through the thankyous and the ‘I never do this kind of thing, ordinarily,’ I settled in the back, everything blissfully out of my control.
There was an uneasy tension between the two of them.
It turned out that she had gone for a hill walk on her own with an agreed pick up point by him in the car.
Somehow — it did not seem  diplomatic to enquire too deeply just how — he had missed her at the arranged spot.
‘I fell asleep,’ he guffawed in a self deprecatory way.
She was not laughing.
She had walked many miles along the road before he had caught up with her.
Suddenly I recognised her.
The woman on the road.
I said nothing, diplomatic coward that I was, but wondered at her generosity in drawing up for me.
Was she trying to tell her companion something?
I was very grateful to her, whatever the reasons.
I had missed the ferry by half an hour.
A fisherman unloading boxes of fish, shimmering in the arc lights of the pier, told me the next one was not until midday the following day.
No, there would not be any fishing boats going back out.
It was Friday and all the boats tied up.
It was at times like this that my physical and emotional stamina dangerously evaporated; nurturing was essential.
I treated myself to a night in the Ceilidh Place; I had not given up the habit of including the dangly earrings and the flowery trousers in the rucksack.
At dinner, the conservatory-like room was filled with couples in varying stages of partnership — lovers, outdoor companions, well-heeled oldies.
Next to Paul Theroux and me were two lady companions.
JTR had chickened out and was travelling south -‘we saw the first snows fall before we left…’— to write up his chapter retrospectively on previous rambles in Skye, for some obscure reason.
Maybe it was because of the snow or maybe he was getting fed up with me.
Travelling companions do need a break now and then.
We had been at it for three months now.
I was glad of the break.
As I say, next to Paul and me were these two ladies obviously enjoying every mouthful of their meal.
I did not take too much notice of them, Paul and I had so much to share.
Why don't you ever mention where your change of clothes come from when you go on those long journeys, I was dying to ask, but I did not want to stop the flow of his fatal attraction and eccentric erudition.
Next morning I was a new woman, quite revitalised and waiting contritely for JTR who I had summoned back up from Edinburgh to get on with the Lewis Ramble.
‘Do you mind if I join you?’
It was one of the two gourmet ladies of the previous evening.
I was sipping coffee in the coffee house of the hotel.
She and her companion had come up under full sail to my table.
‘Are you a writer?’ the other asked, once they had berthed.
‘I was just saying to my friend, there she is scribbling again.’
They were genial enough and we exchanged pleasantries until the leading galleon said, ‘Do you believe in destiny?’
And before I could reply she rushed on, eyes moist with excitement.
‘We came to meet someone who hasn't turned up.
But now we have met you…!’
And out it all came.
They were canvassers for the Bah á'; í Faith.
JTR turn up quickly, please.
It is you they want, not me.
Stalling for his arrival I asked about the religion.
It originated in the East in Persia, made manifest in Bah á'u'll; áh who was born in 1817 and ‘spokesman for our age.
John the Baptist was his forerunner,’ said the Galleon firmly, underlining his respectability.
Bah á'; ís do not disbelieve in any previous founders of world religions.
Such leaders are all members of a spiritual relay race handing on the messianic baton it seems.
Meetings are held every nineteen days, not necessarily Sundays, which must keep people on their toes.
The world centre is in Haifa, Israel.
Seeing I was interested the ladies warmed to their subject — and victim.
‘These are exciting times.
Times of great change.
That is when the current, the energy cannot be ignored.
Our numbers are increasing.’
They were doubly enthused when they heard about JTR — he had arrived, at last— and the evangelical parallels with the 1870s.
I suggested that that economic disparity might be the link to all evangelical movements.
They felt it was more to do with the wickedness of the world.
‘But that is a form of wickedness, isn't it?’
I persisted.
‘What do they say in Iran about Bah á'u'll; áh and the Bah á'; ís?’
I was getting bored and provocative.
Did they realise?
Maybe the Galleon did.
‘What a perceptive question,’ she commented, patronisingly.
‘The Shah accepted them but not the Ayatollah; persecuted to annihilation.’
I wondered who the ladies were directly responsible to in the Organisation.
I could tell that my questioning was slowly turning off the taps of their charm.
I never did get an answer to that final one.
I think they began to realise my destiny did not tie in with theirs.
RAMBLE SIX
Saturday, November 3 — Saturday, November 7
Lewis •Stornoway •Gress •Garrynahine •Barvas •Ness •Butt of Lewis
At Ullapool the midday early November sun was low in the sky, white gold fanning down into the sea beyond Scoraig peninsula; An Teallach hid its snow caps, cut off by a cool indigo-grey cloud.
The boat slurped and sloughed its way Lewisward through great troughs of waves blown from the north at forty-five degrees across our bows.
The modern car ferry was like a nautical greenhouse with the sun streaming in the south-facing picture windows — passengers' heads wilting with heat and motion like so many tomato plants.
Ever moving currents of rain, with silver vertical folds of sun behind, touched the horizon line of the sea in dancing gold, silver and platinum.
It is what I hope death will be; an everlasting ringseat show of stormy seas, sky and cloud, an island and headland or two silhouetted in the far distance.
Those curtains are called ‘precipitation’ by meteorologists and are fast falling products of condensation in the atmosphere of rain, hail or snow.
I love that word.
Maybe I will die quickly, too.
This was a local's boat.
Gaelic on both sides of the cafeteria counter.
A few tourists were aboard; a couple with walking gear and their spaniel dog with one blind eye staring out of the low window, and a Canadian, rather loud, who had struck up conversation with a young Lewis woman who was coming back from visiting her husband working in Libya.
She was obviously relieved to have got out and to be on the boat home.
The Eastern problem and the emotions it had aroused were still with us.
Saddam still held the world to ransom.
‘Arabs!
There are no words in the English language to describe them.’
She was as loud as he.
The young Canadian took it upon himself in too domineering a fashion to explain about their religion, but she was having none of it.
Would he just as keenly defend the strict Presbyterian religion of the island he was about to visit, I wondered.
I swear that dog was looking out to sea with his blind eye.
JTR
At the pier [Gairloch]I waited the transport boats, seen in dim shadowy form coming  from the steamboat that lay out in the bay, and listened to the plash of the oars.
They had much goods for Gairloch, and not a little to take on board.
Once on board, I took a look below, where many men folk were as comfortably spread on the saloon sofas as circumstances would permit, and finding a vacant space sufficiently large to stretch my full complement of feet and inches on, I tried to fall asleep before we got into rough water; but with the first movement of the screw, I was on my feet and on deck, having a view of the hills round Gairloch as they slept in the mist of night ere the faint streaks of dawn disturbed their repose.
Each gentle breath was exquisitely hushed in these still hours as the light began to glimmer over the arch of heaven, ‘mid the cloud-wreaths, over the mountains, and on the wide expanse of ocean — ahead, astern, and on either side of us, as we sped towards Lewis.
As we receded from the mainland we ever sighted new mountain ranges: we saw them growing fainter and dipping out of our sight; to the southward the Skye hills lent a charm, and the Isle of Lewis loomed bigger and broader, till we steamed alongside of the pier and were landed ‘mid the curing of a fine catch of herring taken during the night.
The boats were sparkling with the glitter of the ‘caller ou,’ as our fishwives call them; and busily the men were throwing them out from among the nets into the creels, while the shore was lined by brawny-armed women clothed in waterproof aprons, who with marvellous rapidity were gutting the fish, and packing them in barrels with abundance of salt between each layer.
As a whole the season had not brought a successful fishing, which, sad to relate, would condemn to bachelorhood for another year many Lewismen who waited a successful season to enable them to begin life in partnership with a fisher lass.
Shortly thereafter I read in one of the local papers: ‘The recent failure in the herring fishery has had a very depressing effect on the matrimonial market at nearly all the fishing stations.
The decrease on the marriages in the three months ending 30th September is very considerable.
In the island of Lewis, with upwards of 25,000 inhabitants, there were only two marriages.’
An unsuccessful fishing is a most discouraging event to the dwellers in these remote western isles: hundreds leaving every year for the east coast; when fortunate, they will be able to bring home with them, after clearing all expenses for board, etc., more than enough to pay the rent of their crofts; but in a bad year they may come away in debt to the curer.
JTR's vivid description of Stornoway harbour and the ‘caller ou’ belongs very much to history.
Those herring fishing days are gone.
But not the drift to the mainland for work for the young men.
The young woman back from Libya an example.
Her man ‘in the oil’.
But Lewis has its own oil-based industry.
Lewis Offshore has a fabricated yard for the oil industry at Arnish Point, a little south of the town.
The week I was there the Stornoway Gazette had a page three article celebrating a fourth contract for the firm that would mean 120 jobs.
Nosing around the pier and harbour I learned that the fishing for ‘89 had been terrible, but not so bad for ‘90.
It was impossible to ascertain how many of the boats moored in the harbour over the weekend were local.
Since 1988 all fishing boats are registered in Cardiff.
The majority of islanders who are fishermen are based in Ness to the very north of Lewis yet will tie up their boats in Stornoway and drive home.
The young man in the  Fisherman's Cooperative office was trying to be helpful.
‘£221,000 worth of business came through the Stornoway office this month.’
That meant nothing to me.
The harbour would never be the scene of activity described by JTR.
There was a late Saturday afternoon buzz in the streets of Stornoway.
The inexorableness of the Sabbath was almost palpable, waiting just round the corner, to slap up grills and padlock doors.
Meanwhile the end of the world had not yet come.
Life was for living — and buying.
Third generation Pakistani youngsters, some Gaelic speaking, serve in family shops, the most north-westerly branch of their clans happily absorbed into the community.
That dread word religion again, an ingredient of their successful assimilation.
The Muslim faith has many similarities to that of the fundamentalist Free Presbyterian Church whose last stronghold is on the Isle of Lewis.
There are signs of cracks in the bonding however as bigger and better shops are being taken over by Pakistani families.
But that is not religion threatening, that is money.
The number of stories about the power of religion in Lewis are legion.
And there is no need to exaggerate for effect.
The current story was about the innocent yet ignorant mistake the Scottish Chamber Orchestra had made in promoting their presentation of Stravinsky's ‘The Soldier's Tale’ which was to include professional dancers and actors and local schoolchildren who had been invited to participate.
Manuscripts and scripts and advertising blurb were sent well in advance of performance date.
Unfortunately, the SCO were not aware of the sin of incarnating the Devil and inviting everyone to a knees-up to ‘shame the devil’ after a ‘devilish’evening's entertainment…
Several primary teachers from the staunch outlying districts would not let the children attend rehearsals let alone the performance in Stornoway.
The children's loss but the fault lay more with the SCO's insensitivity to a cultural difference than to a lack of religious awareness.
The apparent bigotry, to an outsider's eye, of the Free Presbyterian Church has some good points.
For one thing, I'm all in favour of workless Sundays though I draw a line at taking the cockerel out of the henhouse or padlocking the children's swings on a Saturday night.
Imagine trafficless roads for one day of the week!
We'd all start walking .
For another, has the Scottish Tourist Board not cottoned on to the fact that this Sunday sailings issue is good copy.
Ideally, of course, there should be the choice, especially for islanders having to work on the mainland who want to come home for the weekend.
Next day, Sunday, walking through the town, I was amused to see hired buses (no scheduled services) and car loads of black clad churchgoers proving that some compromises have been made.
That's when I hit on the answer.
Church service travel only allowed on CalMac ferries on Sundays.
What price an hour or two pewbound to get across the Minch either way on God's day.
Better still, services on the boats…
Have them all — Billy Graham, Moody and Sankey, Bah á'u'll; áh, John  the Baptist.
And JTR, of course.
JTR
The most noteworthy feature about Stornoway is the castle and grounds of Sir James Mathieson.
It is a palatial residence, and occupies a worthy sire, like the magnificent piles of masonry built in our forefathers' days, to guard the people's home; this stronghold raises its proud walls and towers, and commands alike the bay and every house that lines  the shores.
There are no remarkable buildings in the town; there are banks, churches, very many general merchants, and a few bakers, butchers, curing yards, ship-building yards and suchlike, while in the harbour there is some shipping life.
Stornoway Castle is almost hidden by a forest of ageing trees and maybe as well, for it is in a boarded up state just recently implemented.
Having been a College of Further Education for years, subsidence below the main tower has caused the building to be closed for reasons of safety.
A modern complex out at the back is now the College.
As luck would have it, I met a retired teacher walking through the grounds.
He remembered getting grapes from the greenhouse in the twenties as a boy.
The Oban Times that Autumn of 1876 reported that the fruit crop had been disastrous but went on to detail the varieties of fruits.
‘Apricots and plums sadly below average.
Peaches and nectarines fair in the south but ‘thin’ in Scotland.
Apples more plentiful in Ireland.
Pears below average.
Currants and raspberries fine.
Gooseberries thin.
Strawberries abundant.
Nuts of all kinds owing to drought below average.’
All these and more exotics grown in Britain and supplied locally.
Judging by the  greenhouses in JTR's sketch there were grapes and more at the Castle prior to the 1920s.
With glass and tender loving care it can be done.
Those friends in Skye grow figs, grapes, peaches, nectarines and sweet cherries.
It was their grape leaf wine that helped the Skye section of this book.
A Brother Brush friend of JTR's was staying in the Lewis Hotel.
Its traditional upstairs windows are now uncurtained and uninhabited, two bars at street level its only function.
Victim of bureaucratic and other forces it stands awaiting ‘development’, or heaven forfend and JTR's ghost, demolition.
JTR
It is time to leave the capital and have a walk; let us rise betimes.
My respected landladies, who are the double-distilled quintessence of considerateness and island hospitality, would think all good would leave their abodes if a dweller beneath their roof left fasting, so, in spite of all my entreaties to the contrary, a cup of tea was prepared to forestall my start; and as I walked by the river-side and reached a road that skirts a number of very  massive peat-stacks, and displays on the landward side an interminable host of peat-pits, the geniality of the sunshine was felt, and I would  gladly have slackened my pace were it not that by so doing my good friends at Gress (some eight miles from Stornoway, where I was due at eight o'clock, if I remember rightly), might have waited breakfast for me.
The road was very pleasant, and nice peeps were opened out along the shore, those scenes peculiar to this and neighbouring isles; long flat stretches of heath and sand, and lines of cliff; and in the pearliest hues the mountains of the north-west of Scotland graced their glowing setting of sunlit cloud and sun-reflecting sea, while the ether was embalmed in shades that partook of many emerald rays.
Many thatched cottages were built on the brow of a hill overlooking the sea; and a large potato-field, divided into elongated sections, gave ample scope for many Lewis families to prove that union is strength, for they were busily engaged lifting the crop: each family group was complete in itself; those who had the most children got most quickly over the ground: many hands make light work, and young backs bend easily.
I was pleased to see so many hearty workers thus earnestly labouring early in the day.
It was a golden day to them; for dry weather is the only safe weather for potato-lifting.
The costumes were for the most part composed of homespun cloth of native dye, though now and again gay neckerchiefs — the manufacture of the south country — gave liveliness to the head; while now and again a bright-coloured shawl was pinned across the shoulders of the women.
The pastoral scene described denied the back breaking nature of the islanders' survival conditions.
And it is a bit patronising, John, that bit about the ‘hearty islanders…earnestly labouring so early in the day.’
Typhoid and cholera and, most common, tuberculosis were rampant throughout the population.
That night in the B&B north of Stornoway the other guest was a visiting resident GP from Melbourne.
She was taking a year out before specialising.
I asked what the Lewis ailments were compared to those in Australia.
‘Smoking and diet.
Some hereditary problems, too.’
Almost as an afterthought she added, ‘There is a very high pain threshold here.’
All those centuries of inherited stoicism?
JTR made merry at Gress where breakfast was waiting and congenial company took him along the coastline to caves that, because of lack of stamina on my part, were never redrawn.
He was into his pastoral bit again with literary references for every pretty female encountered.
He found ‘a Shiella’ and with her ‘bounded over heath and rock, over hill and vale, barely conscious of the sloughs when marshy ground met us…’
His ‘good friends’ were most likely the MacKinlays who rented Gress Lodge from 1874 to 1876 from Sir James Mathieson, the island's proprietor.
David MacKinlay was a Lewisach born and bred, educated at Stornoway who made good in the outside world.
He became the managing partner of a large mercantile firm in India, returning to Lewis for the fishing and shooting season.
Gress Lodge is now the private house of the widow of one of the island's doctors.
‘He was a ship's surgeon.
Came to Lewis forty years ago.
We stayed put,’ said seventy-three-year-old Jean Greig, showing me round the old house where JTR had fallen in love with sunny-hearted Sheilla.
Leverhulme, subsequent proprietor to Mathieson, gave the lands of Gress to the Stornoway Trust, a crofter-managed organisation, the landless Lodge being sold to  Dr Greig.
His widow reminisced on the days of her children's upbringing.
‘We hardly ever went to the mainland.
It was a big expedition and very expensive.’
I could almost smell the peat and oil from the lamps; the flour and the sugar in the big bins and sacks; and hear children's voices echoing through the rambling old house.
How many dinner parties those walls must have entertained.
There was a happy feeling; a sunny-hearted link with JTR.
JTR
I was glad to reach Garrynahine Inn, and after the fourteen miles of a walk was not unthankful to test the merits of a roasted wild duck for breakfast.
Thereafter I looked out of all the windows of the snug hostelry, and not finding a satisfactory view, for it now rained in earnest, and it was vain to hope to be able to sketch out of doors, I noticed a new house a short distance from the inn (it was being prepared for a doctor); was entrusted with the keys, and from one of the front windows looked out on the rainy scene depicted in the sketch of ‘Garrynahine, Isle of Lewis.’
It rained in downright earnest, and the noise of rain and wind on the roof, windows, and doors of the empty house gave the place an eerie feeling.
Garrynahine is the Lodge for a present day shooting estate — the reversals of time.
I did my sketch from that doctor's house.
It is now called The Cottage, but Mrs Smith  remembers that her father-in-law bought it in the early thirties and referred to it as ‘the Doctor's House.’
She caretakes for the Lodge —‘a chew owns it’— and was amazed, as was I, by the growth that obscured the erstwhile Inn.
How bleak was so much of the landscape that JTR walked through.
Thousands of imported sheep had left their devastating mark and the latest ‘crop’, the deer, finished off any saplings the sheep might have missed when they came down from the high tops in the winter.
If the sheep subsidy is removed the latter part of our century might see another crop in the Highlands and Islands — naturalised trees.
They have started to make an impact on the scenery already.
JTR
I could not restrain myself from hastening to view one of those Druid circles, of which there are so many in the Isle of Lewis; that given in the small vignette is the first one I reached.
It stood on a mossy hill, and was environed by an expanse of peat soil and many stacks of the dark-coloured fuel; and in reaching it, many most forbidding sloughs had to be rounded and jumped over.
Other circles were within sight, the most notable being the famed Druid temple known as Callanish; and my imagination, I must own, was discovering Druid circles or single Druid stones wherever grey rocks were seen rising above or bedded in the dark moor.
I spent hours at one of those ‘so many’ stone circles near Garrynahine trying to get the same angle as JTR to no avail.
Frustrated but secretly delighted that I had maybe caught him out with shoddy workmanship until an old fellow from Bernera stopped to give me a lift on the way past Carlaway and showed me the right ones, just before the main stones of Callanish.
Here I apologised to JTR and learned that he must have been a very tall man.
My five feet four and a half even on tiptoe could nowhere approximate his angle of vision.
‘Big shop day?’
I asked the old man, his nose almost level with the steering wheel  of his equally elderly car.
He had told me he was going all the way to Stornoway and I could tell that it was quite an event.
‘No, it is a matter of business ,’ he replied with beautiful but serious enunciation.
I thought it must be a visit to his lawyer or somesuch and politely asked no more.
But he volunteered the information.
‘I'm reflooring my other bedroom floor’— emphasis was placed on the ‘other’—‘and run out of wood nails.
Fifty is all I need.’
Serious business, indeed.
Everyone stops and gives you a lift in Lewis.
After Callanish it was the local archaeological buff who was thrilled to see JTR's drawing of the famous stones.
Crawford was the first person I came across in all the rambles who immediately saw the historical value of JTR's records.
Maybe it was obvious to most people but he gave me recharged confidence in the project.
‘Definitely one stone missing since his time,’ sharply observed Crawford.
I implicitly trust your accuracy, JTR, I promise no more lapses of faith.
As I hope others will see fit to so do with my own records…
At Barvas Lodge knickerbockered ladies with good stud pearl earrings invited me in for tea.
Black labradors draped over chairs looked as ‘buggered’ as one of the ladies said they were after the four hour walk in the wake of their shooting husbands that morning.
They had all come back for lunch but the women had rebelled at going out in the afternoon.
‘We are meant to be plucking the bloody snipe…’
Ann, the caretaker sitting on the arm of one of the chairs with her pale blue nylon tabard on, cosily sipped tea.
She would do them.
She was used to it.
‘Fiddly little things.
You need at least two per person.’
Over the past four days five hundred had been shot.
It was quite unbelievable.
There can't be that number of snipe in the whole of Lewis let alone Barvas Estate, surely?
It seemed that the sad little snipe were the victims of a blood lust still carrying on from the heyday of Victorian game hunting.
A slaughter for the fun of it, the challenge of it, certainly the skill of it, it would be argued.
‘Lewis grouse good sport.
Much smaller and stay very still,’ I learned.
But Ann would not be plucking five hundred snipe carcases surely?
It would not be so disconcerting if they were all eaten, the poor wee souls.
I enjoyed my tea and glimpse into a way of life that would have been familiar to JTR.
‘Call in anytime,’ the hospitable ladies further invited as they rallied reluctant dogs and piled into the car to go and collect the men.
Ann headed for the kitchen.
I could not get that figure of five hundred out of my mind.
Barvas Lodge was a Temperance Hotel up until 1923.
Possibly JTR had another wild duck for his breakfast when he stayed there.
If so I hope he enjoyed it.
There are not so many about these days.
JTR
Next morning, after joining the family at worship, I turned my steps still farther north, having a desire to reach the most northerly part of the island.
The landscapes differed from those of the last day's walk, and were seen in another mood; the rain-clouds floated high, the road lay over rocky ridges, the homesteads had an amplitude of stone wall fencing over these exposed seaboard cliffs; and they were built more compactly to withstand all assaults.
These districts were not very fruitful in peat, and they would have to carry them from a distance of many miles; in some cases a pavement of large stones led from the main road to the door of the dwelling.
This was, I think, because the soil all round was so softened and converted into cloggy mud by the habit of keeping the cattle within the gates in bad weather, when their high stone dykes served as a bield for the protection of the cattle.
In the forenoon many groups of men and women passed me.
I could not make out where they were going, and made several inquiries without getting any answers save in Gaelic; it might as well have been Hindostani.
I thought they might be going to pay their rents, for I was told it was about the settling-time.
At last some passed me with books; I stopped them, and found the books to be Bibles: it was all clear  now, they were going to a week-day preaching, and shortly after, as the road wound down a glen over a burn, I met the Free Church minister on his way to the place of meeting.
He was on horseback.
There was a difficulty ahead; there is no inn or hotel at the Ness.
I have to include this extract if for no other reason but to draw attention to JTR's unconscious  déjá vu  language comparisons and the uncanny metaphor of ‘the strongholds of a brotherhood in holy alliance with each other to withstand all assaults.’
For Ness is the last bastion of Free Presbyterian fundamentalism and the miles of wall to wall crofthouses that line the single main road today have a  palisade quality.
Who knows what goes on behind those net curtains.
The inhabitants inside certainly know everything that goes on on the outside of their windowpanes, however.
Thinking to steal a march on watchful eyes I set off from the Cross Inn (not long established as the only hotel and bar) at 6.15 a.m. and headed for Port of Ness and the Butt of Lewis.
I walked the neon lit gauntlet of the road, houses on either side fading into pitch black.
To the left the predawn roar of the Atlantic surge.
A soft hint of spent peat from dying overnight fires.
I remembered arriving in Cross the previous day on the school bus noticing the universal teatime re-fuelling of hundreds of fires and stores; fresh puffing chimneys as far as the eye could see.
In the dimming day the skyscape was like a miniature Grangemouth but sweeter smelling.
The peatstacks loomed large to right and left in between each house.
It is about four miles to the Port of Ness from Cross and I think I tiptoed the whole way.
To the east a pale pearl skyline was appearing.
The occasional house light, thick and orange behind curtains, crude by comparison.
The swathing sweep of the Butt of Lewis lighthouse faded the nearer I got to the Port.
It was going to be another unusually wind free day when islanders take the opportunity to tie down any loose facings and fencings before the furies of winter.
Frail souls and stronger can be dashed to the ground by gale force winds that blow for days on end.
How lucky I was.
There was gentle warmth in the morning sun and flowering geraniums in a window by the harbour of the Port.
It was 5th November.
The zigzag of harbour walls and breakwaters below the cliff were deserted.
Boats pulled up for the deceptive winter, the restless thud of the sea beyond the outer wall threatening to break into their sanctuary.
At the lighthouse, the keepers and contract workmen were taking the opportunity of the weather to carry out painting and maintenance work.
No, the lighthouse was not open to the public and then the keeper relented.
‘Take the key.
We'll be up in five minutes.’
A whole lighthouse to myself.
An eery echoing spiralling climb of 168 steps took me up to the light itself and 180 degree views stretching to hazy nothingness to the west and north; Harris hills to the south-west; the Cuillins of Skye to the south and the mainland mountains to the east.
The lighthouse was fourteen years old when JTR sketched it and by 1876 fish oil had been replaced by paraffin fuel.
It was a hundred years later that electricity was first used.
Erosion of the cliffs below have changed the profile of his view.
The  previous year to my visit a sizeable chunk had cracked off in a storm.
The day I was there was the still, silent kind of a winter day when the light clings to the skyline slowly moving round from east to south to west.
The sky was grey pearl with immobile scuds of cloud above.
The horizon line to the north would never lighten.
It was a deep grey blue leading into the lands of sunless winter; the weak golden fingers to the south cannot stretch that far.
Standing on top of the world I felt the pull of the cool gold beyond Skye dragging me further and further south, warmer and warmer.
A cheque book and an airline ticket — that is all it needed to bathe in that heat so far away.
Instead I warmed up retracing the predawn walk to Cross where I would collect the big rucksack and the last bus to Stornoway.
I passed through townships kissed like the Sleeping Beauty by the Prince.
Not an appropriate analogy as fairy tales and pantomimes are the Devil's tools, I'm sure — Ness District deleted ‘Devil's Dance’ from the SCO posters — but all that had been asleep was now activated.
Chattering starlings and continual dog barking backdropped carrying voices in the  pellucid late afternoon air.
Those puffing chimneys again and a strong peat reek now.
Clacking of a loom in a shed.
Behind an impeccably pebble-dashed and bloomer-curtained house with Georgian teak panelled door, the old ways incongruously go on.
A row of four oat ‘huts’ just like African beehive huts with pointy straw twisted tops preserved winter feed for the beasts.
And behind each house were the great moors and finally the sea on each side of the island.
Viewing sunset and dawnrise skyscapes was secondary to viewing each other across the road.
Who was that person walking by towards Cross?
Coming from Port of Ness?
Where had she spent the night?
Cross? but why as she walking back  towards it?
Somebody had seen her mid-morning coming from the lighthouse…
She couldn't have spent the night in Cross.
Who was she anyway?
Passing Barvas Lodge in the bus I saw one of ‘the men’.
His shooting uniform of olive greens and tweeds as tribal as the black Sunday outfits of the Lewis churchgoers.
Their isolation the same.
It was bonfire night and townships had long prepared stacks of driftwood and domestic combustibles.
‘All that kindling !’
An incomer friend — all of seventeen years but forever an incomer — in Ness had wailed.
She had chosen to live and bring up her family with the old ways in mind and practice.
A minority furrow to plough but plough it she literally did.
‘Change comes slow when people have been repressed for so long.
And is the Lewisach a farmer anyway?
Like the Shetlander, he's a fisherman at heart.’
As the bus trundled on towards Stornoway I noticed a tup with a galvanised steel boat-cleat embedded through its horn.
Why did I wince?
It was no more painful than a ring through a punk's nose.
In fact much less so in execution.
And further evidence of Carola's theory of all Lewisachs being fishermen not farmers?
Despite the diminishing fishing industry, material improvements are coming fast to Lewis.
Once inside many of the houses, the door shut on the (some would say) bleak environment.
The lifestyle and surroundings are no different from that on the mainland.
‘It is only the water in-between that makes the difference,’ one woman told me, proudly.
But the old ways and attitudes are still there behind the double glazing and the latest edition of Neighbours .
All that celebratory burning of good kindling at the onset of the darkest and longest months of the year must assuage some deep primitive need.
The very cavalier nature of such waste seems to cock a snook at the Presbyterianism that controls a large section of the community.
This interweaving of pre-Christian, reformation and contemporary religions gives Lewis its unique flavour and an opportunity for a lot of us to take stock of all that is slowly being eroded in our own cultures.
RAMBLE SEVEN
Wednesday, November 7 — Saturday, November 10
Lewis •Wick (via Dingwall)•Thurso
Lewis to Wick in one day via public transport?
It can be done.
Early morning boat ex Stornoway to Ullapool; bus to Dingwall, train to Thurso changing at Georgemas Junction for Wick.
JTR took all day travelling, courtesy of the Highland Railway Company, from Inverness to Wick.
He stopped off at Dingwall for a sketch or two and rejoined the train in Inverness.
JTR
The train that leaves Inverness in the morning does not reach Wick till a late hour in the evening: the hotel folk know this, and are quite prepared to keep open house till after the arrival of the train.
The last time I travelled from Wick to Dingwall was when the railway only reached as far north as Golspie; the other portion of the road was an overnight stage-coach journey; and to accommodate some ladies I took a seat on the top: it was a clear cold night, and the air was keen indeed.
We may well endorse the saying regarding him who had so much to do with road-making in the Highlands and islands; ‘if you had seen these roads before they were made you would have blessed brave General Wade,’ and wish prosperity to the Highland Railway Company.
I found my way to a temperance hotel advertised in the guide-book and found it a homely house.
The renamed Temperance Hotel was dismissive of backpackers.
The little B&B down by the harbour was far more in keeping with the thread of the sea that had kept with me the whole day's travel from west to east coast Scotland.
The woods, still leafy, and the mountains of Wester Ross were almost claustrophobic after the wide bleak expanse of North Lewis and the wastes of the Minch in between.
In Dingwall everyone spoke English!
Along the edge of the Cromarty Firth there were more seagulls in the fields than  over the whole of Lewis.
The land was so rolling and fertile and this was winter .
Give a Lewisach a tiny corner of one of these great fields and he would be a cattle baron.
Winter barley was coming through new green.
Free-range pigs rootled around miniature nissen huts.
The day was faintly foggy; lights were on on the tall hazy meccano sculptures of oil rigs moored in the Firth.
The deserted acres of the Invergordon smelter ghosted past with a corn stubbled field in tow, sixteen white swans standing on a rise.
At Tain the ancient stones in the graveyard above the railway line looked in as I ate an apple bought in Ness in Lewis that had come from Spain.
I found that quite amazing; something to do with the speed and continuity of the journey.
After Tain the cold grey expanse of the North Sea and to the north the grey-blue hills of Sutherland.
The tide was so high it gave the impression of the train being waterborne.
Rafts and rafts of water birds floated in the flat sanded estuary.
Coming inland a bit the land gets rougher.
A little terrier dog ran parallel with the train, barking with joy.
Fields get smaller and birch tree scrub predominates but it is all a Garden of Eden by Lewis standards.
Inland to Lairg, the birch woods give way to the heather moors of Sutherland.
In 1875 the notorious Duchess of Sutherland, responsible for some of the most brutal Clearances, was in London with the Duke lionising Mr Moody.
Every day she insisted on dragging her society friends, some very reluctant, to the Opera House in Haymarket where he was preaching.
Moody was entertained at Dunrobin Castle near Golspie, and the Duke, who owned more acres than anyone in Europe, wrote to him, ‘I shall never forget what I have heard from you.
If you know what a life mine is, in ways I was not able to tell you the other day, and what a terrible story mine has been, you would pray for me much.’
The Duke and Duchess were old by this time and salvation uppermost on the Duke's mind, it would seem.
At Rogart the hills were blanketed with autumn-coloured trees, the brown treeless moors beyond; in hollows of stubby hillocky straths little houses were dotted in isolation.
Extensive sheep pens at the side of the line at Rogart indicated that stock still travel by rail to the markets in the south.
Here the guard changed over and the train headed back eastwards to the coast.
Lilting Orcadian voices chattered behind; this line goes to the furthest northern railhead of Britain.
At Thurso the Orcadians then get the boat to Orkney.
They had a long way to go.
Two ladies with identical spectacles and points of view sat with folded arms under the luggage rack packed with treats from Marks and Spencers in Inverness (most northerly outlet of that firm's empire).
Some Orcadian cat was in for a good supper.
Two of the labels on the ‘cat gourmet triple pack’ read ‘Steak and Kidney Casserole’and ‘Sea Food Flan’.
The third choice was hidden by a pint of St Michael's milk.
Imagine going all the way to Inverness for a pint of milk…
Maybe that was for the cat, too.
At Brora the date 1895 was on the station building.
It would have been a platformless stop for JTR, like the Wild West of America.
The impersonal grey line of the North Sea kept us company to Helmsdale which nestles in the folds of heather hills close-cropped by winds that come relentlessly over that cruel water.
The folds look as if they are pushing Helmsdale right into the sea; as though the river in spate had collected all the houses it could uproot inland and deposited them at the river mouth with just enough of a toehold to keep them there.
Once again the train loops inland through moors that make those of Lewis look like playparks.
Silhouetted sticks of rotted snow barriers emphasise godforsaken desert stretching for endless miles.
But no desert when it comes to wild life, for this is the Flow Country where David Bellamy brought to popular attention how deep he could sink as he cavorted from tuft to tuft of floating bog.
By Kinbrace the guard had given up advising what station we were coming to.
Six or so houses, one with a satellite dish, and a little old graveyard on a lumpy knoll totalled the extent of the community.
Lights were on in the primary school.
It was 2.30 in the afternoon.
Numbers on the train were greatly reduced at Georgemas where those going to Wick had to dismount and wait for a connecting Sprinter.
Here the land is flat and fertile like Ayrshire and as if on cue a herd of Ayrshire cows obliged by ambling by Loch Watten.
Flotillas of birds sculled and flapped away from the train.
A farmer was burning straw, the yellow billows of smoke spiralling lazily upward.
Winter was coming in slowly to the North East of Scotland.
Hundreds of greylag geese grazing in fields looked like some new  cinereous winter crop until they flew thickly into the dim sky.
We had disturbed their last feed of the day.
The street lights were very bright in Wick.
It was 3.30 p.m.
The thread of the sea that had kept with me all day had not been literal.
It was historical.
Wick was where many of those impoverished Lewisachs, men and women, went to look for work that unsuccessful fishing season of ‘74.
They did not travel as I had, feet up, surveying the passing countryside with prawn and avocado sandwiches and a can of white wine.
They would have come, some in their own boats, others by steerage in mail or cargo boats, round the wild coastline of Cape Wrath.
A lot of the women, young girls for the most part, came overland as I had, packed in steamers and trains like the fish they were to gut.
On east coast boats in the 1870s, Lewis hands got a fixed wage of £7 to £10 for a six-week period with an additional 6d or 1/- for every cran (basket weight) fished.
The fisher girls were paid pennies for packing the barrels but this was still enough, if they were lucky in health and spirit, to buy bonnets and lace to take back to Lewis at the end of the season for dreamy bottom drawers.
Inevitably there was friction between the east and west coast men.
The expansion of business and industry in all the main ports and towns of Scotland also brought with it an influx of work-hungry ‘inlanders’, as well as islanders, adding even more to the tensions.
Drink the fuel for combatants and onlookers alike.
The harbour at Wick is fronted with Telford-designed buildings, beautifully  proportioned, the little dormitory windows of the west coast herring lassies high above the larger windows of the managers' and traders' rooms, warehouses and storerooms below.
Nowadays there is a sad, derelict air; a sweetie shop, a pub and a cafe at street level and nobody looking out of upstairs windows.
It is as though Wick is still waiting for the fishing to come back, drink no longer a fuel, but a solace.
Wick's future lies in the balance.
The other fishing stations of JTR's time on the west coast suffered the collapse of the herring industry earlier and have kept alive mostly through tourism (though Stornoway still tenuously has oil and fishing links).
Wick waits, remembering the herring more recently; the lovely old buildings stare blankly over the vast harbour once a forest of masts.
Now the masts total a small copse.
Wick, where the biggest shop is Woolworths and the young girls pass reeking of cigarette smoke, and CHRIST DIED FOR OUR SINS is writ large on the exterior of the Harbour Mission wall.
Leaving the harbour high on the Pultney side of the river I passed an old folks' home looking out over that cold North Sea; only the dawn in winter can show any warmth.
An old man was out feeding the gulls in his carpet slippers.
Thin bony shanks showed through his wind-fluttered trousers.
‘We had to throw the herring away in the '20s.
Now they'd be millionaires if they could have them.’
He was referring to the British Government's ‘bloody Tories’ trade block against Russia whose revolution threatened European equilibrium.
Over a million and a half barrels of herring a year had been exported to Russia prior to the embargo.
‘The evilness of those in power who change the rules.
There's always those that suffer.’
His old eyes behind smudged spectacles talked to the seagulls and the North Sea as much as to me.
‘The Messiah's Second Coming is the only thing that will  change man's wicked ways.
We get chance after chance to make it right and what do we do?
Fight.’
His mounting anger was making his speech more and more incomprehensible through his stroke-stiffened mouth.
‘Look!
Look!
There's another war brewing…’
I shook his hand to calm him as much as to show respect.
‘May the Lord bless you and keep you…’ and he reeled off the whole benediction, still clinging to my hand.
Then he tottered to the home, polybag empty of crusts.
The seagulls wheeled off and up over the harbour.
It wasn't the wind that brought tears to my eyes as I turned to walk along the cliff path.
JTR
It was too late to witness the fishing life, which is the leading interest attaching to Wick, but when on the Orkney passage, I have sailed through the fleet of herring-boats, and it is a fine sight.
The Aberdeen and Shetland mail steamers call at Wick Bay,weather permitting ; this clause has a deep meaning in it, as many can witness who have seen how the waves break on that shore at times.
After sketching the steamboat, as she lay in the bay unlading her cargo, from the bridge over the water that divides Pultneytown from the old town of Wick, I got into one of the boats leaving the pier, and was landed on board the ‘St. Nicholas,’ thinking it would be more pleasant to visit Thurso by sailing round the coast than to go by rail.
I was to be at the harbour at 8 a.m. on the dot.
At 7.45, with a knot of sickness already tightening in my stomach, there was not a soul about.
It was bitterly cold but dry.
I had arranged to go out in a crab boat to get JTR's coastal sketches.
Trawling the harbour the previous afternoon for a lift was not easy — not many boats to choose from and a distinct wariness on the part of the seamen.
But a pirate with a paunch said ‘OK- eight on the dot.’
Behind me a boat yard opened up.
Men in blue overalls with newspapers sticking out of back pockets wandered in.
Children in warm anoraks passed on the way to school.
9.15.
The local dog staked out his territory, cocking a leg.
Pirate arrived with a screech of rusty Ford brakes without any acknowledgement of my huddled form sheltering by his fishboxes on the quay.
I could tell he had forgotten the arrangement.
Or had chosen to.
His boat was small and open with a minute wheelhouse that would dangerously wedge his bulk.
There was a young lad with him.
No doubt as to where I would be standing for the eight-hour day, two miles out to sea.
At the stern.
I watched the dog lifting his leg again and wondered if my idea was sensible.
I was not even going to get a lift to Thurso out of it.
‘Six spoonfuls of strawberry jam before you go out the harbour.
Sweet going down, sweet coming back up,’ the man in the boat yard had said the previous night.
Beyond the breakwater the waves were getting bigger as the Pirate effed and cee-ed, bent over the uncovered inboard engine.
Something was wrong with the pump.
Men, obviously out of work, had gathered by me and the pile of fishboxes.
Advice started to volley back and forth.
Only the Pirate knew why I was there and was not letting on.
The atmosphere became excruciating.
There is nothing like a band of men in their working environment to make a single female feel like a page three Martian.
The timing to walk away from such a situation is crucial; unless you are in the mood to parry age old male posturings and sexual innuendo.
Just then I felt that my unspoken liberation, symbolised by the backpack, was a criticism of their trapped unemployed state.
The sketchbook is a great aid at times like this.
There was something terribly interesting to sketch further along the quayside.
And I just kept going.
Tired and cold and full of anticlimax.
And needing a pee.
The cafe was warm and smelling of fish scales.
Three young men with loop and stud earrings in one ear (the lad on the Caledonian Canal fishing boat was not as individual as I had thought) had three beefburgers and a pie each and then a chocolate KitKat with their tea.
Rows of sweetie jars lined the shelves.
I bought some Liquorice Perfections after my pie, beans and chips and sucked them on the bus to Thurso.
Rivalry exists between Thurso and Wick but in reverse to when JTR visited.
Wick was the big prosperous town and Thurso a little village just being developed by the wealthy for residences ‘whose whereabouts a Wick man can scarcely discover on the map’.
Tea in a bowla/Floor sconags/Soor sellags/Dirty Thirsa
(Tea in a  handless cup/Flour scones/Sour fish/Dirty Thurso)
So went the old rhyme.
But the last line goes ‘Dirty Weeckers’ nowadays.
Thurso has got a swimming pool and a wine bar.
And Dounreay, which for the moment is the major employer of highly trained and specialised employees; wage packets are accordingly high.
Yet Wick is the Royal Burgh despite its current depression.
Thurso could not afford the £300 needed for the charter in 1876 when, hard on the heels of the Prince and Princess of Wales' visit to ‘The Exhibition’, the Town Council proposed applying for the honour.
JTR
Thurso my readers will have heard much about, at the time when his Royal Highness visited it to open the Exhibition there in the autumn of 1876.
I saw that Exhibition, and did find it a great treat to see so far north some of the choice gems of painting from South Kensington.
Many other contributions were of interest! but it was strange to look on this picture and on that — to see on the same walls so many poor efforts at painting alongside of chef-d'oeuvres of artistic power.
Concerts were being held in the building.
The fruit of the little enlivening the quaint old northern town has got through the Exhibition may be seen by-and-bye.
It was certainly unique, such an Exhibition, so near the northern shore and the Pentland waves.
We will leave the waves to sing a plaintive closing requiem over the Exhibition that was held, and hope Thurso may enjoy much true prosperity.
Exhibitions were all the rage at that time, and not just for the artistic elite of the big cities to the south, much to JTR's misgivings, obviously.
John T. Reid, not only are you a religious groupie, a thwarted poet of the Romantic School, a fitness freak, a possible paedophile, you are an artistic snob as well…
At ‘The Caithness and Sutherland Industrial and Art Exhibition’ to give it its full title, a labourer was charged with having done damage to the extent of £8 by falling upon a glass case and breaking a valuable jug the property of one John Fitsgibbon, china merchant.
A fine of fifteen shillings was imposed.
Maybe JTR helped pick up the pieces or did he watch the poor man's agony from afar?
The John O' Groats Journal and the Caithness Courier were full of the details of the exhibits.
The Duke of Sutherland (had Moody saved his soul yet?) sent deer heads, geological specimens and paintings.
The MP Sir Tollemache Sinclair (who desperately wanted Thurso to become a Royal Burgh) sent the largest collection of items including oleographs, prize-winning inlaid walnut cabinet and ships' models.
The Flagstone Quarrying Co. exhibited an immense flagstone.
‘A navvie sent a beautiful polished piece of stone from Spittal quarry.’
Maybe he was the one that broke the glass case…
Caithness fields are fenced with these stone flags.
Like gravestones they lead to Dounreay.
The Des.
Res. on the clifftop that joins Thurso to Scrabster are not interested in the loads of driftwood washed up below.
Oil tanks hide behind pampas grasses and dried-up clematis.
No nuclear mock driftwood units yet sitting in Fifestone fireplaces.
An oyster catcher piped aboard a peach orange sunset all of three o'clock in the afternoon.