

Everyone is ill sometimes.
At school, Nicola had a cold last week.
Adam broke his leg in the summer.
Iain had measles for two weeks.
Anthony gets headaches when he reads for too long.
Sometimes, when you are ill, the doctor comes to your home.
If she thinks you need medicine the doctor will write a note so the medicine can be collected from the chemist.
At other times people have to go into hospital to have an operation to make them better.
But sometimes people have an illness which cannot be made better.
In our family we have a special illness.
It is called Huntington's Chorea, or HC for short.
Peter and Paul's grandfather had HC.
He was their Mum's dad and so their Mum could have HC from him.
HC is not catching, like measles.
It is only if your Mum or Dad has it, that you may possible have it when you grown up, whether you are a boy or a girl.
There are other families like Peter and Paul's who have HC.
They all joined together to make a group called COMBAT.
Combat means to fight, and they help each other to fight against this illness, by talking and finding out more about it, and having parties, too.
HC is not like other illnesses.
Usually, it only happens to grown-ups.
People with HC may be clumsy, or fall over a lot, or get very fidgety.
Sometimes they may not be able to eat or talk very well.
They can also be forgetful or very tired and perhaps bad tempered.
When people get it, they may have to go into hospital or a special home, to rest, or perhaps to stay.
Not everyone understands it is HC which makes people behave strangely.
It is not their fault, it is the illness.
It does not mean they don't love their families, but sometimes the HC stops them showing it.
When Peter and Paul's Mum sometimes get angry or clumsy, they don't know whether she is starting HC, or just worrying about starting HC.
HC normally begins after you are grown up, so you don't know whether you will get it or not.
If their Mum does have HC, Peter and Paul may get it later on.
There is as much chance of them having it, as them not having it.
The chances are the same for both of them.
But if she does not have it then they will never get it nor could their children.
If their Mum does get HC, Peter and Paul have a favourite Aunty who will help Daddy look after them and love them very much.
Peter and Paul will want to remember their Mummy as she was before she got ill, and how much she loved and cared about them when they were younger, even if the illness makes here different.
Peter and Paul do not want Mummy to be ill or to have HC themselves, but at the moment there is no sure way to know for everyone.
Doctors all over the world have been working to find a way to test whether people like Peter and Paul's Mum will have HC or not.
This test is around now for some people.
Doctors are also trying to find ways to make people with HC better and everyone hopes they will.
In the meantime, families like Peter and Paul's have to think carefully about whether to have children themselves, or not.
Peter and Paul hope that by the time they are grown up, the doctors will know more about HC and how to stop it.
They know that other unhappy things can happen to people like road accidents or other illnesses.
It's not just their family which has worried.
They will enjoy themselves and make the most of their lives like everyone else.
The family hopes Mum never gets HC.
If she does she will need them to love her and to understand.
They also know other families with HC, and about COMBAT so they won't feel alone.