

‘Not a bad fit,’ said the Hungarian.
‘Lucky we're nearly the same size.’
A little dandyish for Karelius' liking, with lemon trousers and silver waistcoat beneath a frockcoat of turquoise blue.
The lace cravat was really too much, but he could hardly say so.
‘I'm obliged to you,’ he murmured, seating himself by the fire and extending his hands.
‘Greatly obliged.
You've made yourself very comfortable here, I must say.’
Despite the lodging-house furniture, the room bore hallmarks of long individual occupation, Aranyos having impressed it with his stamp in the form of various ornaments, mostly of a military flavour.
A couple of swords and a coat of arms adorned the wall, whilst the wardrobe contained uniforms of differing design; Hapsburg officers, especially hussars, were wont to please themselves what they wore.
A miniature of a girl with red hair stood amongst some campaign medals and ribbons on his desk and the mantelpiece bore an impressive collection of cups and shields.
‘Fencing trophies,’ explained Aranyos immodestly.
‘I'm the best blade in Europe, I believe.’
Most Hapsburg officers were fine swordsmen.
Karelius thought he had heard of their champion, but could not recall the name.
Probably this was the man.
‘Really?
We must try a few passes some time.’
‘By all means.
But first to business.’
‘Of course.
Perhaps you'd better start,’ suggested Karelius with what he felt to be rather transparent cunning.
‘You're better informed than me.’
Aranyos screwed the monocle carefully into his eye and regarded him pityingly.
‘My dear fellow, I could hardly be  worse.
So far as the organization of your operations here is concerned, I cannot congratulate you.’
‘That's what I've come to put right,’ said Karelius, nettled.
‘You'll find ample scope for improvement, I assure you.
But let's start with the easiest question first.
Who do you imagine it was using you for target practice this afternoon?’
‘Probably the man I was going to see.
His name is Fedorov.’
‘Very good,’ said the Hungarian, as if agreeably surprised by the intelligence of a backward child.
‘Fedorov it was, unless I'm much mistaken.
We've had our eye on him for some time.
There's little doubt he's your man.’
‘Can't be on his own.’
‘Of course not, he's just the executioner.
Why were you going to see him, by the way?’
‘I'm a language tutor of sorts.
He wanted me to teach his wife Dutch, and help improve her German.’
‘Fedorov's wife died two years ago.
A pretty reckless lie when you could so easily have checked, but he often demonstrates an indifference to risk.
And it was a little odd, surely, to give Dutch priority over German.’
Very odd, Karelius had to agree.
Why bother learning a language to impress visitors, when you hadn't even troubled to learn that of the place where you lived?
He cursed himself for a fool.
‘It's almost certain he killed Goldstein as well,’ Aranyos continued.
‘There were three men involved.
Contrary to what the Wiener Tageblatt seems to think, we — the Imperial Police that is — succeeded in arresting one of those responsible.
He named one accomplice, but refused point-blank to identify the other, despite the most detailed interrogation.’
‘Detailed’ Karelius took to be a euphemism for brutal.
He nodded gloomily.
‘How about the one he did name?’
‘We went to arrest him too.
Unfortunately we managed to arrive only in time for his funeral.’
‘Fedorov again?’
‘So we infer.
There have also been one or two apparently motiveless murders in Vienna these last few weeks which could be his work, though it's less certain.’
‘He's a wealthy man,’ Karelius pointed out.
‘Wouldn't it be less risky for him to employ others to do his dirty work?’
‘Maybe, but as I mentioned he seems to attach no importance to risk, besides which he apparently enjoys killing.
The description we have of Goldstein's third assailant fits him pretty well.
There are discrepancies, but all the witnesses observed that the murderer was a powerfully built man with very fair hair.’
Karelius nodded.
Those of a violently criminal disposition often demonstrated a contempt for their own safety.
‘Certainly sounds like him again.
Is there enough evidence for an arrest?’
‘In my view, yes.
I was in favour of hauling him in last week, but the powers-that-be thought it better to let him remain at large for the time being, in the hope that he might lead us to his employers.’
Karelius glanced up from the fire.
‘And who are they?’
‘Two possibilities: the Russians and the French.
Only one, really.
I can't think of a reason why the Czar or his advisers should want to murder British agents.
So that leaves the French.
And I don't mean the Grand Army.’
‘Fouché's men?’
The French Senator-Minister for the High Police controlled a web of espionage as efficient as that of the Hapsburgs, and if anything even more ruthless.
Karelius frowned.
‘I've thought of that,’ he continued, ‘but the problem seems to be this.
Fouché is basically a policeman: a corrupt, meddling, political sort of policeman it's true, but a policeman none the less.
His job is to stamp out opposition to Bonaparte within the French Empire.
British operations in Austria lie outside his usual ambit, it seems to me.’
‘A fair point,’ Aranyos conceded, ‘but I think I can answer it.
For a start, Fouché is obsessed with intrigue: a meddler, as you say.
He loves poking his nose into all sorts of things throughout Europe, whether relevant to his office or not.’
‘True.
But why the murders?
Even Fouché doesn't order people killed just for the hell of it.’
‘Ah, there you have me.
It's possible that Fedorov may have exceeded his authority: I forgot to mention that he's a madman, though he succeeds in disguising it most of the time.
The other possibility is that one or more of your men stumbled across something important which Fouché would prefer kept secret: something, at a guess, more relevant to internal French politics than Bonaparte's military adventures, which as you say don't really concern the police.’
‘I suppose you've no idea what it might be?’
‘None.
As I've already said, it takes some believing that your agents could have unearthed anything worth killing for.
They'd been known to us for years as a couple of minor police informers, dabblers in espionage who never come up with anything much.’
Karelius sighed ruefully.
‘That's the impression I was given, too.
How did you get on to me, by the way?’
Aranyos had evaded the question once, but after some hesitation, now continued, ‘I don't mind telling you.
We were half expecting someone to arrive to investigate the deaths anyway, and we'd been keeping Fedorov under observation for some time.
When he tried his hand at another murder and the proposed victim turned out to be a young Anglo-Prussian only just arrived in Vienna, it seemed likely you were the man.
‘And the name Orestes?’
Aranyos smiled apologetically.
‘You must allow me to keep some secrets.’
‘Our people at the Austrian court, I expect.
Quaestor warned me they were too pally with you lot.
Still, I suppose I can't complain: you could have let me drown, after all.’
‘Pointless,’ said Aranyos calmly.
‘When you might be the very man we need to defeat the entire French operation.’
‘Instead of General Kutusov?’
‘If he's the alternative,’ grunted the Hungarian, ‘you're the better bet.’
He removed his eyeglass and polished it thoroughly.
‘For the time being at least you hold one trump card.’
‘Fedorov thinks I'm dead.’
‘Exactly.
So far as he's concerned, he shot you, you fell in the river, and your body was swept away.
No doubt he will so advise his superiors.’
‘It follows, said Karelius slowly, ‘that I can't go back to Sanders' place.
Fedorov would soon get to hear and try again.
It's a nuisance having to abandon my belongings, though.
There aren't that many, but I could do with a few more clothes.’
He paused for thought.
‘I suppose you couldn't call on old Sanders, posing as a sorrowing relative?’
‘He might ask some awkward questions.
Evidence of my  identity — why I, presumably an Englishman, since my relative is, should independently choose to visit Vienna at the same time — a time, incidentally, when most people with any sense are travelling in precisely the opposite direction…
‘Shouldn't think so for a minute, knowing him.’
‘How about if he tries speaking English?
I hardly know a dozen words.’
‘He won't,’ Karelius assured him with confidence.
‘If he does, I'm sure you'll manage to bluff it out.’
The Hungarian pulled a wry face.
‘All right, I'll give it a try.
But in return, there's a little job I'd like you to do for me.’
For the first time Aranyos seemed uncertain how to proceed, sucking his lip thoughtfully for several seconds before continuing, ‘It involves looking into a curious business which could prove to be a complete dead end, namely an attack on a girl in the Bauernmarkt last Saturday evening.
On the fact of it, a sexual assault by a drunken ruffian.
Luckily the victim put up a fight and a couple of passers-by joined in, so that the assailant failed to accomplish what the local newspaper delicately referred to as ‘his appalling purpose.’’
‘Not Fedorov again?’
‘For once, no, the description didn't fit at all .
Indeed, the attacker was traced without much difficulty.
One Ernst Vogel, a loutish youth of criminal antecedents.’
‘You've arrested him, then?’
‘I'm afraid not.
Before we could do so he was called to account before a higher tribunal.
Dead,’ added Aranyos, in case Karelius had missed the point.
‘I see.
Is he the same one…’
‘Killed following Goldstein's murder?
Yes.
So there's the link with Fedorov, albeit a rather inconclusive one.
I'd like you to look into it, though.’
Karelius had nothing else to go on, besides which he owed the Hapsburgs' man something for saving his life.
‘By all means,’ he replied.
‘Where do I start?’
‘I'd suggest with the victim.
There's not much known about the girl, because she's a recent visitor to Vienna.
According to her own account, which we haven't yet had time to check but there's no particular reason to doubt, she's twenty-five years old, single, and works in the millinery trade in Mannheim.
Travelling alone, which needless to say is rather  unusual for a member of the fair sex.’
‘Oh, I don't know,’ said Karelius uncertainly.
‘She might be one of those modern women.
They seem to get up to all sorts of things nowadays.
Where's she staying?’
‘A small pension in the Rauhensteingasse, kept by a Herr Zimmerman.
I'd like you to put up there for a few days, and try to scrape acquaintance with her.
Her name's Müller: Katje Müller.’
‘Why is she visiting Vienna just now?’
‘She claims to be visiting her sister, who's a singer with the opera company at the Theater an der Wien .
Again we haven't had time to check fully, but there is a soprano of that name.’
Aranyos paused momentarily, apparently lost in thought.
Recovering himself, he continued, ‘Müllers are ten-a-penny in Germany, of course.
‘Yes.
Funny.
I was hoping to get the chance to see the new Beethoven opera.
I might manage to escort Fräulein Müller there, especially if she's on her own as you say.
Then she could take me backstage to meet her beautiful, talented, desirable sister, and who knows…’
‘No need to get carried away,’ Aranyos advised.
‘Still, at least you seem to appreciate I've given you the plum job, whilst landing myself with the task of keeping an eye on Fedorov.
But there doesn't seem any alternative.
It's obviously best that he continues to believe you're at the bottom of the Danube, or halfway to the Black Sea by now.’
Vienna fell without a fight on the fourteenth of November, together with large quantities of arms and ammunition abandoned by the retreating Hapsburg army.
The remaining populace, disillusioned with their rulers and protectors, accordingly greeted the French emperor and his men with less hostility than might have been expected.
Thiercelin and Lefevre found themselves received at their billet with almost embarrassing cordiality, the householder, Herr Bauer, and his wife insisting upon catering for their every need, whilst regaling them with complaints of Hapsburg perfidy and the brutality of their Russian allies.
No doubt in due course they would become equally vocal in their complaints about the French, but Thiercelin decided that so far as possible his own behaviour should be above reproach.
Lefevre agreed.
The Grand Army had problems enough without alienating the local population.
Their lodgings lay almost in the shadow of the Stefansdom, the great cathedral dominating the centre of the city, and less than a mile from the  Theatre  an der Wien .
This proved to be an imposing edifice in the latest Empire style.
According to the posters outside, the winter season would open the following Wednesday with the first performance of a new work,Leonore , by Ludwig van Beethoven.
Most prominent billing was accorded to the proprietor, a Baron von Braun.
Prima Donna was a lady called Anna Milder; the other leading artistes were a Herr Demner and Louise Müller.
‘There's young Daniel's Louise, anyway,’ commented Lefevre.
‘At least she isn't entirely a product of his imagination.
‘Yes, I'd been rather afraid of that, too.’
‘When do you suggest we call?’
Thiercelin glanced up at the ornate gilded clock above the main entrance.
Six-thirty on a dank November evening.
‘We could try straight away.
Listen.’
From within came the strains of an orchestra.
The tune was indistinguishable to Thiercelin, who acknowledged himself practically tone deaf.
‘There's something going on,’ agreed Lefevre.
‘Let's see if she's in.’
The man at the stage door seemed disinclined to argue with a pair of French uniforms, and indicated one of the larger dressing-rooms along an ill-lit corridor.
A couple of performers, clad in unconvincing military costume, bustled past whilst regarding the examples of the genuine article with mild curiosity.
Thiercelin, who knew nothing of theatres, walked uneasily up to the door and knocked.
‘One moment.’
A woman's face appeared around the door.
She must have been nearly forty years of age, tall, thin and plainly dressed.
Black hair was pulled back into a bun, hausfrau-style.
Thiercelin allowed himself to wonder how Daniel could have been attracted by her.
‘Fräulein Müller?’
‘I am her dresser.
Who is it wishes to see her?’
‘Captain Thiercelin and Lieutenant Lefevre of the Grand Army.’
This information was apparently relayed, for, after muted conversation with someone inside, the dark woman said, ‘Come in,’ rather ungraciously, and stood aside.
Thiercelin looked around.
It was a cosy if untidy room, the furniture strewn with various items of women's clothing, including the most immodest.
A dressing-table was cluttered with grease-paints, ribbons, stage jewellery and bric-a-brac.
There were two large bouquets and a bundle of letters tied with pale blue ribbon, presumably from stage-door admirers.
Of the occupant herself he could see no sign.
‘Good evening, gentlemen,’ came a voice from behind a pink embroidered screen at the far end of the room.
A pretty blonde head appeared over the top.
‘I am Louise Müller.
You wanted to see me?’
‘Yes, mademoiselle.
We regret having to disturb you at a time when you are busy, but the matter is important.’
‘That's all right,’ said the blonde woman cheerfully.
‘I've finished now anyway.
The show'll be over in ten minutes.
I hate dress rehearsals, and this was a disaster, but who cares?
Only the composer, who's going deaf anyway; as for the conductor, my dears, the man's a positive halfwit…’
She spoke French fluently, with the accents of the Rhine.
Thiercelin, to whom first impressions were important, sensed that beneath the gushing stream of words she was not altogether at ease.
Admittedly that might be a normal reaction to an unexpected visit from a couple of French officers.
‘It is a matter of some confidentiality,’ he said, glancing at the dark woman hovering nearby.
‘Say what you like in front of Rachel.
She's heard it all before.’
‘Very well, mademoiselle.
I'm afraid we may be bringing you bad news.’
She emerged from behind the screen and walked over to the dressing-table, brushing gently against Thiercelin as she did so.
No doubt about what Daniel had seen in this woman.
Her face was plump, pretty rather than beautiful, with long fair hair tied back from the brow in defiance of the current fashion.
She had not troubled to dress, despite, or perhaps because of, the fact that she had male visitors.
The thin gown of emerald green silk was quite inadequate to the task of concealing what lay beneath.
Her skin, unlike that of many fair women, was not too pale, but of glowing polished texture.
Thiercelin, who was a Frenchman after all, observed that her breasts were particularly fine, and the rest of her figure in proportion.
He looked into the mirror to see a pair of brown eyes looking at him levelly, appreciative of and amused by his scrutiny.
‘You were about to tell me some bad news.’
‘Yes, mademoiselle.
Might I ask whether you were acquainted with a friend of ours, a Lieutenant Daniel, of the Grand Army?’
She frowned.
‘Daniel.
Daniel.
Ah, yes, I remember now.
I met him in Strasbourg some months ago.
He came to see me after the performance — several times, in fact.’
Thiercelin cleared his throat.
‘Forgive me, mademoiselle, but I'm afraid it is my duty to ask whether…that is, if you  were…’
‘Lovers?’ provided Louise Müller, with a smile quite free from embarrassment.
‘Oh, no.
He fancied himself in love with me, the silly boy, but that was absurd.
I tried to discourage him, but in the end he became a little bit of a nuisance, you know?
Very nice boy, though.’
‘When did you see him last?’
‘Oh’— she gestured vaguely —‘quite a while ago.
Some time in the summer, I think.
I'm not very good at dates.
Why, has something happened to him?’
‘I'm afraid so.
He was killed a fortnight since.’
‘Oh.’
The pretty face registered conventional sorrow.
I'm very sorry.
Was he killed in action?’
‘On the contrary.
Murdered.
That's what we're looking into.’
‘Oh, how dreadful,’ said Fräulein Müller, again without appearing unduly distressed.
Some sort of private grudge would seem to have been responsible; Do you know of anyone who could have wished him harm?
‘Oh, no.
But as I said, I hardly knew him.’
‘Did he ever escort you anywhere?’
‘Certainly not.
I would never have encouraged him like that.
He used to bring me flowers, but as you can see’— she gestured to some carnations on the table —‘that's always happening.
We talked a bit, but that was all.’
‘I see.
Well, mademoiselle…‘
‘Call me Louise,’ the girl invited him.
‘Everyone does.
And your name is…?’
‘Jacques,’ he answered sheepishly.
‘Jacques,’ she purred, leaning forward.
‘Yes, Jacques?’
Thiercelin swallowed.
‘I need to know, er, whether there might be anyone who had cause to feel, shall we say, jealous of Lieutenant Daniel.
Any gentleman friend…’
She laughed musically.
‘Dear me, no.
I assure you I am quite free of all entanglements of that kind at the moment.
In any case the idea of such a thing between me and the lieutenant is quite absurd.
He was far too young for me, for one thing.’
The glance she threw Thiercelin carried the strong implication that she preferred the more mature type of man.
Lefevre developed a sudden interest in the box of greasepaints  on her dressing-table, and started poking about amongst them idly.
‘Just one or two more routine questions, Louise.’
Taking his cue from her, Thiercelin pronounced it German-style, with three syllables.
She accepted the tribute with a dazzling smile.
‘How long have you been with this company?’
‘About three months.
I joined at the end of July.’
‘So it was before then that you met Lieutenant Daniel?’
‘Yes.
I was with a small company in Strasbourg at the time.
April or May, I suppose it must have been.’
Thiercelin took from his tunic a small sheet of card bearing a line drawing.
‘Is that Lieutenant Daniel?’
Again she leant forward, ostensibly to peruse it more closely.
The emerald green gown gaped open.
Thiercelin's eyes widened at the sight.
‘Ah, yes, that's him.
It's some time, of course, but yes, I'm almost certain.’
‘Thank you, ma — Louise.’
Thiercelin pocketed the sketch and pulled out a notebook and Conté pencil.
‘Perhaps I could make one or two notes, only a formality.
My superiors like me to get as much detail as possible.’
‘Of course, Jacques.
I quite understand.’
‘Er, yes.
How came it that you obtained employment here?’
‘It was really quite out of the blue.
Herr Schikenader, the former proprietor, chanced to see me perform one evening.
He told me he was always on the lookout for new artistes, and offered me a position with his company.
The opportunity was too good to miss.
Vienna is the Mecca of the music world, of course.’
‘I see.
Better a little fish in a big pond than the other way round?’
After this somewhat less than well-chosen remark a momentary glassiness affected Fräulein Müller's ready smile, but she was quick to recover her poise and said simply, ‘You could put it like that, I suppose.’
‘I meant…er, yes.
Well, thank you, Louise.
We're most grateful for your help, and apologize again for having to disturb you.
See, next Wednesday is the big night, isn't it?’
‘That's right, Jacques,’ breathed Fräulein Müller, in a tone suggesting that such a very handsome officer could be forgiven the occasional minor indiscretion.
‘I do so hope  you'll be here.’
‘Well,’ said Thiercelin uncertainly, ‘I suppose I might come along, yes.
I'm afraid my musical appreciation is very slight, but…’
‘Oh, please come, Jacques.
I'll be so disappointed if you don't.’
‘Ah.
Very well, Louise.
I shall be here.’
‘Your technique with women,’ said Lefevre, ‘is a revelation.
I never saw anything like it.
You had her eating out of your hand.
‘Jacques, what a divine name…
Do call me Louise, Jacques…
Come to see me any time, Jacques, I'll be heartbroken if you don't…’’
‘Hm.
Your recollection of what she said seems remarkably inaccurate.
Still, I must admit women who are that forward do tend to intimidate me rather.’
‘I'd never have suspected it.
The polished manner, the suave small-talk —‘Would you look at this picture, Louise…
A matter of routine, you understand…
Have you any gentleman friend, Louise…’
Formidable-formidable .
Put me completely in the shade.’
‘When you've finished ridiculing your superior officer, you may care to give your attention to what we learnt back there.’
‘Nothing.’
It had started to rain, and Lefevre pulled up his collar.
‘Come on, there's a cab over there.
Oh no, damn it, it's taken.
Let's hope there's another along shortly.’
‘Never mind about that.
You must surely have observed a few things about Fräulein Müller.’
‘Two things, anyway.’
‘No need to be crude.
I was thinking of the colour of her hair: Daniel, you may remember, alluded to her as a redhead.
This woman was blonde.’
‘Surely,’ said Lefevre, ‘it cannot have escaped a man of your experience that some ladies are in the habit of dyeing their hair.’
‘He also, if I remember correctly, called her a little Louise’.
Little.
Now Fräulein Müller, as you may have noticed…’
‘She's a big girl,’ agreed Lefevre appreciatively.
‘But ‘little’ could just have been a term of endearment.
Daniel was pie-eyed at the time, anyway.’
‘Nevertheless, I thought two such discrepancies called for  an explanation.
That's why I used this.’
Thiercelin took out the picture again.
Lefevre examined it closely.
‘That's funny.
I didn't look at it when you were showing it to her.’
‘No, you were too intent on investigation of her neckline.
Just as well one of us had his mind on the job.’
‘Who is it?’
‘My father, sketched by my mother when he was rather younger than I am now.
Lucky that I carry it around with me; and that it bears not the faintest resemblance to Daniel.’
‘So she was mistaken.’
‘Or lying, more likely.
Of course it's just possible that she has poor eyesight — a woman like that would be too vain to wear spectacles.
But together with the other matters, it raises the possibility that she may never have known Daniel at all.’
‘In which case she's an imposter.
And, damn it, yes: Daniel must have been killed to prevent the personation being discovered.’
‘We must avoid jumping to conclusions,’ replied Thiercelin cautiously.
‘But it may well be so.’
‘Surely others in the company must know the truth?’
‘Not necessarily.
She's only been with them three months, remember, and Daniel hasn't been to see her since.
The substitution probably took place before she came here.’
‘What's-his-name, then, the fellow who offered her the job.
He'd know if she's been substituted.’
‘She called him the former proprietor.
He might have sold up before she arrived here.
Anyway we've only got her word for the whole story.
It'll have to be checked.
Discreetly, of course.’
‘Your subtlety never ceases to amaze me.
What do you suppose happened to the real Louise Müller?’
Thiercelin shrugged and pulled his collar up in turn.
‘Same thing that happened to Daniel, I expect.’
He stamped up and down.
‘What a foul night.’
‘Have you noticed that cab?’
‘The one you wanted to take, you mean?’
Thiercelin glanced across the road.
The driver on top was huddled into a blanket to protect himself from the elements.
‘Not particularly.
Should I have?’
‘He'd already got a fare when we left the theatre.
But he  hasn't moved since.’
‘Waiting for someone else, I suppose.’
Thiercelin hesitated.
‘You don't mean…the driver…’
‘No, not the man we're looking for.
He's far too small for one thing.
It's the passenger I'm more interested in.’
‘Very likely just waiting for one of the girls from the theatre.’
‘Not very gallant,’ Lefevre pointed out, ‘to make her traipse across the road in this weather.
I reckon he might be more concerned about us.’
‘Let's have a word with him, then.’
They set off briskly, boots echoing hollowly from the paving-stones.
A head looked out of the offside window and spoke to the driver, who shook the reins.
The coach trotted smartly away.
‘Damn it,’ fumed Thiercelin.
‘Quick, pray for another cab.’
A frustrating ninety seconds passed before they were successful.
‘Where to, sir?’
‘Zum Ende der Strasse ,’ said Thiercelin in his laboured German.
In Paris a cabby would have commiserated upon the unfortunate malady affecting his legs, but the Viennese were different.
If a man wanted to spend his money taking a drive of a hundred paces, it was up to him.
‘Schnell, bitte ’ Lefevre's injunction, on the other hand, would have been unnecessary in the French capital, where one and all drove like madmen.
In Vienna the pace of life was more civilized.
At the end of the street the driver drew rein.
‘And now, sir?’
‘Never mind,’ Thiercelin sighed.
Whoever it was must be miles away by now.
And his German was hardly up to the task of pursuing the matter.
‘Do you speak French?’ he enquired hopefully.
‘Fairly well, monsieur.’
Better, from the sound of things, than Thiercelin's German.
It was worth a try.
He reached into his pocket and extracted the largest coin he could find.
‘I wonder if you might be able to help us.
Be so kind, please, as to enquire from your colleagues whether any of them brought a fare from the Theater an der Wien this evening at about,’— Thiercelin consulted his watch —‘ten minutes before seven, and where he took him.’
The man smiled and held up a hand.
‘I very much regret, sir.
I will take you in my carriage, because that is my job, but I am an Austrian, and you are my country's enemies.
I cannot help you.’
‘Damnation,’ complained Lefevre, ‘we are French officers, and…’
Thiercelin interrupted him.
‘I respect your decision, sir.
Our enquiry, however, is a matter of some importance, relating to the recent murder of a young French officer.
It was not an act of war and I have no reason to believe that one of your countrymen was responsible.
I should therefore esteem it a favour if you could speak to your friends along the lines I have indicated.
That could do no harm.
I shall not force you to tell me if you still consider it would be contrary to your country's interests to do so.’
The driver thought for a moment.
‘Keep your money, monsieur.
I will make the enquiry you request and, if you visit me here tomorrow at this time, I will either tell you what I have found out, or refuse to help.
I cannot promise more.’
‘I appreciate that.
Thank you.
The Rotenturmstrasse, please.
‘Wird gemacht .’
The driver flicked his whip, and the cab moved off.
‘Awkward bugger,’ grumbled Lefevre under his breath.
‘I wonder you were so patient with him.’
‘Was he so unreasonable?
If the Hapsburgs occupied Paris and a couple of Austrian soldiers asked you for information about a Frenchman, would you tell them?’
Lefevre pulled a resigned face.
‘I suppose not.
Frustrating, though.
Now what do we do?’
‘I'll see the man again tomorrow of course, in case there's anything he can tell us, but I don't hold out much hope.
We must keep Fräulein Müller under observation…’
‘I'd be best suited to that job,’ said Lefevre promptly.
‘She'd recognize you straight away, Jacques, you made such a devastating impression, whereas she's forgotten me already.’
‘Very well.
You can stand outside the theatre every evening until further notice, trying to look inconspicuous.
Meanwhile I propose paying a visit to the offices of the Wiener Tageblatt .’
‘What for?’
‘Recent back numbers.
In case anything noteworthy has happened in Vienna these last few weeks, relevant to our enquiry, that is.’
‘What sort of thing?
And how will you recognize it?’
‘I don't really know,’ Thiercelin confessed.
‘It's a long shot, but we can't afford to overlook anything.
I'll look through its columns for oddities — curious unexplained happenings and so on…there's an outside chance something might turn up.
Fortunately I'm better at reading German than speaking it.’
‘Worth a try, I suppose.
Who's behind all this business, do you reckon?
The Hapsburgs?’
Thiercelin shook his head, in bewilderment rather than disagreement.
‘Difficult to say.
The Müller woman is the key, of course.
The only thing that occurs to me is this.
We have just occupied Vienna; a far-sighted man could have foreseen the possibility some considerable time ago.
From now on, a high proportion of the audience at the Theater an der Wien will consist of French soldiers.
That also could have been predicted.’
‘So?’
‘Fräulein Müller is, shall we say, a lady of rather striking appearance.
It seems fair to assume that she will attract the attention of a goodly number of our countrymen.
Judging from her reaction to me, she is unlikely to discourage their interest.’
Lefevre nodded.
‘I get your drift.
Some fellows, when they have had a few drinks, and are in the presence of an attractive woman, are prone to talk too much.
But isn't the whole scheme rather elaborate for such a speculative outcome?’
‘You're right, of course,’ Thiercelin agreed.
‘No-one would go to the trouble to devise such an imposture, and kill at least once, probably twice, to maintain it, just for the possibility of a few snippets of military information.
Besides, how many men in the Grand Army know anything worth killing for?’
He shook his head again.
‘It's all a confounded puzzle.’
Karelius placed his bag on the floor of the vestibule and peered into the gloomy reception hatch.
There was no-one there, so he rang the small handbell provided.
He was posing as a fairly typical member of the Prussian bourgeois.
No Englishman could now have presented himself in Vienna without attracting the attention of the Grand Army, and with his accent he could not have hoped to pass for Austrian.
That left Prussian, which was sufficiently near to the truth to withstand enquiry.
The main problem had been finding a reason why anyone should want to visit Vienna at present.
Most of the well-to-do had departed hurriedly, leaving the resentful lower orders to cope with the French as best they could.
Paradoxically it was not quite so bad now the invaders had arrived.
Fearful anticipation had proved somewhat worse than the event, and most Viennese were coming round to the opinion that, whatever the failings of Napoleon's men, they were at least an improvement upon the Hapsburgs' Russian allies, whom everyone loathed.
A plump balding man of late middle age appeared framed in the dark cavern.
‘Yes, sir?’
‘Good afternoon.
I should like a single room, please.
For about a fortnight.’
‘Very good, sir,’ said the man, after a brief pretence of consulting his register.
‘There will be no difficulty in accommodating you.’
Karelius produced his passport without being asked.
It had taken a week to obtain, and had Hapsburg officialdom realized that it was for him rather than Aranyos it would have been unlikely to arrive before the end of the war.
Fortunately he and the Hungarian were of superficially similar appearance  and, unlike his superiors, Aranyos had no objection to cutting a few corners.
The document gave the name Hans Richter and the occupation, surgeon.
‘There's always some sort of medical conference going on in Vienna,’ Aranyos had explained.
A problem might arise if he was required to demonstrate his knowledge in that field, but Karelius was reasonably confident of his ability to cope, not least because he had a fairly low opinion of the competence of the healing profession generally.
In fact the man's examination of his papers was so cursory that a lot of Hapsburg ingenuity had evidently been wasted.
No doubt he was grateful for any custom available.
Karelius glanced around.
‘Business a bit slack?’ he enquired casually.
The man shook his head.
‘Dreadful.
But what can you expect?’
‘The French,’ Karelius agreed wryly.
‘Indeed.
I've got half a dozen billeted on me at the moment.
Nothing against them personally, in fact they're a decent lot of fellows.
I dare say I've been luckier than a good many.
But when it comes to delivering a bill to the Grand Army…’
‘Hopeless, I know,’ said Karelius, going on to relate a fictitious story of the difficulties encountered by one of his farmer patients in obtaining payment for fodder.
Better, he felt, to appear over-talkative than give the impression of a man of mystery.
‘Very provoking, sir,’ commiserated the other, as his tale came to an end.
‘Now if you'll allow me to take your bag: this way, please.’
That French soldiers were billeted in the place was unfortunate but not surprising.
Perhaps there might be a small bonus in the shape of occasional military news.
The man had not mentioned any other guests; it was to be hoped Fräulein Müller was still staying here.
If not he would have to leave as soon as possible without arousing suspicion.
His room was drab and poky, but clean, rather as he had expected from a rundown lower middle-class Viennese pension.
Perhaps a surgeon might normally have chosen somewhere with a little more style, but a young and newly-admitted man might not have been able to afford anything better.
Having informed him that the evening meal was at eight, the proprietor took himself off, leaving Karelius with his thoughts.
So far so good.
He had already begun to establish friendly relations with the man, portraying himself meanwhile as an amiable if somewhat tedious fellow with francophobic leanings.
The next step would be to get to know Fräulein Müller.
Should she prove to be young and pretty this might even turn out to be a pleasure.
He did not want to attract attention by being the first or last to appear for dinner, so he left things until five minutes to eight, by which time he had heard several other guests moving about.
As he entered the dining room the gong was just being sounded by a squat elderly women who later proved to be Frau Zimmerman, wife of the proprietor.
Everyone dined together at a plain wooden table more suited to the kitchen or servants' quarters than the guests' dining room, and the fare was similarly lacking in charm.
A gluey broth was followed by a main course confirming that the cook subscribed whole-heartedly to the German culinary faith in the sausage.
There were also some rather sad-looking vegetables, mostly beans.
Karelius coped by employing a technique he had first developed at university and perfected in the army: that of chewing and swallowing whilst managing to divorce his mind completely from the organs of taste.
The pension had attracted a few more guests than Herr Zimmerman's complaints had given him to expect.
Mine host insisted upon introducing him to everyone, which helped identification at the cost of making him somewhat more conspicuous than he would have liked.
There were seven soldiers of the Grand Army, including two officers, Captain Moreau and Lieutenant Lapointe: three elderly and apparently permanent residents, consisting of a Widow Geller, her unobtrusive companion, and an old man called Stern, who was hard of hearing: and finally, Fräulein Müller.
She was a small woman of about his own age, with light brown hair and blue eyes.
Her dress was in the high-waisted Empire style worn by almost all young women nowadays, but something about it seemed to Karelius, far from expert though he was, vaguely wrong.
For some reason he was put in mind of the daughter of a shabby-genteel family having to wear her elder sister's cast-offs.
So far as getting to know her  was concerned, it was apparent that Lieutenant Lapointe had achieved a start on him.
The Frenchman sat next to her, assiduous in his attentions to her needs, enquiring whether she would like more of this or that, whilst periodically paying her what he evidently considered rather dashing compliments.
Their hands touched more often than seemed necessary.
Karelius took an immediate dislike to Lapointe, whom he considered a flashy young gallant.
Though scarcely a couple of years the lieutenant's senior, he somehow felt much older.
It was not clear whether she was yet the French officer's mistress.
On the whole Karelius thought not; Lapointe's attentions were rather more extravagant, and less  proprietary , than if he had already achieved his goal.
However that might have been, it was clear that the elderly female residents regarded her as little better than a whore.
They addressed most of their conversation to Zimmerman and his wife, occasionally deigned, as it were under protest, to speak to the Frenchmen, but pointedly avoided addressing the fräulein at all.
Karelius retaliated by replying to their occasional remarks in  monosyllables .
Zimmerman's usual remedy for the resulting gaps in conversation was to introduce the topic of the Russian army, against whom French and Germans joined in inveighing with equal venom.
At such times Captain Moreau was inclined to take heat out of the discussion by recounting jovial anecdotes illustrating the imbecility of officers on the staff of the Czarina Catherine, under whom he had served years before as a young man.
Moreau of all the company was much the most congenial.
By fortunate chance, he was Karelius' right-hand neighbour, Fräulein Müller sitting almost opposite.
An opportunity soon arose to broach the question of Herr Beethoven's new opera.
‘You want to talk to Fräulein Müller about that,’ said Moreau, to Karelius' satisfaction.
‘Her sister is playing one of the leading roles.’
‘Really?’ said Karelius, looking impressed.
‘Indeed.
Louise Müller, who plays the part of Marcellina, is this young lady's elder sister.
Isn't that so, fräulein?’
Fräulein Müller, who had given a start upon first hearing her name, stumbled a little over the words as she replied,
‘Why, yes.
I was hoping to see her while I was here, that's why I came…’
‘Of course,’ said Karelius, snapping his fingers, ‘I remember now.
The playbills mentioned a Louise Müller.
But with it being such a common name…’
‘It may not be possible after all,’ continued the fräulein breathlessly.
‘Things are so difficult…’
Moreau gave a puzzled smile.
‘Surely having come all this way, you won't leave without seeing her.’
‘My sister and I have been estranged some years.
When she first decided to pursue her career, our parents were most set against it.
They thought the stage no life for a respectable lady.’
‘What nonsense,’ said Lapointe.
‘It seems to me, young man,’ said Frau Geller severely, ‘an eminently proper view.
Certainly I should never have countenanced any such career for a daughter of mine.’
‘A little old-fashioned nowadays, surely,’ opined Moreau in his usual friendly manner.
‘In Vienna it might be thought so,’ agreed Fräulein Müller, ‘but in a small town in the Rhineland people are more conservative in their ways…
Well, I say a small town, it was more of a village really, but I live in Mannheim now, since my parents died…anyway, when things came to a head, I failed to support her, though I agreed with her really — up to a point that is, there were some things I disagreed with her about.
She'd sided with my parents a couple of years before when I'd been thinking of a career as an artist, and they were opposed to that…
I did water-colours mostly but I'd just started painting in oils and felt I had quite a talent for it, but they weren't very encouraging…
Anyway, getting back to my sister, she seemed to expect me to side with her when she'd been just the opposite with me when I'd wanted to paint, and I'm afraid harsh words were spoken all round.
I'm a very volatile person and said things I regretted later…
It may be she won't want to see me again.’
It occurred to Karelius to wonder whether the fräulein made a practice of confiding her problems to everyone as readily as in this instance.
‘I shouldn't let it worry you,’ said Zimmerman, with rather misplaced heartiness.
‘The wife and I have had our ups and downs over the years too, like all  married folk, and the children, well, quite a handful in some ways…take our eldest for example…
Ah well,’ he continued unhappily, having caught his wife's eye, ‘least said soonest mended, I dare say.’
There followed an awkward silence, finally broken by Fräulein Müller blurting out, ‘I've written to her, you know.
Two letters addressed to the theatre, but no reply.
It seems she still hasn't forgiven me.
I can't blame her really.
I'm always falling out with people,’ she concluded miserably.
Several of the men, though none of the women, made embarrassed noises of dissent.
‘It was our father's last wish, too,’ she continued, blue eyes blinking rapidly, ‘that we become reconciled.
It seems so sad.
Everything seems to be going wrong for me.’
She sighed deeply and stared around in abject despair.
Karelius was seized with panic lest she should burst into tears.
It was hideously embarrassing when women wept.
‘I'm sure it must have been quite dreadful for you, my dear,’ said Frau Zimmerman, apparently taking the fräulein's last remark to refer to her recent ordeal in the Bauernmarkt.
‘Dreadful.
I don't know what Vienna's coming to nowadays.
Not safe for a respectable woman to walk the streets.’
This well-meaning attempt to steer clear of one awkward topic landed them in the midst of another.
Frau Geller murmured something to her companion about it never happening to a woman unless she'd been asking for it.
Her sotto voce remark unfortunately chanced to coincide with a lull in the conversation, so that it was clearly audible not only to Karelius but most of the others.
For one appalling moment he thought the fräulein was going to make a scene.
She apparently thought better of it, but her face started to crumple as if she was going to cry.
Silence descended in a cloud of universal embarrassment, even the urbane Moreau seeming somewhat at a loss.
Lapointe shot the old ladies a savage glance, placed a hand over that of the fräulein, and murmured something in her ear.
‘Lieutenant Lapointe is escorting me to the opera on Wednesday,’ she announced defiantly.
‘I'll go and see Louise then.’
‘Good idea,’ agreed Moreau.
‘It'll all turn out for the best, you mark my words.
Your sister will have been busy  rehearsing, must be a hectic time for her.
She knows you'll be going to see her anyway, so hasn't bothered to reply.
You know how careless theatre people are.’
‘Of course, that's it,chérie ,’ said Lapointe, putting an arm round the fräulein and giving her a squeeze.
She turned on him a glance of tearful gratitude that caused Karelius an unexpectedly sharp pang of jealousy.
What's it to you? he asked himself irritably.
She's just part of your job, and whatever she might feel for anyone else is beside the point.
You haven't known her five minutes.
You can't be fool enough to imagine there could ever be anything between you.
She's hardly the type for an old puritan like you, Karelius.
Or for anyone with any sense, really.
She means Trouble, with a capital T. Trouble with Lapointe, with other men, with bitchy women, with her moods, her stammer, her embarrassing conversation, her tears, and that awful habit she has of staring at people….
And she realizes it herself too, better even than I do.
Certainly better than that young idiot Lapointe.
I can't see her sticking with him for long.
What right have I to patronize and judge her, anyway?
Everyone's got their problems, and no-one knows what life's been like for anyone else.
But would I want a woman who's second, third, fourth-hand or more?
Because that's what she is, I can tell.
I don't know why, but I can.
Perhaps I would.
If I really felt strongly enough about her, I don't think that would matter.
‘I'm going to the opera on Wednesday,’ the girl repeated.
‘With Lieutenant Lapointe,’ she added, glaring at Frau Geller.
‘Thought I might go along as well,’ said Moreau casually.
‘Not a lot to do in Vienna at present, and this Beethoven seems to be building himself quite a reputation.’
‘Indeed he is,’ agreed Karelius in relief.
‘Not that I'm all that well up in musical matters.’
‘Nor me,’ said the Frenchman, ‘but I enjoy the occasional night at the opera.
And it's some time since I was in Paris.’
‘Why, you must both come with us,’ said Fräulein Müller to Karelius' gratification, the more so as he glimpsed the chagrin in Lapointe's dark face.
‘Oh no,’ protested Moreau, ‘I'm sure you don't want an old buffer like me tagging along with you.’
Shut up, Moreau, thought Karelius, there's a good fellow.
‘Oh, but I do,’ insisted the fräulein earnestly.
‘And you must come too, Herr Richter.
I'd like all of my friends to come with me, and we do count as friends, don't we?’
‘Put like that,’ said Karelius, smiling, ‘I don't see how either of us can refuse.’
‘Good idea,’ said Lapointe, face set like granite.
Conversation drifted into other channels.
Karelius talked mainly with Moreau, reflecting on the irony that he so often found the French easier to talk to than Austrians.
Something to do with the old rivalry perhaps, north Germany versus south, Hohenzollern against Hapsburg, Protestant against Catholic.
At least Bonaparte had swept all that religious nonsense aside; he didn't care if you were a Protestant, an atheist, or what you were.
‘Right enough,’ agreed Moreau, as Karelius passed some such remark.
‘A soldier, that's what the emperor is: no time for priests and suchlike.
A second Cromwell, some call him.’
But Cromwell had cared a good deal about religion, thought Karelius.
Too much, in fact.
Calvinists had got no nearer to the truth about life than the Pope.
Yet for all that he no longer believed the creed in which he had been raised: for all that he fought for a king against an upstart general, for the old order against the new, Karelius recognized that at heart he would always be one of Cromwell's men.
A puritan in a licentious age: always a Roundhead, never a Cavalier.
‘Yet,’ Moreau was saying, ‘I suppose you could say a soldier has more need of a religious faith than most.
With having to face the possibility of death, and so on.
Not that I've ever felt that way myself’ He abandoned philosophical speculation to enquire: ‘Ever done any soldiering, Herr Richter?
I suppose not, with your medical studies and all.’
‘Not as such,’ replied Karelius mendaciously.
‘A little swordplay at university, that's all.’
‘Which university would that be?’
‘Königsberg.’
At this point Fräulein Müller, half-overhearing their conversation, made one of her embarrassing mistakes.
She had been talking to Lapointe, which no doubt explained why she had misheard.
‘Heidelberg?’
Karelius was about to correct her when she blundered on into a question that left  him speechless.
‘Did you know a man called Farkas Aranyos?’
The misunderstanding provided a convenient excuse for his momentary confusion.
‘Er, Königsberg,’ he corrected her at length.
‘Not Heidelberg, I'm afraid.’
He cut across her stammered apologies to enquire casually, ‘Why, who was this Aranyos?
A friend of yours?’
‘Of my sister's, really,’ said the fräulein, launching into another personal tale of woe.
‘He was a student at the university: they were to be married until she decided a career on the stage suited her better than becoming the wife of a Hapsburg cavalry officer.
Everyone was very upset about it…
He was such a nice young man, we all agreed it would have made an ideal match…
I tried telling her she was wrong, which was silly really, because no-one ought to decide such things for anyone else…’
‘She did right, if you ask me,’ opined Moreau heartily.
‘Not much of a life, married to a soldier.’
Again the conversation returned to innocuous channels, leaving Karelius to ponder this latest piece of information.
The Hapsburgs' man had been surprisingly frank with him about political and military topics.
He was less inclined to be so, it seemed, about private matters.
Surely he must have realized who the fräulein was.
There were a million Müllers in Germany and no doubt a good many Louise Müllers, but of Louise Müllers who were opera singers, and had a sister called Katje, there could hardly have been more than one.
Why had Aranyos concealed this from him?
Was it relevant to his enquiry, or just a curious coincidence?
Should he tax the Hungarian with it next time they met, or keep his knowledge up his sleeve?
Karelius continued to puzzle over these questions all evening and, as he finally drifted off to sleep that night, was no nearer to any answers.
As expected, the cab-driver was no help.
Thiercelin spoke to him again the following evening, when he reluctantly conceded that one of his colleagues could remember the man they were seeking.
The description was vague and did not fit that of Daniel's murderer.
The mysterious passenger had been slimmer, darker and younger, but beyond that the driver could or would not go.
The remainder of the weekend was equally unproductive.
Lefevre spent much of his time standing about in the street outside the theatre to no avail, whilst Thiercelin wasted a day and a half following up a couple of false trails supplied by articles in the local  newssheet .
He returned to his lodgings late on Monday evening, tired and in ill humour.
‘Ah, there you are,’ said Lefevre, looking up from his supper.
‘Any luck?’
‘None.
Complete waste of time.’
‘Never mind.
I think I may be on to something.’
Thiercelin knelt to pour himself a mug of soup from the bowl in the hearth.
‘Good.
Tell me.’
‘Tonight seems to have been the final dress rehearsal before Wednesday.
Finished a couple of hours ago.
A man called to see Fräulein Müller soon after the performance.
Hard to make out much detail of his appearance, the lighting was bad.
Medium-sized; from his gait I'd say middle-aged.’
‘Colour of hair?’
‘Couldn't even tell you that, he kept his hat on all the time.
Not sure I could recognize the murderer again anyway.
You may remember I was pretty well oiled that evening, apart from being knocked senseless.’
‘True.
Where did they go?’
‘Straight back to her apartment off the Aurelianstrasse, accompanied by her maid.
Wished them both goodnight — very respectable — and drove off back to his home, a big country house in a village just north of the city, called Kahlenbergerdorf.’
‘Kahlenbergerdorf,’ breathed Thiercelin in suppressed excitement.
‘That's interesting.
Never mind, I'll tell you when you've finished.
Go on.’
Lefevre dunked another handful of bread in his soup and waved it in emphasis before continuing, ‘The place our man lives is a large mansion just beyond the village.
Easy to find; I'll take you tomorrow.
Obviously I couldn't follow him up to his front door, but I saw him turn into the grounds.’
‘Hardly the time to go visiting.
As you say, it must be where he lives.
Well done.
‘What's your interest in Kahlenbergerdorf?’
‘One of the newspaper items I'd marked to follow up.
Now, where are we?’
After a few moments search Thiercelin succeeded in tracing the relevant issue and spread the broadsheet on the table, translating hesitantly into French for the benefit of his colleague.
‘Mysterious Disappearance of an Englishman.
An episode of a singularly disquieting nature recently came to the notice of our reporter, concerning the unaccountable disappearance of one Richard Hamnett, a young Englishman.
Herr Hamnett, who was but recently arrived in Vienna for the purpose of vacation, had been residing at the home of a friend, a certain Herr Sanders of Kagrant.
The latter, a gentleman of cultural and literary tastes, is in the practice of providing tuition in various languages to those desirous of obtaining his services in that behalf, and tells us that Herr Hamnett, being a young gentleman of similar intellectual inclinations, had kindly offered to assist him in his labours…’
‘These journalists certainly know how to string a story out,’ grumbled Lefevre.
‘When does he get to the point?’
‘Not long now:—
‘Upon the afternoon of Friday last, the 8th instant, Herr Hamnett quitted the residence of his aforementioned  colleague, with the expressed object of visiting a client in the nearby village of Kahlenbergerdorf.
He stepped out of the door shortly after two in the afternoon,and has not been seen since .
That he did not depart of his own free will is abundantly evidenced by the fact that he left behind all his belongings and expressed the intention of being back within the period of four hours.
Nor is there any suggestion that a disagreement with his venerable friend might have been responsible; Herr Sanders tells us that he and the young gentleman were on terms of the greatest amity, their relations being always of the most cordial.
The authorities and Herr Sanders are alike baffled to explain the affair, which contains all the ingredients of an insoluble mystery.
The possibility that the unfortunate young gentleman was waylaid seems inescapable; he was, however, in possession of little, if any, money to attract the attention of would-be malefactors, and that he could have been attacked in broad daylight, in the middle of a city the size of Vienna, appears to us virtually incredible.’'
‘A bit odd, certainly,’ agreed Lefevre.
‘What makes you think it might concern us?’
‘Any Englishman,’ said Thiercelin between sips, ‘who is drifting about Vienna at present, supposedly as a tourist, has at least an even chance of being one of Pitt's spies.
The circumstances of Herr Hamnett's disappearance are peculiar to say the least.
But the main thing is the link with Kahlenbergerdorf.
The name of the client he was visiting isn't given, but if he employs a language tutor he must be reasonably well-to-do.
The village is a tiny place; the chances of the client and the man you followed being one and the same must be quite high.’
Lefevre finished his bowl of soup in uncouth but effective manner, gripping it in both hands and pouring the remaining contents down his throat at a gulp.
‘Good stuff.
What's the plan for tomorrow, then?’
‘See Sanders first thing — he shouldn't be difficult to find — and get the name of his client.
Incidentally we'll insist on looking through Hamnett's belongings.
Then we'll pay a visit to your friend at Kahlenbergerdorf.’
The call on Sanders elicited the information that the client in question had been a Herr Fedorov, who lived in a large house just north of the village.
Herr Hamnett had been going to teach his wife Dutch and German.
He had left soon after two o'clock, taking nothing with him but a couple of German textbooks.
They were not valuable, so it was out of the question for him to have stolen them.
Besides, young Herr Hamnett, apart from having left all his luggage behind, was a gentleman.
Not that he knew much about him — English, of course, related to an old friend who used to serve in the Royal Navy and had asked Sanders to accommodate his young kinsman for a week or two as a favour.
He had naturally been delighted to do so.
When had he arrived?
After much muddled calculation of dates, Sanders opted for the Wednesday of the week of his disappearance.
He had stayed two nights, that was all.
There had been a further recent development; only a couple of days ago Herr Hamnett's brother, another agreeable young gentleman, had turned up and collected his entire belongings.
The disappearance had naturally been as much a mystery to him as anyone else…
‘His brother?’ demanded Thiercelin incredulously.
‘Why should he suddenly have materialized out of the blue?’
‘It seems he chanced to be staying in Vienna also, and read of the disappearance in the local paper.
Upon which, he came to see me, as you have done, to ascertain full details of what had happened.
Whilst he was here he took Herr Hamnett's things away with him.
I think he was his brother.
He may have said cousin.’
‘Did you not require some evidence of his identity?’
‘No,’ said the old fellow blandly, ‘it didn't occur to me.
Why…you mean…the man who called the other day might not have been his brother after all?’
‘I've no idea,’ Thiercelin replied.
‘But I'm bound to say that in your position I think I should have made some enquiry into his bona fides .
Anyway, where can we find this alleged brother?’
‘Ah,’ said Sanders unhappily.
‘I'm afraid I didn't think to ask his address.
He struck me as such a genuine young fellow, there seemed no need.
I'm sorry if I did wrong.’
Thiercelin sighed.
‘Never mind.’
The old man evidently  lived in a world of his own; it was pointless blaming him.
‘Can you give us a description of the man who called?’
‘Very much like Herr Hamnett in appearance.
That's partly why I saw no reason to doubt they were related.
In his twenties, medium height, slim, dark.’
‘Does that description fit Herr Hamnett as well?’
‘Yes.
He was perhaps an inch or two shorter, and not quite so dark.
I certainly hope you manage to trace him, Captain, or at least bring those who have made away with him to account.’
‘Thank you, sir.
So do we.
Anything else you can tell us about Herr Hamnett, or the other man?’
Sanders hesitated.
‘There is just one thing.
Herr Hamnett was an Englishman, as you probably know; he spoke perfect German, but with the accents of the north.
His brother, on the other hand — this did seem a little odd, now that I come to think of it — had apparently learnt his German locally; from his voice I should have said he was Austrian.
And his manner was, if I may say so, more relaxed, almost like an aristocrat.
Young Herr Hamnett was always rather correct and formal: Prussian, in fact.’
‘Thank you,’ said Thiercelin thoughtfully.
‘That gives us a bit more to go on.
But there's nothing unusual about the appearance of either man that might help us?’
‘No.’
Sanders shook his head.
‘No, I don't think so.
Oh, yes, just one thing.’
‘What?’
‘The brother wore an eyeglass: a monocle.
I remember it kept falling out.’
They thanked him and took their leave.
‘Not much to help us there,’ commented Lefevre in the coach on the way to the village.
‘Poor old devil's practically senile.’
‘I don't really agree,’ said Thiercelin.
‘He's just decided to live in the past, and why not?
Anyway, this brother or cousin or whatever he is, could be important.
The description fits the man we saw outside the opera the other night.
Apart from the monocle, and the cab-driver might deliberately have concealed that.’
‘Or it might be a disguise.’
‘That's possible too.
Anyway, now for Herr Fedorov.’
‘The big house on the other side of the village, according to Sanders.
Must be the same place I followed our suspect to last night.’
‘Sounds very much like it.
I think I'll confine my questions to the disappearance of the Englishman.
He'll be expecting that, whereas there's no point in putting him on his guard about the other matter until we've more to go on.’
‘If he's spoken to Fräulein Müller,’ Lefevre pointed out, ‘he'll realise you're interested in Daniel's death as well.’
‘Damn it, so he will.
Oh well, can't be helped.
While I'm seeing him, by the way, I'd like you to make some enquiries in the village.
Do you feel up to a bit of leg work?’
‘Oh yes, I'm fine now,’ his colleague assured him.
‘Feel a lot better this last couple of days.
Just the occasional twinge, that's all.’
‘Good.
Best place to start should be the local tavern.
Get talking to people over a few drinks; you're better than me at that sort of thing.’
‘Suits me,’ agreed Lefevre with a grin.
‘Do I mention the disappearing Englishman?’
‘Wait for them to do so first, if possible.
I don't suppose anything else out of the ordinary has happened there for about five hundred years, so the local people should be full of it for weeks.’
The coach jangled to a halt.
‘Is this the place?’
Thiercelin enquired, peering out.
The driver turned.
‘Yes, sir.
Kahlenbergerdorf.’
Lefevre opened the door and jumped out.
‘Meet you back here in, say, an hour?’
‘Yes, that should be all the time I need.
All right, driver, carry on.
Herr Fedorov's house: that's the big one on the right, just north of the village.’
Thiercelin stood looking out of the french window at the end of the long narrow room that was Fedorov's library.
Yet again he had reason to be grateful that no-one in Vienna argued with a uniform.
The servants had not been keen to let him see the man, but his rank and vague remarks about the importance of co-operation with the Grand Army had succeeded in securing him an interview.
His eyes wandered across the spacious lawns and drive.
A pleasant place to live, or would be in summer, but a little bleak and windswept at this time of year.
Expensive to maintain; Fedorov must be at least well-to-do, probably rich.
He heard a footfall in the passage outside and felt his pulse quicken.
In a few seconds time he might be face to face with the man who had killed Daniel.
Though he couldn't be sure of recognizing him.
It had been dark, and the murderer muffled up.
With luck the man wouldn't recognize him either.
And if he did, what of it?
It would shake him badly, which might help.
‘Captain Thiercelin?’
He turned.
‘I am Fedorov.
I believe you wanted to see me.’
He spoke in German.
Thiercelin replied in French.
‘Indeed, sir.
Forgive me, but my command of the German tongue is slight.
May we converse in French?’
The man hesitated.
Thiercelin knew him.
Today he was dressed as a country squire, but some things he could not disguise: the muscular build and fair hair.
The momentary pause had turned suspicion into certainty.
He had recognized Thiercelin, and was wondering whether or not to admit his knowledge of French.
When the reply came, his speech was correct but slow, with heavy slavonic stress.
‘Certainly.
It is some years since I was wont to use the language, though I spoke it often enough at home in Russia.
How can I be of assistance?’
‘It is about the curious affair of the other day, sir,’ Thiercelin explained.
‘The young Englishman who disappeared.’
Did the man relax a shade?
He looked suitably puzzled.
‘Ah, yes.
A most extraordinary business.’
He gestured to Thiercelin to sit.
‘I had no idea, however, that it had attracted the attention of the Grand Army.’
Fedorov sat beside Thiercelin at the end of the long library table, steepled his blunt fingers and rubbed them together carefully.
Thiercelin, who in his youth had studied law, was put in mind of an expert witness preparing to face examination.
‘It may have some connection with certain other matters we are investigating.
You will appreciate that with political affairs in their present delicate state we cannot afford to overlook anything that might touch upon questions of security.’
Fedorov nodded heavily.
For the first time Thiercelin noticed that his eyes were very pale blue.
He had always distrusted people with eyes that colour, unreasonably no doubt.
But pale eyes often held a far-away look which he tended to associate with insanity.
It was common opinion that maniacs often had very blue eyes.
‘Espionage, you mean,’ said Fedorov at length.
‘I thought it odd an Englishman should visit Vienna at a time like this.’
‘So do we, sir, to be frank.
Now,’ Thiercelin took out notebook and pencil, ‘just as a matter of routine, might I ask you to relate once again the circumstances of Herr Hamnett's business with you?’
‘I had been to see him the previous day, and arranged that he come and teach me Dutch.
I have friends in Holland who are to visit next August and I wished to acquire some degree of proficiency in their language by then.’
Thiercelin wrote this down.
‘Forgive me if I make notes, sir — my memory.
The name of your Dutch friends?’
Fedorov hesitated, then gave the name de Vries and an address in Utrecht.
‘I've told the Vienna Polizei this already.’
‘I'm sure, sir, but to speak frankly, the Grand Army prefers  to rely upon its own enquiries into such matters.
We try to involve ourselves with the Austrian authorities as little as possible.’
‘As to that,’ said Fedorov firmly, ‘I must remind you that I am a Russian, and both my native and adopted countries are at war with yours.
There is a limit to the amount of help I am prepared to give.’
‘I appreciate your position, sir.’
Thiercelin made a pretence of consulting his notes.
There seems to be some discrepancy here.
According to Herr Sanders, it was not you who were desirous of learning Dutch, but your wife.’
‘My wife has been dead these two years.
I distinctly said that it was I who required the tuition.
As you probably know, Herr Sanders is a gentleman of advanced years, inclined to be a little vague.
He is certainly in error about that.’
Thiercelin nodded.
‘Yes, I expect that's it.’
The whole interview reminded him of the English card game in which you not only had to guess what cards your opponent held, but decide what he thought yours were, and so on.
Fedorov had clearly recognized him.
But did he realize Thiercelin knew that?
‘You didn't express any desire to learn German?’
Fedorov assumed a convincing expression of surprise.
‘Certainly not.
If I may say so, my German is perfectly adequate.’
‘I wish I could say the same.
At what time was Herr Hamnett's appointment?’
‘Three o'clock in the afternoon, if I remember rightly.
Yes, three o'clock.’
‘I suppose you were puzzled when he failed to arrive?’
‘Yes, and frankly more than a little displeased.
I had postponed an important business meeting in order to remain at home to see him.’
‘When did you first realize that Herr Hamnett had, as it were, vanished from the face of the earth?’
The Russian considered.
‘Two or three days later.
I received a visit from the local polizei ’
‘You had not enquired from Herr Sanders what was amiss?’
‘No.’
Again Fedorov hesitated.
‘No.
As I said, I was somewhat annoyed in view of the definitive nature of the  arrangement I had made the previous day, and the fact that no explanation or apology had been forthcoming.
I therefore determined to take my business elsewhere.’
‘Did you do so in fact?’
‘No; the police came to see me before I had had time to make other arrangements.
Besides, I am not aware of anyone else who gives such lessons.’
‘I see.’
Thiercelin paused.
‘Now that you realize Herr Sanders was not at fault, do you intend to ask him to reach you Dutch again?’
‘Ah, no.
I think not.
He conceded that his knowledge of the language was slight; that is why he referred me to his young assistant.’
‘Possibly he may know of someone else who gives such lessons.’
‘I doubt it.
He has a very narrow range of acquaintance.’
Thiercelin snapped his notebook shut and rose.
‘Well, thank you very much, Herr Fedorov.
Your information largely confirms what we already knew, and I trust we shall not need to trouble you again.’
Their eyes met as they shook hands.
He knows, all right, thought Thiercelin.
But he's still not sure how much I know…
He arrived back at the appointed spot some ten minutes early, and spent an irritable half-hour tramping up and down before Lefevre's return.
‘The cab's been here twenty minutes,’ he said accusingly.
‘I was just about to tell him not to wait.
It'll cost a fortune.’
‘Never mind that.
Davout'll be glad to allow our expenses when he hears the news.
I've found out quite a lot.’
‘Good, so have I.’ They scrambled abroad.
‘Rotenturmstrasse, please, driver.
Fedorov's our man, I'm sure.
Appearance fits, though I suppose in court I couldn't swear for stone-cold certain.
He spoke French with a strong Russian accent cultivated for the occasion, which suggests he also recognized me.
I steered clear of Daniel's murder, but he's as guilty as hell in the other case too.’
‘I agree,’ said Lefevre.
‘But how do you know?’
‘According to what he said he wanted to learn Dutch, but not German, and he hasn't got a wife.
Sanders is a muddled  old chap, but I don't think he could have been wrong about anything as fundamental as that.
Fedorov made no complaint when Hamnett failed to show up, now demonstrates no interest in learning Dutch at all, and no doubt the address of his friends in Utrecht is false.
A pity it'll take so long to check.
Finally, if he was prepared to visit Sanders to make the appointment, why not do so for the lessons as well?’
‘I'm not so sure about that.
Rich people are lazy.
He can afford to pay a tutor to visit him, so why not?’
‘Then why trouble to make the appointment in person?
Servant's work, surely.’
‘I don't know about that,’ said Lefevre ruefully, ‘never having been rich.’
‘He didn't want his servants to know anything about it, that's why.
Anyway, tell me your news.
I can see you're pleased with yourself ‘
Lefevre, who for some time had been shifting in his seat with every sign of impatience, relaxed and smiled.
‘Yes, I am rather.
I'll start with the routine stuff.
Fedorov is Russian of course, and has lived here ten years or thereabouts; wife, also Russian, died about two years ago.
The impressive manor he occupies isn't actually his: it belongs to a minor local aristocrat who's let it to him, presumably under a long lease.
Neither popular nor unpopular with the villagers.
Doesn't mix, and spends most of his time in Vienna on business, none of them seem too sure what.
From the sound of things you were lucky to catch him in.
His tenants — he sublets — hardly ever see him, and deal with his estate manager.
More or less what you'd expect.’
Thiercelin nodded and sat back amongst the upholstery.
‘Now give me the real news.’
‘Well, there I was damned lucky, as well as brilliant of course.
The first man I met was an old fellow sitting on the church wall smoking a pipe.
I pretended to be visiting Fedorov, and enquired where he lived.
He asked if I was a friend of the other young chap who had made exactly the same enquiry of him ten days ago.’
Thiercelin whistled.
‘Not Hamnett?’
‘Almost certainly.
I asked what young chap, and he gave me a description which tallies with what Sanders told us: about twenty-five, darkish, slightly built.
Anyway, Hamnett, it must have been, walked off in the direction indicated and didn't return.
Not while the old man was here anyway, and he seems to spend most of his time sitting on the wall doing nothing in particular.’
‘Didn't that seem odd?’
‘Not particularly.
You see, there are two ways to get to Fedorov's: the road, which is the way we went, and the towpath, which on foot is actually quicker, but impassable by carriage.
Hamnett took the towpath; insofar as he'd considered it at all, the old fellow thought he must have returned the other way.’
‘But hadn't he heard of the disappearance?’
‘It seems he never reads the papers.
I doubt if anyone does here.
And the enquiries made by the Viennese authorities seem to have been pretty perfunctory.
No-one I met had even been seen by the police.
It seems a couple of them came out here a time or two, asked a few questions, shrugged their shoulders and took themselves off.’
‘That sounds like the Viennese: the civil police that is, not the Hapsburgs’ men.
You've done well.’
‘I haven't finished yet.’
Lefevre took a folded piece of paper from his pocket and handed it over.
‘Doesn't look very exciting,’ said Thiercelin, peering at the mildewed page, brown and cracked around the edges.
‘Oh, I see what you mean.
A list of German strong verbs.’
He looked up.
‘Where did you find this?’
‘On the towpath, not fifty yards from Fedorov's gatehouse.
Hidden in a clump of grass.
‘So.
Hamnett was waylaid there, and dropped his books.
Incidentally German, not Dutch, a further indication that Fedorov was lying.’
‘That's about the size of it.
And one final thing.
Whilst I was there, someone came out of the gatehouse and started walking towards me.
Thickset middle-aged man with fair hair.’
‘Fedorov.’
‘Ça va de soi.
Of course I simply wandered away in the opposite direction.
But just before leaving the path, I looked back.
Guess what he was doing?’
‘Go on.’
‘Grubbing around amongst the undergrowth beside the  path, obviously looking for something.’
‘Good job you got there first.
My visit must have alarmed him to the extent that he decided to check again to ensure he hadn't left any clues.
Well,’ said Thiercelin with satisfaction, ‘that about settles it.
I think we've evidence to justify an arrest, don't you?’
‘For Hamnett's murder, yes.
His body must have been thrown in the river, and hasn't surfaced yet.
Maybe it never will, if it was weighted down, but we should have enough even without that.
Can't prove anything about Daniel, though.’
Thiercelin shrugged.
‘It's all the same to me.
So long as he's our man, it doesn't matter whether we have him shot for the murder of Daniel or this other fellow.
What sort of witness would your old man make?’
‘Not bad.
Quite lucid for his age, and transparently honest.
That reminds me: I asked whether he'd heard anything within a few minutes of seeing young Hamnett, hoping he'd say a shot, of course, which really would have been too good to be true.
He couldn't say for sure; when I mentioned a shot, he said he wouldn't have noticed it particularly.
The gamekeepers on Fedorov's estate are always pooping off with shotguns at something or other: crows, vermin, poachers — whatever gamekeepers shoot.’
‘Can't be much doubt about it, anyway.
The only thing we don't know is motive.
Presumably there's a connection with espionage somewhere.’
Lefevre frowned.
‘I'd rather been inclined to favour the theory that Fedorov is working for the Hapsburgs.
But now I'm not so sure.
I can't see them involved in killing an Englishman; they're supposed to be on the same side.’
‘The Hapsburgs are on their own side,’ Thiercelin reminded him.
‘But I take your point.
For that matter, there are also one or two of our countrymen who are on their own side, notably our Senator-Minister for the High Police.’
‘Fouché?
Yes, that's possible.
If a French soldier found out something he shouldn't, I can't see the minister hesitating for a moment.
Unless he was likely to be found out, of course.’
‘I suggest we let Davout look into it.
We seem to have solved a couple of murders, but espionage is a job for specialists.
I expect he'll pass it on to Duroc's men.’
Duroc was head of the emperor's private police.
Lefevre nodded.
‘Yes.
A pity we have to bow out now, but I don't think we've done badly.
Even Davout should be pleased, and that's saying something.’
Davout told Thiercelin he had done better than expected, which was generous praise from him, especially as the marshal's own enquiries had been unproductive.
He did not after all suggest passing conduct of the investigation over to Duroc's police, which suggested less confidence in them, or more in Thiercelin, than the latter had anticipated.
‘We've enough evidence to convict him of the Englishman's murder, anyway,’ the marshal pointed out.
‘If interrogation reveals anything of concern to Duroc, we'll pass it on.
If not,’ he shrugged, ‘at least we can shoot the bastard.
The fact that it's for a different crime isn't important.’
‘When do you propose to arrest him, sir?’
Davout consulted his watch.
Although not yet six o'clock, it was already dark as midnight.
‘You say he has a liaison of some sort with the Müller woman, so presumably he'll be attending the premiere tonight.
To avoid the risk of a disturbance in the middle of town I should leave it until he's returned home.
Take a couple of dozen men, that should be enough.
And try to take him alive if possible.
If not…’ the marshal shrugged again, ‘it can't be helped.’
‘Very good, sir.
How about Fräulein Müller?’
Davout frowned.
‘Less evidence against her, of course, unless Fedorov is prepared to incriminate her.
Have you anything in mind?’
Thiercelin hesitated.
‘I'd half-arranged to see her again tonight, after the show.’
‘Well,’ said the marshal briskly, ‘I leave that to you.
Handle things as you think best.
But so far as I'm concerned, Fedorov is the more important; don't do anything to prejudice our chances of taking him.’
Fedorov was going to the opera.
He was not a music lover, nor was he particularly attracted by any cultural activity.
At one time he had taken a mild interest in literature, especially erotic works, but of late it had flagged.
Of what use was reading about life?
First-hand experience held more appeal.
Ten years now he had lived in Vienna, fourteen since he had quit Russia for the last time, twenty-two since the day he had realized his boyhood ambition to become an officer in the St. Petersburg Grenadiers.
His name in those far-off days had not been Fedorov; he had been the youngest son of a noble family, with high hopes of a distinguished military career.
Fedorov had never liked his family, or felt anything in common with them.
In the army, he had imagined that he would find comradeship, excitement and adventure in company with men of similar taste.
It had not turned out like that.
His brother officers were silly, shallow men, more interested in impressing ladies with the cut of their uniform, and trifling intellectual pretensions, than in the real business of a soldier.
They were neglectful and inattentive to their duties: several times Fedorov had reported such failings to his superiors, but to his surprise had been ignored or abused instead of thanked.
He set himself to become the best shot and swordsman in the regiment with a single-minded determination which aroused, not the respect he had anticipated, but derision.
One day in fencing practice, he had wondered what it would be like to kill his opponent, and had done so.
Yakovlev was the man's name; even now he could see the look of surprise on his face as the sword entered his body.
The affair had been regarded as a tragic accident, and Fedorov severely censured for negligence.
Thenceforward he became increasingly unpopular and involved in frequent quarrels.
Twice he had seriously wounded men in duels, and finally he had run another junior officer through in a tavern brawl.
He had been lucky to escape, with the help of his family, who were influential, but his career in the army, and in Russia, was finished.
He left Petersburg and changed his name.
About the same time a series of unsolved murders of prostitutes in that city came to an end.
He had travelled to  France, arriving in Paris at the time of the revolution.
He enjoyed it, dangerous though it was for foreigners, but after the fall of Robespierre he had deemed it advisable to leave again.
The authorities were investigating certain matters that had occurred during the Terror, at which time no-one had been too concerned about violence in the streets and the occasional unexplained corpse.
This last decade he had spent in Vienna, obtaining sufficient funds from his family to be able to settle down and marry the only Russian girl amongst his acquaintances.
For a time things had improved; his wife had been a foolish woman, concerned only with her appearance, social engagements and feminine trivia, but she had performed her conjugal duties satisfactorily.
After her death he had felt restless again.
Then had come the visit from a middle-aged man with a grey face.
It had come as an unpleasant shock to realize how much they knew: those employing the man, that was — the French Haute Police , as they called themselves.
Fedorov had not thought anyone could have discovered that much, not only about his French activities, but those during his youth in Russia.
The killing of Yakovlev, a couple of murders in Paris, and another incident which even Fedorov would have preferred to forget.
It had been enjoyable at the time, but after it was over it had left a disagreeable taste in the mouth.
He had tried to put it out of his mind, but of late it had begun to recur, especially in dreams.
The attitude of the Haute Police , he had to admit, had been extremely reasonable.
They were not too concerned with what had happened to a couple of whores in Paris over ten years ago, or even the other matter.
Nor did they greatly care how he chose to spend his spare time in Vienna.
They would be quite happy to forget all those things so long as Fedorov obliged them by carrying out certain routine tasks from time to time.
In consideration of this, not only would they shelve the files in question, but pay him a monthly stipend into the bargain.
The money was useful, the duties not particularly arduous.
Mostly they consisted of reporting upon the current state of affairs in Vienna, with particular reference to the activities of certain persons suspected of being hostile to the French and  their emperor.
For once he felt a sense of purpose enlivening his existence.
The French, after all, were the enemies of Russia, and indirectly of the family he despised, and the officers who had hated and ridiculed him.
On three occasions — once last June and twice recently — orders had arrived to kill people, which was risky but enjoyable.
The Daniel and Hamnett shootings had been competently executed, his pride in the latter however slightly dented by recollection of the stupid lie he had told about his wife.
He must avoid that sort of mistake in future.
Carelessness could be dangerous.
Disposing of the British agents had been an idea of his own, and killing Goldstein a positive pleasure.
He had always hated Jews — the pogrom was the way to deal with them — and a beating gave more satisfaction than use of a gun.
Fedorov and his men had knocked him down, broken his glasses and kicked him in the ribs.
The other two, a couple of weak-kneed cowards, had thought that was enough and run off.
But Fedorov had stayed behind to ensure the job was completed.
He had kicked the old Jew in the face whilst he was grovelling after his glasses, and kept on doing so until the whimpering had stopped and he was satisfied the man could not live.
For some unfathomable reason the Haute Police had been displeased, pointing out that his orders had simply been to keep the men under observation and report on their activities.
Evidently they had no idea how dangerous foreign spies could be, especially Jews.
One of them had been watching him recently.
He was not quite sure who it was, but he had certain ideas.
That French officer, Thiercelin, might well be one of them.
He'd been there when the man Daniel had been killed.
Fortunately he didn't realize that Fedorov had recognized him.
Or perhaps he did; they were clever, and it wouldn't do to underestimate them.
The coach had drawn to a halt outside the Theater an der Wien .
A small crowd, containing a high proportion of French officers, was milling about outside.
Thin drizzle dampened the pavement, which gleamed in reflection of the oil-lamps within.
A poor house, and the prospect of a dull evening.
A two-in-hand jingled to a halt amidst the puddles.
Karelius  peered out at the theatre lamps glowing through the mist.
In the sparse crowd around the entrance French uniforms predominated.
The first night of Leonore would take place without the usual audience of wealthy and fashionable Viennese.
Indeed Karelius, in opera cloak and one of Aranyos' dandyish suits, flattered himself he looked as distinguished as any.
He sprang from the coach and opened the nearside door with a flourish, helping Katja Müller to alight whilst leaving the Frenchmen to fend for themselves.
‘We are going round to the stage door now,’ she announced firmly.
‘If I am to be disappointed, I should like to get it over.’
‘We,’ Karelius accepted reluctantly, meant her and Lapointe.
They accordingly departed, leaving him and Moreau to make their way into the entrance-hall
‘LEONORE,’ announced the posters, ‘or Married Love.’
The far wall bore a garish illustration of a man in chains and a young woman unconvincingly disguised in male dress.
Louise Müller's name occupied third place in the playbills.
‘Hope Fräulein Müller isn't disappointed,’ commented Moreau.
‘She's a nice little thing.’
‘Yes,’ Karelius agreed.
‘Life has been rather hard on her, methinks.
I dare say you read in the paper she had been attacked last week by some pervert.’
‘Yes.
Shocking.’
‘Blackguards like that ought to be shot.
Police don't seem to be doing much about finding him, though.
Still,’ Moreau shrugged, ‘that's Austrians.’
Evidently the fate of the would-be rapist had not been made public.
Karelius nodded.
‘I'm not sure Lapointe's quite right for her, you know,’ confided his companion, who unlike Karelius seemed in talkative mood.
‘Bit of a one for the ladies.
I'd have thought she needed a steady young chap.’
The middle-aged Frenchman's interest in the fräulein seemed genuinely fatherly.
Indeed, a couple of times she had complained that he was trying to adopt her.
One of the minor tragedies of the war, thought Karelius, lay in the fact that his own enforced deceit meant that he and a totally decent man like Moreau, however cordial their relations, could never  become true friends.
‘Ah, here they come,’ the Frenchman was saying, just as the orchestra fell silent from tuning up.
Fräulein Müller looked subdued, if not depressed.
‘How did things go?’ asked Karelius.
She shook her head.
‘I'm really not sure.
We enquired of the door-keeper, whereupon a woman came out to see us, claiming to be Louise's dresser.
She tells me she is indisposed, and her understudy is to play the part tonight.’
‘Oh dear, that's disappointing.
But her illness might explain why you received no reply to your letters.’
‘That's what Gaston said,’ replied the fräulein with a glance at her escort, who nodded sympathetically, and gave her another squeeze.
Gaston, thought Karelius in disgust.
Christian names already.
She'll soon be sharing his bed at this rate.
By now they were in the concert hall itself, shuffling into their seats to the accompaniment of the overture as the chandeliers beneath the vaulted ceiling were gradually extinguished.
Fortunately their late arrival did not seem to have aroused the usual hostile chorus of hushing, the majority of the audience consisting of French soldiers who were far from particular about such matters.
‘Did you manage to obtain her address?’ asked Moreau.
‘No.
The woman said her lodgings were rather difficult to find, but if we go to see her after the show, she'll arrange for a member of the company to escort us there.’
Again Karelius was painfully aware that ‘us’ excluded Moreau and himself.
‘Good,’ he said with forced cheerfulness, and sat back in an attempt to enjoy the entertainment.
‘Couldn't you have left it till after the show?’ demanded the dark woman.
She looks like a Jewess, thought Fedorov.
Her name's Jewish too, Rachel.
It's dangerous for Fouché to employ her.
Perhaps I ought to recommend that she be killed.
‘Let me in.
It's urgent.’
‘All right, Rachel,’ said the girl sitting at the dressing-table, powdering her creamy white shoulders and throat.
‘I wanted to see him.’
He glanced at the maid in triumph and pushed his way in.
‘A French officer called to see me yesterday about the  Hamnett affair.’
‘So he suspects.’
‘Apparently.
What's more, I think — I'm not sure, but I think — he was one of the men with Daniel when I killed him.’
‘What's his name?’
‘Thiercelin.’
She stopped powdering herself and turned, eyes narrowed.
‘That was the name of one of the Frenchmen who called to see about Daniel the other day.
You remember I told you about them.’
‘So he must know.
Should I dispose of him?’
‘Don't be a fool.’
The full lips curled in contempt.
I'd like to kill her too, thought Fedorov, the arrogant bitch.
It'd be a real pleasure to feel my fingers sinking into that plump throat.
‘If he knows, so do the Grand Army.
Even you can't kill them all.
I have a job for you in that line, nevertheless.’
‘Who is it this time?’
‘A few minutes ago,’ said the girl, turning back to the mirror, ‘I received an unwelcome visitor.’
‘Someone from your past?
Who was he?’
‘She was a certain Fräulein Müller.’
Fedorov's face stiffened.
Impossible.
He could remember very clearly the feeling of power and joy as he had held her head under the waters of the Danube that fine summer afternoon.
He didn't enjoy women the way he used to, but killing them was different.
That could still make him feel good.
A silly little bitch she had been, pleading with him to let her live, and promising that if he did she would say nothing and leave Vienna at once, never to return.
Twice he had let her come up for air, so that it would take longer, but the third time he had held her under until she was finished.
But was she?
The aristocracy in Russia gave no credence to such things, but the common people knew better.
There were stories from the steppes, and the Baltic snows, and the mountains of Transylvania, of the dead who walked again.
He had not believed it at first, but now he was not so sure.
The other day he thought he had seen Fedorov again — the real one, that was, whose identity he had taken — in a crowded street near the Stefansdom.
Just glimpsed him for a moment, not to be certain.
And that last whore he had killed had looked very much like one of those from Petersburg.
He  wondered whether she had come alive again so that he had had to kill her once more.
And this Thiercelin who was persecuting him, now he came to think about it, much resembled young Yakovlev, whom he had slain in sport all those years ago.
Might it be him in disguise, returned to spy on him and seek revenge?
He would have to be very, very careful.
‘Louise Müller,’ he said slowly, ‘is dead.’
‘Not her, you idiot.
This is her sister.
She's written a couple of times, and now she's arrived in person.
Seems a naive little bitch: very anxious to meet her famous sister again, and kiss and make up some pathetic family squabble.’
‘What did you tell her?’
‘I didn't see her.
Rachel told her the only thing she could: that her sister had a mild indisposition, and I was her understudy.
She seemed to believe it.’
‘How do we do the job?’
The girl finished the final touches to her make-up and stood.
‘That is your concern.
Rachel asked her to come back after the show, when someone would take her to her sister's lodgings.’
She gazed at him coldly.
‘That's where you come in.’
Fedorov had suspected for some time, and now he knew.
That dress she was wearing, flaunting her breasts, and the cosmetic.
She was a whore.
I'm surprised at Fouché, he thought, employing Jews and whores.
I must warn him how dangerous such people are.
Then he'll want me to kill them, I expect.
Aloud he said, ‘I can do it tonight.
Hoffmann's driving me.
He's helped in such business before.’
‘Come back when the show's over.
I'll introduce you as a member of the company and a friend of her sister.
Then you and your driver can take her away and do as you will with her.
You should enjoy that.
Her lover is with her, a French officer.
It'll mean disposing of him too, of course.’
Fedorov stared vacantly at both women for several seconds, then turned and walked out.
‘A pity you didn't get him to attend to the little bitch before,’ commented Rachel.
‘He wouldn't have bungled it like Vogel.’
‘I suppose he's useful at times.
But becoming less so.
Apart from the fact that the Grand Army obviously suspect him, he's getting too independent, not to mention unstable.
I understand from the senator-minister that his reports recently have become decidedly bizarre.’
‘What orders have you had about it?’
‘I have authority to act as I see fit.
Tonight could well be the last service Herr Fedorov performs for us.
I'm afraid he's becoming as much a danger to us as he is to everyone else.’
‘Disposing of him won't be easy.’
‘No, he's naturally suspicious and resourceful, besides which we've no-one else who carries out such work now.’
She patted her hair into place.
‘How do I look?’
‘Lovely, my dear.’
‘Of course, said the fair girl, taking the tribute for granted, ‘there remains the problem of Jacques Thiercelin.’
‘Yes, Thiercelin.
Rachel's face hardened.
‘I didn't like him.’
‘I thought he was rather sweet.
A perfect gentleman, if a trifle gauche.’
She turned in the doorway with a dazzling smile.
‘But then, you never do like my gentleman friends, do you?’
She smiled again and left.
‘Bitch,’ said the dark woman savagely.
Karelius enjoyed the show more than he had expected.
He sat next to Katja Müller who to his pleasant surprise made a practice of turning to speak to him as often as to her supposed escort Lapointe.
Unlike Karelius and Fräulein Müller, the Frenchman seemed to know nothing about the opera or even the rudiments of music.
By the later stages of the performance he had become increasingly sulky, though the fräulein, wrapped up in her own problems as usual, seemed not to notice.
Another pleasure, which Karelius shared with most male members of the audience, was the performance of her sister's understudy.
Cast as the gaoler's daughter, she had a pleasing soprano voice and was an adequate actress by the undemanding standards of grand opera.
The reasons for her popularity however owed little to her musical or thespian talents.
A generously proportioned blonde, she wore a blouse of thin white silk with outrageous decolletage and virtually nothing underneath.
Several times during the performance she permitted the most delicious show of her own.
It was impossible she should be unaware of the treat she was thus providing for the soldiery, many of whom expressed their appreciation in appropriately ribald terms.
After four hours and three acts the performance came to an end.
It had not been an unqualified success.
Even Karelius, a Beethoven admirer, felt that it could have been improved, though to be fair his attention had often been distracted by Louise Müller and audience reaction to her.
There had been no announcement of her substitution, but theatre people were notoriously careless about such things.
He had not enjoyed the second half of the show quite as  much.
Louise Müller's appearances were less frequent, and the fräulein was again showing signs of becoming over-emotional.
‘The girl taking your sister's part was deucedly good,’ said Lapointe, with, from Karelius' point of view, gratifying lack of tact.
Katja Müller blinked back her tears and shot him an angry glance.
‘Did you think so?
I thought her a trollop.’
It couldn't have been very nice for her, thought Karelius, seeing her sister substituted by a woman who had obtained cheap success by such a blatant display of sexuality.
But he refrained from overt agreement, telling himself that in view of his own disreputable pleasure it would have been hypocritical.
‘Good show, I thought,’ said Moreau heartily, as they began to push their way out of the auditorium.
‘Pity there weren't more here to see it.
Can't help feeling the Grand Army isn't really the ideal audience.’
‘They seemed to enjoy the trollop's performance, anyway,’ said Fräulein Müller bitterly.
‘Ah well, my dear, you must remember they're a long way from home, and many of them haven't had much feminine company for a while.
Must admit I rather enjoyed it myself,’ confessed Moreau with a laugh.
‘Certainly a bit of an eyeful at times.
Still, the theatre's supposed to be about entertainment, isn't it?
Doesn't do to take it all too seriously.’
His good humour was so infectious that even the fräulein managed a wan smile.
Karelius, about to agree, suddenly turned away in a fit of coughing.
‘All right?’ enquired Moreau as he recovered.
‘Yes, fine, thanks.
It was nothing.’
Ahead of them a burly figure was emerging into the street.
Karelius hoped he had not caught sight of him.
For Fedorov was still supposed to believe him to be lying in the mud at the bottom of the Danube.
Thiercelin had enjoyed the performance too.
The music had sounded exactly like all other music he had ever heard, and the intervals between Louise Müller's appearances had been rather tedious, but the display of her charms had provided more than adequate compensation for  the occasional ennui Lefevre had enjoyed it even more, expressing his enthusiasm at the end by shouting, ‘Bravo!’ standing, and clapping his hands above his head.
No-one else had gone quite as far as that, and the self-conscious Thiercelin had tried to look as if Lefevre was nothing to do with him.
As they left he was surprised to learn that his colleague's appreciation of the proceedings had not been entirely lecherous.
‘Absolutely brilliant,’ Lefevre assured him.
‘Beethoven's a genius, but those fools in the audience couldn't tear their attention from your lady friend's pumpkins.
Mind you,’ he admitted fairly, ‘they really are quite remarkable.’
‘The plot didn't seem too plausible,’ Thiercelin ventured.
‘Oh, the plot.
Nobody goes to the opera for that.
It's just a vehicle for the music…’
Lefevre launched into a semi-technical explanation of the latter, accompanied by snatches from some of the arias.
‘I dare say you're right.
Anyway, to business.
We'd better go and see Fräulein Müller again.’
‘Was I invited too?
I didn't get that impression, Jacques.’
'Just for that you can stand outside in the rain.
Might not be a bad idea, anyway.
All sorts of people go to see performers after a first night.
Apart from Fedorov, that fellow who gave us the slip the other evening might turn up.’
‘If they do, should I follow?’
‘The mystery man, yes.
Fedorov, not unless you see special reason.
We'll be waiting for him back at his place, after all.
A tantôt.’
Thiercelin began to nudge through the crowd of idlers around the stage door, leaving his friend gazing stoically after him in the late evening rain.
‘You and I might as well be getting back to Zimmerman's, Richter,’ said Moreau as they shuffled out into the street.
‘I'm sure these two young people don't want us tagging on to them any longer, eh?’
‘I suppose not,’ agreed Karelius, none too happy either at leaving Fräulein Müller alone with Lapointe or his own implied promotion to middle age.
‘We'll let you know what's happened first thing tomorrow,’ said the fräulein.
‘Promise.
You've been such good friends, both of you.’
At this she turned on Karelius a look of such  desperate gratitude that his selfish irritation was quite vanquished.
‘Good luck,’ said Moreau.
‘But I'm sure everything will turn out all right.’
‘Yes,’ said Karelius inadequately.
Amidst a jumble of confused emotions, he had finally made the decision that he was in love with Katja Müller.
Meanwhile the logical part of his mind acknowledged that in all the world he could hardly have chosen anyone more hopelessly wrong for him.
They all said goodnight, Lapointe and Moreau in French.
The fräulein smiled and said, ‘Auf wiedersehen ’ Karelius alone used the old Austrian farewell: ‘Ich küsse die Hand .’
—‘I kiss your hand.’
‘Nice girl,’ said Moreau again, shooting Karelius a swift sideways glance.
‘The sort I could really have gone for twenty years ago.’
‘Yes,’ agreed Karelius monosyllabically.
‘Too bad about her sister.
You could tell she wasn't too happy about seeing her replaced by that baggage.
Understandable.
‘Yes.
Still,’ said Karelius, recovering himself, ‘there was a certain interest in trying to decide whether the top half of the new Fräulein Müller was actually going to fall out of her dress.’
Moreau laughed.
‘Right enough.
One or two damn near things, weren't there?
Goodnight, ladies,’ he continued with a cheerful wave, as he and Karelius made their way past a waiting crowd of belles de nuit .
Karelius contented himself with raising his hat.
As they stood in the rain trying to hail a cab, Fräulein Müller and Lapointe disappeared round the corner of the gleaming facade of the Theater an der Wien .
The crowd dispersed, and the oil-lamps were extinguished one by one.
It was a dismal night.
‘Why, Jacques?’ purred Louise Müller throatily, ‘how lovely of you to come and see me again.’
She was standing amidst a pile of bouquets, mostly pink and red roses which must have cost a fortune at this season, and chrysanthemums.
In France, but not apparently in  Vienna, the latter were regarded as flowers of death.
She still had on the revealing silk blouse she had worn in the show, with stage jewellery sparkling at her throat and breast.
This time, thought Thiercelin, the practised smile held just a hint of strain.
‘Did you enjoy the show?’
‘Very much.
Especially your performance, of course.’
‘Sweet of you, Jacques.
Some friends should be here in a few minutes, for a little drink.’
She waved a perfectly manicured hand at a bucket of wine-bottles.
‘Would you like to pour me one?’
He opened a bottle inexpertly, spilt a quantity, but succeeded in filling a couple of glasses.
Then he remembered her maid, Rachel.
‘I don't drink,’ she said.
‘Nonsense, you old misery, have one.’
The girl was still smiling, but there was an edge to her voice.
The dark woman shrugged and took a glass.
‘Santé, mesdemoiselles.’
‘Zum Wohl, Herr Hauptmann.’
Thiercelin took a tiny sip and replaced his glass on the corner of the dressing-table.
He had two choices.
Either he could hang about drinking and flirting and achieve nothing, with the risk of embarrassment if Fedorov arrived, or he could try the direct approach.
Artistes after a performance, he guessed, were like soldiers following a battle: the sudden relaxation of tension would be likely to leave them emotionally drained.
On the first night the effect should be specially pronounced.
If, whilst suffering from the reaction, she received a sudden shock…
‘There is something I wished to ask you, Louise,’ he said hesitantly.
Apparently she thought she knew what it was, for she smiled again and said huskily, ‘What is it, Jacques?’
Now was the moment.
He must make the switch from half-baked seducer to ruthless interrogator as brutally as possible.
After fiddling with the stem of his glass for a few seconds, he looked straight at her and said:
‘What happened to the real Louise Müller?’
She did pretty well.
Mildly indignant surprise was what she intended to convey, and almost succeeded.
All that betrayed  her was the slight tremor in the hand holding her wineglass.
She had to place her other hand on the bowl to steady it before replacing the glass carefully on the dressing-table.
‘I don't understand you, Jacques.’
‘I think you do.
Your name, Louise, is not Louise Müller.
I do not know what it is, nor do I greatly care.
But I do know that the real Louise Müller was removed some time ago so that you could take her place.’
‘Jacques…you don't know what you're saying…’
‘That's why Daniel was killed.
He knew her, and would have exposed your deception.’
‘You're crazy.
Or suffering from some incredible delusion.’
‘It's no good.
We know of your connection with Fedorov, and the murder of the Englishman the other day: everything.
Now would you rather answer my questions, or try explaining yourself to Marshal Davout at headquarters?’
The girl caught her breath and sat down suddenly.
Then she slumped her head on to her arms in a dramatic gesture of capitulation.
‘Oh, Jacques, Jacques.
Yes, it's all true.
Everything you said.
But —’ she turned to him, eyes brimming with tears, ‘— you don't know what it's been like, trying every day to live a lie…’
‘No.
But you're going to tell me.’
She looked up at him, lips moist and quivering.
‘Three or four months ago I was appearing with a small company in Regensburg.
A theatrical gentleman approached me after one of the performances, said he was impressed by my singing, and that he could obtain a part for me with the Schikenader Company in Vienna.
I had never dreamed of such a thing.
He was so persuasive, and the salary was twice what I had been getting.
There would one condition, however: I should change my name and call myself Louise Müller.’
‘What reason did he give for that?’
‘The real singer of that name was indisposed, and was likely to remain so for some time.
She too was a comparatively unknown artiste, and had not wished to turn the part down, since she feared she might never obtain another such opportunity.
No-one in Vienna knew her or me; I was to perform on her behalf for the current season.
Later, when she  came to seek employment elsewhere, she could claim to have appeared at the Vienna Opera, and the record would confirm it.’
The weaknesses in the story were manifest.
Thiercelin contented himself with asking, ‘And did you believe that?’
She glanced away and dabbed her eyes.
A gleaming breast shifted within the white silk and presented itself to his gaze.
‘I didn't know what to believe.
But I was a poor, struggling singer — believe me, Jacques, you can't imagine what it's like in this business for a woman on her own.
I might never have got such a chance again.’
‘When did you discover what I've just told you?’
‘A few weeks ago, when Fedorov appeared.
He said I must do his bidding, or he would reveal the falsehood and have me imprisoned for fraud.
At first I refused, but then he told me of Daniel's murder, and said no-one would believe I was not implicated…’
‘So you helped him.’
Again the plump tear-stained face was raised to his.
She passed a hand over her eyes.
‘God forgive me, yes.
But I had no choice.
The man is a monster.
He terrifies me, Jacques.
And those for whom he works…’
‘Who are they?’
She flashed a panic-stricken glance at her companion.
Thiercelin thought he detected an almost imperceptible shake of the dark woman's head.
‘I don't know,’ insisted Fräulein Müller.
‘Honestly, I've no idea.
He would never say.
Somehow that made it worse, not knowing.
And I was so completely in their power.
Oh, Jacques, now that I have told you everything, I am so afraid.
And so alone.’
She flung herself into his arms and looked up imploringly.
‘Say you will protect me, Jacques.
Now that I have been honest with you.’
Thiercelin had quite normal feelings where women were concerned, and was having some difficulty in controlling himself.
Fräulein Müller might be blatant, but she was not easy to resist.
Had he believed her, he might have succumbed to temptation.
As it was he tried to think of other things.
‘Well,’ he said awkwardly.
‘I can't make any promises, but I'll do what I can.
Where is Fedorov now?’
She stiffened.
‘My God, yes.
I forgot to tell you.
The real Louise Müller's sister is visiting Vienna, and called to see me  earlier this evening.
Fedorov knows of it.
I'm sure he means her some harm.’
Thiercelin held the polished curves of her shoulders away from him and looked into her face.
‘What did you tell her?’
‘The truth — that I had no idea what had happened to her sister.
I persuaded her to remain silent for the time being, I think, by promising to find out everything I could.
But Fedorov has learnt of her somehow.
She s in the most terrible danger.’
Which even on her own account of things, this woman had done nothing whatever to avert.
‘Where's she staying?’ demanded Thiercelin harshly.
‘I did not ask.
Oh, Jacques, can you stop him?’
‘We can try.
And you'd better hope we succeed.
Otherwise I've no doubt you'll find yourself charged as an accessory to murder.’
She gave a piteous wail.
Thiercelin remained unmoved.
‘You won't do it without killing him, Jacques.
He's like a wild animal.
He'll never allow himself to be taken alive.
You'll have to kill him.’
Thiercelin nodded.
‘Yes, I believe we will.’
The premiere had not called for any great celebration, even the soi-disant Louise Müller being in subdued spirits after her confession.
Thiercelin had escorted her and her maid to their lodgings, refused the opportunities and dangers presented by her offer of a drink, and bid them goodnight.
He had not felt justified in making an arrest; apart from the possibility of a scene, there was no hard evidence of her complicity in the murders.
He would report to Davout first thing in the morning and leave the decision to him.
Within the hour he had joined a company of infantrymen from the 26th Regiment at Kahlenbergerdorf.
Fedorov was not there.
From his servants they learned that he and his coachman had not yet returned from a visit to the opera.
It was already past midnight, and the performance had been over an hour and a half.
From the theatre to Kahlenbergerdorf was no more than four miles.
Thiercelin's misgivings soon resolved into the sick certainty of a failure which for all he knew could already have cost another life.
He ordered a dozen men to remain in the house whilst the  rest of the company set about the business of rousing the neighbourhood with enquiry.
Meanwhile he returned to headquarters and the disagreeable task of informing Davout of the outcome.
The marshal's reception of the news was predictably sour, but he refrained from any overt suggestion that Thiercelin had been at fault, possibly because he accepted some share of the blame himself.
Fedorov's description was circulated at once, with orders for his immediate arrest.
Any coach leaving the city at this time of night should have been stopped and searched anyway.
By four o'clock Thiercelin had decided there was nothing further he could usefully do but await events.
He finally reached his lodgings a couple of hours before dawn.
Two officers of Davout's staff were waiting for him.
‘Captain Thiercelin?’
The older man, a moustachioed veteran of about his own age, rose as he entered.
‘Epitot, of Staff.
This is Lieutenant Gallier.’
Then they told him about Lefevre.
Within minutes the crowd had dispersed, leaving the frontage of the Theater an der Wienunlit and deserted.
The first night of Leonore, Lefevre conceded sadly, had been a failure.
His countrymen, who had predominated in the audience, lacked the musical appreciation of German and Italian peoples.
Thiercelin, for instance, had no idea of the fact that they had been listening to the work of the greatest composer of the day.
With the provoking incident of the previous week still fresh in his mind, Lefevre had taken the precaution of hiring a cab in advance of any possible need, telling the driver half-truthfully that he was waiting for someone.
It was to be hoped that Davout would be reasonable over the question of expenses.
Thiercelin should soon be returned anyway, when there would be little point in staying any longer.
Neither Fedorov nor the man who had evaded them the other night had put in an appearance, and the chance of their doing so now seemed remote.
And here was his colleague, probably, as he heard brisk footsteps from across the road, and a muffled goodnight.
It was Fedorov.
There could be no mistaking that squat, muscular figure and purposeful walk.
More significantly, he had company: a small woman and a French lieutenant of infantry.
A two-in-hand waiting opposite, which Lefevre had assumed to be plying for hire, trotted sedately up to the stage door.
It was evidently a private carriage.
The coachman jumped down, raised his hat and held open the nearside door.
The Russian acknowledged curtly and stood back to allow his companions to enter.
At first Lefevre took the woman for Louise Müller, though smaller and slimmer than he remembered, and for an actress quietly dressed in sombre cloak and dark bonnet.
But as she turned to thank the coachman he caught sight of her profile: that of a woman unknown to him, about twenty-five years of age, pretty in a conventional way, with mousy-brown hair.
Presumably another girl from the company, thought Lefevre, although he could not recall having noticed her during the performance.
The lieutenant he knew by sight only.
Lefevre allowed the carriage to travel a hundred yards before giving orders to follow at a safe distance.
His driver, a phlegmatic man in middle age, evinced no surprise.
If a fare wanted to amuse himself thus, it was his own affair.
There was little traffic, so that Lefevre's main problem seemed likely to be that of remaining inconspicuous.
His driver, though no speed merchant, had to be reminded to draw rein as the carriage ahead rumbled into the Stefansplatz, disappearing behind the cathedral as Lefevre's vehicle entered the square.
He expected his quarry to turn left at any moment for Heiligenstadt and the north, but instead it pressed on into a part of the city unfamiliar to him, in or near the Jewish quarter.
Pitch-black buildings loomed so close above the narrow streets it seemed they must touch overhead.
By now Fedorov must surely suspect he was being followed, for the deserted streets were silent save for the rattle of carriage wheels and jangling harness.
Lefevre peered behind into the darkness.
He could have sworn that he had heard yet another vehicle out there, as if he in turn were being followed, but there was nothing to be seen.
Their way led down a shallow incline between a row of abandoned warehouses, gaunt against the night sky.
And here was the waterfront, not of the river, but a grimy offshoot of the Danube Canal, apparently little used, though a couple of moored barges were bumping against the ramshackle wooden pier.
Fedorov's carriage was in view again, its outline jutting out from behind a heap of timber on the wharf.
It had drawn to a halt, and above the slapping of the water Lefevre could discern obscure sounds of commotion as the vehicle rocked on its springs.
Had there been only one man in the carriage with the  woman the explanation would have been obvious.
The filthy canalside lacked most of the qualities Lefevre would have chosen for a romantic interlude, but some men were not so particular.
Although puzzled, he hesitated to investigate more closely for fear his driver should imagine his interest to be prurient.
‘Would you believe it?’ grunted the man.
‘Three of ‘em.
Perverted,’ he added gloomily, shaking his head.
Lefevre was still undecided.
The woman had not looked like a prostitute, besides which had that been the case Fedorov's driver should have been taking a walk along the quay, or just sitting gazing tactfully ahead.
But he was clambering down and opening the door, to take part in whatever was going on.
From within Lefevre could hear a stifled scream.
And then came the unmistakable sound of a shot.
He leapt out.
‘Right, driver, we're needed.
Come on.’
The cabman hesitated momentarily, then, ignoring Lefevre's curses and allegations of cowardice, turned his horses round, cracked his whip and galloped away.
The door of the shuddering carriage burst open, and Fedorov tumbled out, struggling with the woman.
Tiny though she was compared with her assailant, she fought like a wildcat.
As they hit the ground, she drove her fingers into his left eye.
He bellowed with pain and rage, and sitting astride, continued punching her savagely in the face until she lay still.
Meanwhile his coachman had advanced to meet Lefevre.
A burly figure, three stone heavier than the Frenchman, and quick on his feet for a big man.
As Lefevre drew his sword, the whip snaked out to catch him full in the face, ripping open his cheek from temple to jaw.
He fell and grovelled in agony as the driver lashed him repeatedly about the head and body.
Meanwhile, unless his senses were awry from fear and pain, a newcomer had arrived on the scene.
From behind he could hear horses whinneying, brakes applied, a crash and splintering wood.
His assailant brought a boot down on his hand, and the sword twisted from his grasp.
One or two fingers must have gone.
Through the haze of anguish and despair he could see Fedorov dragging the woman, dead or senseless, over to the canalside to heave her in.
At that moment a slim figure flung itself out of the shadows to tumble Lefevre's giant adversary from his feet.
As the coachman rose, a lightning kick thumped into his genitals.
The man doubled over and screamed.
Instantly the newcomer smashed an elbow into his mouth.
With vindictive satisfaction Lefevre heard the splintering of teeth.
The coachman went down; there was a sickening sound as his head made contact with one of the bollards on the quay.
He twitched convulsively and made a sobbing noise.
The slim man had seized the whip, and after two more murderous kicks, commenced to thrash the defenceless coachman.
Finally he grabbed him by the collar, and with a spasmodic effort tipped him off the wharf into the canal.
It seemed to Lefevre that the splash took a long time in coming.
Engaged in drowning the woman, Fedorov had been slow to respond to the sudden turn in events, but now he recognized the danger and grabbed Lefevre's sword, wresting it from his feeble grasp as if he were a child.
He struck; the Frenchman rolled away in a last despairing effort to save himself.
Sword clanged on stone, and Fedorov cursed as it jarred his wrist.
‘Merde ,’ and even in his agony and confusion Lefevre-identified again the voice of his assailant of Amstetten.
The man was upon him once more; Lefevre stumbled into his legs and grappled briefly before being kicked away.
He could resist no longer, barely managing to drag himself to his knees as Fedorov raised the sword.
He saw his would-be rescuer launch himself in a final dive…
It was too late.
The blow almost severed Lefevre's head from his body.
Fedorov writhed from his attacker's grip and sprang to his feet.
The man was more cautious now that his friend had been killed, and advanced slowly, brandishing the whip.
Fedorov took the first blow on the arm.
Fortunately these Austrians did not know how to wield the lash.
In Russia he had been expert with the knout, no less than the sword.
Again Fedorov lunged.
His adversary dodged and struck out with the whip again.
Another ineffective blow; he could scarcely feel it.
The man, whoever it was, knew nothing of the correct use of his weapon.
Had positions been reversed, Fedorov could have flogged him senseless within seconds.
Had he not seen the man before?
He peered at him suspiciously through the gloom.
He couldn't see properly; the bitch had half-blinded him.
But now he knew.
It was the young French officer he had slain at Amstetten.
He had changed his uniform for civilian dress, and was wearing a monocle in an absurd attempt at disguise, but he, Fedorov, was not deceived.
The man he had just killed had been with him the night he died.
No doubt the dead man had returned in an unsuccessful attempt to save his friend from a similar fate.
They could return, he knew that.
Hamnett, the Englishman, had been at the opera tonight.
He had turned away and tried to avoid his eye, but it had been him, no question.
And the old Jew had done likewise: coming to live in nearby Heiligenstadt and pretending to be a moneylender.
He had changed his name, of course, but it had been obvious to Fedorov that he was the same man he had disposed of in the Stadtpark three weeks before.
There had been no choice but to kill him again.
The man from Amstetten was backing away towards the canal.
Perhaps he meant to try to save the woman, but he would be too late.
She should have drowned again by now.
A pity in a way; he'd have liked her to suffer more.
His eye was agony.
He ought to have blinded her too, the bitch.
He had known it was her all along, of course.
That stupid whore at the opera had said it was her sister, but Fedorov had known better.
Drowning wasn't permanent, any more than shooting.
They walked again.
But they were afraid when he faced them.
Not like they were in the dreams he had had recently, where they could torment him without his being able to retaliate.
They were all cowards when it came to a fight.
This man was trying to retreat, but Fedorov would not let him.
He advanced again, but was driven back by a hail of blows.
Strange that they didn't hurt, but perhaps that was because the man was dead.
They couldn't harm him face to face.
Cowards — preferring to spy on him from the shadows and whisper lies.
For some reason he had fallen, and his phantom assailant was upon him, but again the blows had no effect.
He regained his feet without difficulty.
The other remained where he was, awaiting his next move.
The cabdrivers had run away, the cowards.
But they were  clever, too.
They must have realized that had they stayed he would have had to kill them as well.
Probably they had cone to see Yakovlev, or Thiercelin as he now called himself, to report on him.
Very likely it was he who had set these men on to him.
Cunning, he was.
But Fedorov was more cunning still.
He would not fight it out just yet.
That was their plan, no doubt; to have this man delay him whilst they summoned reinforcements.
His eye was less painful by now, but his head ached.
He would not wait for Yakovlev.
Not this time.
Later, he would be revenged upon them all, but he would take them individually, one at a time, when they were unprepared.
He desisted from the attack, and began to withdraw.
Yakovlev's man did not follow.
Fedorov clambered aboard the coach and shook the reins.
It jerked into life and moved away.
For the time being he was safe.
But they would try again.
He must remain on guard.
No, shooting and drowning were no use.
Nor even the sword: Yakovlev had returned, after all.
And the Frenchman he had just killed might do so.
But the old Jew and that whore the other night would not.
They knew about such things in Russia.
The serfs, that was, not the fools of aristocrats he had been brought up with.
In the steppes and the Caucasus they knew the dead could rise again, and how they could be stopped.
He had made sure of the Jew this time, and the whore.
They would not trouble him again.
But the French and their army would.
Obviously they had been infiltrated by the enemies who still lay in wait for him in Russia.
He must tell Fouché about it in his next report.
But could even Fouché be trusted?
He had taken to employing Jews and whores, after all.
Perhaps they were all in it together: Yakovlev, the Müller woman, the French officers, the Englishman, Jews, whores, even Fouché.
But he could outwit them.
He had done so twice, and could do again.
Start a new life elsewhere.
Previously he had been only partly successful, because the Jews had managed to track him down.
This time he would have to be more subtle.
No use returning to Russia, for instance; his family would betray him, he knew it.
And he had many enemies there.
Nor must he return to Kahlenbergerdorf.
The Jews would  be waiting for him by now.
He had a little money on him, and could hide out until the end of the month.
With luck, the Jews would not be able to find him as quickly as that.
On the last day of the month he could collect his money from Fouché as usual.
Then he would travel to France: to Paris.
They would not be expecting that.
He would go to see Joseph Fouché personally, and explain the position to him: that he had uncovered a massive international conspiracy of Jews who planned to take over the whole of Europe.
Since he, Fedorov, was the only one who yet realized the danger, they were spying on him, spreading lies and persecuting him, so it had been necessary to kill some of them.
He would know from Fouché's response whether he agreed, or whether he was in league with them.
Afterwards he would make further plans.
But before that, there was one other thing he had to do.
Those Frenchmen he had killed tonight would walk again unless…
Thiercelin drew a deep breath and placed a hand to his brow.
‘Oh God, no.’
‘I'm afraid there's no real doubt about it,’ said Epitot.
‘But we'd like a formal identification from you, if you will.’
He was dog-tired and depressed beyond words.
But he owed it to Lefevre; better a friend should do it than a semi-stranger like Davout, or even his commanding officer.
Thiercelin nodded and straightened himself.
‘Let's go.’
The military hospital was a dismal insanitary edifice on the western outskirts of the city.
Untouched by the reforms of Baron Larrey, it bore the permanent stench of death and corruption, its handful of battle casualties heavily outnumbered by those suffering from accidental or self-inflicted injury, fever, dysentery and venereal complaints.
As dawn twilight lit the pale facade the whited-sepulchre impression was very strong.
The outbuilding used as a mortuary was round the back.
Their boots crunched loudly on the frozen gravel drive.
An orderly at the door struggled to his feet and saluted sloppily.
‘Yes?’
Captain Epitot and Lieutenant Gallier of Marshal Davout's staff.
We are here with Captain Thiercelin to identify the body of an officer who was killed earlier tonight.
Lieutenant Lefevre.’
They trooped in after him.
‘Lefevre?
Number four.’
There were only four altogether.
The man indicated the one in the far corner with a jerk of his head.
It lay covered with a soiled white sheet.
‘Good God,’ muttered Epitot's lieutenant.
‘What a place.’
Thiercelin would never have believed that anything white could look so dirty.
The plaster walls were damp and cracked, the floor unswept, its stones stained with dried blood and excrement.
The orderly's manner and uniform were in keeping.
That Lefevre should finish lying in a place like this.
Not that it made any difference to the dead.
He steeled himself as Epitot drew back the sheet.
The last faint hope that there had been some mistake died.
All that was left of his genial friend lay cold before him on the trestles.
Soldiers were supposed to get used to losing friends, but this was hard.
Young Daniel's death had been as great a tragedy, but had not taken him like this.
They had not warned him about its appearance; the head was nearly severed, and the face slashed to pieces by a whip.
Perhaps they had thought such a warning from one soldier to another might have seemed an impertinence.
He nodded.
They replaced the sheet.
‘Just a moment,’ said Thiercelin.
‘What's that?’
He indicated a small protrusion at the level of the corpse's chest, lifting the sheet up into a miniature peak.
Epitot looked puzzled and removed it again.
Between the ribs on the left-hand side was a short wooden stake.
‘Strange,’ said Epitot.
‘Obviously not what killed him.
Orderly!’
‘Yes?’
‘This wound here.
Why has the piece of wood not been removed?’
The man scratched his head.
‘I don't think it was like that when he came in.
I'll get the notes.’
He returned holding a book, ran his finger down a page, and shrugged.
‘No mention of any chest injury.
Just the wound to the neck, a couple of broken fingers and cuts to the face and body.’
‘We should like to see the officer in charge here,’ said Epitot firmly.
‘What, now?’
‘Yes, now.
Hurry it up, man, we haven't got all day.’
The orderly departed chastened, and a long ten minutes elapsed.
Bleak dawn light filtered in through the grimy windows.
‘Who's in charge of this place, anyway?’ asked Thiercelin.
‘A Captain Bernard, I believe,’ said Epitot.
‘Can't say I'm very favourably impressed by his establishment.’
‘What do you want at this hour?’ demanded an irritable middle-aged officer, evidently just roused from his bed, greatcoat thrown hastily over his night attire.
‘The wound in this man's chest.
Why was the weapon not removed?’
The medical officer made perfunctory reference to some notes.
‘It wasn't like that when he came in.’
‘Must have been.’
‘If these notes say it wasn't, then it wasn't,’ insisted the other.
‘Anyway, I examined the body myself; I'd never have missed a thing like that.’
‘How can you explain it, then?’
‘I can't.
Now, if that's all…’
‘Has anyone been here since, who might have tampered with the body?’ asked Thiercelin.
‘No, no-one.
Except his brother, of course.’
Thiercelin looked at him amazed.
‘Who?’
‘His brother.
Called to identify the body just before I went off duty.
Very upset.’
‘Oh, not another fake brother,’ said Thiercelin in disgust.
‘Describe the man you saw.’
‘Aged about forty, heavy build, fair hair.’
Thiercelin and Epitot exchanged glances.
Fedorov's description had been circulated from Davout's headquarters three hours before.
‘Was he left alone with the body?’
‘I expect so.
Why not?’
Epitot sighed.
‘What name did he give?’
‘No name.
Just said he was the brother of one of the French officers killed in the brawl in the Leopoldstadt.’
‘So, he didn't even know his own brother's name.
Didn't you check his identity?’
‘We get plenty of people in here identifying cadavers — I can't ask to see the credentials of every one.
Now, if you don't mind, captain, I'm going back to bed.’
‘Before you do,’ said Epitot carefully, ‘you may care to reflect upon the fact that thanks to your neglect of the most elementary precautions, you have permitted a homicidal maniac to molest the body of one of our countrymen.’
‘Do you know who you're talking to?’
‘Well, you're not Baron Larrey, I know that.
And I haven't finished.
This place stinks.
It isn't fit for a latrine, let alone a resting place for the dead.
I'll be back at noon to inspect.
If I'm still not satisfied, the next inspection will be by Marshal Davout in person.
And furthermore —’ he brushed aside the other's indignant protests —‘the body of a French officer lies under the tricolour, not these flea-bitten rags.
You'd better smarten your ideas up, too,’ he snarled at the orderly as they left.
‘Bastards like that make me sick,’ he confided to Thiercelin.
‘Transferred to medical duties through cowardice or incompetence, most of them, and start throwing their weight about as soon as they're asked to do a job properly.’
‘Will you be going back to inspect, sir, as you said?’ enquired Lieutenant Gallier.
‘I'll be back all right, don't you worry about that.
And I meant what I said about Davout.
Good job that bastard back there was only a captain; might have cramped my style otherwise.’
‘I meant to mention that, sir,’ said the lieutenant uncertainly.
‘Captain Bernard was transferred back to active service last week.
The officer you just saw was a major.’
Karelius awoke that morning at half-past six, and lay for a while thinking about Fräulein Müller.
How did she fit into things, if at all?
On the face of it, she was what she seemed: a lonely, nervous girl, travelling Europe alone, and, he conceded reluctantly, of very doubtful chastity.
But the link with Aranyos through her sister needed explaining.
It could hardly be coincidence.
What a strange, fascinating woman she was, with her hopeless lack of a normal social manner, and desperate craving for affection.
‘We do count as friends, don't we?’ 'You've been such good friends, both of you.’
Yet not really the clinging type.
She couldn't be completely spurious; no-one could act a part like that.
He'd prefer to keep his illusions about her, if illusions they were.
Strange that in a way he would like to be her friend even more than her lover.
Perhaps that was how middle-aged or old people felt about love.
Sometimes he felt like a middle-aged man trapped inside a young man's body.
At this point, as often happened, his thoughts wandered off into irrelevant  philosophical channels.
Finally, and more practically, he decided to get up.
Whilst he was shaving realization began to dawn that something was amiss.
It was quieter than usual downstairs, yet there were vague sounds of movement and alien conversation, as if normal domestic work had been interrupted and replaced by something more significant, and sinister.
His ears pricked at the unmistakable tones of French officialdom.
It could hardly be him they wanted, or they would have been pounding upstairs and hammering on his door by now.
He wasn't looking forward to meeting them, for all that.
But it would have to be faced.
A few deep breaths to steady his racing pulse, and he was ready.
At the foot of the stairs, a couple of officers of the Grand Army, whose epaulettes proclaimed them members of Davout's staff, were talking to an ashen-faced Moreau.
‘My God, terrible,’ Karelius heard him say.
‘I still can't believe it.’
He glanced up and caught sight of Karelius with something that seemed akin to relief.
‘Ah, here's Herr Richter.
He can confirm what I say.’
‘Herr Richter?’ enquired the senior of the two officers, a forceful-looking man with brick-red complexion and dark moustache.
‘Captain Epitot, of Marshal Davout's staff.
Lieutenant Gallier.’
Karelius smiled uncertainly and nodded.
‘Hans Richter, of Berlin.
Is there something wrong?’
‘I'm afraid so, sir.
I believe you knew a Lieutenant Lapointe, of the 14th Infantry Regiment?’
‘I couldn't tell you the regiment, but there is a lieutenant of that name staying here.
A friend of Captain Moreau.’
Epitot shook his head.
‘I've just been telling the captain.
Lieutenant Lapointe, together with another French officer, was killed last night in a brawl in the north-east of the city, near the Danube Canal.’
Karelius felt a choking sensation and his mouth went dry.
‘Dreadful,’ he heard himself saying.
‘But what of the young lady who was his companion?
Fräulein Müller?’
It was an eternity before Epitot replied.
‘Captain Moreau was telling us about her.
I've had no reports to suggest what might have happened there.
Of course it may be that she  returned here with the deceased last night and he went out again on his own, but it doesn't seem likely.’
From then on everything was unreal.
Karelius produced his papers to Epitot, who seemed satisfied.
Later it occurred to him that it was lucky he had Moreau to vouch for him, otherwise his transparent interest in the fräulein might have made him suspect.
He couldn't even ask too much about what had happened.
Trying to interrogate officers of the Grand Army would have been asking for trouble.
He left half his breakfast and wandered aimlessly about for an hour or two, listening to the other residents telling one another how awful it was.
Moreau returned shortly before ten from the disagreeable duty of identification.
Karelius, though dreading what he might hear, confronted him at once.
‘No news yet about the little girl,’ said the Frenchman correctly identifying Karelius' area of concern.
‘But it was Lapointe, all right.
God-awful business.
They're still trying to sort out what must have happened.
At least two coaches seem to have been involved in a collision in the Leopoldstadt, near the canal.
In the argument that followed, Lapointe and another French officer, name of Lefevre, were killed.
They've just dragged the body of a coachman out of the canal too.
Christ knows how it all came about.’
The news could have been worse.
A brawl following a coach collision was unlikely to have led to fatal violence being offered to a woman.
‘Have they no idea what happened?’ he asked desperately.
‘Lapointe and the other Frenchman come to blows after the accident, or what?’
‘They don't think so.
Lapointe had been shot, and there was no gun found on the other lieutenant, Lefevre.
Besides, I saw Lefevre's body as well.
It wasn't too pretty.
Cut to pieces with a whip, and almost decapitated.
They told me Lapointe's sword was still in its sheath, unused.’
‘How did the coachman become involved?’
‘No idea.
The news about him only arrived just as I was leaving.
They'd fished him out of the water, so presumably he'd drowned.
They're still dragging it,’ he went on unhappily, with a quick glance at Karelius before looking away.
‘Very sorry.’
What a good fellow Moreau is, thought Karelius again.
He's lost a friend himself, but can still spare a thought for a near-stranger  and the way he feels about a woman.
‘One funny thing,’ the Frenchman continued.
‘Perhaps I shouldn't tell you, but I'm sure it'll go no further.’
Karelius nodded.
‘Both officers’ corpses were molested as they lay in the morgue.
An imposter arrived claiming to be related to one of them, and whilst he was alone with the bodies he drove a wooden stake into the heart of each.
Clearly the action of a madman; no possible sense in it.’
Karelius shook his head.
‘Everything about the business seems insane.
Do your people have a description of this madman?’
‘Only very superficial.
Heavily built man in early middle age, with fair hair.’
Superficial maybe, but enough.
Karelius hoped his face did not betray him.
Fedorov yet again.
Possibly he had abducted the girl with a view to rape and murder.
Alternatively, it had to be faced, she could already be dead.
Either way, he would be paying another visit on Fedorov.
Not as part of his enquiry, or on behalf of Hamnett, or his country, but for himself.
And for her.
For the first time in his life Karelius realized how narrow was the gap separating him from his pagan ancestors, the Germanic warriors of a thousand years before.
They would have understood his feelings, better than he did himself.
Vengeance.
The blood-feud.
He would find Fedorov, wherever he might hide: follow him to Russia if need be, but find him he would.
Unless the Grand Army got to him first.
Karelius, who had never disliked the French as much as an Englishman should, felt himself warming to his country's enemies.
They too had suffered at Fedorov's hands.
He had killed three French officers in cold blood.
They would never stop looking for him now.
One way or another, the fräulein would be avenged.
The irony of his code name occurred to him.
Orestes.
The Avenger.
How did it go?
Something about ‘when the avengers strike this monster down in blood, that they avenge as well, a simple slave who died — a small thing, lightly killed.’
Only a small thing.
Karelius was aware of a most painful sensation stabbing into the back of his eyes.
The surviving cab-drivers had been traced and, although they had both decamped as soon as the trouble started, Thiercelin managed to piece together the events of the  previous night with reasonable accuracy.
He reported fully to Davout at noon, and was therefore surprised to receive a further summons from the marshal in early evening.
‘You'll remember we decided to arrest the Müller woman and her maid,’ said Davout, as usual embarking on business without preliminary.
‘Yes, sir.’
The evidence of Moreau and Richter, confirming the identity of Katja Müller, had been thought to strengthen the case against her bogus sister sufficiently to justify bringing charges.
The marshal's face was bleak.
‘Well, owing to some inexplicable negligence,’— he sighed and shook his head —‘they seem to have given us the slip.’
Thiercelin congratulated himself silently that this was nothing to do with him.
The task of keeping them under observation had been deputed to Davout's staff.
But his complacency was soon shaken.
Davout took a slit envelope from the papers on his desk and threw it across.
‘She left this in her apartment.
It's addressed to you.’
Aware that his intended, ‘I, sir?’ would have met with the invariable bark, ‘Yes, you, sir,’Thiercelin contented himself with looking staggered, which he was.
‘My darling Jacques,
‘We have to leave, we are so frightened.
It is not safe for us here; Fedorov is a monster.
We shall return to the Rhineland and start our lives anew — please do not try to find us.
Forgive me, Jacques: I am only a woman, weak and fearful.
Try not to think badly of me.
With all my love,
Louise.’
‘Ah,’ said Thiercelin unhappily.
‘Yes.’
‘You've no idea where she might have gone?’
‘No, sir.
She says here the Rhineland.’
This statement of the obvious met with a blank stare.
‘So I imagine we can eliminate that possibility.
I'll have orders circulated to all frontiers, but I don't hold out much hope.
The Hapsburgs still control half the country, and they've no  reason to be co-operative.
If she travels east we'll never be able to find her.
Shall we, Jacques?’
It was the first time Thiercelin could remember the marshal saying anything even remotely humorous.
He tried to smile, but it was difficult.
It reminded him too much of Lefevre.
Dinner at the Zimmerman pension that evening was a social disaster.
The French soldiers, cut off from the other guests both linguistically and emotionally, spoke only amongst themselves, occasionally voluble, more often morose.
Frau Geller and her companion were dressed in black and wore visages d'occasion .
What little they spoke was in the specially reverent voice reserved by the middle classes for times of bereavement.
Old Herr Stern, isolated in the silent world of the deaf, munched grimly and spoke not at all, whilst the Zimmermans' desultory attempts to engage their guests in conversation were soon abandoned.
Karelius' infrequent remarks were exchanged exclusively with Moreau.
‘To be hoped they catch the mad swine,’ said the Frenchman, who had preserved his usual directness, if not good humour.
‘I think they will, somehow,’ Karelius assured him.
And if they don't, he resolved silently, I will.
‘Yes, so do I. They tell me Davout's got some of his best men on to it.
Young captain called Thiercelin seems to be leading the enquiry.
Met him — quite impressed.’
In years to come Karelius was often to reflect that this was the first time he had heard mention of the man whose destiny was to be so closely entwined with his own.
‘Have they any idea who they're looking for?’
‘Russian named Fedorov's the chief suspect.
His description's been circulated.’
So Davout had got that far.
Sounded as if this Thiercelin was a good man.
He would like to be there when they shot the bastard.
There followed another miserable silence.
Karelius tried to  relieve his depression by making plans.
The French did not suspect him yet, but sooner or later, as a matter of routine, would enquire his business in Vienna.
He would tell them some story — precisely what, he had not decided — and in due course they would check and discover its falsehood.
He ought therefore to disappear at the first opportunity, especially since the purpose of his stay, that of meeting Katja Müller, appeared to have lost its point…
The choking sensation returned, and his eyes began to hurt again.
Tomorrow, as soon as possible without attracting attention, he would go to see Aranyos.
He might know something.
A sound from the reception hall obtruded into his thoughts, that of footsteps, and semi-audible conversation.
‘Excuse me, everyone,’ said Zimmerman, rising, for being short of staff he would have to attend to the visitors himself.
He had scarcely reached his feet when Karelius heard a familiar female voice, speaking French with a hint of the Rhineland, and as ever, slightly breathless.
‘Thank you so much, lieutenant.
You've been very kind.
I shall be all right now.
Yes, really.’
At that the unseen escort took his leave, and Fräulein Müller entered the room.
Moreau was first to recover.
‘Good show,’ he said heartily, if somewhat inadequately.
He turned to Karelius.
‘Are you all right, old man?’
Karelius nodded.
For the first time in his life he had physically felt the colour drain from his face.
He must try not to faint.
Somehow or other he must surely be making an exhibition of himself.
Fortunately most of the others were little better.
The old people gaped silently, whilst Zimmerman and his wife made incoherent noises.
The French soldiers behaved like the crowd in a conventionally produced play, first with exaggerated expressions of surprise, and thereafter gesticulating and muttering amongst themselves.
‘Good evening, everyone,’ said the fräulein, glaring at the old ladies in her most hostile manner.
‘I am going to sit with my friends.’
She pulled out a chair and positioned it between Karelius and Moreau, who struggled awkwardly to their feet to assist her.
It really was her: moody and impossible as ever, and apparently on the verge of a breakdown.
She was even paler than usual, and seemed to have been crying.
A huge purple bruise was stretched tight and shiny over her left cheek-bone.
‘Meal for the young lady!’ bellowed Moreau.
‘And get a move on.’
Frau Zimmerman duly departed to give orders to the cook.
‘Oh, no, really, I couldn't manage…’
‘Nonsense, my dear, get some food down you.
Do you the world of good.’
Moreau fussed about like an old hen, whilst Karelius contented himself with nodding and grinning idiotically.
Then the fräulein told her story.
Characteristically matters teetered between tragedy and farce.
She spoke softly, directing her remarks exclusively at Karelius and Moreau, so that the others were obliged to strain their ears.
After a while the old ladies made a huffy pretence of being uninterested, whilst Herr Stern, cupping a hand round one ear, kept shouting, ‘You what?’ at regular intervals.
Periodically Moreau translated for the benefit of his countrymen, who thereupon continued to behave in the manner of stage Frenchmen, with much shrugging and stifled Gallic oaths.
‘…
After the show,’ said the fräulein, following an emotional and discursive preamble, ‘the dresser woman I told you about introduced us to a man called Fedorov.
Now I come to think of it, she was rather vague regarding his exact position with the company.
Anyway, he was to escort us to my sister's lodgings…’
Planning to murder both witnesses, thought Karelius, they hadn't bothered to devise too convincing a story, or even change Fedorov's name.
‘…
Soon after we got into the coach, he began to talk in a strange rambling manner.
He mentioned a man called Yakovlev, from Petersburg, who he said was persecuting him; and how Europe stood in danger from a huge conspiracy of Jews in high places…
He called me Louise, and seemed to think I was my sister.
He said…’— the fräulein swallowed and continued in a rapid high-pitched voice —‘he had finished me once, in the Danube, and would have to do so again…’
‘What was Lapointe's reaction to all this?’ asked Moreau.
‘The man spoke in German, so he could not understand, but of course he could see I was getting upset.
He asked me what was going on; just then the coach stopped, and the man drew a gun and shot Lieutenant Lapointe in the chest.
I could tell at once that he was dead…
It was all like an insane nightmare.
The next thing I remember is coming to on the canal bank, and a man bending over me asking if I was all right.
He must have rescued me from the canal, because my clothes were wet through, so were his…’
‘Who was this man?’ enquired Karelius, as her voice faltered again.
‘He…wouldn't give his name.’
But you know it, said Karelius to himself.
Why should you conceal it?
Come to that, how is it I know that's what you're doing?
Why can I read you like a book, when we only met for the first time four days ago?
And you're not that transparent; Moreau doesn't miss much, but he hasn't spotted it.
‘He escorted me to his lodgings, where he treated me with every kindness, and dried my clothes whilst I managed a few hours sleep.’
The old ladies cast one another knowing glances, somehow contriving to look at once smug and disapproving.
‘He behaved throughout like a perfect gentleman,’ cried Fräulein Müller angrily at the top of her voice.
‘Nothing amiss took place.’
‘We did not suggest otherwise,’ Frau Geller assured her primly.
‘Never mind about them,’ said Karelius with unusual discourtesy towards a pair of elderly women.
‘Please go on.’
After further coaxing and at some risk of another outburst, the fräulein continued, ‘By this afternoon I was feeling much better.
The gentleman who saved me suggested I tell my story to the French authorities.
He escorted me part of the way to their headquarters, then left me.’
‘So you've been with them?’
‘Yes.
I saw Marshal Davout in person.
He's not as horrible as people say.’
She flashed Frau Geller and her companion a glance of the deepest loathing.
‘A lot nicer than some I could name.’
Moreau intervened hurriedly.
‘Where did this fellow lodge?’
‘I really couldn't say.
It was dark when we arrived, and we  left in a closed carriage.’
This all tripped off the fräulein's tongue with uncharacteristic facility.
‘Besides, I was still a bit shaken.
I'm afraid I didn't notice.’
Presumably the French had believed her, or they would hardly have let her go.
Nor did the other guests seem to suspect anything.
But she knew her rescuer, all right.
So did Karelius.
How many men were there in Vienna known to Fräulein Müller, who were likely to be on the scene when needed, and now preferred to remain anonymous?
Surely no more than one.
It was early afternoon of the following day before Karelius found the opportunity to be alone with her.
Moreau had acted as her unofficial bodyguard all morning, until military duties necessitated his departure.
A couple of his men, apparently under orders from Epitot, were content to follow at a respectful distance as she and Karelius went for a stroll in the city.
‘Captain Aranyos wants to see you in the south chapel of the Stefansdom at three o'clock,’ she blurted before he had the opportunity to broach the subject.
‘He was my rescuer, as of course you realized.’
So she could read him too.
‘I, er, take it he told you more about me than he should?’
She smiled.
She ought to smile more often, he thought.
She has such a solemn, pinched little face as a rule, even quite sour at times.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘He is rather a talkative person, as no doubt you have discovered.’
‘I'm very sorry about your sister,’ he said awkwardly.
‘I'm afraid there can be little doubt what happened.’
‘I have adjusted to that,’ she replied.
‘Perhaps I am tougher than I sometimes appear…
Or maybe I always knew the truth, somehow…
It's difficult to explain, but a part of me never really believed I should see her again, even after what they told me at the theatre.
I'm the only one of our family left now, and I've had the feeling of being alone for so long…
I don't suppose you can understand that.’
‘I think I can.’
‘Another thing I wanted to say.
Obviously you came to the pension to make enquiry about me and my sister.’
There was a pause before Karelius replied.
‘I hope you  don't feel I've been spying on you.’
‘Not at all,’ she said in a brittle voice, avoiding his eye by turning to look into the window of an ironmonger's.
‘You have been doing a job.
And a job with which I am entirely in sympathy.
I have no right to complain.’
‘We are still friends, then?’ he ventured.
She shot him a quick unhappy glance.
‘Why, of course.’
Karelius shook his head.
‘But things between us are, perhaps, not quite as they were.’
‘Well, not quite, I suppose.
I had foolishly allowed myself to imagine that you might be interested in me as a person, even to the extent of being a little jealous of Lieutenant Lapointe.
He was a nice man, you know,’ she added defiantly.
‘No doubt he was.
But I was extremely jealous of him, if you must know.
And I am very interested in you as a person.’
She turned from the shop-window and set off briskly down the street towards the Stefansplatz, Karelius striding alongside.
‘There is really no need to continue the act.
I'm sure it must have been rather a strain to keep pretending an interest in a boring little milliner from Mannheim.’
Karelius sighed in exasperation.
‘Even you can't imagine that you're boring.
Impossible at times, yes.’
‘I know that very well, of course.
Anyway, it was part of your task to appear interested in a woman who, if not boring, was lonely and —’ she gave a high-pitched mirthless laugh —‘shall we say, slightly unbalanced — so as to find out…well, whatever it was that you were enquiring into.
Captain Aranyos was not too specific on that point.’
After a long few seconds Karelius said, ‘I can see it's no use trying to convince you of the way I feel.
That you're the most complex, fascinating woman I've ever met…’
‘I never was his mistress,’ she interrupted in a voice embarrassingly loud.
‘Despite what those old women think.’
‘Yes, well, that's really no business of mine.
If you were, it wouldn't alter the way I feel.’
By now they were in the square, and stood gazing up at the gilded splendour of the cathedral's spire and turrets, bright in the low November sun.
To the Frenchmen behind, they must look like a couple of young lovers — youngish, anyway — who had stepped outside for a few minutes to admire the sights.
Whereas the truth…
What was the truth?
A couple of lonely people, misfits in a sense, neither quite what they seemed, whose paths had crossed…
‘I have had lovers,’ announced the fräulein, launching into another of her bouts of desperate and embarrassing honesty.
‘You must not imagine that I am a pure woman.
And all my affairs seem to end disastrously.’
Karelius shrugged.
‘Maybe you haven't met the right man yet.’
‘And if I do, will he want a slut?’
‘You judge yourself too harshly, fräulein.
I expect most women of your age have had lovers; not so many would admit it.’
There was another long silence.
‘You'll be late for your appointment.’
Karelius pulled out his watch.
‘No, I've got nearly ten minutes yet.’
‘Suppose the Frenchmen follow you?’
He smiled.
‘I shall have to make my encounter with the captain look like an accident.
They can't speak German anyway.’
‘I can see I've made a fool of myself again.
Telling you something you know perfectly well already.’
‘Nothing of the sort.
You're far too sensitive about everything.’
Of a sudden the fräulein tucked her arm into his.
‘I'm going in with you.
It'll look more natural, won't it?’
Karelius sighed.
‘Quite right.
A man alone always attracts more attention than a couple together.
But I hadn't really wanted to involve you.’
‘I'm involved already.’
He nodded.
‘Of course you are.
Come on, then.’
On the way in, they paused by the grave of Eugen of Savoy, buried at the west end of the south aisle chapel.
A hundred years ago, he had saved the life of the Duke of Marlborough at Blenheim; a century later, Karelius reflected, an infinitely less important Englishman had again owed his life, besides that of the woman he loved, to one of the Hapsburgs' men.
They stood in silence for a while with heads bowed.
The man they sought was already there, standing with his  back to them, gazing at the great sarcophagus of Frederick III, first of the Hapsburgs to be Holy Roman Emperor.
‘A.E.I.O.U. ’ read the inscription on the polished white marble: ‘Austria erit in orbe ultima ’or, freely translated, ‘Austria will outlast all nations of the world.’
This place has seen it all before, thought Karelius.
Bloodshed, war, intrigue and treachery.
And will in future, after we and Bonaparte, and even the Hapsburgs, are dead and long forgotten.
‘Well, well, my dear fellow,’ he said with what he felt to be rather unconvincing surprise, ‘fancy meeting you here.
There are a couple of French soldiers following us, but fortunately I don't think they can speak German.’
‘They look rather simple-minded to me, anyway.’
Aranyos, who must already have spotted them somehow, turned and blinked vacantly.
He is pretty good in the role of upper-crust noodle, Karelius conceded.
I wish I had his poise; he can't have expected to see the fräulein, but hasn't turned a hair.
The Hungarian winced as they shook hands.
‘Sorry,’ said Karelius, observing a weal across his fingers.
‘Looks nasty.’
‘Difference of opinion with a cab-driver last night.
I kicked the blackguard in the guts as hard as I could, flogged him into insensibility, and dropped him in the canal.
He may have drowned for all I care.
Karelius raised his eyebrows.
‘Try to give you short change, did he?’
‘Rather worse than that.
But I expect you've heard all about it.’
‘Yes.
Seriously, I must thank you.
You saved Fräulein Müller's life.
‘One of them, yes.
There was one I could not save.’
After this uncharacteristic lapse into gravity, Aranyos continued, ‘The main reason I was there was to keep an eye on Fedorov.
And the unfortunate Frenchman who followed him.’
‘Yes, bad business that.
I don't know how many deaths now stand to his account.’
‘No-one will ever know.
Confining ourselves to Vienna and the last few weeks alone, it seems he may also have been responsible for a couple of recent murders of prostitutes in the Altstadt.
And there was a killing in the Heiligenstadt — Jewish moneylender — which bore similar features.’
‘I didn't know that.
In what way similar?’
‘A piece of wood had been driven clean through the heart, apparently after death.’
‘What on earth for?’
Aranyos smiled in the self-satisfied way that meant he was about to parade his knowledge.
‘There I fancy we venture into the darker recesses of the slavonic mind: primitive folk-belief, such as an educated nineteenth-century Englishman may find hard to credit…’
‘Do get on with it, captain,’ said the fräulein impatiently, ‘and stop showing off.’
‘By all means,’ continued the Hungarian unabashed.
‘Briefly, it seems that in parts of Russia and south-east Europe, some of the country people believe that in certain circumstances — to avenge their murder, for instance— the dead can walk again, unless restrained by having wooden stakes driven into their hearts.’
‘And Fedorov shares that belief, apparently.’
Karelius shrugged.
‘Still, he's as mad as a hatter.’
‘And the more dangerous for it.
But I have a little plan as to how he may be brought to account.’
Aranyos paused for effect.
The low sun slanted through stained-glass windows to cast pools of blood upon the stone.
‘You may recall my telling you that he was probably an agent for the High Police.
That has now been confirmed.
At the end of every month there is a packet awaiting his collection from the main post office in Vienna.
It contains a monetary allowance, supposedly from a rich relative in France.
In fact it's from Fouché's department.
They're invariably punctual, because one of their men works there and has been put in funds in advance.
The next payment is therefore due for collection in just over a week's time.
It seems reasonable to assume Fedorov will collect it, despite the danger.
He's short of ready money, on the run, and indifferent to risk.’
‘Do the Grand Army know about these packets?’
‘Probably not.
They haven't got our contacts in the postal service.’
‘Well, then,’ suggested Karelius, ‘why not an anonymous letter to them?
I've an aversion to tale-bearing from my schooldays, but the man's such a public menace we can hardly allow ourselves to be deterred by scruples of that sort.’
‘That would be one way of handling things, certainly.
However it goes against the grain to tell them anything.
I'd prefer to deal with it ourselves.
The man's delusions might come in positively useful.’
‘Explain.’
‘Suppose we were to compose a letter to him, inviting him to meet us.
When he does, we await him in force, with say, a dozen grenadiers, and make the arrest.’
‘Why should he keep the appointment?’
‘I think we can ensure that he does.
By careful drafting of the invitation, that is.’
‘Yes,’ said Karelius slowly, ‘so do I. As you say, the letter would have to be composed very carefully, for I don't suppose the Grand Army have any more respect for the privacy of the mail than you people.
It must sound innocuous, so as to avoid the attention of the censor.’
‘Quite.
You may like to help me draft it.’
Karelius pulled a face.
‘My Russian isn't up to much.’
‘Nor mine, but Fedorov was an aristocrat.
He and his officer friends would converse in French.’
‘Of course, stupid of me.
So there's no problem.’
Karelius raised his eyes to the altar as if seeking inspiration.
‘How about trying something on these lines:
‘My dear fellow, it is but seldom that one has the pleasure of meeting a friend from the old days in Petersburg, but I chanced to be in Vienna recently, and have heard much about you from mutual acquaintances.
There is a German lady called Louise most anxious to see you again,’— here I suggest two exclamation marks —‘and I have some Jewish friends who are also desirous to meet you.
They really are delightful people when you get to know them.
I wonder when we might arrange a meeting to talk over old times?
I suggest such-and-such time and place…
Believe me, ever yours most sincerely,…’'
‘’ Yakovlev’,’provided the others in unison.
‘Deucedly good,’ agreed Aranyos.
‘Couldn't have done better myself.
My only reservation is that it might be too good.
The man's mind is in such a state that it might unhinge him completely.
He could start thinking he's a poached egg and wander off looking for some toast to sit on.’
‘Your ideas about such things are a little out of date,’ said Karelius drily.
‘I understand they all think they're Napoleon  nowadays.
Anyway, where do you suggest for the meeting?
Anywhere in Vienna's out of the question of course, or we'll finish up getting shot alongside him.’
‘Quite.
I'd suggest a small tavern I know near Olmütz, in Moravia.
It's isolated and little used, but conveniently near to allied headquarters.
Just the place to arrest him with a minimum of trouble.’
‘I shall be there as well, of course ,’ announced the fräulein.
Karelius tried to think of arguments why she should not be, but failed to find any.
With himself, Aranyos and a dozen grenadiers for protection, even the fräulein could hardly get herself into trouble.
‘If you say so.’
‘You're a strange man,’ she said.
‘Nine out of ten would have argued with me.’
‘Oh, I never argue with women.
It's far less trouble to give way.
Anyway, Aranyos, when do you suggest?’
‘Well, Fedorov won't be visiting the post office till the end of the month, but we don't want to waste any time after that.
Suppose we say December the second, that's a week on Monday.
Half-past seven in the evening?’
Karelius nodded.
‘That suits me.
Is the place easy to find?’
‘Oh, yes, you'll have no trouble.
The name of the nearest village is,’— Aranyos paused momentarily with the effort of recall,—‘Austerlitz.
Tiny place.
Nothing ever happens there.’
The place was called the Eaglelike half the taverns in Germany.
It stood some way from the nearest village on the road from Brünn to Olmütz.
What trade it did came from locals, for travellers at this season were few.
A couple of downstairs lights suggested that it was open, but of customers Karelius could see no sign.
He stabled his horse at the rear, and pushed open the inn door.
The landlord was polishing some mugs whilst gazing resignedly around the empty parlour.
A pleasant little place; a pity they did so little trade.
‘Good evening, sir.
What will it be?’
Karelius ordered a small glass of ale and leant on the counter.
‘Not very busy tonight.’
‘Never is at this time, sir.
Especially on a Sunday.
Might be a few in later.’
‘A military gentleman hasn't been asking for me, has he?
Austrian staff officer.’
‘No, sir, you're the first customer tonight.’
Karelius nodded and took his drink over to a small table by the window.
The place seemed very suitable.
It was almost seven-thirty and, if conditions this time tomorrow were similar, they should succeed in apprehending their quarry with little disturbance.
Tonight was by way of a rehearsal to familiarize himself with the place, make final arrangements, and tell the landlord sufficient of their plans to ensure that there was no unforeseen interference.
He had made good use of the last few days.
Early departure from the Zimmerman pension had been followed by abandonment of the Richter persona, a week's reconnaissance, and the eventual recruitment of a couple of new agents.
It  had not been easy without existing contacts in the region, and their reports would have to be treated with caution for a while, but on the whole he felt he had achieved as much as could have been expected.
One thing however could not have been foreseen.
Three miles to the west, near the village of Austerlitz, ninety thousand Russian and Hapsburg troops faced a slightly smaller number of French in preparation for the decisive battle of the campaign.
This time tomorrow it would be all over, and part of history; the victors would be celebrating, the losers complaining that had it not been for this and that, they would have won, and the course of history would have been different.
On the one side a Conqueror riding down to Hastings: on the other, a Harold.
None yet knew which side would fulfil which role.
Karelius sat back reflectively, and let his gaze drift along the road to the west.
And here came Aranyos, resplendent as ever in hussar uniform of scarlet, blue, green and gold, mounted on a grey of the Imperial Staff.
He noticed Karelius, raised a hand in greeting, and dismounted to lead his horse through to the stables.
A minute later he entered the bar, tapping frozen mud from his boots at the door-post.
‘Karelius, my dear fellow.
Hope I'm not late.’
‘No, I was a couple of minutes early.
Another beer, please, landlord.
Any news?’
The Hungarian brought his drink over.
‘None from the front yet.
Rumour has it that Bonaparte has panicked and ordered the retreat.
I don't believe it.’
Karelius shook his head.
‘He's beaten if he does that.
He never retreats anyway.’
‘No indeed.
I have news none the less.
Mixed.’
‘Give me the bad first.’
‘Your Admiral Nelson is dead.’
The long case clock beside the bar ticked away five seconds.
Karelius said, ‘The good news had better be damned good.’
‘It is.
Ever heard of a place called Trafalgar?’
Karelius scratched his head.
‘Cape off the Spanish coast, isn't it?
Between Cadiz and Gibraltar.’
‘Correct.
A great sea-battle took place there on the twenty-first of October, between a British force under Nelson and  the combined fleets of France and Spain.
Your enemies were annihilated, no fewer than twenty of their men-of-war being sunk or taken.’
Karelius clicked his teeth in exasperation.
‘Six weeks ago, and this is the first I've heard.’
‘We learnt of it a fortnight since,’ said Aranyos, ‘but I was only told last week.
The French high command must also have known for some time, but hushed it up no doubt.’
‘Pity about Nelson, he'll be badly missed.
But it means Bonaparte's got to go on now.
It's his only hope.’
‘That's my opinion too.
It seems obvious to all except those in authority on our side.
Anyway, to business.’
‘Seven-thirty tomorrow, did you make it?’
The Hungarian nodded.
‘Aye.
An hour before then, a force of grenadiers will set out on foot from the village down the road.
I don't want them stabling their mounts here, it'd be too conspicuous.
They should arrive for ten past at the latest.
You and I can make our own ways here.
To be hoped things aren't too disorganized following the battle.’
‘Do you know if Fedorov received our message?’
‘Yes, I've heard from our man at the post office that our letter was handed to him when he called yesterday.’
‘I suppose his reaction wasn't reported?’
‘I'm afraid not; it should have been worth seeing.
Incidentally, there was nothing for him from Paris this month.
It confirms our suspicion that he might be out of favour there.’
Karelius nodded.
‘His mental state must be becoming rather too obvious.
No doubt Fouché prefers his agents sane.’
Aranyos called for two more ales.
‘By the way, landlord, my friend and I should like to hire a room here tomorrow evening, for about an hour, from seven-thirty.
A brief meeting with another gentleman.
Three of us in all.’
‘Certainly, sir.
It'll have to be one of the bedrooms, I'm afraid.’
‘That'll do.
And a dozen of my military colleagues will arrive about twenty minutes beforehand.
I'd like them shown into the cellar, please.
They will remain there until about seven-thirty, and then join us.’
‘Very good, captain,’ agreed the landlord, who seemed admirably incurious, ‘Is that all?’
‘Yes, except that, needless to say, the affair must be kept confidential meanwhile.
Clear?’
‘Whatever you say, sir.’
The man repeated his instructions correctly, and departed to fetch the drinks.
‘He'll be all right,’ Aranyos confided.
‘I've known him for years.
Well, that seems to be everything so far as tomorrow is concerned.
All that remains in doubt is whether Fräulein Müller will be joining us.’
Karelius was in very little doubt.
Again he saw her in his mind's eye: a tiny figure standing outside the pension in the rain as he raised her fingers to his lips in farewell.
‘I shall be there,’ she had promised firmly.
And he had said again, ‘I kiss your hand.’
‘I'd be surprised if she isn't,’ he said aloud.
‘She's a more determined person than you might think.’
‘Yes,’ agreed the Hungarian.
‘And hot-headed, too, just like…’
A shadow crossed his face; evidently, thought Karelius, what there had been between him and Louise Müller was not yet dead, and perhaps never would be.
Some things survived the grave.
‘By the way,’ Aranyos was continuing, so completely in his usual languid manner that Karelius could have been imagining things, ‘I suppose I owe you an explanation about Louise Müller.
It's true we were acquainted, with the result that I discovered the imposture as soon as her doppelgängerarrived.
I was engaged in enquiry into the matter when I learnt of the attack upon her sister.
Of course, the deception was bound to come to light sooner or later.
It strikes me as a decidedly short-term scheme.’
‘With what object?’ demanded Karelius, spreading his hands in bewilderment.
‘And how could it have been important enough to justify half-a-dozen murders?’
‘One murder, probably, was the original idea.
I fancy even Fouché might have baulked at half-a-dozen, including three officers in the Grand Army.
The whole thing got out of hand, partly because of the ill chance that no fewer than three people who knew the real Louise Müller converged upon Vienna at the same time: her sister, myself, and the young French officer who replaced me in her affections.’
He's trying to pass it off lightly, thought Karelius.
I'm not convinced.
‘But what was the point of it all?’ he insisted.
‘Our enquiries support a sequence of events something like this.
Last June Louise Müller is appearing at Strasbourg in the same company as one of Fouché's female agents, who makes a routine report to the effect that Louise has obtained employment in Vienna with the SchickenaderOpera.
Coincidentally management of the latter changes hands about the same time.
Someone in the High Police — probably Fouché himself, we know he's obsessed with intrigue — sees it as an opportunity to introduce one of his agents into Vienna.
Distinguished people make a practice of visiting the opera, and pull rank so as to meet the artistes, especially attractive females.’
‘Distinguished people,’ repeated Karelius.
‘Anyone particularly in mind?’
‘Well, that really is speculative, of course.
Anyone at the Austrian court, for instance.
Or better still…’
‘Yes?’
‘I could be quite wrong here, but amongst the French soldiers likely to attend the opera is one of exalted rank, married to an ageing but unfaithful wife, and with an eye for a pretty woman…’
‘Bonaparte of course.
He's an Italian, fond of the opera, and for the woman's part, she'd make herself so blatantly available to him…
As you say, speculative, but you could be right.
It might well assist the devious Minister for the High Police were he to learn something of Bonaparte's future plans, reception in Austria, any little weaknesses, indiscreet comments upon the situation back in France…
But why kill our agents?
Had they somehow found out?’
‘Shouldn't imagine so, knowing them.
My guess is Fedorov went beyond his orders.
He's mad enough to suppose his employers would approve.’
Karelius nodded.
‘Speculative, as you say, but I think it's as near to the truth as we're going to get.
Anyway, we seem to have put a spoke in Fouché's wheel this time, with some assistance from Fedorov and the Grand Army.’
Following the sudden departure of the counterfeit Louise Müller, the opera had survived barely twenty-four hours.
Her replacement had proved a sad disappointment to the French soldiery, besides which the management and composer alike were said to be dissatisfied with the work in its present form.
‘Yes, any schemes based on Leonore seem to have died the death.
And here's hoping we put paid to Fedorov too.’
Aranyos raised his glass.
‘As Shakespeare has it: ‘A great reckoning in a little room’.’
‘Ah, Thiercelin,’ said Epitot, rising.
‘Come in.
Marshal's busy; asked me to see you.’
Having spent the last few minutes in preparation for the strain of an interview with Davout, Thiercelin almost visibly relaxed.
The staff officer waved him to a seat.
‘Told me to bring you up to date with the news.’
Thiercelin was somewhat less interested than he would have been a few days earlier.
The search for Fedorov and Louise Müller, which had seemed all-important at the time, had been overtaken by weightier events.
For tonight was the eve of battle: the great battle, the one they had all hoped, nay known, would take place one day.
Defeat would mean the end: for the emperor, his army, their dreams of glory, perhaps even for France.
But no-one in the Grand Army admitted the possibility of defeat.
For they could call upon the services of men like Davout, Murat, Lannes, Soult, Oudinot, Vandamme and St. Hilaire.
Who on the allied side was the equal of any one of them?
Not the eccentric, inexperienced Czar, nor the ageing Kutusov, whilst the Austrians, after their debacle at Ulm, were regarded as unworthy of serious consideration.
Above all, the Grand Army had in command the greatest warrior of the age: the Emperor.
That afternoon he had published his plan of attack, now known to every man in the ranks.
Reckless confidence, for a single traitor or allied spy could have meant ruin for the whole scheme; yet none in the Grand Army thought such a thing even a possibility.
They knew the plan: they were the emperor's men: that sufficed.
All, from Davout down to the humblest ranker, were eager to put it to the test.
‘Not that important now, I know,’ continued Epitot reading his mind.
‘But the marshal thought you might be interested to hear the latest news of your lady friend, the self-styled Louise Müller.’
‘Has she been arrested?’
‘Unfortunately not.’
Epitot pushed aside the tent-flap and  stared out into the night.
Not clear black, but a fog-soaked grey, haloing the distant watch-fires of the enemy in a smudged orange blur, as if a thumb had been smeared across a landscape canvas.
And in the space between, the dank void of no-man's-land.
‘No, she's given us the slip again, damn it.’
He dropped the flap, expunging the chill reminder of the morrow.
‘Yesterday morning, a coach was stopped by some of our troops on the road from Salzburg to Munich.
A routine check as the vehicle was about to cross the Bavarian frontier; insofar as one can speak of frontiers in this part of the world nowadays.
There were two occupants, according to their papers a Herr and Frau Stegmann.
Something about the man aroused the guard's suspicions, so he was asked to accompany them to the frontier post for further questioning.
Whereupon the woman, who had been left in the carriage alone, whipped up the horses, drove across the border and disappeared.
As simple as that.’
‘Didn't they give chase?’
‘They were about to, but at this point the man, seeing what had happened, panicked and made a run for it himself on foot.
Didn't get far, because a trigger-happy corporal put a bullet into his head on the spot.’
‘Not Fedorov?
Was he killed?’
Epitot returned to his seat.
‘Yes and no.
Or rather,’ he pursed his lips wryly, ‘no and yes.
It was not Fedorov, but he was killed.
Actually, although I said ‘he’, when the body was examined it turned out to be that of a woman in male dress.
The description fits that of Fräulein Müller's maid, the woman called Rachel.’
‘It's a pity she wasn't taken alive,’ said Thiercelin.
‘After being left in the lurch like that, she'd probably have talked.’
Epitot nodded.
‘The whole affair has been a chapter of accidents from start to finish.
We must accept some share of the blame ourselves, of course.’
Thiercelin liked him for the ‘we’: Epitot personally could hardly have been faulted.
‘The men at the frontier post don't seem to have covered themselves with glory either.
By the time they had sorted out the confusion and given chase, the woman had made good her escape.
The bloody fools seem to have been under the impression that they had performed rather well.
After killing the ‘man’, they apparently considered the woman of little  importance.
Needless to say, the marshal soon disabused them of their misapprehension.’
Thiercelin grinned.
‘I can imagine.
Obviously the maid was disguised in view of the fact that we were known to be looking for two women travelling together.
What are the chances of finding Fräulein Müller now?’
‘Indifferent.
The Bavarians have promised co-operation, but their efficiency rivals that of the Viennese.
I don't hold out much hope.’
Thiercelin realized that he ought to feel annoyed, and up to a point he did.
Louise Müller, or whatever her name was, was a treacherous schemer and murderess, as much a public danger in her way as Fedorov.
And yet, at the back of his mind he was conscious of a small unworthy feeling of satisfaction.
Part of him would have been sorry to hear that she had been shot, or sentenced to a long term of imprisonment in the filth of an Austrian gaol.
She was a beautiful woman who had found him attractive, or at least pretended to do so.
Perhaps it had not all been pretence.
There had been no need for her to write that letter.
What quirk of the feminine psyche had been responsible for that decision?
It was not altogether beyond the bounds of possibility that one day, somewhere, they could meet again.
Unlikely, but he could amuse himself by playing with the idea.
Yet should it ever happen, to be honest, he would be afraid of her.
Or of himself.
Better, far better, for it to remain a dream.
‘One thing of use,’ Epitot was continuing.
‘On the body were discovered certain papers which made it only too clear to the marshal and me, though not to those halfwits at the frontier, thank God, that Fräulein Müller and her companion were not, as we had assumed, acting for the Austrians, but for our own High Police.’
Thiercelin drew a deep breath.
‘The High Police.
Surely not.
It's almost beyond belief that they should go as far as to kill three of our own men.’
Epitot shrugged.
‘The evidence seems beyond dispute.
And we can assume, I think, that Fedorov has also been working for them.
No news at all of him, I'm afraid.’
He stood and stretched.
‘Anyway, let's forget it for the time being.
I'm for a walk before turning in.
Coming?’
A line of watchfires stretched away into the night, the nearest heaped into a massive cone, twelve feet or more in height, furiously ablaze, devouring the chill moisture from the night air.
The Grand Army was famous for its fires; another, thirty yards away, was even bigger, and impossible to approach even from windward, so great was the heat.
A third blazed out its fiery message a few yards further on; and a fourth and fifth, all along the line, until they disappeared as orange glowworms in the far distance of the French right wing.
The camp was almost as bright as day, but beyond, to front and rear, stretched the clammy darkness of the Moravian moor.
A thin strip of warmth had been laid across the frozen earth.
Tomorrow it would return again to icy desert.
The Grand Army would have departed, east in victory, or westward in defeat.
Around the fires, the soldiers: sitting on kitbags cleaning their weapons; smoking; a few reading or even writing.
But most lying in greatcoats on the rock-hard ground, trying to snatch a few hours sleep before reveille.
And five hundred yards to the east, across the barren expanse of heath and moor, and the tiny stream they called the Goldbach, the men of the allied army would be doing the same.
In the last hour the mist had cleared a little, so that their fires could be seen glowing as individual points of light: ruby studs upon a sable field.
Red and black, mused Thiercelin, the colours of games of chance, of gambling, conflict and death.
Which way tomorrow would the cards fall, for the Grand Army, and for him?
‘Which way?’ asked Epitot.
‘I was just wondering…
Oh, I see what you mean.’
Thiercelin jerked his head to the right.
‘I'd like to have a look where I'll be tomorrow.’
‘I don't envy you,’ said Epitot, falling into step alongside.
‘You people will bear the brunt of the fighting: others, I think, will take the glory.’
Thiercelin, who was not the least bit interested in glory, nodded absently.
The emperor's plan, broadcast not five hours ago, was simple and, should it work, devastating .
The Grand Army had been marching along the west bank of the Goldbach, parallel to enemy, and away from its base in the Austrian capital.
What more obvious than for the allies to  outflank the French right to cut their lines of communication with Vienna?
Yet if they did, given the slow and cumbrous movement of the Hapsburg and Russian armies, they would leave a small temporary weakness in the centre of their line.
The Grand Army would fall upon that weakness, and smash through.
Simple in theory, yet in practice much could go wrong.
For a start the enemy might refuse the bait; conceivably their generals might be so inept that the idea of outflanking would not occur to them.
Secondly, their centre, though potentially weak, was well posted, on the slopes of a shallow plateau known as the Platzen.
To storm across the stream, uphill, and through the enemy line, would not be easy.
Or the allies might succeed in overrunning the French right, and roll up their line before the issue in the centre was decided.
Yet the emperor's daring, and faith in his men, surely deserved to succeed.
‘Tis not in morals to command success…’ but as the poet had gone on to say, to deserve it was better still.
The emperor.
It was he, Thiercelin was now convinced, who had been the target of the Müller plot.
A noted devotee both of the opera and the fair sex, he could hardly have avoided a dangerous liaison.
Needless to say, however, Thiercelin had no intention of including speculation of this kind in his formal report.
It took a quarter of an hour to reach the farthest outposts of the French right: Friant's corps, stationed near a village called Telnitz.
Over to the west, the allied fires petered out at the same point; yet Thiercelin fancied he could hear the rumble of distant movement.
‘They're on their way, all right,’ Epitot confirmed.
‘Piecemeal, and slow: that's the Austrians.
And the Russians.
By dawn they'll have outflanked us.’
Thiercelin stood straining his eyes into the gloom.
‘Hard to tell what's going on for sure.’
Even as he spoke, the silent darkness was split by pinpoints of light and a crackling sound.
A confused murmur of voices, oaths, and horses' hoofs.
‘Some sort of to-do out there,’ he said.
‘Game to have a look?’
Epitot shrugged.
‘Why not?’
They left the safety of the firelight slowly, giving their eyes time to adjust.
Thiercelin drew his sword, Epitot a horse-pistol  from within his tunic.
It was silent again; the click as he cocked his weapon made Thiercelin start.
‘Fun seems to be over,’ whispered Epitot.
‘Whatever it was.’
Again events served to belie him instantly.
Two massive figures loomed out of the blackness, like ghost-riders descended from the mists above.
‘Who goes there?’ cried Epitot.
‘The emperor,’ came the devastating reply.
‘Stand aside.’
Thiercelin felt his heart begin to hammer violently.
What was in a name?
The emperor was a man, as other men.
He was barely five feet six inches tall; a bullet would kill him; he opened his bowels daily like everyone else.
Yet like many in the Grand Army, Thiercelin was sometimes tempted to believe that Napoleon Bonaparte was not quite as other men.
L'Empereur .
He had never been this close to him before, though of course he had seen him from a distance on parade, the short, brisk figure in green and white, dwarfed by the forest of cocked hats around, yet somehow contriving to dominate them all.
He and Epitot stood to attention to let the convoy pass.
‘Where the hell is he, anyway?’ demanded the horseman, rather spoiling the effect.
‘Gone back for a further inspection,’ provided a voice out of the gloom.
‘What was that trouble just now?’ enquired Epitot.
‘Skirmish with Cossacks two hundred metres yonder.
Damned lucky the emperor wasn't killed.
And he's not safe yet.
Where in hell…?’
There was an embarrassed silence followed by some muttering.
‘His Majesty is here now,’ said another voice eventually.
‘Thank God for that.’
There came a muffled exclamation and a curse.
One of the soldiers in the small troupe lit a handful of straw from his tinder-box and held it aloft.
In the sudden blaze the emperor was discovered blinking angrily at a tree-stump with which he had collided in the dark.
‘Put that light out, you damned fool,’ he snapped.
He was too late.
Another man had followed the example of the first, and now another.
‘The emperor wants more light,’ someone suggested.
Several more lit up.
The emperor's angry face shone pale in the firelight as he glared about him.
‘No!
No!’ he demanded.
‘Quench the light!’
‘Light!’ the cry was taken up from all sides.
‘His Majesty wants more light!’
‘You're making the emperor a target, you bloody fools!’ yelled Epitot, but his voice was drowned by the shouts of ‘Light!
Light!’
And all along the line the torches were blazing out, one after another, from south to north, like a row of beacon-fires.
‘It's his anniversary!’ someone cried.
‘The anniversary of the coronation!’
‘Frimaire dix !’
‘Le deux decembre!
L'anniversaire !’
And finally, all the shouts and slogans were submerged beneath a mighty wave of sound, swelling in crescendo again and again: ‘Vive l'Empereur !’
It was done.
The emperor himself could not stop it now.
His scowl vanished; he shrugged extravagantly and smiled.
Then he climbed back into the saddle and rode off on his grey: a small, sallow man in the red, green and white uniform of the chasseurs of the Guard.
A lank forelock fell from beneath the hat bearing the tricolour cockade.
Around his shoulders the famous cloak, the redingote gris.
Thiercelin and Epitot saluted smartly as he passed, but he did not see them, nor even his entourage.
His eyes were focussed straight ahead, on the double row of lights: watchfires and flares.
His men: his army.
He rode to take their tribute like a Roman general in triumph, and the cry ‘Vive l'Empereur!’ rose again and again, first from the nearest troops, then from afar.
And as he passed along the line, the men near him cried, ‘Vive l'Empereur !’ afresh, and their comrades in the distance did the same.
And so it was all along the line, from Telnitz in the south, right the way to the Olmütz road, where the plain rose into the foothills of the mountains to the north; and after he had disappeared into the tumult and light, neither Thiercelin nor Epitot spoke for a long time.
‘Tonight,’ said Thiercelin at length, ‘has been the real coronation.’
Epitot nodded, came to himself, and tossed his flare to the ground.
Then he trampled it underfoot into the frozen soil.
‘No sense in behaving like bloody fools any longer.
But I somehow think, my friend, that we cannot lose the battle now.’
‘What's going on?’ demanded Karelius sleepily.
Aranyos, already up and about, pointed across the wasteland to the massive orgy of light that was the French line.
‘Vive l'Empereur !’ was borne to them from the enemy lines, time and again— into the land between the opposing armies, through their own lines, and away into the darkness.
‘We think the French may be planning an attack.’
‘At this hour?
Ridiculous.’
‘You never know with Bonaparte.
A surprise attack at midnight would be just the sort of thing he might try.
He's broken every other rule in the book: why not this one?’
‘Well, for a start,’ said Karelius peevishly, ‘it's not midnight.
It's two in the morning, and I'd like to get some sleep.
And if it's meant to be a surprise attack, why are they making so much bloody noise?’
‘I'm not sure about that,’ the Hungarian admitted.
‘But they're obviously up to something.’
Karelius remained for a few moments gazing out into the night, taking in the mighty fires and flares, and the cries of ‘l'Empereur !’ mingled occasionally with snatches from the Carmagnole ,Père Duchesne , and other patriotic songs.
‘Nonsense,’ he decided crossly.
‘It's just Bony showing off again.
I'm going back to bed.’
Karelius crawled from beneath the wooden bivouac he had occupied during the night.
It was a quarter to five.
By the watchfires' waning light he could discern a handful of ghostly figures flitting about nearby.
The fog had thickened, so that the enemy ranks now lay concealed by the screen of mist across the valley.
He unhitched his mare, and led her warily down the slope to the Goldbach stream, stumbling and shivering in the raw morning air.
Staff could probably provide him with something to eat, but he would have to obtain water for himself.
The stream was little more than a frozen marsh, pierced by tufts of blackened grass.
In the dark and freezing mist he could not see ten yards.
On the opposite bank, a stone's-throw away, would stand invisible the foremost outposts of the French.
Yet he could hear nothing; not even the usual early-morning stirrings of an army just before dawn.
Like fighting a spectral host: ‘…
We wrestle, not against flesh and brood, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world; against spiritual wickedness in high places.’
Not that Bonaparte was all that bad.
Just a soldier who had got too big for his boots.
Karelius dug a heel into the frozen surface of the stream.
The ice cracked; muddy water oozed out sluggishly.
Not without hesitation, he filled his water-bottle.
He had no intention of drinking the stuff, but it might do for a shave.
His mare refused to drink.
‘Please yourself,’ he grunted, and led her back.
After briefly getting lost in the fog, he finally succeeded in groping his way to the headquarters of Liechtenstein's cavalry.
A group of staff officers were clustered around one of  the last of the fires, stamping their feet and holding out hands to the blaze.
Amongst them was Aranyos, seated on a log toasting some bread and leberwurst .
‘Ah, Karelius.’
He waved a fork-impaled sausage in greeting.
‘Come and join us.’
‘Thanks.’
Karelius squatted in front of the fire and extended his hands.
‘No attack during the night, then?’
‘No, you were right.
Just some sort of demonstration of strength, I suppose.
Nothing this morning yet, either.’
‘My opinion,’ said a fat major with an impressive pair of moustaches, ‘the French have sneaked off.
Put on a show last night to convince us they're still there, then decamped as quick as they could.’
‘Wouldn't surprise me,’ agreed another.
‘Bonaparte's got no stomach for the fight: knows we're too strong for him, and has cleared off under cover of the mist.’
‘Not his usual form,’ observed Karelius mildly.
The capacity of the Hapsburgs' men for self-deception never ceased to surprise him.
‘What are our orders, anyway?’
‘Proceed yonder.’
Aranyos waved a hand to the south.
‘To the village of Pratzen, on the plateau.
To strengthen the centre, I imagine.’
‘That's certainly needed,’ said Karelius, ‘but I'd have thought infantry better suited to the job.
Don't see how cavalry can deploy effectively on those slopes.
Besides, Murat's men are immediately opposite at present.
By moving out of the way, we'll be giving them a clear run.
Could detach our right wing altogether.’
‘That's what we all think,’ agreed one of the others, ‘but orders are orders.
We move off at six.’
Karelius sighed.
‘Deplorable, isn't it?’ said Aranyos imperturbably.
‘Have a sausage.’
The last act before the battle was the same for all, from the Czar, Kutusov and Weirother down to the humblest man in the ranks.
Only the direction differed: left to right for the Austrians, right to left for the Russians.
Even the casual Aranyos did not disdain to make the sign.
Only amongst his enemies, the French, would there be men like Karelius, who went forth to life or death alone, without a God or prayer.
He climbed into the saddle and took the reins.
‘Protestant?’ enquired Aranyos.
‘Atheist.’
‘Really?
I've never met one before, not who admitted it, anyway.
Must be an uncomfortable feeling at a time like this.
Still,’ the Hungarian shrugged, ‘my views about such things are strictly conventional.
Paganism is a closed book to me.’
Yet minutes later he joined in the traditional chorus sweeping the allied line, the eastern response to the French ‘Vive l'Empereur !’ and far, far older.
‘Hurrah!
Hurrah!
Hurrah!’ repeated thrice.
Descendant of the wild slavonic cry: ‘Hu Raj!’—‘To paradise!’
The belief, common to warrior peoples from Viking to Samurai, that the souls of those slain in battle went straight to heaven.
This time Karelius joined in too.
Not that he believed that either.
Thiercelin had spent what remained of the night in the chateau at Sokolnitz, a requisitioned country house which offered fair prospects of a successful defence, and reasonable comfort in the meantime.
The latter was qualified by his having to share the accommodation with several hundred of his comrades in the 26th Light.
The chateau lay a little to the north of the village bearing its name, amidst spacious grounds and a small enclosed wood known as a pheasantry.
If the odds were not grossly unfavourable, it should be possible to hold it for several hours.
‘How many men have we got?’ he had asked Epitot the previous night.
‘Seventeen or eighteen hundred.
Telnitz is some way ahead of you; we expect the forces there to take the initial impact of the assault.’
‘And how many have we there?’
‘About seven thousand.
It's not enough, but if we defend too strongly the allies might withdraw to cover their centre.
You people will be, as it were, the bouc émissaire.’
The scapegoat.
The Dutch had a word for it too, Thiercelin reflected.
The verloren hoop : lost hope.
Their job was to hold on as long as they could against impossible odds, so as to give the rest of the army time to concentrate in a hammer-blow at the enemy centre.
Someone had to do it: his regiment had been one of the unlucky ones.
He spend the hour between six and seven inspecting his  company: a hundred men in the dark green and grey of the Grand Army's tirailleurs.
They weren't like other infantry, drilled to stand in line and fight until they fell or fled, but skirmishers, men of judgment and initiative, who had to decide for themselves when to fire, advance, retreat, surrender, or die.
Once battle was joined, an officer was hardly needed.
All he could do in advance was check that all was in order, give brief instructions and let them get on with it.
He hated pre-battle exhortations, and kept his brief.
‘Right, men,’ he said briskly.
‘You know the odds as well as I do.
The victory will be won elsewhere.
Our job is to stay here — no more, no less.
Good luck.
Vive la France !’
A year ago they would have replied in kind; now from a hundred throats came the new cry: ‘Vive l'Empereur !’ with if anything even greater fervour.
‘Ave, Imperator.
Morituri te salutant …’
A hundred men under his command, a thousand in the regiment, a few sharpshooters from the 108th, and two cannon.
That was all.
Against them and the seven thousand at Telnitz was ranged the whole might of the Austro-Russian left: forty or fifty thousand men.
‘Is not the king's name forty thousand names?’
Maybe; but for all his adoption of the imperial cause, an obstinate streak of republicanism still clung close to Thiercelin's heart.
He scowled and grumbled under his breath, ‘Vive la France.’
At seven came the first allied setback.
For some time Karelius had been unhappy with the direction of march, up the slopes of the Pratzen plateau into broken terrain littered with boulders and shrubs, criss-crossed by small ravines hopelessly unsuited to cavalry.
Just on the hour came the order to halt.
‘We can't be there already,’ said Karelius.
‘What's going on?’
‘It's peace!’ cried some humorist.
The remark was taken up and passed around, with variations.
‘Don't ask me,’ replied Aranyos.
‘I'll go and find out.’
He rode ahead into the mist, picking his way across the encumbered ground.
Karelius remained seated on his mare, wrapped in his thoughts.
Some of the officers were riding back to explain matters to their men, though since they knew little themselves their assurances were necessarily vague.
Others stayed where they were, grumbling quietly or  exchanging desultory remarks.
The mist cut them off from the rest of the field.
To the west they could hear the rumble of artillery, crackle of muskets and sounds of combat, though curiously muffled and remote.
as if they were already dead, Karelius fancied, and from limbo could still hear the sounds of the battle in which they had been killed.
The men up front were turning their horses' heads.
‘All right,’ cried Aranyos, reappearing through the fog, ‘back you go.
Orders are to reverse march.’
‘Where to?’ asked someone.
‘Blaziowitz, in the plain up north.’
‘We've just come from there,’ Karelius protested.
‘Quite so.
Now we're going back.
Someone at headquarters seems to have confused Blaziowitz with Pratzen.’
There were groans and a variety of sarcastic comments.
Karelius came to a decision.
Attached unofficially to Austrian staff, he was not under the direct authority of anyone.
‘I'll see you gentlemen later, then,’ he said, wheeling his mount.
‘Why,’ demanded Aranyos, ‘where are you going?’
‘South.
That's where most of the action seems to be at present.
Keinmeyer's men may be glad of a hand.’
‘I can't stop you,’ the Hungarian conceded.
‘Take care.’
‘And you.’
Karelius raised a hand.
‘To this evening then, all being well.
At the Eagle .’
‘I shall be there.
Don't worry.’
At Sokolnitz the first shots were fired about seven o'clock the bombardment continuing for almost an hour.
Shot and shell rained in on the village, orchard and chateau grounds, tearing up the earth, smashing roofs and rafters, but causing little in the way of casualties.
Presumably, thought Thiercelin, the defenders of Telnitz were having a harder time, but there was no way of communicating with them.
He checked his musket.
Officers were not supposed to carry them, but since the sword and pistol were useless in the skirmish, the rule was universally disregarded.
Now all he could do was wait.
And muse upon the question of whether, ere the day was out, he would have joined Daniel and Lefevre.
Two of the three men who had drunk and joked together that evening at Amstetten had since wandered out into the dark.
For some reason he had not been too worried  out it last night, nor was he now.
Not that he considered himself immune; but he had always imagined that when it was his turn, he would know somehow.
He did not have that feeling this time.
And the Russians were here, just as the morning mist began to lift from the chateau grounds.
A handful of men in green and white, running hither and thither across the frosty grass like ants on a dirty tablecloth.
Thiercelin signalled to the sharpshooters manning the lower windows of the dining-room to hold their fire.
A couple of dozen invaders at first; but soon there were a hundred, swarming through the undergrowth, hiding where they could, firing muskets and yelling to one another with wild huzzas.
The outnumbered French in the grounds were firing too, and some of the enemy fell.
But the tide was irresistible; the odds were ten to one, now twenty; the tirailleurs fired again and retreated to man the low stone wall before the mansion house.
The artillery-piece beside the building fired for what would be the last time; the enemy would be upon them before the gunners could reload.
A last volley from the men defending the wall, and they were in full retreat, pell-mell across the stone-paved terrace in front of the house.
The first Russian to mount the wall fell at once to a bullet from one of Thiercelin's men, but now a slavonic deluge swamped the wall in a wave of green and grey, bayonets fixed, overran the Frenchmen on the terrace and began smashing at the door.
‘Fire!’ cried Thiercelin again, and more Russians fell.
‘Reload!’
Time for one more volley before the bayonet.
Every room in the place had been barricaded separately; the enemy would have to take not one stronghold, but a dozen.
From the hall behind them they could hear the commotion as their comrades and the invaders fought hand to hand.
A couple of bullets split the heavy oaken door, before it shook under the onslaught of the enemy ram.
Thiercelin had prepared his plan in advance, for there would be little chance of giving coherent orders in the heat of battle.
Half a dozen men lay behind an overturned banqueting table which effectively divided the room in two.
As the Russians entered, the men at the windows would abandon their posts, whilst their comrades behind the table fired a  final volley.
Once it was clear that the room could not be held, he would order its evacuation, men leaving two at a time by the far window.
If the window itself came under direct attack, however, their chances would be poor, to say the least.
‘How are things there, Rannou?’ he enquired.
The young corporal at the bolt-hole grinned and raised his thumb in a gesture that meant the same the world over.
As he spoke, the sideboard barring the entrance toppled over in a heap of shattered crockery and wood.
The massive door gave way, and the Russians were upon them, stumbling through the debris, some falling to the defenders' final volley.
By now the men at the window had fixed bayonets, and fell upon the invaders, driving them back temporarily until sheer weight of numbers decided the issue.
A giant of a man made for Thiercelin, but tripped over a fallen comrade and crashed to the floor.
Thiercelin drove the butt of his musket into his head, and the giant slumped dead or dying amidst the rubble.
Now all was noise and confusion, as he tried to hold two of them off with his single bayonet, and most of his countrymen were dead or in retreat.
‘Window!’ he gasped, as loud as he could.
‘Two at a time!’
There were six Frenchmen left in the room alive; now there were four.
As Thiercelin backed to the window, Rannou, who had stood at his post all along, scrambled up and out.
He was alone; a single Russian with a musket could have slain him with ease, but with fixed bayonets none could fire.
He turned and dived head-first from the window, heard a tearing sound as a blade impaled his sleeve, and he wrenched it free.
He landed in a heap on the gravel, regained his feet and fled.
Valour was one thing, suicide another.
He covered seventy yards to gain the partial cover of the shrubbery, flung himself amongst the undergrowth, and turned to look back at the chateau.
The battle was not over yet.
Those Russians who had taken his room did not pursue, but from the upper storey and outbuildings at the back came the curses, shots and screams of men in mortal combat.
He reloaded, fired at a sniper eighty yards away, missed and loaded again.
Next time he found his mark; an incautious infantryman looking out from the window he had recently left.
Besides the bitter stench of cordite and gunsmoke he caught the smell of burning wood.
A black plume spiralled from the chateau roof.
By accident or design the Russians had set it afire, smoking out the surviving French.
In ones and twos they jumped or fell from upper windows, some to death or injury and surrender; others, more fortunate, were still fit to make a run for the woodlands to the north.
It was time for him to leave as well.
The house had fallen; in the grounds were ten Russians for every Frenchman.
Another undignified scramble, over the wall into the pheasantry and the shelter of the trees.
Here the last of the French had regrouped to make a final stand before the inevitable retreat.
From trees and undergrowth they fired at the victors again and again, as they swarmed over the wall in twos and threes, then in dozens and scores, and finally in hundreds.
And his gallant countrymen were beaten at last.
Barely a hundred survived to regroup with Davout's reserves in the moorland north of the village.
As many again might have escaped by other routes.
Half the original defenders lay dead or dying in the rooms of the old chateau, the courtyard, grounds, and pheasantry.
Fewer than fifty had survived to ask for quarter, and fewer still had received it.
Two squadrons of Hessian hussars occupied the lower slopes of the Pratzen, drawn up in battle array, spotless as if on parade.
A few of the mounts shifted their feet; here and there a rider slid his sword back and forth in its scabbard.
The sun, brilliant after the early fog, glinted on gold braid and polished shakos.
To the fore, the two commanders, gazing straight ahead, down the shallow incline to the cluster of buildings amidst the lingering mist at its foot.
They drew and brandished their swords.
The tableau came to life, slowly at first, each horseman urging his mount forward into a walk, then a gentle trot.
Karelius had stationed himself on the right flank, a little to the rear of those in the very forefront.
A quickening trot now, and as they neared their target he could see the puffs of smoke from the little houses, stone walls and trees ahead, as French and Russians fought for possession of the village they called Telnitz.
The bugle sounded the charge; the horsemen's pace increased, but remained all the while under control.
They were not yet in any personal danger; at that distance no musket-ball could carry.
The skirmishers in the fields had seen them now, and the French had started to withdraw, firing occasionally, but for the most part just running as fast as they could, to obtain cover amidst the village buildings.
The Russians cheered and joined the hussars in pursuit.
Karelius had reached the outskirts of the village; his mount cleared a low stone wall to land almost on top of a daring tirailleur who had remained at his post to the last.
Karelius swung his sabre clumsily, and the man fell, wounded probably, not dead, though he did not rise.
On the ground he was safe from an hussar's blade, so Karelius concerned himself with him no more, but urged his mare on down the footpath to join the advance guard in the main street.
This phase of the struggle was virtually over.
More cavalry poured in, from the fields and woods, orchards and farmyards and side-roads, to flood the village centre and drive the surviving enemy skirmishers back down the slope to the river, where most succeeded in wading across to half-frozen safety.
A handful of snipers held out to the last, and received no quarter.
By nine o'clock, the Double Eagle and the Crowned Lion of Hesse flew alongside from the roof of the little village hall.
Minutes later they heard that Sokolnitz had fallen to the Russians, and the whole of the enemy right was threatened with collapse.
Already the allies could revel in illusions of victory.
Half an hour later French fortunes reached their lowest ebb.
Those of the 26th Regiment who had fled south inflicted heavy casualties on a force hastening towards them from the direction of Telnitz.
Not until the latter raised the gold imperial eagle — with a single head, not two — did the tirailleurs realize their terrible mistake.
They had fired upon their own countrymen in full retreat from the verloren hoop .
At half-past nine that morning, as the pale sun finally conquered the sodden mist, it shone upon the prospect of imminent French disaster.
Both strongpoints of the right were in enemy hands; the allied left was in full cry across the Goldbach.
Of the centre there was yet no news, but battle there could hardly have been fully joined.
The weaknesses in the  emperor's plan and its execution had been cruelly exposed.
The anniversary of his coronation seemed destined to be marked by ignominious defeat.
Thiercelin sat amidst the rubble of the chateau of Sokolnitz, which since noon had been French once again.
His head was throbbing, and he was conscious of a pain in the left eye.
Within an hour he would be prostrate with an attack of the headache which had plagued him since youth, but it did not matter.
The battle was won.
A handful of regiments: the 3rd, 15th, 33rd, 48th, 108th and 1 11th, together with his own 26th Light, had held the right wing for seven hours, against forty thousand of the enemy.
They had not known the result of the battle until now.
At three o'clock the 26th had been ordered into an attack across the Goldbach, driving the superior forces of the allies before them.
And it had been there, about twenty minutes later, that Thiercelin had received his wound; a shell splinter in the cheek, which looked worse than it was, bleeding profusely into his collar and tunic, so that he had been ordered back to the chateau to have it dressed.
There, whilst waiting, he had made the mistake of sitting down, and now discovered to his chagrin that when he wanted to stand again his legs would not respond.
A darkly florid officer with black moustache walked briskly through the debris, gazing round as though looking for someone.
Epitot.
His eyes scanned the wounded propped against half-demolished walls, lying amidst smashed furniture, or sprawling on the floor, and those who lay with faces covered.
A few medical attendants scurried about ineffectually.
‘Ah, Thiercelin,’ said Epitot, spotting him at last.
‘How are you, my friend?’
He smiled wanly.
‘About all in.’
Again he tried unsuccessfully  to struggle to his feet, but failed.
‘Stay where you are.
I congratulate you.
A glorious victory, against all the odds.
Of course, you won't get anything for it.
All you've done is hold out the whole day against odds of ten to one.
Soult and his men will finish with the flags and medals, he'll see to that.’
Thiercelin gave a wry smile.
‘I was never much of a one for that sort of thing.’
‘Nor's the marshal, between you and me.’
To Epitot, there was only one marshal, and he was not the glory-hunting Soult.
‘Anyway, it's back to headquarters for you now.’
‘What for?’
‘My orders were to bring you as soon as the battle was over.
But it is for you already, any fool can see you're in no shape to continue.
What have you been doing to yourself?’
He still couldn't stand without assistance.
A mixture of fatigue and nerves, he supposed.
As to what he'd been doing, there had been a couple of incidents down by the river, which on top of the morning's ordeal, had about finished him.
It was probably the sort of thing they gave medals for, if you were interested.
Epitot helped him to his feet.
His head started to swim; he heard a voice enquiring whether he was all right, and blacked out.
On the allied left the course of battle had fluctuated throughout the day.
They had enjoyed a measure of success, but the outnumbered French had resisted with great ferocity to deny them a decisive result.
Since midday, the enemy had rallied to recapture Sokolnitz.
For all that, it did not seem to Karelius that things had gone too badly.
It therefore came as a shock in early afternoon when reports began to filter through of a massive disaster that had overtaken the centre on the Pratzen Heights.
By three o'clock, there could no longer be any doubt; the battle was lost.
It was a question of saving what could be saved, and retreating in as good order as possible.
Karelius was still in Telnitz, which village, though he knew it not, was the only sector of the front line still in allied hands.
Eventually orders came through confirming the worst: the Austrian cuirassiers were to stay there and fight to the last  man.
Meanwhile the Russians would retreat south with the guns by the only route still open, across the frozen lakes at Monitz.
The order, emanating from a Russian commander, Doctorov, was understandably ill-received by the Austrians thus sacrificed, but obeyed.
The last of the cuirassiers were driven from the village just as darkness fell, leaving a thousand corpses and a heap of rubble to the French as the fruits of victory.
Karelius' mare, after a whole day on her feet, stumbled gamely on across the freezing moorland towards Lake Satschen, and escape to the south.
Along the narrow causeway of the Monitz dyke, the pursuit flagged; he and the handful of cuirassiers who were his companions duly gained the bank of the lake, a frozen bog of mud, grass and ice.
Sprawled out across it were a rabble of Russian fugitives, whilst ahead a thin dark line of guns crept foot by foot towards the safety of the opposite shore.
Miraculously the ice had held.
The big guns, with the horses and crews, had safely negotiated the first quarter of the kilometre's distance across the icy marsh.
But in their very success lay danger.
Seeing the ice hold beneath their weight, the last of the Russian rearguard flung themselves upon the lake in thousands.
And not only infantry; several hundred Cossacks, and two squadrons of the St. Petersburg Dragoons.
Karelius shrugged.
Since everyone else was doing the same, there was no point in chivalrously remaining behind to be captured.
He dismounted to lead his mare across.
On foot there would have been little danger for a man alone; even on horseback not much.
But as for the guns…
Suddenly, above the shouting, shots and noise of battle, the neighing of horses, creaking wheels and ringing harness, came the sound they had all been dreading: the thin, sharp crackle of ice giving way under strain.
And now it gave, with' a harsh tearing sound, to expose a gulf ahead of the leading men and artillery.
A gulf which widened slowly, then quicker.
And little by little the guns with their horses and crews were tilted forward, sliding inexorably towards the freezing mud.
‘Leave the horses!’
Karelius heard someone shout.
‘They can't make it!
But the men, yes!
Every man who doesn't  panic!’
Splinters were radiating from the giant pool; a crack appeared some twenty yards ahead of Karelius and his nearest companions.
His mare would never get across, but he might.
‘Off you go, little girl,’ he said briskly, released the reins and gave her a slap across the haunches.
She whinnied and trotted placidly back.
Presumably he should have shot her or let her drown, rather than make a present of her to the French, but there were some things Karelius could not bring himself to do.
A gun was one thing, a horse another.
The ice beneath him gave; he braced himself, and slid slowly into the muddy lake up to his neck.
Again he knew momentary panic as the freezing water mounted around him, until he felt his feet settle on to hard rock beneath the mud.
Around him it was similar.
Men were floundering about, splashing, yelling and cursing, whilst horses were dragged screaming to their deaths by the guns.
Not a piece would be saved, but they would be lost to the French as well.
The enemy artillery had opened up, lobbing heated roundshot on to the ice, smashing it into a multitude of floes, upon which men perched perilously for a time before toppling off into the lake.
‘The swine are shelling the ice!’
‘My God, it's the end!
We're done for!’
‘Don't panic!
We're within our depth!
Back to the bank!’
‘Every man for himself!’
Most were turning back to the western shore, to life but certain capture.
Those paralysed by panic, or who tried insanely to drag out the guns, were drowned.
The artillery sank like stones, dragging their hysterical teams into threshing, bubbling whirlpools, which became calm as their struggles ceased.
A handful of men, Karelius amongst them, set out for the far bank.
Compared with his lone ordeal in the Danube, it wasn't too bad.
It was colder still, but he was within his depth almost everywhere; at its deepest the lake scarcely plumbed seven feet.
As in his previous adventure, the weed helped save him; he made his way laboriously from tuft to tuft of the blackened reeds that thrust their way through the mud and ice.
Each time he scrambled out, took a short rest, and set out again for  the next refuge.
His only real chance of coming to grief was that of being struck by a stray round-shot, an unlikely mishap, for they sank as soon as they landed.
For obvious reasons there was no pursuit.
Finally he hauled himself out on the allied side.
Or at least it had been; for with sinking heart he recognized a company of infantry two hundred yards away as French.
So the reports had been true: they had taken the Pratzen, and split the allied army in two.
Not a chance of rejoining the main force, if indeed it still existed.
Fortunately it was dusk, and firing was dying out all along the line.
The French had won, and everyone knew it.
The shells stopped falling.
Exhausted fugitives crawled from the lake, frozen and bedraggled, mostly to capture, a few, like him, to possible escape.
It darkened, and became quiet.
Though chilled to the marrow, Karelius was otherwise not in too bad shape.
He dragged himself from the clump of twitch-grass that had been his hiding-place for the last half hour, and shivering violently, set off on foot to the east.
By the last vestiges of twilight he consulted his waterlogged watch.
It showed ten minutes past four.
If his estimate of time was accurate, it would have been rather more than an hour since it had stopped.
So it was still possible to keep the rendezvous with Fedorov.
He had lost most of his enthusiasm for the idea by now.
Far more important, however, was the fact that she might well be there.
The thought had kept him going all day.
For that reason alone, he must try to make it.
Thiercelin could hear voices.
It was always hearing that returned first.
He opened his eyes to find himself in a dimly-lit tent, seated upon hard muddy grass.
His head felt better, though far from fully clear.
He took several deep breaths and tried to rise, again without success.
Epitot, conferring with other officers of staff at a trestle table nearby, turned and noticed him.
‘So you're back with us, my friend.
Good.’
‘How long have I been out?’
Epitot checked his watch.
‘Three or four hours.
Anyway, the marshal asked to see you as soon as you recovered.
Feeling up to it?’
‘I think so.
Better than I was, at any rate.’
‘Take it easy.’
Epitot and another adjutant helped him up.
‘All right?’
‘Yes, thanks.
Bit shaky, that's all.’
‘Good.
Then let's go.’
Davout's tent was a few paces distant, lit by an enormous watchfire and guarded by a pair of sentries.
‘Captain Thiercelin,’ said Epitot.
‘To see the marshal.’
One of the sentries reported inside and returned at once.
‘Come in, sir.’
Davout rose as they entered and exchanged salutes.
‘Sit down, you look all in.
The price of victory fell heavily on your regiment today, I know.’
Something similar could have been said for Davout.
For forty hours he had not slept, and for nine had been in the thickest of the fighting.
He would not, if Thiercelin was any judge, receive more than a curt acknowledgement from the emperor, who disliked him at least as much as most.
‘None of us will get any thanks,’ murmured one of his aides,sotto voce .
‘The marshal least of all.’
Most commanders would have been afflicted with convenient deafness at that moment, but Davout rounded on the speaker at once.
‘Any more talk like that,’ he snarled, ‘and you'll find yourself on a charge for disaffection.’
The daring officer subsided crestfallen.
And Thiercelin wondered whether of all the men in the Grand Army, he alone realized that the charmless, unpopular Davout was a better soldier, and a better man, than the emperor, and might have served as an example to princes, had he only possessed a little more humanity.
Then he caught Epitot's eye, and realized that he knew it too.
Davout waved at some papers on his desk.
‘I don't know whether you're one of those who are interested in such things — from what I know of you I'd say probably not.
But I have here a list of names supplied to me by General Friant.
Those he recommends for the cross.’
‘Sir?’ he replied foolishly.
‘The Grand Cross, man: the Legion of Honour.
It's a matter for the emperor, of course, but I've never known him refuse a name so recommended.’
Thiercelin still could not think what he was talking about.
‘The list,’ explained Davout with uncharacteristic patience, ‘includes both surviving company commanders of the 26th Light Infantry.
Without raising your hopes unduly — as I say, it's a matter for the emperor…’
Belatedly he understood.
‘I, sir?’
‘Yes, you, sir.
For your conduct during the crossing of the Goldbach.
Congratulations, captain.
I salute you.’