

Carrickfergus GASWORKS MUSEUM
The Last Retort Appeal
Over the past 165 years, thousands of householders in some 40 Ulster towns and villages have depended on gas for their lighting, heating, and cooking.
Along with water and electricity, it was an ’ indispensable’public utility.
Since the 1700s, gas was made by baking coal in airtight retorts.
The gas given off was purified and stored in the familiar gasholder, ready for use.
In the 1960s, coal was replaced with cheap and plentiful oil, and new production methods were introduced.
Now oil has also become uneconomic, forcing N. Ireland's gas undertakings to close.
A centuries-old industry is now at an end in Ulster.
Only Carrickfergus Gasworks survives as a unique reminder of the coal-gas era.
Established in 1855, it manufactured gas until 1964, after which the site was used to store oil-gas made in Belfast.
It finally closed in 1987.
Remarkably the whole site remains intact, and is now unique in Ireland.
At its heart are 36 retorts where the gas was made.
Only two other such examples — both preserved — exist in Britain: at Biggar (Scotland) and Fakenham (Norfolk).
In 1988, the Carrickfergus Gasworks Preservation Society was formed as a charitable trust to renovate the gasworks and establish a gas museum.
THE RESTORATION OF CARRICKFERGUS GASWORKS
The Gasworks Preservation Society aims to restore the site to its former glory.
Using local manpower and job-creation schemes, the buildings will be repaired and the machinery refurbished.
A Gasworks Museum will also be created.
Using a variety of media, the development and impact of the gas industry will be presented in a lively and imaginative way.
The Society already has an extensive collection of gas appliances which will also be displayed.
There will also be a reference library of gas-related books.
PHASE 1:
Refurbishment of south retort house, exhauster room, manager's house and installation of basic visitor facilities.
PHASE 2:
Restoration of remaining retort houses, laboratory, governor room, meter house, washers and oxide shed.
Enhancement of visitor facilities and setting up of major displays.
PHASE 3:
Restoration of gasholder, workshops, steam engines and air-raid shelter.
Creation of additional exhibitions, and audio-visual shows.
PROJECT COSTS
The International Fund for Ireland have generously offered £60,000 towards restoration provided the Society can raise the rest.
We urgently need to raise £100,000 to save Carrickfergus Gasworks.
Your contribution — however small — will help fund this vital work, and we are grateful for any donations received.
Carrickfergus, famed for its Norman Castle, lies on the shores of Belfast Lough, 9 miles north of Belfast.
Its 135 year-old Gasworks are located on Irish Quarter West, near the centre of the town.
The only complete coal gas-works left in Ireland , the restoration of the site will be a unique reminder of our past heritage, and of an industry now lost to the North of Ireland.
The creation of a Gas Museum in the refurbished site will be a unique tourist and educational facility.
It will also act as a catalyst for the regeneration and enhancement of the town, complementing its other nationally-important attractions: the Castle, St. Nicholas's Church, and medieval Town Walls.
GUIDE and TICKET Trinity College Library Dublin
Friends of the Library
The Friends of the Library is an organisation devoted to supporting the work of Trinity College Library.
As well as publicizing the activities of the Library the Friends contribute money towards purchases over and above those which can be made from the College funds.
The minimum membership fee is IR10.00 per annum.
For this, members receive:
the journal Long Room , which contains articles about the Library's collections and other items of biographical interest.
a Newsletter , which appears three times a year and includes news of the activities of the Friends and of the Library
free admission to the Long Room (if you join the Friends on your visit to the Library, your admission charge will be refunded)
invitations to the opening of exhibitions in the Long Room
a programme of lectures and visits 
special reductions on some publications of the Friends.
To join:
You can join immediately (enquire at the entrance to the Long Room or in the Library Shop), or write to the Treasurer, Friends of the Library, Trinity College, Dublin 2, from whom further information is available.
Trinity College
Trinity College Library is one of the world's great research libraries, holding the largest collection of manuscripts and printed books in Ireland.
Since 1801 it has had the right to claim a free copy of all British and Irish publications under the relevant Copyright Acts.
It now houses nearly three million volumes and each year an additional half a mile of shelving is needed.
As well as the Old Library which contains the Long Room, there are seven other library buildings.
The Berkeley Library, to the east of the Old Library, was built to a prize-winning design by Paul Koralek and opened in 1967.
The Lecky Library, the library for languages and social sciences, is in the Arts Building, across the square from the Old Library.
The octagonal 1937 Reading Room houses the Music Library and part of the Science Library.
The Map Library and remainder of the Science Library are housed at the east end of the College.
In other parts of Dublin are the libraries for Clinical Medicine and Occupational Therapy as well as a book repository for lesser-used material.
Donate a Dollar for Drama
Trinity College boasts many famous playwrights amongst its graduates — Congreve, Farquhar, Goldsmith, Wilde, Beckett — and many more of the great English-language dramatists were Irishmen — Sheridan, Shaw, Boucicault, etc.
The Drama Collection in the Library's Department of Early Printed Books concentrates on 18th and 19th-century editions of works by Irish authors and on other Irish printed editions and amounts to some 2300 plays.
We invite you to donate a play to be added in your own name to this collection.
In return for a donation of £30, 50 etc. (minimum £30 or $50) you will be sent a certificate showing that you have presented a book to Trinity College Library, and a bookplate bearing your name will be placed inside the book.
As we do not know exactly what will appear in second-hand booksellers' catalogues, the choice of books will of necessity have to be left to us, but your certificate will state the title of the book which you have presented.
To make your donation, please send it with your cheque/money order to: Cheques/money orders should be made out to Trinity College Library.
The Library Shop
The Library Shop sells a wide range of goods including Book of Kells reproductions, books of Irish interest, cards, prints, posters, craft items and jewellery.
It provides a mail order service.
Credit cards are welcome.
Facsimile reproductions from the Book of Kells 
The Shop is administered by Trinity College Library and all revenue is used to support the work of the Library.
Proclamation
On the wall at the end of the Long Room hangs one of the few remaining copies of the Proclamation of the Irish Republic, which was read aloud at the General Post Office on Easter Monday 1916.
‘Brian Boru’ Harp
In a glass case at the end of the room is one of the Library's two early Irish harps, of the type used in the later Middle Ages.
Although associated with Brian Boru, the 11th-century high king of Ireland, the harp is in fact unlikely to be more than five hundred years old.
It is made of oak and willow, with brass strings.
The marble busts against the bookcases date from the 18th and 19th centuries.
They represent past members of the College (including Jonathan Swift, Burke and Wolfe Tone) and other men of fame and learning from Homer and Socrates to Newton and the Duke of Wellington.
A decorated band below the gallery commemorates some of the Library's benefactors in the 17th and 18th centuries: Archbishop James Ussher, King Charles II, Palliser and Gilbert.
The booth to the left of the entrance houses the Long Room Conservation Project.
The panels explain the work and an illustrated booklet is on sale in the Library Shop.
Exhibitions
As well as the permanent exhibition of early Irish manuscripts, the Library has a policy of mounting changing exhibitions so that visitors can see and admire a wide range of its treasures.
You will find catalogues for the current exhibition in the stands near the display cases.
The Long Room
The Long Room is part of the oldest surviving College Library building.
As a collection of books and manuscripts, the Library dates from shortly after the founding by Queen Elizabeth I in 1592 of the ‘College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity’.
The original College buildings no longer exist.
The Old Library, of which the long Room forms the main part, was built between 1712 and 1732.
The Long Room truly deserves its name, being 209 feet, nearly 65 metres, in length.
Originally it had a flat plaster ceiling, but by the 1850s the bookcases on this lower level had become completely full, and in 1859 the roof of the building was raised and the barrel-vaulted ceiling and gallery bookcases which you now see were constructed.
The Room, which is no longer used as a place for readers to study in, houses some 200,000 of the Library's oldest books.
The Book of Kells
The book of Kells is one of the most beautiful illuminated manuscripts in the world.
It contains the Latin text of the four Gospels in Insular majuscule script accompanied by magnificent and intricate whole illuminated pages, with smaller painted decoration everywhere within the text.
The origins of the Book of Kells are uncertain.
It was written and painted with outstanding expertise about the year 800 AD in a monastery scriptorium, but it is impossible to identify where this monastery was located.
The first probable record of the existence of the Book of Kells is an account of the theft of ‘the great Gospel of Columkille, the chief relic of the western world’ from the great stone church of Kells in the year 1007.
The Book was found buried in the ground almost three months later, and presumably remained at Kells until it was brought to Dublin and presented to Trinity College by Henry Jones, Bishop of Meath, some time after the year 1661.
It has been in the College Library ever since as its greatest treasure.
The Book of Kells has not survived the centuries complete and has lost some of its printed pages, or perhaps the plan for the illumination was never completed.
It now has 680 pages, many of them richly illuminated with a flamboyant exuberance unique in Irish and Insular manuscript art.
Each Gospel begins with a richly ornamented page in which the opening words of the text are submerged by the decoration.
There are portraits and many representations of the four Evangelists (Matthew, Mark, Luke and John) by their symbols, the Man, the Lion, the Calf and the Eagle.
In addition almost every page has painted decoration in the text, with brightly coloured birds, animals, faces and figures often entwined into the capital letters at the beginning of the lines.
Originally a single large volume, the Book of Kells was repaired and re-bound in 1953 in four volumes.
There are normally two volumes on display in the Long Room, one opened at a completely illuminated page and the other showing pages of text.
The openings are changed regularly.
The DUBLIN experience
Trinity College introduces an exciting new presentation on the City of Dublin
This major new visitor attraction located at Trinity College uses the most modern techniques to tell the story of Dublin, its origins, its past and its present.
With stunning visuals, light, music, voice and just a touch of theatre, the Experience traces the development of Dublin and the lifestyles of its inhabitants through the ages.
The Dublin Experience is located in the Arts Building, across the square from the Long Room.
MUSIC BOX
music box BANGOR
Orion Quartet & Friends
HERITAGE CENTRE BANGOR
The Orion Quartet present the MUSIC BOX 1991–92 season, with a wide range of music featuring guest performers from the Ulster Orchestra.
THE ORION QUARTET
The Orion Quartet, now well known to audiences throughout Northern Ireland for their recitals and evening ‘Soirees’, are delighted to be returning to Bangor with another ‘MUSIC BOX’ series featuring guest players from the Ulster Orchestra.
The 1991–92 season includes performances of two of the major piano/strings chamber works of the nineteenth century — Dvorak's Piano Quintet and Schubert's Quintet ‘The Trout’.
The series also features a performance by an expanded string ensemble of Brahms' Sextet in B flat.
Each concert will be introduced informally by the performers, and complimentary wines and soft drinks will be served during the interval.
MUSIC BOX BANGOR
Five evenings with the ORION QUARTET and their special guests from the Ulster Orchestra, featuring the music of Beethoven, Haydn, and the great romantic composers.
‘MUSIC BOX’ is a joint promotion between Orion Quartet Ltd. and North Down Arts Committee.
THE YEAR OF THE HARP
BELFAST HARPERS' BICENTENARY 1992
1792 was the most important year in the history of the Irish harp.
For three days in the course of July that year, the last of the traditional Irish harpers were invited to Belfast to have their music recorded for posterity by the young Edward Bunting.
In 1992 there will be a series of events to celebrate the bicentenary of the Belfast Harp Festival, including:
WORLD HARP FESTIVAL, BELFAST, May 7–17, 1992.
Harp music from Ireland and around the world in concerts, workshops, masterclasses and lectures.
Concurrent with major exhibition at Ulster Folk and Transport Museum.
DUBLIN HARP FESTIVAL, June 18–21, 1992.
Major international competition for the Irish harp.
Premier of new work for Irish harp by ’ Mícheál’Ó Súilleabháin.
Recitals and concerts by leading national and international harpers.
Further information from Eighlín ní Chathrailriabhaigh,
Take a part in the celebrations!
If you are organising an event or thinking of doing so, we can help you.
Contact the Administrator at Belfast Harpers' ’ Bicentenary’1992 Ltd.
Patent Resources at the Central Reference Library Belfast
WHAT IS A PATENT?
A patent is a grant, originally a royal prerogative, made to protect inventors, whether individuals, firms or other corporate bodies.
It allows them the monopoly to exploit their invention for a period without unauthorised limitation or competition.
WHAT SORT OF INVENTIONS CAN A PATENT BE GRANTED FOR?
There are two basic criteria: firstly an invention must be based on a wholly new idea or involve an ‘inventive step’; secondly an invention must be capable of industrial (including agricultural, etc.) application.
Patents cannot be granted for things which are contrary to law or morality, foods or medicines made from mixtures of known ingredients, literary and artistic forms and styles (including computer programmes), and ‘frivolous’ inventions, among others.
WHO GRANTS PATENTS?
Patents are granted, in this country, by the U.K. Patent Office, a government body.
Similar organisations exist in most other countries.
WHAT IS THE PATENTS INFORMATION NETWORK?
The Patents Information Network has been established by the British Library to enable the public to find out what patents are being applied for and granted in this country and elsewhere.
Selected libraries throughout the country (including the Central Reference Library Belfast) receive basic documentation,(including abridged versions of British patents), to enable searchers to trace applicants and subjects.
Regional libraries also receive full specifications of British and in some cases foreign patents and will make copies of these available to enquirers.
The existence of the network ensures that searchers do not have to go to London to obtain this information.
WHERE CAN PATENTS DOCUMENTS BE CONSULTED LOCALLY?
A full set of British Patents can be consulted at no charge in the Science Department, Central Library 
WHAT OTHER RELEVANT DOCUMENTS ARE HELD AT CENTRAL LIBRARY, BELFAST?
WHO USES PATENTS DOCUMENTS?
Users fall into various categories: firms can keep up-to-date with the latest developments in their line of business and the indexes also provide the means to check on the activities of competitors; researchers in academic and other institutions similarly can check progress in their particular speciality; students of the history of technology, and industrial archaeologists can follow the gradual development of an industry of science from its earliest days.
CAN PATENTS BE PHOTOCOPIED?
Yes.
The British Patent Office has waived copyright for patents.
Photocopying facilities are available in the library.
CAN COPIES OF FOREIGN PATENTS BE OBTAINED?
By telexing the Science Reference Library in London we can obtain copies of foreign patents usually within the week.
(12)UK Patent Application (19)GB (11)2044532 A
(57) A laser, 8, 12 and a modulating FET 9, 10, 11 are integrated.
A substrate 1 has successive epitaxial layers 2 to 6, the first three 2, 3, 4 being of materials suitable for a double heterojunction laser, layer 5 being of high resistivity material and layer 6 being of a material suitable for an FET channel.
A groove 7 isolates the laser section from the FET section of the vapor and need only extend as far as layer 5.
In the laser section a diffused zone 13 extends through layer 5 to connect contact 8 to region 4.
In the FET section layer 6 has ohmic source and drain contacts 9, 11 and a Schottky gate contact 10.
Laser contact 8 is joined to source contact 9 so that the laser and FET are in series.
A potential to terminals 11, 12 causes the laser to emit, a negative bias on gate electrode 10 reducing the output intensity.
Isolation groove 7 may be filled with insulation or replaced by a high resistivity region.
In a modification the laser layers are removed from the FET section before depositing the high resistivity layer.
BELFAST CENTRAL LIBRARY
FOR YOUR BUSINESS INFORMATION NEEDS
Inquiry service to users in person and by telephone, telex or post.
Immediate access without formality to the largest collection of business literature in Northern Ireland.
Photocopying while you wait.
Trade directories, telephone directories, company information, official and legal publications and other material of business interest is available in the Business Library.
…
The Business Library has the answers…
Who makes beehives in Britain?…or yachts in Yugoslavia?
The answers to these and many other questions can be found by reference to our wide range of general and specialized directories which cover Britain, Europe and the rest of the world.
Whose trade name is Transitray?
The UK Trade Names Directory lists over 50,000 trade names of British manufacturers.
What is the capital of Capital Gearing?
You will find this and much more information in such sources as the Extel card services,McCarthy Information Services, Kompass UK Trade Directory, Who Owns Whom and the Stock Exchange Official Yearbook .
Need to know the changes in the Financial Times Index as they happen?…or the latest foreign exchange rate?
Our Teletext service brings you constantly updated financial information on Ceefax (BBC) and Oracle (ITV).
Where are the beauty shops in Bermuda?
Millions of retail and wholesale outlets are given in the yellow pages of the telephone directory collection, which covers all of Western Europe, as well as most of the world's principal markets.
Is Laura Ashley a limited company?
The Companies Registration Office index lists all UK limited companies, updated monthly.
Companies House records can be obtained on request.
How high are RCA's revenues?
The latest quarterly figures are in the bi-weekly Moody's News Reports which supplement the Moody's Manuals .
More about US corporations can be found in Standard and Poors' Corporation Records .
Other countries are covered by such sources as Information Internationales, Jane's Major Companies of Europe , and the Extel European and Australian Services .
Is there a market for paint in Portugal?
European Marketing Data and Statistics will provide details of consumer expenditure.
Other sources of market research include Marketing in Europe, Mintel, Retail Business, Keynote, Euromonitor reports and many others.
Are there any recent articles on fast food franchising?
Thousands of newspaper and periodical articles are indexed in Research Index; Index to the Financial Times covers the FT from 1981 on.
Anbar Management Abstracts, Business Periodicals Index and Public Affairs Information Service provide extensive coverage of the world's business literature.
Several hundred current periodicals in the field of business and management are immediately available.
Which Which?
Our complete file of Which?
Magazine can help solve your consumer problems and suggest the best buys.
Need statistical information?
Statistics and statistical analyses are available, together with statistics covering manufacturing, raw materials, agriculture, employment, marketing, finance and trade.
These include publications of the EEC, HMSO, OECD and other agencies.
Addresses of hotels in Hungary or motels in Michigan?
We can help you plan your business from our selection of hotel and travel guides, which include the FT World Hotel Directory and the Travel Planner Guides to Europe and N. America .
Current economic and business data is collected in the Countries Information Files.
Publications such as the Hints to Exporters series and EIU quarterly reports ensure up to date information on most countries of the world.
All this and more at…the BUSINESS LIBRARY
The Business Library is situated on the ground floor of the Central Library, Royal Avenue, Belfast BT1 1EA  
BELFAST CENTRAL LIBRARY
FOR YOUR SCIENCE INFORMATION NEEDS
Inquiry service to users in person and by telephone, telex or post.
Immediate access without formality to the largest public collection of science literature in Northern Ireland.
Photocopying while you wait.
Patents, standards, abstracts, technical dictionaries, and other material of interest is available in the Science and Technology Library.
…
The Science and Technology Library has the answers…
Is there a patent for patent leather?
A full set of over 2 million UK patents from the year 1617 is available and the indexes will provide the answer.
Abridgements for U.S., Canada and full European patents are also held.
…or a standard for scalpels?
The Science Library holds a complete set of British Standards, DIN Standards in English and the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standards.
Begin with a bibliography…?
The usual starting point for in depth research.
Many specialized bibliographies can be consulted in the Science and Technology Library.
How powerful is polypropylene reinforced cement?
The latest periodical articles on technical matters can be accessed via our large collection of abstracting and indexing journals by our online computer terminal.
…or need ideas in information technology?
The Science Library holds a comprehensive collection of some 600 technical journals and it is in this field that new developments are first reported.
What is the melting point of melamine?
Specialist encyclopaedias like KIRK-OTHMER Encyclopaedia of Chemical Technology are available for consultation.
Przkladnica is Polish for…?
The English translation will be found within our comprehensive collection of polyglot and bilingual technical dictionaries.
Who is researching aerospace in Australia?
The answer is in Aerospace Research Index which is one of our set of directories of research institutes in the field of science and technology.
Charting a new course…?
A comprehensive selection of Admiralty Charts is available.
How brilliant was Babbage?
Biographical data on Charles Babbage, computer pioneer, and most famous scientists can be obtained from our holdings of biographical reference works and individual biographies.
…or how ugly is an Aardvark?
The McGraw-Hill Encyclopaedia of Science and Technology has the answer or it can be found from one of our collection of zoological encyclopaedias and illustrated books.
Is an ‘eccentric angle’ all that eccentric?
All major technical handbooks are stocked and it is in these compilations of miscellaneous information in handy form that the answer will be found.
Books
Allied to the reference work available on open access in the Science Library is a collection of some 50,000 books on all aspects of science and technology, including the commercial application.
Science Library
The Science Library and its counterpart the Business Library are situated on the ground floor of the Central Library.
Other reference libraries —Humanities and Social Sciences, General Reference, Irish and Local Studies, Fine Arts and Literature and the Music Library are situated on other floors of the Central Library.
DUNDONALD INTERNATIONAL Ice Bowl
TEN PIN BOWLING
Ten Pin Bowling
Ever looked for something different to do?
Why not try one of the worlds greatest fun games.
Ten Pin Bowling at Dundonald International Ice Bowl can be enjoyed by one and all, regardless of age, ability or experience.
It's simply the perfect game for fun with friends, the family or your boy or girlfriend.
Added to which you'll be taking part in one of the most up-to-date bowling centres in Great Britain.
Featuring:
The latest in state of the art quality bowling equipment.
A ‘customer friendly’ computerised scoring system designed to make scoring as simple as possible.
Fully trained friendly staff whose only wish is to ensure your maximum enjoyment.
‘On lane’ waiter food service.
In short the perfect venue for the best in Ulster fun…
Why not give it a try?
The Aim of the Game
To score a maximum of 300 points by knocking down 10 pins in a minimum of 10 frames.
Don't worry if you fall a bit short of the target, even the best bowlers find this a challenge!!
What Equipment Do You Need?
For the beginner:
A pair of bowling shoes.
These are available in a variety of sizes and can be hired at the bowling centre.
A bowling ball, and yes you guessed it, we can provide you with a house ball at the appropriate weight of (8–16 lbs) for your size, absolutely free.
For the serious player:
The Ice Bowl Sports Shop carries a full range of equipment and accessories from a variety of leading manufacturers.
How To Book?
Bowling at Dundonald International Ice Bowl has proved to be extremely popular.
As a result we operate a booking system which aims to give as many people as possible an opportunity to play.
Individuals, families, and small or large groups can book in advance either by coming in person to the Ice Bowl or by telephoning (0232) 482611.
Bookings are accepted from 9.00 a.m.
Anyone wishing to book for a group more than four weeks in advance should obtain and return a booking form (address on back page).
Points To Note Regarding Booking
1.
A maximum of 6 people can play on a lane at any one time.
2.
Bowling lanes are allocated on the basis of games rather than time.
When you book you will be asked how many games you wish to play and how many people are to be playing.
As a guideline it takes approximately 40 minutes for four people to play 1 game.
3.
When you book you will be given a start time.
Because games may vary slightly in length you may not start at the exact time given.
If You Have Not Booked?
Advanced booking is strongly recommended, but for those who wish to turn up and take a chance of a lane being available we will do our best to accommodate you.
We cannot guarantee a lane but dependent on demand we will endeavour to find space.
To ensure fairness a waiting list is always in operation.
Additional Features
Schools Bowling: Schools can enrol in our Schools Bowling programme for which special day-time rates are available.
Bowling can easily be incorporated into a school's leisure programme and many schools use the facility on a regular basis.
The Ice Bowl is the perfect venue for that extra special school outing or end of term trip.
Junior Bowling: Coaching and regular competition available.
Facilities for the Disabled: Ten Pin Bowling can be fully enjoyed by the disabled and both individuals and parties are welcome.
Competitive Bowling: Having developed a taste for bowling you may wish to consider bowling in a league.
Differing skill levels are accommodated through a handicapping system so everyone can play a full part.
Dundonald International Ice Bowl offers a comprehensive league and tournament programme and in addition to the competition it is a great way to make new friends.
Children's Bowling Parties: Birthday cakes, balloons, badges and bowling all added together to make a memorable occasion.
Bowling Suppers: Office Parties, youth clubs etc.
Why not consider following an evening of bowling with a supper (meal or buffet) in our Functions Suite.
This is an excellent facility for a special corporate company day out.
Further Details:
Full details including booking forms and leaflets regarding our other facilities can be obtained from Dundonald International Ice Bowl 
Youth Hostel Association of Northern Ireland
Go as you please
and enjoy the freedom of Northern Ireland by bus
7 days unlimited travel and 6 nights in Youth Hostels across the Province
The Youth Hostel Association of Northern Ireland has combined with the Ulsterbus and Citybus Freedom of Northern Ireland ticket to offer you a great value passport to see our country.
From the busy cities of Belfast and Londonderry, of important historical and architectural significance, to the peace and tranquillity of Castle Archdale Hostel in the Fermanagh Lakeland and the coastal resort of Newcastle with its backdrop of the Mourne Mountains,’ it's’all waiting to be explored.
The scenery along the Antrim Coast, and at Ballygally, is as good a view as you will get from anywhere; the quaint village of Cushendall with its forest parks and traditional music pubs; and then Whitepark Bay, the ideal base for the Giant's Causeway and the Causeway Coast.
‘Go As You Please’ is just as it sounds, and with your unlimited 7-day bus pass and your 6 accommodation vouchers, which can be used at any of the Youth Hostels in Northern Ireland, you have the freedom to go where you want, when you want.
Please note that these itineraries are suggestions only, and are subject to bus timetables and accommodation availability.
Price Includes:
Freedom of Northern Ireland Ticket which gives you 7 consecutive days unlimited travel on Ulsterbus and Citybus services throughout Northern Ireland.
6 nights accommodation at Youth Hostels, including bed linen and use of facilities
Guide to Youth Hostels in Northern Ireland, where to go and what to see.
Your first night pre-booked in advance for you, at Belfast Youth Hostel.
Breakfast included on your first morning.
Comprehensive bus timetable.
Temporary membership of the Youth Hostel Association of Northern Ireland.
Please Note: No meals are provided apart from breakfast on your first morning in Belfast.
Your accommodation vouchers are valid for one night only in Belfast and a supplement of £3.00 per night is payable for any additional nights at the Belfast Youth Hostel.
THE LONDONDERRY ARMS HOTEL
CARNLOUGH Co.Antrim
The Londonderry Arms Hotel is a family-owned hotel situated in the fishing village of Carnlough at the foot of Glencloy, one of the famous Nine Glens of Antrim.
The hotel was built in 1848 as a coaching inn by Frances Anne Vane Tempest, Marchioness of Londonderry whose great grandson, Sir Winston Churchill inherited it in 1921.
Since 1947 the O'Neill family has owned this fine Georgian building into which they have introduced the highest standards of comfort while retaining its original character and creating an atmosphere of charm and warmth.
Unusual pieces of carved furniture, paintings by Ulster artists, early maps of Ireland, a unique driftwood collection and open log fires all add to the pervading sense of comfort.
The hotel is open to non-residents and has a reputation for good food and a carefully chosen selection of wines.
All bedrooms have been tastefully furnished and have bathroom en suite, telephone and radio.
A private garden for the use of hotel patrons runs down the water's edge and there is a wonderful view of the Sea of Moyle stretching beyond to the shores of Scotland and the Western Isles which can be seen on clear days.
The hotel is fully licenses and is approved by the Northern Ireland Tourist Board, AA and RAC.
Touring
The scenic Antrim Coast Road offers easy access to the Nine Glens of Antrim — Glenarm, Glencloy, Glenarriff, Glenballeamon, Glenann, Glencorp, Glendun, Glenshesk and Glentaise.
The beauty of this road consists not only of unfolding scenes of mountains, cliffs, glens and sea, but also of the colours of the lands and rocks.
The world-famous Giant's Causeway is an hour's drive from the hotel and there are many interesting stops on the way — Torr Head, Ballypatrick Forest and Murlough Bay.
Hill Walking
The Cranny River tumbles down a small glen of its own, not counted among the famous Nine.
By strolling up the Waterfall Road one can see first the old Lime Kiln and then higher up the Cranny Waterfalls.
From there a track leads up the mountain to the Lemnalarry Lakes (seven in all).
Drumnasole is another pretty, secondary glen with a waterfall and is within easy walking distance.
Geology
No part of the British Isles holds greater interest for the geologist than the coastline of Country Antrim from Larne to Portrush.
There are schists over 300 million years old, the largest lava field in the British Isles formed 50–70 million years ago, with glens eroded by retreating glaciers and raised beaches resulting from the land rising when the enormous weight of the ice had melted.
Archaeology
The area is rich in ancient monuments, ecclesiastical sites, raths, souterrains and chambered graves.
There is a Stone Age weapon factory at Tievebulliagh, early Celtic settlements, megalithic monuments and giant graves.
Many civilisations have left their mark on this part of Ulster — Celts, Danes, Normans.
There is an active local historical society and members are delighted to meet visitors exploring the area.
Golf
There is an 18-hole golf course at Cairndhu, 9 miles south of the village overlooking the sea and an attractive 9-hole golf course at Cushendall 9 miles north along the Coast Road.
Fishing
Deep Sea fishing offers everything from conger eel to codling, even the occasional shark.
Common plaice and flounder are easily caught from the shore.
The Lakes in the hills behind the village are ideal for trout fishing and are stocked every year by the local Angling Club.
Permits can be obtained in the hotel without charge to residents.
Boating and Sailing
The harbour at Carnlough is one of the safest on the North Antrim Coast and is a haven for yachts and pleasure boats on their way to Scotland and the Western Isles.
It has recently been deepened and widened to accommodate more boats but the picturesque setting has been retained.
The harbour is used by local fishermen, yachtsmen, motor boat and rowing enthusiasts.
Rowing boats may be hired and sailing can be arranged through the hotel.
HOW TO GET THERE
By air
Belfast Aldergrove Airport — 45 minutes by road to Carnlough.
Car Hire can be arranged by the hotel.
By Road
Carnlough is 35 miles from Belfast and is well connected with regular transport services.
From Larne along the famous Antrim Coast Road it is only 14 miles and Ballymena is the same distance inland.
TARIFF
All bedrooms are centrally heated, have bathroom en suite, direct-dial telephone, radio and colour television.
Rates for the following packages are per person, based on two people sharing.
Single Room supplement £2.00 per night.
These prices exclude Christmas and Easter.
Special emphasis on good food and comfort.
Is an ideal setting for conferences, parties, functions and weddings.
Excellent base for touring and activity breaks.
Contact Reception for reservations and any further information on our services and packages.
HISTORICAL SKETCH
Carnlough, which translated from the Gaelic means ‘Cairn of the Lake’, lies at the foot of Glencloy, one of the Nine Glens of Antrim, overlooking the Sea of Moyle.
The Londonderry Arms Hotel was built in 1848 as a coaching inn by Frances Ann Vane-Tempest, Marchioness of Londonderry.
Frances Anne was the grand-daughter of Randall William, sixth Earl and second Marques of Antrim.
He was the great great grandson of Sir Randall Mac Donnell, the first of that branch of the Mac Donnells to bear the title Earl of Antrim.
Frances Anne inherited from her mother, Anne Katherine, Countess of Antrim in her own right, land between Glenarm and Cushendall, including Carnlough.
At the age of 19 she married Charles William, Lord Stewart, the British Ambassador to Austria, afterwards third Marquis of Londonderry and sometimes affectionately known as Fighting Charlie.
As Ambassador he assisted his half-brother, Castlereagh, and afterwards the Duke of Wellington, in the negotiations of the celebrated Congress of Vienna.
Lady Londonderry was greatly admired at the Russian Court and some of the Londonderry family jewels — the Down Diamonds and the parure and cross were given to her by the Russian Emperor Alexander I.
Conscious of their responsibilities as landlords the Marquis and Marchioness of Londonderry determined to provide assistance for the people of the area.
Ireland at this period was suffering one of the greatest tragedies of its history — the Great Famine.
They initiated the erection of a town hall, lime kilns and the building of a protected harbour.
Later a mineral railway line was built to connect the south pier with the limestone quarry in the hills rising behind the village.
The Marquis died in 1854 and on the death of Lady Londonderry in 1865 the Carnlough Estate passed to her grandson, Herbert Vane Tempest.
After his death the Estate, including the hotel passed to his second cousin, Sir Winston Churchill.
Belfast City Council Parks Department
Belfast Castle Talks 1992
‘UNOFFICIAL HEALING IN ULSTER’
Dr Tony Buckley, Ulster Folk and Transport Museum, investigates the fascinating realm of local cures and charms.
‘DANDERS, HIKES AND RAMBLES’
Sonya Jeffery, Belfast Parks Department, highlights opportunities for walking in the Cave Hill area, which includes part of the Ulster Way.
‘THE DONEGALL CONNECTION’
Belfast Castle was built by the Donegall family on the slopes of their Deer Park.
Dr W Maguire, Ulster Museum, looks at the family's connection with the city and the castle.
‘HYENAS AT HAZELWOOD’
Kathleen Mannis, Belfast Parks Department, looks at the changes and development of ‘Bellevue Zoo’ over the last ten years.
All talks begin at 7.30pm, in the Ashley Room, Belfast Castle, Antrim Road, BELFAST.
Entrance is free.
FOREST FEASTS
A GUIDE TO NORTHERN IRELAND'S PICNIC SITES PREPARED BY THE FLOUR ADVISORY BUREAU
The season for forest feasts is upon us!
Recent research for the Flour Advisory Board reveals that Britons are as passionate about picnics today as they've always been.
Seven out of 10 families visit a local beauty spot or attraction at least once a month, according to the research by Gallop, with three out of 10 people ‘getting away from it all’ as often as once a week.
And more than eight out of 10 people on a day out include bread — the most portable of foods — in their picnic feast, either brought from home or purchased en-route.
Virtually anything, sweet or savoury can be transported safely (and eaten deliciously) between two slices of crusty bread or in a roll.
Forests and woodlands come second only to the beach as a perfect place for an away-day, with four out of 10 people preferring to picnic in style, at a designated picnic site.
The Forest Service in Northern Ireland is run by the Department of Agriculture.
There are over 60 forests which have been developed for recreation.
Many have wooden tables and benches for spreading all those goodies on.
Some sites have facilities for barbecues, and many have parking facilities.
The Flour Advisory Bureau, in conjunction with the Forest Service of Northern Ireland, has produced this guide to some of the best places for a picnic in the forest and woodlands of Northern Ireland.
There are 13 other ‘Forest Feasts’ guides in the series produced by The Flour Advisory Bureau and the Forestry Commission.
They cover each regional tourist board in England; two for Scotland and one for Wales.
All are available free of charge from the Flour Advisory Bureau  Please send an SAE (9″ × 12″) stating which leaflet you require.
PICNIC TIPS
Take advantage of the great variety of breads and rolls available — sliced, unsliced, crusty and soft.
And use different textures, colours and shapes such as malted wheat grain, wholemeal, softgrain white, cottage shape, knotted rolls and cheese bread.
Sandwiches can be made in advance and frozen.
Remember not to freeze fillings containing hard-boiled eggs, mayonnaise, fruits or salads which can be added later, or served with the sandwiches as an accompaniment.
Pack your picnic carefully.
If possible carry sandwiches in a rigid container.
Be careful not to squash them with film wrapping.
When filling rolls, cut through leaving a hinge for easy eating.
A lettuce leaf in a roll acts like a hand to help hold in moist fillings.
Spread filling right to the edges.
Butter and margarine act as a waterproof layer for bread against wet foods like sliced tomato.
Make double decker sandwiches for big appetites.
Make a check list of essential items such as a corkscrew, bottle opener and a sharp knife for cutting bread etc.
OTHER SANDWICH FILLING IDEAS
Sausage and apple with mustard mayonnaise.
Ham with cream cheese and pineapple.
Crab sticks with egg mayonnaise.
Pâté with sliced egg and gherkin.
MEDITERRANEAN MAGIC
Cut the Ciabatta in half leaving a hinge on one side, spread cut surfaces with the tomato puree mixed with some olive oil.
Mix tuna, kidney beans, cucumber, tomato, olives, parsley and garlic, season with salt and pepper and add about 1 tablespoon of olive oil to help combine ingredients.
Fill bread with tuna mixture.
Cut into sections for easy eating.
GREEN GRAPE AND BRIE BAP
Cut baps in half leaving a hinge, butter cut surfaces.
Place a lettuce leaf in each bap topped with the sliced brie, finish with the grapes and sprinkle with chopped walnuts.
CHICKEN AND MUSHROOM SANDWICH
Butter the bread.
Divide watercress and chicken between four of the slices.
Mix sliced mushrooms, sweetcorn, yoghurt and mayonnaise.
Season with pepper and salt, spoon onto chicken and top with remaining slices of bread.
Cut sandwiches into triangles to serve.
PEANUT, BACON AND AVOCADO SANDWICH
Butter the bread, spread peanut butter on four slices and mayonnaise on the other four.
Place the filling ingredients on the slices with peanut butter, season with pepper and top with slices spread with mayonnaise.
NORTHERN IRELAND
Northern Ireland's forests are home to a wide variety of wildlife.
Enjoy numerous scenic drives, or walk along coastlines taking in the breathtaking views Northern Ireland has to offer.
Why not visit Castle Caldwell Forest, and enjoy the delights of a National Nature Reserve (see no 9) or enjoy a picnic while taking in the beautiful views of Glenelly Valley and Sperrin Mountains (see no 17).
COUNTRY ANTRIM
1 Ballypatrick Forest 
On A2 Ballycastle—Cushendun Road.
There are seven miles of scenic drives with river walks and panoramic views.
Car park, toilets.
2 Glenarm Forest 
Glenarm Village lies on the main coastal road in Antrim.
Entrance from Altmore Street in village.
Beautiful glen with riverside walks and coastal views.
3 Tardree Forest 
Lying between the villages of Kells and Parkgate, Tardree Forest is on the Parkgate Road.
Several car parks with planned walks, panoramic views of Lough Neagh and Slemish Mountain.
COUNTY ARMAGH
4 Gosford Forest Park 
The entrance to the forest is off the A28 into Markethill village.
Woodland walks through conservation forest.
Wildlife enclosures, poultry exhibit and deer enclosure.
5 Slieve Gullion Forest Park 
On B134 from Newry to Forkhill.
Forest drive with magnificent views of the volcanic ring of hills of which Slieve Gullion forms a part.
COUNTY DOWN
6 Drumkeeragh Forest 
Four miles south east of Dromara.
Forest situated on eastern slopes of Slieve Croob.
Magnificent views, car park.
7 Crocknafeola Forest 
On B27 Kilkeel to Hilltown Road.
Views of Mourne Mountains.
COUNTY FERMANAGH
8 Ely Lodge Forest 
On A46 Enniskillen–Belleek Road.
Jetty, coastline walks and viewpoints.
9 Castle Caldwell Forest 
On A47 Belleek–Kesh Road.
Visitor centre with exhibit.
17th century ruined castle and fine lake scenery.
National Forest Nature Reserve.
10 Florencecourt Forest Park 
Signposted to Florencecourt, off Enniskillen–Swanlinbar Road (A32).
Walks through old estate woodlands adjoining National Trust property.
COUNTY LONDONDERRY
11 Garvagh Forest 
Off Main Street in Garvagh.
Forest and riverside walks.
Interesting pyramidal cenotaph.
12 Muff Glen Wood 
Eglinton lies on the main Limavady Londonderry Road (A27), Muff Glen is one mile from Eglinton.
Pleasant walks through wooded glen.
13 Loughermore Forest 
On B69 Limavady—Claudy Road.
Forest and riverside walks.
Giant's Grave.
COUNTY TYRONE
14 Favour Royal Forest 
On A28 Aughnacloy–Augher Road.
Attractive sheltered picnic site adjoining planned walk through wildlife meadow.
15 Knockmany Forest 
Two miles North West of Augher village signposts from Auger–Omagh Road.
Walks through lovely mature woodland.
Historic monument, splendid views of Clogher Valley.
16 Gortin Glen Forest Park 
On B48 Omagh–Gortin Road.
Forest walks, nature trail and wildlife enclosures.
17 Goles Forest 
On B47 Draperstown—Plumbridge Road.
Views of Glenelly Valley and Sperrin Mountains.
FLOUR ADVISORY BUREAU
Founded in 1956, the Flour Advisory Bureau has established itself as the UK's central source of information on all matters relating to bread and flour.
A helpline deals with many hundreds of ’ enquiries’each year from the general public, students, the retail and catering industries, and the media.
A wide range of literature is also available free of charge from the Bureau at 
FOREST SERVICE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
If you require further information on the Forests and recreational areas that Northern Ireland has to offer please write to the following address:
THE OFFICE OF PUBLIC WORKS
75 after 16
1916–49: The realisation of a Republic
The rebellion in Dublin at Easter 1916 commenced with Patrick Pearse reading the Proclamation of an Irish Republic from the steps of the General Post Office.
After it was over the poet W.B. Yeats began to reflect on the significance of the rebellion and the subsequent executions.
He already sensed that things would never be the same again.
In memorable phrases he spoke of things being ‘changed utterly’ as a ‘terrible beauty’was born.
Over the next decade that prophetic vision was made real as the landscape of Irish politics underwent revolutionary change at the hands of men and women who had been moulded and inspired by the events of 1916.
In the general election of 1918 the Irish Parliamentary Party which had dominated Irish politics since the days of Parnell was routed by a reorganised Sinn Fein, many of whose members had fought in the 1916 Rising.
Casting aside the aspiration to Home Rule as no longer acceptable, Sinn Fein set as its goal an Irish Republic as declared in the 1916 Proclamation.
Sinn Fein MP's met in Dublin and formed the First Dail in January 1919.
The two years of intensive guerilla war that followed led to a Truce in July, 1921.
Six months later a Treaty was signed in London which led to the setting up of a 26-county Free State.
(The six-county state of Northern Ireland had been set up under the Government of Ireland Act, 1920).
Following ratification of the Treaty by the Dail a bitter Civil War broke out in June 1922 in which Republican forces who rejected the Treaty were defeated by the forces of the new Free State.
Michael Collins, who had been killed in the course of the Civil War, had argued that the Treaty could be used as ‘the stepping stones to freedom’.
Gradually, over the next twenty-five years the terms of the Treaty were eroded as the Free State became a Republic in all but name.
In 1949 the Irish Republic came formally into being.
About the Cu Chulainn statue
With the widespread translation of Early Irish stories into English around the turn of the century a younger generation of Irishmen and women discovered for the first time a fresh and potent source of images to define their sense of nationality.
Like Yeats, Pearse and a host of other artists and writers, the sculptor Oliver Sheppard (1865–1941) was inspired by the image of the boy hero Cu Chulainn as described in the early legends.
Though a fictional character, Cu Chulainn came to stand for a very real sense of patriotic courage and self-sacrifice.
Sheppard modelled the statue in 1911–12 and exhibited it for the first time in 1914.
The plaster cast lay in his studio for many years until it was selected by the then Taoiseach, Eamon de Valera, as a memorial to the 1916 Rising.
It was cast in bronze in Belgium and installed in the GPO in 1935.
In 1902 Sheppard was appointed instructor in modelling at the Dublin Metropolitan School of Art.
One of his pupils was Willie Pearse, younger brother of Patrick, who was executed the day after his brother on the 4th May, 1916.
About the GPO
The General Post Office was designed by the leading Irish architect Francis Johnson and completed in 1818.
The building was gutted by the fires of the 1916 Rising.
The facade survived intact and was incorporated in the rebuilding, which was completed in 1932.
However, the fires of the Rising and exposure to the weather in the years immediately after contributed to the decay of the stonework of the facade in a way that has made it hazardous in recent years.
To remedy this, a major restoration project is now under way, financed by an allocation of funds from the National Lottery.
Where you can find out more about 1916
This exhibition is intended to provide a brief survey of the political events and historical forces that shaped the 1916 Rising.
The Video-wall presentation attempts to give an impression of what actually happened over those 18 tumultuous days between the reading of the Proclamation and the execution of James Connolly.
If you would like to understand more about its origins and consequences and the people who participated in it, there are three places we would recommend you to visit.
National Museum of Ireland
To commemorate the 75th anniversary of the 1916 Rising, the National Museum of Ireland has revised its exhibition on the vital period of modern Irish history between 1900 and 1921 and called it ‘The Road to Independence’.
How to Get There
Situated in Kildare Street, about 10 minutes walk from the GPO.
Kilmainham Gaol
The gaol is one of the biggest unoccupied gaols in Europe and an impressive architectural experience in its own right.
But it owes its status as a national monument to the way it has reflected from its opening in 1796 to its closure in 1924 the most dramatic and moving events in the history of modern Irish nationalism.
It was here that the 1916 leaders were executed.
This summer a major art exhibition entitled ‘Caught in a State’ involving many of Ireland's leading contemporary artists will be held at the gaol.
How to Get There
Take a 79, 24 or a 51A, B or C, bus going southwards and get off on the South Circular Road, Kilmainham.
Pearse Museum
Patrick Pearse's early career was devoted to reviving the Irish language and inspiring a love for it in others.
He set up his school, St. Enda's, in 1908 to show by example how a bilingual school in Irish and English could work.
He moved his school to Rathfarnham in 1910 where he hoped that the beauty of the natural surroundings would inspire a love of nature in his pupils.
This is now the Pearse Museum.
The museum is an eighteenth-century house set in 40 acres of parkland with a river and waterfall.
It is one of the city's most charming parks.
How to Get There
Take a 16 bus from opposite the GPO to the southern terminus, which is situated on the ’ perimeter’of St. Enda's Park.
This exhibition has been sponsored jointly by An Post and the Office of Public Works to mark the 75th Anniversary of the 1916 Rising.
An Post has also issued a commemorative stamp to mark the event.
The OPW managed Kilmainham Gaol and the Pearse Museum as National Monuments in state care, and maintains the GPO building.
We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of the following ’ in compiling’the exhibition:
GPO clock which stopped at 2.25 on the afternoon of Easter Monday.
Flag of the Irish Republic which flew over the GPO during the fighting.
Eamon de Valera under arrest at Richmond Barracks.
IRISH LINEN STOCKISTS
Royal households, embassies, famous hotels, airlines and restaurants choose Irish Linen because of its beautiful appearance and durability.
The unique qualities of strength, high moisture absorption, excellent washing and colour retention characteristics have led to Irish Linen's renowned reputation throughout the world as the best fabric for Household Textiles.
Each time Irish Linen is laundered, a subtle molecular change occurs around each fibre, resulting in the fabric's renewal of its smooth, lustrous surface.
Undoubtedly, Irish Linen is unparalleled in its ability to enhance style, luxury and elegance.
DERRY CRAFT VILLAGE
AN INNER CITY TRUST PROJECT
The Craft Village
Take a step back in time when you visit this charming Craft Village located right in the heart of Derry City centre.
The Craft Village is a unique development initiated by Mr. Patrick Doherty, Chief Executive of the Inner City Trust, and is a portrayal of life in Derry from 16th–19th centuries successfully combining retail, workshop and residential accommodation.
The first phase of the village opened in October 1989 and contains thirteen workshop/retail units on the ground floor.
The concept of the village is to afford local craftspeople the opportunity to establish viable business for themselves while providing an alternative range of consumer goods which should prove attractive to both locals and visitors to the city.
A second phase of the village is due to open in July 1991 featuring a traditional Irish thatched cottage, entertainment, a street market at weekends and more craft workshops.
The Craft Village is part of an overall development to be completed by 1993 which will include a siege exhibition centre, a youth hostel and a heritage centre housing genealogical research and conference facilities.
These will be linked to the O'Doherty Fort at the foot of Magazine Street, and the overall development will represent Derry throughout the ages from its foundation in 545 A.D.
Enjoy the pleasant atmosphere and join in other activities reminiscent of village life.
The Craft People
Edel McBride Designer Knitwear
A stunning collection of high fashion design knitwear to suit every occasion.
Smart daywear featuring fine knits and evening chenille garments featuring exaggerated celtic and aran stitches in truly innovative shapes.
The Irish Shop
When you enter this quaint Irish Shop in the village, you discover a treasure trove of Irish made goods.
Pure linen, woven and manufactured in Ulster, hand crafted bogwood, copperware, china, porcelain, bronze and jewellery are just a few of the quality products on sale.
Twirl ‘n’ Curl
Relax and enjoy the friendly atmosphere and comfortable surroundings provided at the village hairdressing salon.
All hairdressing requirements catered for.
Toyology
Toyology supply an extensive range of educational toys designed to help your child's early learning development needs.
Large supply of Art and Craft materials in stock.
Little Luxuries
Let Little Luxuries develop your home design ideas.
Specialists in quilting, patchwork, applique and curtain making.
Unique gift ideas range from personalized quilts and cushions to covered baskets.
Village Music
Hand crafted traditional Irish instruments — mandolins, guitars, bazoukis and bodhráns available.
Other musical instruments and accessories include percussion, keyboards and amplification for sale and hire.
The Olive Leaf
A large selection of third world products (Traidcraft) are available in this delightful curio shop including hand made jewellery, belts, bags, scarves, tapestry…
Stitch Craft
Stitch craft design and make flags and banners to customer requirements.
Designs are beautifully enhanced by incorporating the use of applique, piping and machine embroidery.
An extensive range of fancy dress costumes are also available for hire or sale.
The Attic
Among the many interesting gift items available at The Attic are beautiful pieces of reproduction furniture, mirrors, pictures, fenders…
Antique clock sales and restoration services a speciality.
Truffles ‘n’ Treats
The distinctive aroma of chocolate and liqueurs will entice you to view the delectable selection of hand made quality chocolates and fudge made daily at the village confectionery.
The Boston Tea Party
For the finest and freshest in home made snacks and mouth watering baked goods visit the Boston Tea Party and enjoy a well earned break.
Evening meetings and parties catered for.
Enquiries welcome.
FRIENDS OF THE ULSTER ORCHESTRA
Help promote and support the activities of the Ulster Orchestra by becoming a Friend and benefit from the privileges that only come from being a Friend of the Ulster Orchestra.
PRIORITY BOOKINGS
For the Ulster Orchestra Subscription Series
SPECIAL EVENTS
Social evenings, including opportunities to meet international conductors, soloists and members of the orchestra.
SPECIAL DISCOUNT
Available on Ulster Orchestra merchandise available from the Shop
REGULAR INFORMATION
Through the monthly Artslink mailing service and regular Friends' Bulletins.
OPEN REHEARSALS
Free admission to rehearsals on request.
HOW YOU CAN HELP
If you do have some spare time on your hands, here are just some of the ways you can become involved:
help with regular mailings to our members
sell Ulster Orchestra recordings at our Concerts
become involved with fundraising events.
Why not join our band of Volunteers — even if you can spare a little time you will always be welcome.
I would like to help with the activities of the Friends of the Ulster Orchestra in the following way(s):
Fundraising
Organising Events
Young Friends
I would like to help in a general way with Friends' events
Please tick appropriate box(es)
Don't forget
As a Friend you will receive 10% discount on all Ulster Orchestra records, cassettes and compact discs on sale at all Ulster Orchestra Concerts or the Ulster Orchestra Shop.
BBC RADIO GOES TO TOWN
THE BBC RADIO SHOW
11–16 november at the Belfast festival
open daily
all the fun of the air!
BBC Network Radio and BBC Radio Ulster feature a week of live programmes as part of the 29th Belfast Festival at Queen's.
In the second week of the festival Radio's 1,2,3,4 and 5 and BBC Radio Ulster will be inviting listeners to meet their favourite radio personalities, participate in programmes and be members of the audience during live shows from the ELMWOOD HALL and various other festival venues.
Highlights include concerts from the BBC Symphony Orchestra and the BBC Big Band.
Live programmes presented by GLORIA HUNNIFORD, GARY DAVIES, ANGELA RIPPON and NED SHERRIN.
Plus Radio 4's ANY QUESTIONS?, a lunchtime Arts Forum with Radio 3's Controller, JOHN DRUMMOND and Radio 5's Citizens Advice Bureau of the airwaves offer listeners some SOUND ADVICE on job hunting.
Radio Ulster makes a major contribution to the week with TALK BACK, PUNTERS' NIGHT, and several folk evenings.
FOR FULL PROGRAMME DETAILS SEE REVERSE
A BBC Radio Information Centre will operate outside the ELMWOOD HALL throughout the week (OPEN 10AM–5PM DAILY).
Staff will be on hand to answer listeners' questions, respond to any comments or complaints and BBC Engineers will be available to help with technical tips on tuning and frequencies.
Admission is free to the majority of events, by ticket, in advance from THE FESTIVAL BOOKING OFFICE in COLLEGE GARDENS and THE GRAND OPERA HOUSE in GLENGALL STREET.
tuning guide: BBC radio in Belfast
This guide recommends the best frequencies to use, so compare these scales with the dial on your radio set and tune to the positions shown.
digital display:
If your set has a digital display you need the exact frequencies in digital form as given here:
can we help?
If you have any queries about reception or frequency please ring our special radio Helpline on 0345 010313 during office hours — you'll only be charged at the local rate.
Or, write to 
11 november monday
Radio 4's DAILY SERVICE broadcast live from the Elmwood Hall.
Leading the worship is the REV.
DR.
ROBERT TOSH, with singing from the choir of Methodist College, Belfast.
GLORIA HUNNIFORD takes a trip home to present her show live from the Elmwood Hall.
Gloria's special guests include GEORGIE FAME, TERRY LIGHTFOOD AND HIS BAND, KEIRAN GOSS, FRANCES BLACK AND SAM McAUGHTRY.
IT'S YOUR RADIO 2!
Here's your chance to air your views and put your questions to the people responsible for the programmes you hear on Radio 2!
GLORIA HUNNIFORD chairs the debate in the Elmwood Hall with panellists DAVID VERCOE (Head of Radio 2 Music), RICHARD WILLCOX (Asst Head of Light Entertainment) and BARRY KNIGHT (Editor Live Music).
BIG BAND SPECIAL, RADIO 2.
SHEILA TRACY introduces the BBC BIG BAND SPECIAL conducted by BARRY FORGIE with special guest GEORGIE FAME from the Whitla Hall.
Tickets on sale (£6–£10) from the Festival booking office, College Gardens and the Grand Opera House.
TUNING UP, RADIO 3.
CHRIS DE SOUZA introduces an evening of music provided by GERALD McCRHYSTAL (’ saxophon’) and KATHRYN LENEHAN (piano) from the Harty Room.
TRAVELLING FOLK.
BBC Radio Scotland and Radio Ulster present a live edition from the Harp Folk Club, with ARCHIE FISHER, PHIL CAMPBELL and a host of guest musicians and singers from the festival.
12 november tuesday
SOUND ADVICE.
GUY MICHELMORE AND LIZ BARCLAY present Radio 5's Citizens Advice Bureau of the airwaves live from the Elmwood Hall.
The main topic for discussion will be finding a job.
GARY GOES TO YOUR PLACE.
Radio 1's GARY DAVIES takes to the streets of Belfast, surprising listeners in local schools, offices and homes live on air.
PIANO RECITAL.
An entertaining lunchtime programme performed by PHILIP MARTIN playing music by Gottschalk to be recorded for Radio Ulster's ‘The Classical Show’ in the Elmwood Hall.
ROGER ROYLE introduces local choirs at the Fisherwick Presbyterian Church for a special pre-recording of Radio 2's SUNDAY HALF HOUR.
THE BBC SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA AT THE ULSTER HALL.
SPONSORED BY BRITISH PETROLEUM
Please note that there is no overture in this programme and it will probably not be possible for latecomers to be admitted before the interval.
Tickets (£6–£12) are on sale from the Festival Booking Office, College Gardens and the Grand Opera House.
13 november wednesday
THIS FAMILY BUSINESS.
Radio 5's JOHNNIE WALKER presents a live show in the Elmwood Hall debating current news issues that affect family life in the '90s with special guests.
ARTS FORUM.
Radio 3 invites you to join the Network's Controller, JOHN DRUMMOND and NATALIE WHEEN, music journalist and broadcaster in the Arts Council Gallery to discuss all aspects of the arts in the UK today.
Radio 2's DAVID JACOBS brings his lunchtime show to the Ulster Hall in the company of the BBC BIG BAND and special guest, ROSEMARY SQUIRES.
MARK GOODIER'S EVENING SESSION.
Mark presents his show live on Radio 1 from the Limelight Club.
Sampling the best in Irish youth culture, the show will feature ‘THAT PETROL EMOTION’ live on stage, new releases and this week's Dance Chart.
FREE tickets available from the Limelight Club, Ormeau Avenue.
PUNTER'S NIGHT
Radio Ulster's Gerry Anderson presents his popular show from the new BBC Blackstaff Studio, Great Victoria Street.
IT'S YOUR RADIO 1!
Everything you've always wanted to know about Radio 1 but haven't had the chance to ask.
A question and answer sessions chaired by DJ MIKE EDGAR, with panellists: Radio 1 DJ MARK GOODIER, his Producer, JEFF SMITH and CHRIS LYCETT, Head of Radio 1 Music.
Free tickets available from the Limelight Club, Ormeau Avenue.
14 november thursday
THE HEALTH SHOW.
ANGELA RIPPON presents a live edition of Radio 5's magazine and phone-in programme from the Elmwood Hall.
The show will take a look at the latest medical developments, consult leading experts and offer free advice to keeping fit and staying healthy.
MONEYBOX — A QUESTION OF MONEY?
Radio 4's presenters LOUISE BOTTING and VINCENT DUGGLEBY are joined by Investment Advisor CHRISTOPHER GILCHRIST to answer your questions on personal finance in the Elmwood Hall.
Radio 1 records JAMES ‘IN CONCERT’ at the Ulster Hall for future transmission.
Tickets on sale  from the Festival Booking Office, College Gardens and at the Grand Opera House.
Radio Ulster records ‘Love is Teasin’ and ‘Love is Pleasin’, a show compiled and presented by JANE CASSIDY and MAURICE LEYDEN from the Harp Folk Club.
Tickets (£5) on sale from the Festival Booking Office, College Gardens and the Grand Opera House.
15 november friday
From 6.30 am tune into Radio 4 (96.0FM) and hear JOHN HUMPHRIES presenting the ‘TODAY’ programme live from Belfast.
TALK BACK.
Radio Ulster's popular lunchtime topical affairs programme invites listeners to join regular armchair commentators and DAVID DUNSEITH for a live show in the Elmwood Hall.
The latest news, views and analysis and Talk Back regulars.
KALEIDOSCOPE.
Music journalist and broadcaster, NATALIE WHEEN presents a live edition of Radio 4's daily arts programme from the Elmwood Hall.
Her special guests include MICHAEL BARNES, Director of the Festival, local storyteller SAM McNAUGHTRY and music from STEVE TILSTON and MAGGIE BOYLE.
‘ANY QUESTIONS?’
JONATHAN DIMBLEBY chairs this live Radio 4 programme from the Elmwood Hall.
FOLK CLUB.
Radio Ulster record MELANIE HARROLD and OLLY BLANCHFLOWER plus NIAMH PARSONS and LOOSE CONNECTIONS at the Harp Folk Club.
Tickets (£5) on sale from the Festival Booking Office, College Gardens and the Grand Opera House.
THE RADIO 2 ARTS PROGRAMME.
SEAMUS McKEE presents a live selection of festival music and song featuring the HUNT DUO, STEVE TILSTON & MAGGIE BOYLE and the HOLE IN THE WALL GANG from Studio 1, BBC Broadcasting House.
16 november saturday
‘LOOSE ENDS’.
NED SHERRIN presides over an hour of entertaining, provocative talk and badinage with special guests EMMA FREUD and JOHN WALTERS live on Radio 4 from the Elmwood Hall.
FOLK CLUB.
Radio Ulster Record STEVE TILSTON and MAGGIE BOYLE with special guest NOMOS at the Harp Folk Club.
Tickets (£5) on sale from the Festival Booking Office, College Gardens and the Grand Opera House.
Take the emigrant trail to the Ulster-American Folk Park…
…and follow in the footsteps of the thousands of men and women who in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries left Ulster to seek a new life in America.
Here in contrasting Old World and New World settings you will see the types of dwellings, farm out-houses and craft workshops that the emigrants used on both sides of the Atlantic.
Each exhibit building is equipped with authentic furnishings, cooking utensils and farm implements illustrating the various facets of life in those early times.
THE EMIGRANTS
The Folk Park is constructed around the thatched farmhouse birthplace of Judge Thomas Mellon and the reconstructed New World farm where he lived when the family first emigrated to America.
It also tells the story of another famous County Tyrone emigrant, Archbishop John Joseph Hughes, whose boyhood home has been reerected in the Park.
In addition to these buildings, the main exhibits in the outdoor museum consist of an original National Schoolhouse, a Presbyterian Meeting House, Blacksmith's Forge and Weaver's Cottage in the Old World side of the Park and a Log Cabin, Pennsylvania Farmhouse and Log Barn in the New World area.
Pride of place is given to a Conestoga Wagon which dates back to the time the Mellons crossed the Appalachians.
CRAFT DEMONSTRATIONS
As you stroll through the museum grounds you will be warmly welcomed by historically-dressed interpreters who explain the exhibits and, in the summer months, regularly demonstrate a range of domestic chores and traditional crafts.
In their farm kitchens and workshops you could be forgiven for thinking that time has stood still for 150 years.
Turf fires, the aroma of baking bread and clicking of the spinning wheel all contribute to the special atmosphere of by-gone days.
EXHIBITIONS
In the indoor galleries a range of exhibitions and audio visual presentations provide background information about the lives and experiences of the thousands of other Ulster-American emigrants and the part they played in the birth and growth of the United States.
There is also an on-going programme of temporary exhibitions including:
‘A Nation Emerges’— the history of the American Constitution.
‘Quilts and Quilting’— American patchwork.
With the exception of winter weekends the Folk Park is open to visitors throughout the year.
There is a well-developed education service and teachers wishing to arrange school visits should contact the education department for details.
All group visits should be booked in advance.
NO DOGS ALLOWED
FACILITIES
Coach park, car park, picnic area, gift and craft shop, cafe and toilets.
Cafe meals for large parties should be booked in advance.
Belfast Parks
Belfast City Council, Parks Department
There are, at present, over 46 parks and playing field sites under the control of the Belfast Parks Department, along with a Zoological Garden, a major tree and shrub nursery, seven cemeteries and historical graveyards and numerous open spaces scattered throughout the city.
In all, a total of 3,000 acres dedicated to horticulture, recreation, environmental improvement, education and conservation.
These parks range in character and facilities e.g. the older, 19th century parks form an integral part of Belfast's social history, while the ‘newer’, less formal parks on the outskirts are virtually pieces of the countryside within the city.
Ever since the first public park was opened at Ormeau on Easter Saturday 1871, the commitment to providing public open space has been on the increase.
By the turn of the century another five parks were open, and by the mid 1930's a further eight had been added, including the major property of Belfast Castle Estate.
Many properties, once private demesnes, have been generously donated to the City Council — none more beautifully situated than Barnett Demesne and Sir Thomas and Lady Dixon Park, both named after their benefactors.
Today there is much within Belfast to attract visitors and citizens alike.
There is no more magnificent building than the early 19th century Palm House within the Botanic Gardens.
One of the first examples of a curvilinear glasshouse, it stands as a reminder of bygone eras in Belfast's history.
The nearby Tropical Ravine is an unique example of ‘Victoriana’, and its valuable plant collection provides a captivating and educational experience for many local schoolchildren.
The rose gardens at Sir Thomas and Lady Dixon Park are world famous for the International Rose Trials held annually.
The roses can be enjoyed in a splendid park setting.
This park is one of four riverside parks that provide opportunity for those who enjoy walking.
Clement Wilson Park, Barnett Demesne and Lagan Meadows are rich in seasonal colour and interest, with the last being managed primarily for wildlife and education.
The Zoological Gardens are currently being re-developed into one of the most modern in Europe, and now attract more visitors than ever before.
Sited on the hillsides to the north west of the city, the Gardens, together with Hazelwood, Bellevue and Belfast Castle Estates form a major resource area.
Belfast Castle, with its panoramic views over the city and Belfast Lough, has undergone major refurbishment and will become a busy conference and function centre.
Similar use has been made of the late Georgian mansion, Malone House, and has proved very successful.
Set in the heart of the Lagan Valley Regional Park, this house also provides the Parks Department's main information and education centre.
There is good provision for all manner of recreation.
The range includes many team sports such as soccer, rugby, gaelic football, cricket and bowls, non-team activities such as tennis and BMX racing, and family recreation such as putting, boating and over 40 children's playgrounds.
Specialist facilities include an International Junior Soccer pitch, a PAR 3 gold course and the Mary Peters Athletics Track.
Horticultural standards are high throughout the city, with many bedding schemes, floral features, bulb and shrub planting etc.
They reach perfection (or as near as possible) at Grovelands Training Centre, where staff and apprentices receive instruction and training.
Certain features are carried out on a large scale.
Literally tens of thousands of crocus and daffodil bulbs brighten the spring months throughout the city, while in the summertime over 1000 hanging baskets bring a splash of colour to the city centre streets.
They complement the plant tubs and tree planting that is also a feature of Belfast.
It is of vital importance that open spaces and parklands are protected and maintained to a high standard, and that schemes such as the floral baskets, spring bulb displays, extensive tree planting are continued and expanded if Belfast is to become an increasingly attractive city for future generations.
Should you go to Yoga?
TAKE HEED that no man deceive you.
(Matthew 24 v.4).
Many deceivers are entered into the world.
(2 John v.7)
‘Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee.’
(Isaiah 26 verse 3).
INTRODUCTION
As a teenager I grew up through the rock ‘n roll era and witnessed the influence many pop stars exerted on things such as fashion and philosophy.
Most of the early ‘greats’ hailed from America — people like Elvis Presley and Chuck Berry.
However in the early 1960's there emerged from Britain probably the most influential of all fashion and philosophical trendsetting rock groups — The Beatles.
Most of us who lived through those times will, I believe, never forget the impact made by their unique hair styles and the famous jackets with no collars.
As the years passed The Beatles came under many influences and one of the most famous was Maharishi Mahesh Yogi who founded Transcendental Meditation.
The publicity which surrounded this venture into Eastern Mysticism did much to popularise and gain acceptance for the Eastern religious practice of Yoga.
It is important at the outset for people to realise that Yoga is essentially religious and not physical or as ‘A Book of Beliefs’ published by Lion Publishing Co. states (P147)‘Yoga is the Hindu word which signifies a spiritual discipline by which men may reach union with God.’
Bearing this in mind we shall endeavour to answer the question ‘Should you go to Yoga?’
Cecil Andrews
THE ‘GOD’ OF YOGA
As stated in the introduction, the goal of Yoga is to bring a person into union with ‘God’.
It is however essential at this stage to understand the ‘God’ the person practising Yoga is seeking to brought into union with.
This ‘God’ is not the personal God of The Bible, but is instead the pantheistic ‘God’of Hinduism which teaches that ‘God is everything and everything is God’.
This means that everything and everyone is part of the ‘Great divine’ or Brahman.
When we understand this we realise that Yoga is seeking to point people to a FALSE GOD.
In the Word of God we find the position of the one, true God, Jehovah stated plainly ‘I am the Lord thy God…
Thou shalt have no other gods before me.’
(Exodus 20 v.2/3)‘I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.’
(Isaiah 43 v. 10).
THE ‘WAY’ OF YOGA
In the introduction Yoga was described as a ‘spiritual discipline’ and this discipline has two elements when one considers two of the most popular forms of Yoga.
One element relates to the physical and involves diet, fasting breathing techniques (pranayama) and postures (asanas).
These constitute the main aspects of Hatha Yoga.
The other element related to control of the mind where through meditation or chanting the practitioner seeks to free his soul from the bondage of his mind and body and to prepare himself for spiritual enlightenment or true self-realisation — that he is in fact part of the ‘Impersonal Absolute’(Brahman).
This element is the core of Raja Yoga.
Hatha Yoga is seen as leading to Raja Yoga and there are other forms of Yoga which are rungs on the Yoga ladder leading to union with ‘God’.
Yoga promotes a FALSE WAY to God.
In the World of God we find that union with God is only possible when the barrier to that union has been dealt with.
We find this barrier to be our sins.
Speaking of God the prophet Habakkuk wrote ‘Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil and canst not look on iniquity.’
(Habakkuk 1 v. 13).
However, God Himself dealt with that barrier when God the Son, Jesus Christ, came to earth and sacrifice Himself on the Cross of Calvary to pay the penalty for the sins of others.
The Apostle Peter wrote concerning Jesus ‘Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree.’
(1 Peter2 v.24).
The writer to the Hebrews, speaking of Jesus said,‘When he had by himself purged our sins.’
(Hebrews 1 v. 3).
Knowing He would remove the sin barrier on the Cross at Calvary, Jesus was able to say to His disciples ‘I am the way, the truth and the life: no man cometh unto the Father but by me.’
(John 14 v.6).
Access to or re-union with God is only possible by personal faith in the finished sacrificial work of Jesus on the Cross.
Entrance into the presence of God is by  ‘the blood of Jesus.’
(Hebrews 10 v.19).
Union with God for the Christian does not mean recognising oneself as part of God (‘self-realisation’) but means becoming a member of God's family by adoption.
To those in Rome who had trusted Christ alone for salvation the Apostle Paul wrote ‘Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba, Father.
The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.’
(Romans 8 v. 15/16).
In Proverbs 16 verse 25 we read ‘There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.’
Those who seek union with ‘God’ by practising Yoga are following ‘the ways of death.’
THE PEACE OF YOGA
Yoga classes are often advertised as offering people the opportunity to get rid of the stresses and strains of everyday living, a chance to escape from the cares of the material world.
On page 47 of ‘Yoga Today’(Vol. 12 No. 4, August 1987) an advert for Pranayama Yoga, The Art of Relaxation, stated ‘it will induce the mind to calmness, eliminating tension and help one to face the demands of each day without fatigue of mind or body.’
Yoga classes are often held in leisure centres, schools and even on occasions in church halls.
Some doctors have also been known to recommend Yoga to patients coming to them because they feel they ‘just can't cope’ or ‘just can't go on’.
Peace is the promise given to those who engage in Yoga.
The ultimate in this sphere is to reach a state of ‘Nirvana’— a state of ‘passionless peace’ as it is defined in the late Mr. Jim McCormick's booklet ‘What ever Christian should know about Hinduism and Yoga’.
(P11).
Certainly man desires peace in his inner conscience and to cope with his outward circumstances, but what is true peace?
The Word of God records the words of the Lord Jesus Christ in John chapter 16 verse 33 when He said ‘These things I have spoken unto you, that IN ME YE MIGHT HAVE PEACE.’
The prophet Jeremiah spoke of people saying ‘Peace, peace; when there is no peace.’
(Jeremiah 6 v. 14: 8 v. 11).
Peace outside of Christ is no peace at all.
Yoga promises a FALSE PEACE.
To those who put their trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, he says ‘Peace I leave with you (peace with God)my peace I give unto you (the peace of God).’
(John 14 v. 27).
Peace with God comes at conversion to saving faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
‘Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.’
(Romans 5 v. 1).
That brings peace to our inner conscience.
The peace of God is ours through prayer,‘Be careful for nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God.
And the peace of God which passeth all understanding shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.’
(Philippians 4 v. 6/7).
That brings peace to us in the midst of our outward circumstances.
When we have cares, we are not to look to pagan religious practices and philosophies for respite, but we are to be as the Apostle Peter put it ‘Casting all your care upon him, for he careth for you.’
(1 Peter 5 v.7).
True and lasting peace is found alone in the One who said ‘Come unto me all ye that are ’ heavy’ laden, and I will give you rest.’
(Matthew 11 v. 28) and we learn from the Word of God that He ‘made peace through the blood of his cross.’
(Colossians 1 v. 20).
Trust Him and His finished work and experience true and lasting peace.
CONCLUSION
Yoga is religious.
Hinduism, Buddhism and other groups such as The Hare Krishnas and those who engage in Transcendental Meditation all recognise Yoga to be essential to their religious philosophies.
These religions and groups stand in direct opposition to ‘the gospel of the grace of God.’
(Acts 20 v. 24).
One quote from ‘Yoga Today’(Vol. 12 No. 4, August 1987) will illustrate how the religious philosophy surrounding Yoga contradicts what the Word of God reveals about God and His relationship to the world and man.
In an article entitled ‘Spirit of the Upanishads’(The Upanishads are of course Hindu holy books) on page 18 we read ‘The Upanishads speak of God…maintaining that such a being is formless, all pervasive and transcendent, OF WHICH THE SOUL OR THE SPIRIT OF MAN IS A PART…
To negate this universal vision and make God a tribal deity is to use religion as a divisive and obscurant force, rather than a uniting and illuminating influence in life, which its Latin root re-ligare (reunite) literally means.
Religion becomes an opiate when it sets apart God from the world and makes him a means of escape from suffering that is a part of life.’
Having read this I was drawn to the words of the Apostle Paul when he wrote ‘But when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.’
(Galatians 4 v.4/5).
Paul posed the question ‘O wretched man that I am!
Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?’and answered it ‘I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.’
(Romans 7 v. 24/25.
Paul ‘determined not to know any thing…save Jesus Christ and him crucified.’(1 Corinthians 2 v. 2).
That was why Paul could affirm concerning Jesus ‘He is our peace.’
(Ephesians 2 v. 14).
Is He your peace?
Should you go to Yoga?
The Word of God says no.
‘Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness but rather reprove them.’
(Ephesians 5 v. 11).
Yoga is ‘unfruitful ’ but for those who have trusted Christ for salvation and received the promised indwelling Holy Spirit (see John 7 v. 39)‘the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, PEACE, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance.’
(Galatians 5 v. 22/23).
‘O taste and see that the Lord is good: Blessed is the man that trusteth in him.’
(Psalm 34 v. 8).
EVOLUTION CREATES LIARS
‘He that believeth not God, hath made Him a liar.’(1 John 5 verse 10).
INTRODUCTION
Having just finished a talk to a class of candidates for the ministry in a major denomination I was ‘verbally assaulted’ by the principal of the theological college concerned who picked up on a brief reference I made to Creation and Evolution and proceeded to state in the strongest possible terms that many true Christians believe in the theory of evolution and reject the biblical account of a literal six day creation as recorded in Genesis.
Somewhat taken aback by this development I tried to explain why I accepted without reservation the account in Genesis to be correct, adding of course that I also accepted that there are genuine brothers and sisters in Christ who are evolutionists.
Graciously the principal did apologise for the ferocity of his attack but that encounter prompted me to produce this leaflet in defence of the Word of God and the integrity of some very important person who are in effect made out to be liars if the theory of evolution is true.
Cecil Andrews
THE WRITER TO THE HEBREWS
In the eleventh chapter of Hebrews, that great chapter which deals with ‘the nature and fruits of faith’ as it is headed in the ‘Thompson Chain Reference’bible, the third verse reads as follows -‘Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.’
An evolutionist CANNOT say ‘Amen’ to this verse.
What an evolutionist believes is totally and completely opposite to what is stated in this verse.
Dr. John Whitcomb, professor of Theology and Old Testament at Grace Theological Seminary in Winona Lake, Indiana, summed it up very well when on page 52 of his book ‘The Early Earth’, he wrote, ‘the testimony of an honest evolutionist could be expressed in terms of Hebrews 11:3 as follows, ‘By faith, I, an evolutionist, understand that the worlds were not framed by the word of any god, so that what is seen has indeed been made out of previously existing and less complex visible things, by purely natural processes through billions of years’.’
THE APOSTLE PAUL
Constantly in his writings, the apostle Paul makes reference to the characters and events portrayed in the account of creation as recorded in Genesis.
On most occasions he refers to them to underscore a particular fundamental truth and if evolution is true and creation is simply a myth then some great biblical truths are built on sinking sand and not on solid rock.
In explaining God's order in relation to authority, headship, etc., Paul wrote in 1 Timothy 2 verse 13,‘For Adam was first formed, then Eve.’
When warning the Church in Corinth to be on their guard against false preachers and false gospels he wrote ‘But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtility, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.’
(2 Cor. 11 verse 3).
Concerning the universality of sin and its consequences, in the fifth chapter of Romans he wrote ‘As by ONE man sin entered into the world and death by sin’(v.12)‘death reigned from ADAM to Moses’(v.14)‘through the offence of ONE many be dead’(v.15)‘by the offence of ONE, judgment came upon all men to condemnation.’(v.18).
Paul clearly taught that ADAM was a real person and that HIS transgression of God's law had consequences for every individual (except for the virgin-born Lord Jesus Christ) born thereafter.
In contrast to the offence of this ONE man Paul then declared what ONE other person, the Lord Jesus Christ had accomplished on behalf of many ‘the grace of God and the gift of grace, which is by ONE man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many’(v.15)‘by the righteousness of ONE the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life…by the obedience of ONE shall many be made righteous.’(v.18/19).
MOSES
For many years there has been an ongoing debate concerning the human author of the first five books of the bible.
I believe the Word of God states clearly that Moses was the author.
The Jewish people regarded what we now have as the Old Testament to be the World of God and acknowledged three categories or divisions:(1) The writings of Moses known as the ’ Pentateuch’(Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy);(2) The Psalms;(3) The Prophets.
On two known occasions the Lord Jesus Christ clearly acknowledged His agreement to the view that Moses wrote the Pentateuch.
In His account of what happened to the rich man and Lazarus after they died (Luke 16 verses 19/31) Jesus quoted the words spoken to the rich man in hell, by Abraham and in verses 29 and 31 we see Abraham referring to Moses and The Prophets and clearly he is speaking specifically of the scriptures attributed to them.
Then in the account of how the risen Lord Jesus Himself drew near and walked with the two disciples on the road to Emmaus (Luke 24 verses 13/31) we read of how He explained from the scriptures that all the events surrounding His crucifixion had been foreshadowed and foretold in the Word of God.
In verse 27 we read ‘And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself.’
That must have been quite a bible lesson.
Later these two disciples themselves also confirmed the authorship of Moses when recounting what had happened to them.
To their fellow disciples they quoted the words of Jesus,‘all things must be fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses and in the Prophets and in the psalms concerning me.’(v.44) The Word of God declares Moses to be the writer of Genesis and if evolution is true than he is guilty of fabricating a pack of lies.
THE APOSTLE PETER
In the third chapter of his second letter, the apostle Peter predicted that a time will come when people will poke fun at the ‘blessed hope’of every true believer, the promised and eagerly awaited personal return of the Lord Jesus Christ.
They will shut their minds to the certain fact that judgment is coming and they will live as though all things will continue without change or interruption.
In the course of his writings Peter refers to two mighty ‘acts of God’ recorded by Moses in the book of Genesis.
In verses 5 and 6 Peter makes direct reference to the flood of judgment which came upon the earth in the days of Noah and at the end of the preceding verse 4 he writes of how the scoffers will say that ‘all things continue as they were from the beginning of the CREATION.’
It would certainly damage the apostle's prophecy of future judgment of the world by God if he were found to be making reference to events which were only myth and legend.
In the first chapter of this second letter the apostle wrote ‘no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation.
For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.’(v. 20/21).
Here the apostle Peter affirms his belief that the scriptures are ‘inspired’ or literally ‘God breathed’and his reference to ‘the creation ’shows that he accepted the Genesis account fully which leaves no room for belief in evolution.
JESUS CHRIST
In the introduction I stated that to the principal of the theological college without reservation the Genesis account of creation.
When speaking to him I made no reference to the writer to the Hebrews, to the apostle Paul, to Moses or to the apostle Peter, but rather I concentrated on what the Lord Jesus Christ had to say on the subject.
During His ministry the Lord Jesus often referred to events recorded in the Old Testament such as the story of Jonah, the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah and like Peter to the flood.
Today many people reject the story of the flood and yet the Lord Jesus Christ made specific reference to it when speaking of His promised return.
(Matthew 24 v. 37).
Again, if like Peter, Jesus was likening conditions on earth at the time of His promised return and judgment to an event which was only myth or legend then the ‘blessed hope ’ would be reduced to ‘no hope’.
The specific reference by Jesus to the flood again confirms that it was a true fact of history as far as He was concerned.
But what of creation?
In my discussions with the principal I made reference to the words of Jesus recorded in Matthew 19 v.4 and Mark 10 v.6.
These words are part of the conversation which Jesus had with the Pharisees on the topic of divorce.
In particular I want to highlight the words recorded by Mark where Jesus said ‘But from the beginning of the CREATION God made them male and female.
I believe this clearly shows that Jesus accepted the account of the creation of the world and Adam and Eve to be fact and not ’ fantasy’.
CONCLUSION
Recent changes in the education curriculum have opened the way for the teaching of evolution to primary school pupils.
It has been encouraging to read of both parents and teachers objecting to this because of their belief in the Word of God.
Jesus who Himself spoke of ‘the creation ’ could also have rightly spoken in terms of‘my creation’for as the apostle Paul wrote ‘by Him were all things CREATED that are in heaven (was there evolution in heaven?)and that are in earth…all things were CREATED by Him and for Him .’
Colossians 1 v. 16.
Purgatory Before Death
‘Come now and let us reason together saith the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.’
(Isaiah 1 verse 18).
INTRODUCTION
Any visitor to Ireland doesn't have to travel very far before realising that this is a land where religion plays a major role in the life of every city, town and village.
Even the poorest of communities have down through the years made great sacrifices to ensure that the ‘House of God’ has been kept neat, tidy and in a good state of repair.
In many instances it is in fact the dominant building in a particular area or location.
This is especially true in the Republic of Ireland where Roman Catholicism would be the largest religious denomination and where the local chapel would be lovingly maintained by the faithful.
It is with sincere people such as these in mind that this leaflet has been written — not to ride roughshod over a sincerely held belief but rather to confirm the absolute necessity of finding Purgatory, but not a Purgatory that is arrived at after death which is the popular view, but rather a Purgatory that is found before death which is the proper view according to God's guide, the Holy Bible.
Cecil Andrews
THE PURPOSE OF PURGATORY
Irrespective of which view a person takes concerning Purgatory, whether it is found in this life before death or is arrived at in the next life after death there is agreement as to the purpose of Purgatory namely that it is a place where cleansing from sin takes place.
The Roman Catholic Catechism drawn up by Dr. James Butler and approved by the 4 Roman Catholic Archbishops of Ireland gives this definition on page 32 —‘Purgatory — a place of cleansing.’
Sin stains our lives and God is repelled by the sight.
The prophet Habbakuk expressed this truth very well when under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit he wrote concerning God ‘Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil and canst not look on iniquity.’
(Habbakuk 1 v. 13).
In the 21st chapter of the book of Revelation the Apostle John describes the future eternal state — the ‘new Jerusalem’(v. 2) and we learn that this ‘new Jerusalem’is in fact ‘a bride adorned for her husband’(v. 2) and more than that it is ‘the Lamb's wife’(v. 9).
This bride is made up of ‘them which are saved’(v. 24) and ‘which are written in the Lamb's book of life’(v. 27).
In verse 27 we also learn this concerning those who will share eternity with Christ ‘there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth neither whatsoever worketh abomination or maketh a lie.’
Quite simply, nothing unclean shall enter heaven or dwell in the presence of God so if we wish to spend eternity with Christ we need to be thoroughly and permanently cleansed from our sins, totally purged and in fact clothed with the righteousness of God.
Is there a Purgatory where this can take place?
This question we shall now examine and answer.
THE POPULAR PURGATORY
When I refer to the ‘Popular Purgatory’ I am referring to the Purgatory which is most widely known — the place referred to in Roman Catholic teaching and which is said to be arrived at after death.
As already stated the purpose of Purgatory is cleansing and what I now want to examine is how the necessary cleansing is effected.
During their lives faithful Roman Catholics are taught that by certain sacraments a person becomes a Christian, obtains ongoing pardon for sins and is prepared for the life hereafter.
However few who die are reckoned fit to enter directly into the presence of God and the vast majority of Roman Catholics expect to go first to Purgatory either on account of dying ‘in venial sin’(Catechism P. 32) or being ‘indebted to God's justice on account of mortal sin.’
(P. 33).
Cleansing in Purgatory is necessary for such people.
Having died they cannot do this themselves, but the Roman Catholic church teaches that the cleansing can be effected by the ‘prayers and…good works’ of those still alive.
(P. 33).
Another aspect of a person's stay in Purgatory is mentioned in relation to question 3 (P. 33) and that is ‘temporary punishment’ in Purgatory.
So the teaching is that cleansing from sin and relief of the temporary punishment of souls in Purgatory is effected by the prayers and good works of the living.
One of the most common ways relatives and friends seek to relive the souls of their loved ones in Purgatory is by paying for masses to be offered on their behalf.
Concerning this practice Loraine Boettner in his book ‘Roman Catholicism’ wrote (P. 223)‘It is due in no small measure to this doctrine of purgatory that the Roman Catholic church has been able to…build magnificent cathedrals…even in regions where the people are poor.’
Later on the same page he makes this challenging statement ‘If any of us actually had the power to release souls from purgatory and refused to exercise that power except in return for a payment of money he would be considered cruel and unchristian — which indeed he would be.’
Can the living, by prayers, payments and good works release the souls of those said to be in ‘The Popular Purgatory?’
I want to answer that by looking at what I call ‘The Proper Purgatory.’
THE PROPER PURGATORY
Often the visible effects of sinful excesses can be seen in the physical bodies of ’’who so indulge themselves.
The Apostle Paul wrote ‘Be not deceived: neither fornicators…nor drunkards shall inherit the kingdom of God.’
(1 Corinthians 6 v. 6).
We live in an age which because of AIDS and cirrhosis of the liver knows full well the dangers of pursuing such life styles.
The cleansing however required for eternity does not relate to our physical dimension but related to the invisible, eternal soul of man which also bears the scars of sin.
The lovely negro spiritual ‘Balm in Gilead’ expresses it very well when it refers to ‘the sin sick soul.’
It is the soul of man which needs to be dealt with to enable him to spend eternity with Christ, clothed in a new incorruptible body as explained by the Apostle Paul in 1st Corinthians 15 verses 35–58.
In the book of Leviticus we learn of sacrifices which priests were to offer on behalf of the nation of Israel and individual Jews as well.
Chapter 17 verse 11 declares ‘it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.’
The ‘blood ’ referred to came of course from the animal which died as a substitute for the repentant Jew and which was sprinkled on his behalf on the altar by the priest.
What does the expression ‘that maketh an atonement’actually mean?
Simply it means to have our sins ‘covered ’ or removed from God's sight and memory.
For over a year David wrestled with a guilty conscience because of his adultery with Bathsheba and other crimes which followed and his anguish and desire to be right with God are recorded in Psalm 51 ‘Have mercy upon me, O God…blot out my transgressions.’(v. 1)‘Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity and cleanse me from my sin.’
(v. 2).
 ‘Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean.’
(v. 7).
Knowing the joy of sins forgiven David subsequently wrote in the Psalm 32,‘Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is COVERED.’
(v. 1).
‘I acknowledged my sin unto thee…and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.’
(v. 5).
Sins which can cause our soul to be lost for ever in hell need to be atoned for, need to be covered.
The sacrifices described in the Old Testament could never effect any such atonement but were instituted by God to point to a coming all-sufficient sacrifice which would fully atone for sin.
In Hebrews chapter 10 verse 4 we read ‘it is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take away sins’(referring to the Old Testament sacrifices) but in verse 12 we read ‘But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God.’
(This refers to the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross).
Is the shed blood of Jesus a sufficient atonement or covering for sins?
The Apostle Paul writing to the believers in Rome said ‘We also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ by whom we have now received the atonement.’
(Romans 5 v. 11).
Their atonement or covering for sin was received DIRECT from Jesus Himself, the One who is ‘the mediator of the new testament’(Hebrews 9 v. 15).
Listen to Jesus as he states exactly what this new testament is.
Lifting the cup of wine which symbolically pointed to His blood which would be shed on the cross He said ‘This is my blood of the new testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins.’
An unbloody sacrifice cannot take away sins for we read ‘without shedding of blood is no remission.’
(Hebrews 9 v. 22).
The sacrifice of Jesus was ‘for ever’and cannot and does not need to be repeated or re-enacted.
The merits of that full and complete sacrifice are brought to men by Jesus Himself for ‘there is one God and one mediator between God and men the man Christ Jesus.’
(1 Timothy 2 v.5).
He is the only priest we need ‘seeing then that we have a great high priest that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God.’
(Hebrews 4 v.14).
We need no other mediator or earthly priest.
Can we trust in the shed blood of Jesus to fully atone for and cover our sins?
The Apostle John wrote ‘the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from ALL sin.’
(1 John 1 v. 7).
Going back go David's desire for forgiveness I want to look again at what he said in verse 7 of Psalm 51 ‘Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean.’
Hyssop was a bush used to sprinkle the blood of the passover lamb slain in Egypt and also the blood using the the cleansing of a ’ leper's’house.
(Exodus 12 and Leviticus 14).
Here the blood provided protection and cleansing.
David realised he couldn't cleanse himself — only God could do it.
It is the same today; neither we nor our friends or loved ones can cleanse us by any means from sin or its due punishment.
Only God Himself can cleanse us.
Has such a cleansing been effected on our behalf?
Look at God's Word concerning Jesus ‘Who…
WHEN HE HAD BY HIMSELF PURGED OUR SINS, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.’
(Hebrews 1 v. 3).
THERE IS THE ‘PROPER PURGATORY.’
At Calvary is found full cleansing for ever through faith alone in the finished work of Christ on the cross.
That is the true gospel ‘I declare unto you the gospel…
Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures.’
(Corinthians 15 v. 1/3).
‘Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ (His work)and thou shalt be saved.’
(Acts 17 v. 31).
Is there cleansing from sin after death?
Listen to the words of Abraham to the rich man who died ‘between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot; neither can they pass to us that would come from thence.’
(Luke 16 v, 26).
Death seals our eternal destiny.
In Revelation 22 verse 11 we read ‘He that is unjust let him be unjust still: and he which is filthy let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous let him be righteous still.’
Are we righteous by believing on the Lord Jesus Christ and His finished work?
Paul wrote ‘the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto ALL and upon ALL them THAT BELIEVE.’
(Romans 3 v. 22).
CONCLUSION
‘Popular Purgatory’ conflicts with The Word of God which teaches that sin must be dealt with in this life.
Concerning those who die in their sins Jesus said ‘Whither I go ye CANNOT come.’
(John 8 v. 21).
Trust Christ alone and testify like Paul ‘the son of God who loved ME and gave himself for ME.’
(Galatians 2 v. 20).
Paul had found the ‘Proper Purgatory’ before death.
Zoo Crack
FREE Special 6-page Edition
Belfast Zoo No.25.
Autumn 1991
Jane Goodall endorses new chimpanzee enclosure
by John Stronge, Zoo Manager
Belfast Zoo was honoured to have a visit in August from Dr Jane Goodall, world-renowned zoologist and tireless campaigner on behalf of chimpanzees in the wild and in captivity.
Dr Goodall, with Mrs Dilys Vass, administrator of the Jane Goodall Institute (UK), toured the zoo with manager John Stronge and then gave her undivided attention to the new chimpanzee enclosure.
Completed in July 1991, it now houses our colony of nine chimpanzees, who have not been on public display for over two years.
Dr Goodall praised the new house and enclosure and in particular said she was impressed by the enthusiasm and commitment of the keepers.
‘I believe of course that ideally chimps should live freely and safely in the wild,’ she said.
‘However, these animals are here and we must look after them and make full use of them to bring the attention of people in Northern Ireland to the plight of thousands of other, much less fortunate, chimpanzees.’
Dr Goodall liked the design and building of the house and enclosure both outside and in.
‘Outside, the chimps have lots of space, grass, shade and the hill is cleverly utilised to provide extra play space.
Inside, where they will spend a lot of time in this northern climate, the zoo has thoughtfully specified sleeping cubicles, scramble nets, climbing ropes and in particular, their log climbing frames.
I have seen many, many enclosures all over the world where design, not animal welfare, has been the primary focus and thousands of dollars have been wasted on making things look pretty.
Here it's obvious that money has been well spent on things that the animals actually need and use, with natural materials — and yet the public still gets a beautiful enclosure with good viewing facilities.’
Dr Goodall gave a sell-out evening lecture to over 150 people in the Ark Restaurant and showed slides of her 31 year long research study in Tanzania's Gombe National park and of her work with the Jane Goodall Institute (UK).
Her talk used observations of individual chimps to illustrate their astonishingly intelligent and inventive behaviour.
The two points which were made most strongly were, firstly, that they are so very much like humans in their reasoning and strategic thinking and secondly, that, to quote Dr Goodall, ‘Only if we understand can we care.
Only if we care will we help.
Only if we help shall they be saved.’
Sales of books and chimp T-shirts afterwards raised almost £1,000 for the Institute and it's hoped to start a Northern Ireland branch.
Meanwhile donations for the Jane Goodall Institute to help less fortunate chimps than ours can be sent to Dilys Vass , who can also supply membership details and further information.
The primate house has been a key stage in the zoo's development and we have been able to plan and equip the house and enclosure to the very highest standards, pooling animal management expertise and design ideas.
It will house a nucleus family of gorillas in its other half and we hope to be able to start a breeding programme and also to collect funds for and publicise the Digit Fund, set up to conserve gorillas in the wild.
It gives the Zoo enormous pleasure to have the seal of approval of a world-class expert on chimpanzees and really justifies all the effort put into the project.
But if you needed any further proof, go up and watch Jill, who's only two years old, discover the fun of swinging on a rope, or one of the adults absorbed in making a stick into a tool.
That's the real benefit of the new chimpanzee enclosure.
Zoo Manager John Stronge with Dr Jane Goodall
Jill, a two year old infant, discovers the joy of swinging on a rope
All about Lizzie
by Alyn Cairns, keeper
I think Lizzie (pictured above right) is my favourite chimp.
She's a ‘free spirit’ and appears to be the second most dominant female in the group.
She was born at Belfast Zoo on August 10, 1972, and was hand-reared by zoo staff.
They must have done a good job and not over ‘humanised’ her because her introduction to the chimp group was problem-free.
Her first daughter, Kim, arrived on September 29, 1983, when Lizzie was eleven years old.
(Chimps in zoos can become mothers as young as eight years old.)
Lizzie proved a very capable and caring mother and Kim is now a fully integrated member of the group — always on the go and with a distinctly extrovert personality.
Robert, Kim's father, has since moved to Paignton Zoo in South Devon, where he is in the company of some more mature females!
Jill (see front page) is Lizzie's second surviving daughter and is now a little over two years old.
I noticed that Lizzie was more ‘laid back’ with her than with her first daughter, lending her out on many occasions to Kim and Annie, females who, as yet, haven't become mothers themselves.
This behaviour is valuable in teaching inexperienced females of the responsibilities of motherhood.
As you see, Jill is an energetic and playful infant.
Her father is Andy, the only adult dominant male in the Belfast group.
He originates from Dublin Zoo and is an example of the cooperation which exists between zoos.
Would this frog ever make the front cover of the NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC?
Actor John Sessions, performing his one-man show Travelling Tales of the Grand Opera House in Belfast, features glamorous and fast-talking South American tree frogs as characters throughout the first act.
He took time out of a busy schedule to come up to the zoo and meet the rather less glamorous, but real, White's Tree Frog.
Water Baby!
We were thrilled in June to have the first live sea-lion pup born and subsequently raised to young adulthood.
Baby sea-lions have been born at Belfast before but have always been born dead or have only survived a few hours.
This pup, probably a female, is strong and healthy and growing fast.
She quickly learned to swim but because of her small size had some initial problems with buoyancy and kept bobbing to the surface like a cork!
Unlike the adults, who are used to seeing people looking at them through the underwater viewing window, the baby couldn't believe her eyes when she saw people under the water and kept going back down to have another look.
Again the design of the sea-lion enclosure has been of great help in the management of these attractive marine mammals.
Because the water is filtered clear and we are the only zoo in the UK to have the underwater viewing facility, it was easy to spot the pregnant female and keep a check on her progress throughout gestation.
Determining the sex of a sea-lion is hard when the sealion is on land, but keepers may be able to get a look at the baby underwater.
Who's New?
by John Stronge, Zoo Manager
As could be expected, spring and early summer at Belfast Zoo saw a whole bout of births.
Many were of species bred before at Belfast, however, one or two were exciting ‘firsts’.
Pride of place must go to the sea-lion group which produced two pups.
Unfortunately one did not survive, but the second, thought to be a female, responded well to her mother Simone's loving care and is now an extremely healthy and lively young sea-lion.
The other two mammal species which bred for the first time were a pair of Geoffroy's marmoset which had one youngster, and the cheetah female, Angie, who produced four cubs.
Unfortunately, as this was her first litter and probably due to inexperience on her part, the cubs did not survive.
As usual, there was a great number of births among the antelope herds with blackbuck, gemsbok and red lechwe especially productive.
The Bennett's and parma wallaby groups also produced a large number of ‘joeys’.
New arrivals included Belfast Zoo's first-ever gorillas, the male KéKé coming from Arnhem and the female Naomi from Edinburgh Zoo.
Two males of the very rare golden-headed lion tamarins arrived to form pairs with females already received from Jersey Zoo.
Not to be outdone by the mammals at the zoo there were several ‘firsts’ among the bird species.
The cattle egrets hatched and reared two chicks and the white-faced tree ducks also two.
Other hatchings of interest were two straw-necked ibis, three scarlet ibis, three rhea and three emu.
Possibly the hatching which caused most interest among some of the keeper staff was of sixteen yellow rat snakes.
These hatched from twenty three eggs and since this first clutch the female has laid a further fifteen which are being artificially incubated at the moment.
The other reptile species which laid eggs was the spur-thighed tortoise; unfortunately, these eggs were infertile.
A young mara finds its feet
Golden-headed lion tamarin
Rolf Harris Art Session
Rolf Harris was the star attraction at the zoo in June.
Sponsored by Denny's, who feature Rolf in their advertising, over 200 children from all over Northern Ireland came along to help Rolf paint a mural, join in a cartoon class and have a short guided tour of the zoo.
The day finished with a delicious barbecue, using Denny's products.
Penguins on PARADE
This year began well for the zoo with the successful hatching of 56 penguin eggs and the successful rearing of these chicks to maturity.
We now have a pool full of gentoo, rockhopper and Magellanic penguins, recently joined by a group of 17 king penguins.
The eggs were collected in the Falkland Islands under licence from the British Antarctic Survey and transported by air to England.
John Stronge, the zoo manager, then collected them and flew them to their incubators in Belfast.
As the chicks hatched, they were moved into an out-building and then, when fully fledged, up to the pool.
They had to be kept out of the water until they had lost their baby down and grown waterproof adult oily feathers.
The king penguins, biggest in size and slowest to mature, moved into the crèche area (off limits to visitors, but just behind the main penguin pool) until they, too, had fledged, and they were put on public display during the summer.
The feeding of these chicks was extremely time-consuming and fairly unpleasant.
Almost every member of staff, including people who normally spend all day in the office, was involved in cutting raw squid and fish into slivers for the babies and at feeding time, every 4 hours day and night, each little bill had to be opened and the food introduced down the throat in the way the mother bird would have fed the chick.
However, the hard work paid off and all the staff can now feel proud of these thriving and beautiful birds.
In particular, we must note the generous and imaginative sponsorship of the group of king penguins by McVitie's Biscuits.
Kings appear in the highly successful Penguin biscuit commercials and McVitie's have kindly offered to ‘p-p-pick up’ the tab for the group for 2 years.
There are eighteen species of penguin worldwide, all confined to the southern hemisphere.
All penguins are flightless but are perfectly adapted to life in water and to withstanding cold.
They ‘fly’ underwater at high speeds, hunting fish, squid and shellfish.
Of the four species of penguin kept at Belfast Zoo, the adult king towers above the rest at about a metre.
Victor Martin, zoo management assistant, is pictured here hard at work being a surrogate parent to a hungry young king penguin.
The clearly visible wing bands enable individual birds to be identified and detailed records of their growth to be kept.
The babies' dense woolly down is essential in their native Antarctica as they huddle together in freezing temperatures and howling winds.
In addition to raw fish and squid, the baby penguins were fed a special ‘Belfast Zoo’ supplement containing minerals and vitamins.
The formula was clearly a successful one as proved by the high survival rate and healthy condition of all four penguin species.
Egg and Pickle Sandwiches
A short story with a point, by Margaret Wilson, keeper
‘Oooh!’ groaned Sam, the Spectacled Bear, ‘I feel terrible!’
‘What's wrong, Sam?’ said Omero, the younger bear, ‘you've kept me awake all night with your moaning.’
‘It's my tummy,’ said Sam, ‘It hurts like mad.’
Omero left the den and went outside to find Minky, who was out exercising in the morning air.
Minky can be grumpy first thing in the morning, but she looked crosser than usual.
‘Sam is sick,’ said Omero.
‘Tell me about it!’ snapped Minky.
‘Serves him right for pigging out on egg and pickle sandwiches!’
‘Where on earth did he get egg and pickle sandwiches?’ asked Omero.
‘The keeper never gives us anything like that — she only gives us what's good for us!’
‘Don't you remember those visitors throwing food over the wall yesterday?’ replied Minky.
‘There are signs saying not to feed us, but they always think they know better.
Then a weak-willed greedy bear like Sam has to suffer.’
Omero knew exactly what she meant as he had broken a tooth as a result of eating rock given to him by visitors at Easter, and sometimes it really hurts.
When the keeper came up to check on the Spectacled Bears, she couldn't understand that Omero and Minky were trying to tell her that Sam was ill, she just saw that he was curled up in a ball and wouldn't move.
She got very worried when he couldn't even lift his head.
She radioed down to her senior keeper who called the vet.
The vet arrived very quickly and prescribed some tablets.
Both the vet and the keeper came to the same conclusion — that Sam had eaten something that didn't agree with him, as he hadn't eaten much of his food from the day before.
The keeper had problems coaxing Sam to take the tablets as he didn't want to eat anything.
Eventually she managed to give him his tablet in a nice, juicy pear.
The next day Sam was back on his feet, looking and feeling much better.
Omero and Minky hoped he had learnt his lesson not to accept food thrown to him by visitors.
I think if they could talk they would ask visitors not to throw food into their enclosure.
So, on behalf of Sam, Omero, Minky and all the other animals — please obey the signs and do not feed .
Photography Competition 1991
Entries in this year's competition,(closing date October 26) are due to be judged at the beginning of November.
Generous cash prizes from the Northern Bank will be awarded to winners in four categories at a special presentation ceremony.
All the entries can then be perused at leisure in a popular year-long exhibition in the foyer of the Ark Restaurant.
Many beautiful animal portraits have been submitted over the months of the competition, but it usually takes that special ‘something’ to create the magic of a prize-winning photograph — perhaps a bird captured in mid-flight, or the moment of sheer wonder on a child's face as it encounters one of the several animal species now allowed to roam freely in the zoo grounds.
Entrants are also reminded of the great potential in the colours and forms of the zoo's plants and landscaping.
There are some stunning views and unique vantage points just crying out to be exploited by the imaginative photographer.
The Zoo's own photographer managed to come face to face with this somewhat disrespectful giraffe, and yes, he was in an area available to the general public — albeit in a slightly acrobatic pose!
Children's Page — BELFAST REACHES OUT
As you can see, the Zoo has hosted a number of exciting events designed to widen people's interest in its work.
The zoo can bring something new to almost every activity under the sun.
MULTI COLOURED ROAD SHOW
In May, the Multi-Coloured Roadshow hit the road on its way to Avoniel and Andersonstown Leisure Centres.
The theme was ‘Light and Colour’ with the Ulster Museum Science Bus providing fascinating experiments and equipment to demonstrate the properties of light — including the ‘Laser Amazer’and ‘Plasma Dome’(see right).
The zoo provided a variety of animals ranging from chameleons to fire salamanders to show how animals use colour in nature for camouflage, warning and display.
Dr Sally Montgomery of the Ulster Museum explains the principle of the plasma dome to two boys visiting the science bus at Andersonstown Leisure Centre.
CONSERVATION DAY
In July, the zoo held its first-ever Conservation Day.
Conservation and animal welfare organisations had stands in a marquee in the zoo grounds and admission prices were specially reduced for the day.
The Zoolympics were run for children, and there were quizzes, trails and exhibitions.
The highlights of the afternoon were ‘Elephants’ Toenails’and ‘Water Babies’.
The first event took place in the elephant house, where keeper Tommy Swindell went through Tina and Lena's health and hygiene routines — including checking and cleaning their teeth and toenails and veterinary procedures.
Education officer Kathleen Mannis explained what Tommy was doing and why.
‘Water Babies’ featured Linda Frew and June Milligan feeding our sea-lions, and starred the new baby sea-lion; and then moved on to the young penguins next door.
Again, Kathleen talked to the visitors about our penguins, how they were hatched and hand-reared here and about their award-winning enclosure.
The editor will consider any original contributions, whether written, drawn or photographic.
Drawings should be in a bold, clear line for easy reproduction.
BAGLADY BY FRANK MCGUINNESS
What the critics say:
There is no escape from the Baglady's ghastly tale of a ruined life until she has released herself by at last telling her story.
Such raw, and frightening theatre is rare, as difficult for the audience to react to as an outstretched hand from a drunken vagrant…
It was an extraordinary, unnerving and unforgettable evening.
Charles Hutchinson York and County Press
The production is cleverly controlled by Gerardine McDermottroe's understated direction, and the tone and pace of the 40 minute monologue are skilfully animated to prevent it ever becoming tedious…the poetic torrent of Frank McGuinness' text comes to life with a terrifying and portentous symbolism for a rivetting piece of drama.
Clare Bayley City Limits
It is a short piece with an immense emotional impact.
It has already firmly lodged itself, like some haunting vision, in my mind.
Malcolm Hay Time Out
Learn To Drive Off The Public Roads
Antrim Borough Council is setting its one mile motor racing circuit at Nutt's Corner aside for Learner Drivers to practice in a safe and controlled environment off the public roads.
The track will be signposted, with specific areas for reversing, emergency stops, turning right, gentle hill start, reverse parking and three point turns.
No advance booking is necessary — just turn up with your licence, a passenger over 21 years of age who has held a full driving licence for at least 3 years and the fee of only £2 (motorcycles £1) per hour.
The Motor Sports Centre is signposted from the Nutt's Corner roundabout, with access from the Dundrod Road.
For further information, telephone Antrim Borough Council, Leisure and Tourism Department 
‘UNMISSABLE REALLY…
BOBBY WATSON, VICTOR LEWIS & HORIZON
Bobby Watson and Victor Lewis have been at the centre of the remarkable revival of hard bop on the world jazz stage in recent years.
Other musicians may have enjoyed greater financial reward playing this music, but nobody has done it better or with greater flexibility.
The saxophonist is an outstanding musician, and spices up his favoured bop register with exotic touches drawn from swing through to free jazz.
Lewis is high on the list of great contemporary drummers, blending impeccable timing and furious swing with immaculate taste.
The co-leaders receive excellent support from trumpeter Terell Stafford, pianist Ed Simon and bass player Essiet Essiet, who make up one of the most consistently brilliant — but still under-valued — bands on the jazz scene.
BILL FRISELL BAND
‘The world's most interesting guitarist’— Bill Frisell has played for everybody from Paul Bley to Marianne Faithfull.
He deserves his reputation for radicalism — he has the softness of a cerebral bop guitarist like Jim Hall but coupled with the sudden fire of Jimmy Hendrix.
The all-American band consists of Bill Frisell (guitar), Wayne Horowitz (keyboards, bass) and Joey Barron (drums).
BIRDS OF A FEATHER…
SHEILA JORDAN — one of the best kept secrets in jazz, sings without a net.
She's got everything — superb musicianship; a unique sound; a sensitive, deeply emotional approach to lyrics; boundless, fearless creativity.
Charlie Parker (her original inspiration) said she had ‘million dollar ears’ and Jordan uses her voice much as Bird played sax — improvising on the melody with exquisite tonal shadings.
9 times winner of Downbeat Magazine's Poll ‘Talent deserving Wider Recognition’, Selia Jordan joins Claudio Roditi and The Bill Mays Trio at 
BARBARA DENNERLEIN , the Austrian Hammond organist, is another ‘Bird lover’ and 1990 winner of the Downbeat Poll, Category ‘Talent deserving Wider Recognition’.
Organ jazz has long been club-trendy, but it has taken until now for a new artist to come through to match the likes of Jimmy Smith and John Patton.
The New York Times called her ‘an absolutely effortless musician’.
Nothing barring a major disaster can prevent her from becoming a main attraction — Barbara Dennerlein is a star in the ascendant.
PONDEROSA!
The Highest Pub.
Perched a few feet from the top of the 1,000ft Glenshane Pass is one of N. Ireland's most famous pubs, and probably also ’ its’highest,The Ponderosa .
At 1,000ft as you can imagine, the Ponderosa has to be pretty self-sufficient.
It has ’ its’own turf bank for fuel, generates ’its’own electricity, and the water supply comes from a spring well.
However, there is no truth in the story you may have heard that the Ponderosa also distils ’ its’own Poteen , so if your drink seems somehow stronger, it's probably due to the thin air at that altitude!
Going back perhaps 200 years the Ponderosa was a little farmhouse nestling in a redoubt at the highest point on the mountain road between Belfast and ‘Derry.
Nowadays a modern road crosses the Glenshane Pass, and a forest has been planted across from the pub, but the tradition of hospitality begun in the little farmhouse continues to this day.
Over the years the Ponderosa has had some interesting and amusing yarns to tell.
Now they are recounted in Tales from the Ponderosa , an occasional series of stories and anecdotes about the pub, its characters, and the locale down the years.
You can pick up a complimentary copy when you call for a meal or a drink.
Up at the Ponderosa one of the more colourful local characters is Nial the Blackneed , a 10th century King of Ireland, who is on nearby Slachtneill Carn .
Though to be honest he hasn't called this past thousand years.
Perhaps he got tired always getting his knees black on the way home from the pub!
The Ponderosa is featured in several books, including the award winning novel Harry's Game by Gerald Seymour.
If you're from abroad and have never tasted an Irish Hot Half'un , why don't you take the advice of the characters in Mr Seymour's book and sample one there.
For the many foreign visitors who call at the Ponderosa each year it is often their first visit to an Irish pub, for local people it's a chance to meet old friends, and make new ones.
Lots of well known people have called at this famous pub, and signed the visitor's book.
Ask to see the book, sign it yourself, and if you're rich, famous, or both, don't be afraid to say so!
This unique pub is just 45 minutes from Belfast via the M2.
Call any day of the week, you'll find some of the most beautiful scenery in N. Ireland together with an excellent choice of food and refreshments, and of course, a warm welcome.
Tales from the Ponderosa.
The Link Box.
As you motored across the Glenshane Pass, were you irritated because you ’ got’stuck behind a slow-moving tractor?
Then perhaps you had time to notice a large, rectangular, open topped metal box connected to the rear of the tractor.
That's a Link Box .
A link box can be adjusted hydraulically from the tractor cab, and has a multitude of uses about the farm; carrying bales of hay, bags of fertiliser, manure, and even sheepdogs.
A few summers ago, when the local people were cutting their turf banks in Glenshane, tractors with link boxes were much in evidence.
So too were coaches and cars full of foreign tourists.
One such car with four Frenchmen called at the Ponderosa.
They were a jolly bunch of chaps, eager to make friends with the locals, learn about the mysteries of turf cutting, and of course sample our local beverages.
They even commented favourably on the quality of the water from the spring well at the Ponderosa.
Refreshed, they bade us all adieu , and sped off in their big car.
Not more than half an hour had passed when a little grey tractor chugged into the car park.
Sitting in the link box behind the tractor, and very much enjoying the experience, were our four Frenchmen!
Apparently the climb to the top of the Glenshane Pass had put paid to their radiator.
A local farmer, with bags of dried turf in his link box had stopped, and carried them and his bags of turf, in the link box back to the Ponderosa.
Having obtained a supply of Ponderosa spring water, and with a final round of handshaking and kissing of cheeks,(the local lads weren't so keen on the latter, but the girls didn't mind a bit), the Frenchmen finally took their leave.
In the pub that evening the hero of the hour was asked what his French friends had said.
He admitted modestly that it was a long time since he had been at school, but one phrase he had understood was ‘Vive la link box!’.
So be patient with the driver of that slow little tractor if you meet him again, perhaps he might be the Good Samaritan who stops to help you some day.
Tales From the Ponderosa Is an occasional series published in Northern Ireland by the famous pub on top of the Glenshane Pass.
Look out for further tales, available free at the Ponderosa.
MAHON'S HOTEL
Christmas Menu
Christmas Lunch Menu £6.95
Florida Cocktail
Egg Mayonnaise
Fresh Vegetable Broth Roll & Butter
Roast Stuffed Turkey
Boiled Ulster Ham
Roast and Creamed Potatoes
Carrots and Parsnips
’ Brussels’Sprouts
Christmas Pudding and Brandy Sauce
Fresh Fruit Salad
Pear Vin Rouge
Tea/Coffee
Mince Pies
Christmas Fare Menu
Available on request £8.95
Christmas Party Nights
Thursday 19th December
Music by the Secrets (incl Meal) £9.95
Friday 20th & Saturday 21st December
’ Ireland's’top Entertainer:
DOMINIC KIRWAN
£13.50 (incl Meal)
Party Night Menu
Melon Gondola
Fresh Vegetable Soup Roll & Butter
Chilled Fruit Juice
Roast Stuffed Fermanagh Turkey & Ulster Ham
Prime Roast Sirloin of Beef & Chasseur Sauce
Fresh Salmon Mayonnaise
Selection Fresh Vegetables
Roast, Creamed & French Fried Potatoes
Christmas Pudding & Brandy Sauce
Fresh Fruit Salad Au Kirsch
Fruit Pavlova
Tea/Coffee & Mince Pies
(Glass of Punch on Arrival)
BOOK EARLY TO AVOID DISAPPOINTMENT
Other Entertainment for the Festive Season at: Mahon's Hotel
Friday 13th December: Back by popular demand 
Friday 20th and Saturday 21st December
Sunday 22nd December: CHRISTMAS DRAW NIGHT
Music by: THOMAS MAGUIRE
Friday 27th December: Direct from WOGAN
Sunday 29th December: Pop night with the outrageous ROCK STEWART
Tuesday 31st December: Giant New ’ Year's’Eve Party
Various Local Artists
Have a Cracker of a Christmas at MAHON'S
THE PLACE TO BE SEEN
CHARABANC THEATRE COMPANY Autumn Tour 1991
IRISH PREMIERE
BONDAGERS
By Sue Glover
Directed by Maureen White
Designed by Liz Cullinane
Winner of 1990 LWT Plays On Stage Award
Richly atmospheric, ‘Bondagers’ is set against the sprawling landscape of the 1860's borders farms in Scotland.
It combines original music and dance in a spirited evocation of the women bondagers who worked vast agricultural lands.
A bondager was hired annually by a male farm worker or ‘hind’ who in turn was hired by the farmer.
Bondagers were paid half a man's rate for the same work.
The play follows six women as they laugh and work, flirt and fight their way through a long hard year on the farm.
When the hinds and farmers begin to demand reform of the bondager system, the insecurity of the bondagers' lives is brought into sharp focus.
Charabanc Theatre Company are grateful to receive funding from the Arts Council of N.I.
and sponsorship from Ken McGaffin Marketing and Public Relations.
Charabanc is also grateful for support under the Physical and Social Environment Sub-Programme of the European Regional Development Fund.
THE BUTTERMARKET
Enniskillen Craft & Design Centre
Built around 1835, The Buttermarket was the focus for the buying and selling of local dairy produce.
Situated in the historic ‘Boston’ area of Enniskillen,(nearby is the Boston-Quay from where in the 19th century paupers were ferried across the river to the workhouse) the recently restored and refurbished buildings have been brought back to life as a thriving market place and exciting resource centre for craft and design in Fermanagh.
Street Theatre
Craft Exhibitions
Community Arts
Traditional Music
Dance and Drama
Craft Fairs
Country Fairs
Hi-Tech Demonstrations
Cultural Programmes
Graphic Design
Buskers
Jazz Bands
Craft Demonstrations
THIS PROJECT IS MANAGED BY FERMANAGH ENTERPRISE LTD.
CRAFT WORKSHOPS:
Come and see a range of crafts being hand produced in our craft workshops.
Crafts on display include ceramics, fly-tying, jewellery making, textile design, etc.
Visitors are welcomed to the studios.
BOSTON QUAY CRAFT SHOP:
The Buttermarket craft shop carries a range of the best craftwork and design produced in Fermanagh.
Somewhere to treat yourself or buy that special gift.
REBECCA'S PLACE:
our Coffee Shop.
Relax and enjoy the taste of traditional fare in the welcoming atmosphere of Boston Quay Coffee Shop (Group bookings available, phone for details.)
WESTPHALIAN ROOM:
Our Westphalian Room, named after the region in Germany with which we are twinned, can offer facilities for small community art exhibitions.
CRAFT EXHIBITIONS:
Exhibitions including local craftwork will be on display in the exhibition area.
Enjoy the lively atmosphere of a variety of craft fares and street entertainment which will be held throughout the season.
STAR ROOM:
New technology to support traditional craft.
(E.C.
funded-special Telecommunications Action for Rural Development.)
Fermanagh District Council are currently establishing a ‘STAR’ demonstration room in the craft and design centre.
Open to all the room houses and shows the latest applications of advanced telecommunications and information technology.
THE BUTTERMARKET IS A FERMANAGH DISTRICT COUNCIL PROJECT ASSISTED BY THE EUROPEAN REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT FUND
RIVERSIDE THEATRE
University of Ulster at Coleraine
PROGRAMME OCTOBER to DECEMBER 1991
Diary of Events at a Glance
SEE INSIDE FOR DETAILS OF DATES & TIMES
Thanks to Our Sponsors
Borderline Theatre presents CASANOVA The True Confessions of a Cabalist (and other lies) by David Kane
David Kane's witty and incisive play evokes the decadent sensuality of the period.
The play skims across the surface of high and low society in the ’ Capitals’of Europe at a breathtaking pace.
Venice, Paris, Prague in 1758 provided the backdrop for ’ Casanova's’personal journey into the political and sexual customs of society ’whose’glittering external beauty, held all the charm of the Venus Fly-Trap.
Casanova seduces, tricks, and bounds from one bed to another, from one betrayal to the final betrayal, his own.
A living paradox, he was many things.
A man of letters, a man of love and a man of lies.
A comedy which will set pulses racing.
Field Day Theatre Company presents THE MADAME MacADAM TRAVELLING THEATRE by Thomas Kilroy
Europe resounds to the noises of World War II.
Rationing is in place.
People live from day to day in a world full of uncertainties.
However, for one rural Irish town, the war is about to become the supporting act because Madam macAdam has arrived and she and her troupe of travelling players are stuck without a drop of petrol to be had.
This hugely entertaining, funny play recalls the glorious days of the fit-up companies, touring the country with everything from Shakespeare to melodrama.
The play tells several stories, such as young love, but most of all it tells of the magnificent Madame MacAdam and her troupe and of the comic and tragic effects they have upon an isolated community.
Voices-Go-Round presents NO COWARD SOUL IS MINE
Commissioned by the National Trust ‘No Coward Soul is Mine’ is a tribute to Emily, Anne and Charlotte Brontë.
Bringing together the world of books and music, it includes extracts from their own writings, contemporary anecdotes and impressions and songs by composers such as Handel, Haydn, Mozart and Mendelssohn, as well as two from Anne's Song Book.
The readings are given by Vanessa Rosenthal who has worked extensively in theatre, television and film.
Virginia Rushton the soprano will be accompanied on piano by Elizabeth Bicker who, is well known throughout Ireland and has performed widely in the U.K. including in Sir Harry Secombe's ‘Highway’ programme.
Big Telly Theatre Company presents CUT AND DRIED by Jane Thornton
Following Big Telly's sell out tour with John Godber's comedy ‘Teachers’ last year, Flowerfield Arts Centre is delighted to have its resident theatre company open its Annual Arts Festival with another riotous comedy.
This festival promises to be the most exciting yet and full details may be obtained by telephoning Flowerfield Arts Festival Centre on (026583) 3959.
‘Cut and Dried’ is set in a local hairdressing salon which is losing money fast.
Bankruptcy looms, the next snip could be the last and the owners are desperate for custom.
Meanwhile, the young stylist must find her long lost sister before her wedding on Saturday and time is running out.
Add to that a groom in a broom cupboard with the bridesmaid and a case of mistaken identities.
The result is farce at its finest.
Charabanc Theatre Company presents BONDAGERS by Sue Glover
In the desolate landscape of East Lothian and the border farms of the 1860s six women laugh, work, flirt and fight their way through a long hard year of farmwork.
They are bondagers, women hired by a male farm worker or ‘hind’ who has to provide a woman to work with him before he will be hired by a farmer.
Doing the same work as the ‘hind’ they are paid only half his rate.
However, their positions are threatened and the impermanence and insecurity of their lives suddenly revealed when the ‘hinds’ and farmers begin to demand reform of the bondager system.
This funny and moving new play was the winner of the 1990 London Weekend Television plays on stage award.
EVENTS FROM THE JAPAN FESTIVAL
Throughout the U.K. this autumn Japanese culture and traditions are celebrated in a unique festival of events.
A number of Japanese performances as part of the Japan Festival will take place in the Riverside Theatre, including the Kosh Dance Company.
This will provide an unprecedented opportunity for many to experience at first hand the richness and diversity of Japanese culture.
All events for this week have not been finalised.
Please watch the local press for details nearer the time.
Martin McEvoy Productions present RICHARD BAKER'S GRAND TOUR TO MELODY
Richard Baker is the ‘Cook's guide’ on this tour of European operetta.
Melody is the key word and the tour demonstrates how, in the cities of Paris, Berlin, Vienna and London, the music of Offenbach, Strauss, Lehar, Ivor Novello and Lionel Monkton poured forth.
Audiences will feel compelled to hum along to the popular old tunes such as‘Die Fledermaus’.
This fully staged and costumed production is directed by Tom Hawkes and stars soloists who regularly broadcast on Radio 2 and appear with the national opera companies.
As well as acting as presenter of the various scenes Richard Baker displays his talent as a pianist, singer, and even for one moment as a dancer!
Theatre Ulster presents IS THE PRIEST AT HOME by Joseph Tomelty
All of life's rich fabric is here in Joseph Tomelty's look at life in a rural village in Ireland.
When the new Parish Priest arrives to take up his post he is very quickly introduced to the petty jealousies and gossip mongering of village life.
The play is peopled with a wealth of characters whose problems, prejudices, attitudes and activities allow a gentle, good humoured look at the Catholic Church's views on issues such as sex, nationalism, obedience and freedom.
‘Is the Priest at Home’ was Tomelty's most popular play, attracting capacity audiences for months after its opening.
This production by Theatre Ulster celebrates his eightieth year.
NT ROYAL NATIONAL THEATRE presents BLOOD WEDDING by Federico Garcia Lorca in a version by Grace Nichols
A passionate tale of love, hate, revenge and death, ‘Blood Wedding’ tells the story of a young bride who elopes with her lover on the morning of her marriage to her childhood sweetheart, and of the tragic consequences of their action.
Adapted by poet Grace Nichols, this production transposes the setting from pre-‘Fascist’Spain to pre-revolutionary Cuba, where the essence of the original shines through, as intense and as vibrant as the heat and colours of the ‘land of sun and shadow’.
The Belfast Youth Company Theatre presents LYSISTRATA
Following their very successful production of Büchner's ‘Woyzeck’ last summer the Belfast Youth and Community Theatre present ‘Lysistrata’, Aristophane's reg=’Aristophanes'’famous comedy in a new adaptation by John McClelland.
The plot concerns a strategy conceived and agreed by the women of the world to end all wars.
Their ultimatum to the men is simple: no peace, no sex.
What follows is a fantastic, heady cocktail of feminism,’ bawdy’humour, song, dance and satire.
THE ALEXANDER BROTHERS
After almost thirty years in show business the Alexander Brothers are as popular as ever.
They consider Northern Ireland to be their second home and visit it as often as possible.
Be prepared for a nostalgic evening's music featuring many of the old favourites such as, ‘Nobody's Child’ and ‘Roamin' in the Gloamin'.’
Pendle Productions present JAMES and THE GIANT PEACH
A Musical by Herbert Chappell
This delightful musical adaptation of ‘James and the Giant Peach’ will have feet tapping from the second the curtain rises.
Children will be spellbound by the adventures of James.
Imaging their amazement as the single peach on the tree grows to enormous proportions and James climbs aboard for the journey of a lifetime.
They will be fascinated at the incredible insects that he meets inside the Peach as it floats away over the ocean and delighted when the seagulls come to the rescue and James and the insects inside the Peach are carried away towards America for a hero's reception.
In this production which is guaranteed to entertain any audience from five to ninety five, all the music is live, played by the creatures that James meets on his journey into the Peach.
HOW TO BOOK
Cashier's Office
Personal and telephone bookings can be made at the Cashier's Office, University of Ulster, Coleraine during the following hours  The Cashier's Office also accepts postal bookings.
Coleraine Tourist Information Centre
Personal bookings can also be made at the Coleraine Tourist Information Centre, Railway Road, during the following hours: It is not possible for the Tourist Information Centre to accept postal, telephone or credit card bookings.
Riverside Theatre
Personal and telephone bookings can be made in the Riverside Theatre on performance evenings only between 5.30 p.m. –8 p.m.
Credit Card Bookings
We welcome bookings made with Access and Visa.
Telephone 51388 during box office hours in the Cashier's Office and Theatre.
To avoid queues at the Theatre box office patrons wishing to pay by credit card must do so 24 hours in advance of the performance .
24 Hour Answering Service
Should you be unable to make a booking during the above times please take advantage of the 24 hour telephone answering service.
Tel. (0265) 51388 and leave your name, booking details and telephone number on the answering machine.
Your booking will be attended to when staff return.
Concessions
There are concessions for party bookings and school groups and for senior citizens, students and unemployed.
Disabled Patrons
We welcome disabled patrons.
For your convenience please let us know your requirements in advance.
DID YOU KNOW?
Riverside Theatre Club
As a member of the Riverside Theatre Club you will receive concessions on selected shows throughout the year.
The club holds regular social functions including wine and cheese parties and receptions for visiting companies which give members an opportunity to meet the actors and actresses.
Club members can provide help with Front of House, Bar and Foyer duties in return for which they receive a free ticket to the show.
Free Mailing List
Avoid the possibility of missing a show which you would like to have seen.
You can receive information about all of the show in the Riverside Theatre by simply giving your full name and address to the Box Office staff and asking to be added to our mailing list.
There is no charge for this service.
Wardrobe Hire Facilities
The Riverside Theatre wardrobe contains a large selection of costumes which are available for hire.
The Theatre Club organizes the costume hire scheme and appointments can be made by telephoning (0265) 44141 Ext. 4459.
Foyer Services
The Riverside has a licensed bar, the ‘Old Bushmills Bar’ which opens half an hour before and after, as well as during each performance.
Bar staff will be pleased to accept orders for interval drinks in advance to avoid queues.
Coffee is available during intervals.
A wide range of confectionery and ice-cream is sold from the Riverside Theatre Shop before the show and during the interval.
SMOKIE JOES
Christmas Menus available from November 18th by prior booking only!
Christmas Lunch
STARTER
Vegetable Broth served with Bread Roll
CHOICE OF MAIN MENU
Traditional Roast Turkey with Baked Ham, Herb Stuffing and Cranberry Sauce served with Boiled and Roast Potatoes, Brussels Sprouts and Carrots
Sliced Roast Loin of Pork with Sage Stuffing and Baked Spiced Apple served with Boiled and Roast Potatoes, Brussels Sprouts and Carrots.
SWEETS
Traditional Christmas Pudding with Cream and Brandy Sauce 
Christmas Dinner
Christmas Fruit Cocktail laced with Liqueur
Vegetable Broth served with Crusty Bread
CHOICE OF MAIN COURSE
Traditional Roast Turkey with Baked Ham Herb Stuffing and Cranberry Sauce
Sliced Sirloin of Beef served with Horseradish Sauce
Sliced Roast Loin of Pork with Sage Stuffing and Baked Spiced Apple
All served with Fresh Brussels Sprouts, Carrots, Creamed and Roast Potatoes
CHOICE OF DESSERTS
Traditional Christmas Pudding with Cream and Brandy Sauce
Chocolate and Grand ’ Marnier’Mousse
Bookings can only be accepted on the payment of a non refundable non transferrable deposit of £5 per person.
Only one total bill will be prepared for any party booking.
Christmas Dinner will be served in 3 evening sittings at 6.00 p.m., 8.45 p.m. and 11.00 p.m.
Diners are requested to vacate their tables by 8.15 p.m. and 10.45 p.m. respectively.
Larger parties of up to 100 persons will be considered for the 11.00 p.m. sitting.
Christmas Lunch will be served Monday to Friday 12.00 noon to 3.00 p.m.
There will be two sittings for Christmas Lunch — the first at 12.15 p.m. and the second at 2.45 p.m.
You are requested to vacate your tables by 2.00 p.m. and 5.00 p.m. respectively.
The maximum number of any party is 35.
We will endeavour to seat parties at adjacent tables, however in this busy Christmas period this cannot be guaranteed.
You should not arrive early as we are most unlikely to have waiting space available in the lounge area.
If any of your party is late arriving we will be unable to alter your vacation time from your tables as we will have other parties arriving for later sittings.
(Unless of course, you are booked for the last sitting!)
ARTS EVENTS ACROSS THE CAMPUSES
University of Ulster Cultural Affairs Committee
EXHIBITIONS
RECITALS
SPECIAL EVENTS
CONCERTS
October 1991–January 1992
BELFAST COLERAINE JORDANSTOWN MAGEE COLLEGE
Arts Diary
MUSIC PRESENTATIONS
[All events commence promptly at 8.00 pm unless otherwise stated]
SPONSORED BY CALOR GAS NORTHERN IRELAND LTD.
PROMOTED BY LONDONDERRY ARTS ASSOCIATION 
AUTUMN SERENADE
A varied and interesting concert by senior students of the University's Music Dept.
Full details will be available in the local press.
A CHORAL AND ORCHESTRAL CONCERT
with the combined Studio and University of Ulster Symphony Orchestras  
[Please note time change]
THE CHRISTMAS STORY
Music and Readings for The Festive Season with the choir of the University of Ulster conducted by Desmond Hunter 
Admission Free 
LUNCHTIME CONCERTS
A regular series of free Lunchtime concerts is held each Tuesday during Term Time in the Music Dept  For details, please telephone the Music Dept. on 
MUSIC IN MAGEE — SUBSCRIPTION SERIES
Londonderry Arts Association will be presenting a Ten Concert Subscription Series during the current academic year.
For full details, please telephone Mrs Fidelis Doran on 0504 351362.
It is possible to purchase greatly discounted tickets for Magee Music events in this way.
VISUAL ARTS EXHIBITIONS
The Riverside Theatre Foyer Gallery on the Coleraine Campus and the Foyer Gallery in the Faculty of Art and Design's Belfast Campus promote regular monthly exhibitions, on view daily to the public during office hours, except weekends.
For details, please telephone 
General Information
HOW TO OBTAIN TICKETS
For any events detailed on this brochure, contact:
REGIONAL BOOKING AGENTS
For Ulster Orchestra Concerts in the Coleraine Campus, tickets can also be obtained from 
Please check opening times locally as they are subject to variance.
FURTHER INFORMATION
For general enquiries regarding arts events promoted by the University of Ulster, or for further information about any of the events contained in this leaflet, please contact JEREMY LEWIS, the University's Arts Administrator on Coleraine 44141.
Information contained in this brochure is correct at the time of going to press.
SUPPORT FOR YOUNG PEOPLE STARTING IN BUSINESS
If you are a young person and need help to start your own business, this leaflet will help you decide which of the Youth organisations best suits your needs.
It contains a summary of the advice, support and financial assistance which Livewire, the Prince's Youth Business Trust and the Youth Enterprise Scheme offers young people.
LIVEWIRE
YOUNG IDEAS AT WORK
Livewire helps young people aged 16–25 who want to set up in business.
Livewire offers help by giving free advice to young entrepreneurs.
Advice on the following:
Should you start a business/project?
How you should sell your product/service.
What type of company/co-operative you should form.
How you can raise money.
Which grants are available to you.
Where you could find premises.
Where you can find other help and advice.
Advisers will help you explore how realistic your idea is and guide you through the steps to getting started successfully.
In addition, Livewire organises and promotes annual award schemes which offer attractive cash awards and prestigious media coverage to the best new and existing enterprises throughout N. Ireland.
The top youth enterprise in N. Ireland will have the opportunity to compete at U.K. level.
For further information contact the local Livewire Co-ordinator in your area:
The Prince's Youth Business Trust
Prince's Youth Business Trust is particularly concerned with helping young unemployed people, between the ages of 18 and 25, who are disadvantaged whether for social, economic, environmental or physical reasons.
Prince's Youth Business Trust awards grants up to £1,500 although more may be available if more than one person is involved.
The grant can be used to purchase any items other than stock or materials.
Applicants are attached to a voluntary business advisor in their own area who will assist them with their initial business plan.
On completion of the business plan the regional co-ordinator will visit them to discuss the final application.
Advice and support is provided on an ongoing basis by each business advisor who monitors the progress of the business and helps with any problems which may arise.
For further information contact:
YES
Youth Enterprise Scheme helps young people aged 25 and under who wish to start up a business or who have been in business and now wish to expand.
They will help any type of business provided it is legal and moral!
The Scheme gives ‘Soft Loans’ up to £5,000 for 3 years with easy repayment terms.
Applicants will meet a Youth Enterprise Scheme officer to discuss their business idea.
This idea should fill a gap in its particular market.
Applicants should have commitment and determination to succeed.
If needed, applicants will be referred to Business Training Courses.
Advice and guidance is provided in setting up the business and thereafter should any problems arise.
For further information contact:
Oliver Bradley, Draperstown, helped by the Youth Enterprise Scheme
Rita Rafferty, Armagh, assisted by the Prince's Youth Business Trust
Karen Fleming, Belfast, received advice from Livewire
Enterprising Northern Ireland is an initiative by LEDU, aided by the International Fund for Ireland to stimulate enterprise, raise awareness and promote existing enterprise activity in the province.
CRAIGAVON WATERSPORTS CENTRE
Water-Skiing
Jet-Skiing
Windsurfing
Outdoor Pursuits
Residentials
Sailing
Canoeing
Craigavon Sprite Watersports Centre is situated on the Province's only purpose built teaching lake.
This provides a safe and sheltered location in which groups of all ages can experience the thrills and spills of watersports.
Water-Skiing
Whether you are a complete novice or an experienced skier we have the facilities to cater for you.
Beginners can develop a taste for the sport using the Ski Boom and the more proficient will no doubt be interested in our new jump, and tricks course.
Jet-Skiing
Why not experience the exhilaration of jet-skiing on Craigavon Lake, using the basic jet propelled 440 cc machines or the unique 650 cc TS.
Basic instruction and safety equipment are provided.
Sailing
Experience the thrill of topper sailing at Craigavon Watersports Centre.
The topper is the fastest and most exciting way of learning the fundamental art of sailing or of perfecting the more advanced techniques.
Canoeing
Instruction in either Canadian canoes or Kayaks is available either for recreation or serious coaching.
Windsurfing
Thinking about going abroad or just want to take up an exciting new pastime?
Windsurfing is the sport for you.
Our courses offer 6 hours of expert instructions in the basics of the sport at the end of which you will possess the fundamentals and should be competent in moderate winds.
Residentials
Waterside House is situated on the shores of Lough Neagh within the National Nature Reserve at Oxford Island.
There are facilities for self catering groups as well as full board residentials.
For vocation and training groups we can offer a comprehensive course covering all aspects of outdoor pursuits, watersports and general recreation facilities in the Craigavon area.
The Centre can provide for individuals as well as for groups and parties.
Special rates are negotiable and the price includes:
All specialist equipment (wetsuits, buoyancy aids etc)
Full instruction
VAT
NB: Swimwear and an old pair of trainers are essential and must be provided by the individuals.
Craigavon Lakes are situated in the heart of North Armagh straddling the main Belfast to Dublin railway line.
The South Lake is a haven for watersports enthusiasts whilst the North Lake has a rich and varied array of wildlife.
The surrounding path system makes the area an ideal place for a pleasant walk.
The cafe situated at the watersports building is opened for all the summer months and provides a comprehensive menu of both hot and cold foods.
Various events such as Powerboat Races, Circuit of Ireland Rally, Carnivals, Mountain Bike Races and Fun Runs are held in or around the lake and farmlands and there are ample parking facilities.
If you feel that you, or any group that you are associated with, could avail of our facilities, please do not hesitate to contact us at 0762 342669 or write to us at Craigavon Sprite Watersports Centre 
HOW TO FIND US
From Belfast
M1 junction 10 take left for Lurgan
First right past Ski Slope
T junction — turn right
Roundabout — turn left
Roundabout — turn right
Roundabout 1 — turn right
Roundabout 2 straight on.
We are at Roundabout 3
From elsewhere
Head towards Craigavon Centre
We are off Roundabout 3
ULSTER FOLK AND TRANSPORT MUSEUM
CULTRA — HOLYWOOD
THE ULSTER FOLK AND TRANSPORT MUSEUM
The Museum illustrates the social history of the people of the north of Ireland.
It emphasises the rural nature of much of our heritage (despite the pre-eminence of Belfast as a great industrial city) and ensures the preservation and display of the objects, customs and beliefs of our past.
The open-air Museum shows buildings removed from the Ulster countryside and re-erected at Cultra in a setting made to resemble the landscape from which they came.
When completed, this section of the Museum will show a village or small town and the open countryside with its isolated farms and rural industries — a microcosm of Ulster in 1900.
Awards won by the Museum include ‘United Kingdom Museum of the Year’(1983) and ‘Irish Museum of the Year’(1986).
Your admission ticket also entitles access to the Transport Galleries on the other side of the main Belfast-Bangor road, over the bridge.
Here are permanent exhibitions of archaic transport, horse-drawn vehicles, bicycles, motorcars and smaller displays relating to maritime history, ship-building and air transport.
Outside the Gallery there is a miniature railway, operated on Saturdays throughout the summer (weather permitting) by the Model Engineers' Society of Northern Ireland.
A wide range of books, guides, postcards and souvenirs is available in the Museum shops in both Folk and Transport Galleries.
WITHAM STREET GALLERY, BELFAST
Transport Museum of the Year (1981)
Formerly the Belfast Transport Museum, this gallery of the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum houses a unique collection illustrating aspects of Irish transport history.
Exhibits include a widely representative collection of railway rolling stock, including a vehicle from Ireland's first railway (1834), the Dublin and Kingstown.
Other rail exhibits include the ‘Maeve’, the largest steam locomotive in this country, and a fine collection representing the Co.
Donegal Railway.
there are also exhibits of bicycles, trams, motor cycles, carriages and motor cars — including the Amphicar which drove across the 30 miles from Scotland to Ireland in 1968.
SEALINK
Larne-Stranraer
Sealink Stena Line is an enthusiastic sponsor of the museum's new souvenir guide book and are delighted to be supporters of such an impressive collection of outdoor folk and transport exhibits.
A key link with the mainland, the Larne-Stranraer route has been in existence for almost 130 years and has become an integral part of Ulster's maritime heritage.
The three Belfast built vessels, the Stena Antrim, Stena Galloway and the Stena Caledonia offer Larne–Stranraer passengers an excellent range of on-board facilities and entertainment, aimed at creating an exciting and enjoyable travel experience.
Sealink Stena Line looks forward to successfully serving the Northern Ireland travel, freight and tourism markets for many more years.
HOW TO GET THERE
By car or bus the museum is about 7 miles from Belfast city centre on the A2 Belfast-Bangor Road.
You can also reach the museum by train from any station on the suburban line.
For buses and trains you should consult current timetables.
The museum is open 7 days a week although opening times vary between summer and winter.
For further details please ring Belfast 428428.
The BLACKSTAFF PRESS
Autumn & Winter 1991
NEW BOOKS
THE DISSENTING VOICE
Protestant Democracy in Ulster from Plantation to Partition
FLANN CAMPBELL
In recent years the clarity and compassion of the ‘dissenting voice’— that of the liberal Protestant, allied to radicalism, socialism and even nationalism — has seemed to fade into the mists of history, gravely neglected by historians, often drowned by the sectarian rhetoric of extreme loyalism.
In effect, a ‘conspiracy of silence’ still surrounds those northern Protestants who at various times and in their different ways condemned the landlord system, called for a wider franchise, disapproved of religious bigotry, or even sought to break the connection with Britain.
Challenging the popular belief that northern Protestants have formed a monolithic bloc, all holding the same political, social and religious views,The Dissenting Voice quarries the historical record to expose the complex truth.
Urgently reappraising the crucial role played by the radical Protestants who defied privilege, hierarchy and imperialism, this is an incisive and timely reminder of a hidden but powerful undercurrent in Irish history.
THE COLLECTED POEMS of JOHN HEWITT edited by FRANK ORMSBY
‘Troubled into utterance’ by the tensions and paradoxes of his native Ulster, John Hewitt's poetry was marked by a sustained, unfaltering engagement with myth, the meaning of place and language, history and politics.
For over sixty years, his work explored the constants and variables of the human condition, embodying the individual's quest for meaning in a world burdened by ‘complexities of ancestry and identity’.
The sources of his inspiration were many — ranging from Irish folklore and custom to the politics of international socialism — but his voice was uniquely his own; in the words of Eavan Boland, ‘no one else has quite had his themes; no one else has quite ventured on his enquiries’.
‘He outstrips the categories we keep invoking for him, such as‘doyen of the Ulster poets’ or ‘conscience of the planter tradition’.
He becomes, instead, the universal poet, servant of the medium, renewer of the forms, discoverer of the nugget of harmony in the language and ourselves…’
Seamus Heaney
A POETRY BOOK SOCIETY SPECIAL COMMENDATION
MAEVE KELLY
Orange Horses
Fresh and distinctive, the short stories in this remarkable collection portray a view of society that is infused with wry fun and a sharp but sympathetic wisdom, as Maeve Kelly captures the hopes, passions and despairs of women struggling with the constraints of everyday life.
‘Orange Horses is a powerful collection, often painful to read, the pathos balanced by Kelly's anger and feminism, the anger softened by her compassion, humour and the poetry of her landscapes.’
Wendy Brandmark,Financial Times 
‘beautifully written’
Ruth Rendell,Daily Telegraph 
NECESSARY TREASONS
A new paperback edition of Maeve Kelly's first novel — an urgent, provocative story of a woman's escape from the claustrophobia of provincial family life and her baptism of fire into the feminist movement, working for a battered women's refuge.
‘Sensitive and often funny, this is a nicely balanced view of the female predicament in a strict society.’
Homes and Gardens
‘a landmark in Irish feminist writing’
Fortnight
Also available: FLORRIE'S GIRLS
The enthralling bestseller about a young Irish nurse training in England.
The second BLACKSTAFF book of SHORT STORIES 2
A woman seeks the truth of her ancestry, and discovers truth can be what you want it to be; in a hospital a neglected old man weaves fables in a lost language; fantasy becomes reality when a young boy's sense of wonder is awakened by the first man in space; a man's obsession with ‘the dogs’ has grim but farcical consequences; a couple's holiday in France is disturbed by the ghosts of war; a chance encounter brings an unexpected delight to a birdwatcher.
Employing a wide range of styles and settings, this vibrant collection demonstrates the continuing power of the short story to surprise, disturb and entertain.
Social Attitudes in Northern Ireland
edited by Peter Stringer and Gillian Robinson
1990–91 edition
The first of a new series of annual reports on attitudes, values and beliefs,Social Attitudes in Northern Ireland is based on detailed interviews carried out with a large and representative sample of adults, and presents exacting analyses of their opinions on a wide range of issues — including national identity, law and order, discrimination, the role of women, morality, poverty and AIDS.
By examining the response to these and similar issues over the coming years, this series will provide a unique means of monitoring the changes in society as the twentieth century draws to a close.
DISTRIBUTION ARRANGEMENTS FOR BLACKSTAFF PRESS BOOKS
JOHN WATERS Jiving AT THE CROSSROADS
A journey to the heartland of today's Ireland,Jiving at the Crossroads cuts to the core of the unresolved struggles that haunt the Irish psyche — between the past and the present, between the urban and the rural — creating a unique insight into the dilemmas faced by a whole generation born since de Valera's vision of comely lads and lasses dancing at the crossroads.
Combining a poignant exploration of his relationship with his father with a sharply critical account of the Dublin political media, John Waters captures the change in recent Irish society.
And as he tells the story of one Irish politician who was emblematic of the past — Fianna Fáil TD Sean Doherty — he strips away the layers of fiction and delusion underpinning both Doherty and his critics to touch the pulse of an Ireland distorted by the rhetoric of the newsroom and debating chamber.
FOR BRIAN'S SAKE
The Story of the Keenan Sisters
ANNIE MAGUIRE
‘I have experienced a lot of emotion in so many ways.
I feel sorry for people who haven't.
A brother lost and found, the emotion in that alone…’
Brenda Gillham
On 11 April 1986 Minnie Keenan was listening to the radio in her east Belfast home when she heard the news that her son Brian had been taken hostage in Beirut.
For the Keenan family a terrible ordeal had begun…
The next four and a half years were a waking nightmare for the Keenans, especially for Brian's sisters Brenda Gillham and Elaine Spence.
Their long campaign for his release was courageous and relentless; it also almost wrecked their personal lives as they tried to cope with the glare of the world's media and the frustrations of clandestine diplomacy.
The fierce but totally unsentimental family loyalty that saw Brenda and Elaine through the intense pressures of those years — from the shock to the difficult aftermath of Brian's release — blazes on every page of this book, making it a gripping record of the extraordinary achievement of two ‘ordinary’ women.
TROUBLED TIMES
Fortnight Magazine and the Troubles in Northern Ireland 1970–91
edited by Robert Bell, Robert Johnstone, Robin Wilson
Fortnight — first published in 1970 — is now essential reading for anyone with a serious interest in the real Northern Ireland.
For over twenty years it has been constantly perceptive and probing in its reporting of the North's political and artistic life, as well as providing a platform for all shades of opinion in Ireland.
Through its unique independent editorial stance and promotion of civil liberty and cultural awareness, it has become a forum for the expression of political innovation and understanding.
Now Troubled Times assembles the highlights from Fortnight 's first two decades.
With contributors as widely diverse as Garret FitzGerald, Seamus Heaney, Tom Paulin and Nell McCafferty, plus a detailed day-by-day chronology of key events in the Troubles, this book — like Fortnight itself — presents some of the most informative and entertaining writing in Ireland today.