

District Health Authorities
Stuart Haywood
Introduction
A feature of the NHS since its inception has been a combination of central responsibility for the Service and authorities responsible for local decision-making.
The alternative of a directly managed service with a bureaucratic chain from Whitehall to Whitehaven has not been considered appropriate, although the merits of the interposition of members between tiers of management have not been universally accepted in the NHS.
However, the preference for a ‘local’ authority has not led to local government control, considered appropriate for social services.
NHS authorities were appointed rather than elected, with the exception of health committees responsible for some community and preventive services since 1974.
The new  arrangements for the NHS continue this tradition of appointed Health Authorities, rather than a directly managed service or local government control.
Regional and District Health Authorities (DHAs) have been retained as have Family Health Service Authorities.
Additionally, boards will be created for each NHS trust, a ‘new and separate legal body’(White Paper, para 3.4).
However, the continuation of a tradition of appointed local boards cannot be taken as a vote of confidence in their predecessors.
The White Paper makes trenchant criticisms of Health Authorities, particularly the ‘long standing lack of clarity about (their) role’(para 8.4).
The system of appointment coupled with effective nomination rights by some interests and local government meant that they were ‘neither truly representative nor management’(para 5.4).
Consequently, the government felt that they would be ill equipped ‘to handle the complex managerial and contractual issues’ of the new arrangements (para 8.5).
This chapter examines the likely impact of changes in size, composition and role on the performance of new-style Health Authorities, particularly DHAs.
Their retention suggests that ‘an authoritative basis for independent action’ at local level (Regan and Stewart, 1982) is seen as important in NHS management, in spite of previous difficulties.
Presumably a hierarchy of managers was considered less likely to produce local ‘bodies’ with sufficient authority.
The latter are also more in tune with the idea of internal markets and the future role of authorities, less identified with and dominated by the aspirations of providers.
The discussion focuses on members of the authorities (executive and non-executives) and three issues central to the successful implementation of these  changes.
The first is the standing of authorities, which depends on effective decentralisation.
Recent history is not very encouraging since previous promises of effective decentralisation (1974, 1982) have not been realised in practice.
The second is the remit of the new authorities, previously not very clear.
The new remit has to be clear about the purpose and contribution of members, corporately and individually.
It is a crucial element in the new arrangements if market type behaviour among purchasers and providers is to be promoted and reinforced.
Otherwise, the ways of managers and professionals, accustomed only to the customs of public bureaucracies and monopolies, will reassert themselves.
The third issue concerns the preparation and support for executive and non-executive members of authorities.
Success is not guaranteed by the adoption of this model of management or by wise selection and clear remits.
Private sector organisations, more familiar with the model, have not always found it easy to integrate non-executive directors into their work (Ham, 1988).
This chapter explores each of these three issues.
The perspective is the supportive critic highlighting problems and opportunities to transform Health Authorities into organisations with increased local standing, and more consumer and market oriented.
It concludes with a plea for an official checklist to inform assessments of the success of this feature of the reforms, together with some suggestions for inclusion.
Conditions for success
Standing of authorities
The arrangements for the new style NHS  assume a continuing need for a local organisation which is more than a tier of management.
Decisions will not be purely technical: they will contain an element of social policy and require judgements on acceptability of alternatives.
An obvious example is the weight to be given to each of the central initiatives and the most appropriate form of implementation.
This role needs a body with sufficient standing and thereby ‘legitimacy’ in the eyes of local communities, particularly health professionals or the RHA in the case of DHAs.
A group of full time managers, individually and directly accountable to the next tier above across the whole range of their duties, may have more difficulties in establishing sufficient local standing.
The next tier would be seen as a legitimate point for appeal, and superior managers would not be so able to deny responsibility for action.
In the pre-reform NHS this need for an authoritative source of local decision making was not totally met for two reasons; the composition of authorities and the inability of the centre to decentralise authority.
The Government's criticism of the composition of the pre-1991 authorities has already been made.
Regan and Stewart (1982) had also earlier argued that they had insufficient legitimacy since members were neither elected or selected on the basis of expert knowledge, prerequisites of authority.
Without either or these two requirements they could not provide an ‘authoritative’ base for local decision-making.
Members of pre-1991 authorities were chosen partly from nominations from local councils and the ranks of interested parties for their knowledge and expertise.
While councillors came in for much criticism for being representative, health professionals had similar difficulties.
While members were asked not to behave in a representative manner, the source of their nomination (councils, fellow doctors, nurses and trade unionists) made it very difficult for them not to consider ramifications on their constituencies.
Personal observation of a number of Health Authorities suggested that few attained this level of almost sublime detachment.
The effect was a de facto accountability to ‘local communities’ and employees, particularly powerful professionals (Haywood and Ranade, 1985).
Consequently, the composition of authorities reinforced conflicts of loyalties: many members did not feel accountable to the RHA who appointed them but to local constituencies.
More legitimacy for Health Authorities?
The elimination of remaining representative elements should remove any doubt about accountability to RHAs and their status as agents of government.
The NHS Bill reminded DHAs of the latter in its description of its primary functions: ‘the exercise of its delegated powers in arranging the provision of services to its resident population’(emphasis added, quoted in NAHA briefing, 24).
DHAs are now composed of five executive directors with a chairman and five non-executive members selected on the ‘basis of the skills and experience they can bring to the authority’(White Paper, para 8.6).
Efforts to interest people with experience of business and top management in authority membership (DH, 1990) make clear the kind of experience the government considers to be particularly relevant.
The intended authority and legitimacy of members will be sought in expertise, not in representation.
This removes one source of confusion.
What remains to be seen is whether this particular expertise is sufficient to enable the authority to become ‘authoritative’ in the world of strong professional and political interests.
Success is not guaranteed by applying this criterion of selection.
Studies of Health Authorities in the 1980s unearthed many examples of the kind of member the government has in mind but whose impact was minimal (Haywood & Ranade, 1985).
This was only partly due to organisational weaknesses (size of authorities, confusion about accountability) negating effective contributions from members with appropriate expertise.
Failure also owed something to inappropriate motivation and inadequate committee skills.
It follows that selection should also take account of other factors, such as an interest in the NHS, ability in senior decision-making groups and a tolerance of the ambiguities of public service management.
Otherwise, the phenomenon of the ‘silent nightingales’, well qualified but peripheral members with appropriate expertise and experience, will persist and reduce the effectiveness of corporate decision-making.
There is another reason for thinking business expertise will be insufficient in itself to transform DHAs into authoritative bodies.
Private sector organisations have had difficulty making similar arrangements work effectively.
Non-executive directors, presumably with appropriate expertise, have also found it difficult to influence corporate policy, even when things are going wrong.
Executives effectively control (Ham, 1988).
A recent report of the Institute of Directors on the professional development of directors (1990) led a spokesman to say that ‘it is not surprising that many boards do an adequate rather than an excellent job’(quoted in The Independent, 1990).
The changes in composition and clarification of accountability are, therefore, only a start.
They are a necessary, but insufficient, condition for effective decentralisation or effective working.
Other changes are also required to reverse the trend towards centralisation and authorities with more responsibility than power.
Some are relatively unexciting and un-newsworthy for the commentator and politician, such as decision-making practices which make corporate responsibility a reality rather than a slogan.
This will not be easy, requiring the NHS to crack problems which those with longer experience of the comparable private sector models have made only modest progress with.
An even more important requirement will be decentralisation of responsibility and authority by government and the NHS Management Executive.
More decentralisation?
The White Paper justification for the ‘delegation’ of ‘as much power and responsibility as possible…to local level’was to make the NHS ‘more responsive to the needs of patients’(para 1.9).
However, the pre-eminent impression of the 1970s and 1980s is of a contrary trend: increasing centralisation.
The regularity of promises of moves to reverse the trend suggests that Ministers also share that perception.
Centralisation has been very evident in stronger arrangements to reinforce accountability of authorities, in annual reviews, of performance and the development and use of performance indicators.
The government have also specified their expectations of outputs such as target numbers of certain operative procedures, previously left to authorities, their managers and professionals.
The latter have also been aware of a closer and more detailed interest in how they use resources and efficiency: ‘cost-improvement’ programmes have been introduced and performance scrutinised.
Some of these trends predated the present government.
A Labour administration developed a planning system which made government priorities clearer and thereby a more important consideration in the minds of local decision-makers.
Previously, there had been a mixture of administrative controls on details (administrative establishments, capital schemes) and little direction on service development.
There was also a recognition of the problems of escalating expenditure with, no or inadequate, commensurate improvements in services (‘doing better, feeling worse’) and the need for  stricter limits on spending.
Cash limits for hospital and community health services were introduced by a Labour government.
The contribution of the Conservative government has been to quicken the pace of centralisation, concerned perhaps to exercise greater control of public sector organisations for which privatisation was not an option.
Promises to ‘delegate’ have, therefore, to be seen against a long-established trend, with no obvious change in the reasons that underlie it.
One is the continuing political responsibility of the Secretary of State and his accountability to Parliament.
The effect of this is inevitable central interest in details of NHS functioning.
This would still be so even if Members of Parliament were persuaded to settle issues with Health Authorities and not raise them in the House of Commons when dissatisfied.
The high political profile of the NHS must mean that short-term issues will continue to intrude on NHS operations.
A good example is priorities.
In a truly decentralised system, subsidiary organisations could reasonably be given a few well-defined priorities to which assessments of corporate and individual performance would be related.
While this has been the intention in the NHS, the reality has been different, partly because ministers have to be seen to respond to public concerns.
The effect has been so many priorities and urgent tasks to change the meaning and the effect of the concept.
Annual reviews of authorities similarly cover a large number of issues (15 plus) rather than a few, ‘bottom line’, indicators of performance.
It is difficult to see this changing dramatically in spite of attempts to build up the position of the NHS Management Executive and timely clarifications of its role and relationships with the Policy Board, chaired by the Secretary of State.
The designation of the NHS chief executive as the accounting officer for the hospital and community health and family practitioner services may also improve his standing relative to senior DoH civil servants.
However, the essential dynamics of political accountability for the NHS will not change.
The Secretary of State remains answerable to Parliament and the everyday pressures of political life, concerned with services rather than management prerogatives.
Nevertheless, increased delegation will depend on government carving out more areas of activity for which authorities are seen to be responsible, and central intervention is improper.
A factor which could facilitate this process is the selection of chairmen and members in sympathy with the government's aims for the NHS, or at least willing to accept that its views are paramount.
In the previous system, some interventions from the centre were occasioned by differences of view.
For example, some Health Authorities tried to obstruct the competitive tendering process for ancillary services.
Others were unenthusiastic about the government's notion of fair competition.
The result was detailed guidance and monitoring.
Similarly, the Labour government's policies on the reduction of the number of private pay beds did not always lead to enthusiastic implementation in the late 1970s.
A possible justification of the increased politicisation of appointments is more confidence in authorities and hopefully, a reduction in the need for detailed central interventions.
The fact of greater control over the activities of the NHS may also improve the prospects for decentralisation: a disciplined and defined delegation  is now possible.
An abdication, on the other hand, would prove impossible to reconcile with the realities of political responsibility for the NHS.
However, this requires clearer remits for authorities, something we discuss in the next section.
Any test of the implementation of policy of more delegation, therefore, needs to focus on two factors in the standing of DHAs.
One will be concerned with their legitimacy and whether their writ carries more weight with higher authorities, the local community and providers than did that of their predecessors.
The other will be concerned with the ‘space’ given to the new authorities and whether it is larger than in the old system.
Clearer remits?
The expected contribution of expired Health Authority members to local management was not very clear.
Reminders that responsibilities were for policy-making and relating government priorities to local needs offered no real guide to role or purpose.
A policy issue for one was a management issue for another.
The notion of ‘policy’ is insufficiently precise to indicate the role of members, for example in the consideration of the scope and content of cost-improvement programmes to free up resources for developments and unfunded elements of pay awards.
In some places, this was considered to be the province of full-time managers, regarded as a technical matter with minimal reporting to the Health Authority.
In other authorities, it was a major item for consideration.
A clearer remit needs two things: indication of purpose to make expectations more explicit and more specification of member roles, corporately and individually.
The first is provided in the new arrangements, though it would benefit from more elaboration.
The second requires much more thought.
Clearer expectations of authority member performance?
The attention of new authorities is directed to contracting issues rather than problems of supply.
A key principle of the White Paper is the separation of the responsibility for managing services and for identifying the need for health care.
DHAs will be freed from the responsibility for operational management to enable them to concentrate on achieving the optimum improvement in the health of the population they serve.
(NHS Management Executive, 1990 ).
The remit of the new authorities is thus clearer and more specific.
They are concerned with purchasing care which promotes health rather than management of ill-health facilities.
The business which should command their corporate attention should be health needs, appropriateness of programmes, letting and monitoring contract performance.
An indication of whether this  change is successfully negotiated is the size and composition of the secretariat.
A purchasing organisation should be much smaller since it will not need personnel concerned with line management and the provision of services.
The mix of skills should also be very different with an emphasis on analytical and contracting expertise.
However, the different status of suppliers will pose problems and muddy what would otherwise have been clearer waters.
A self-governing Trust will have its own board and not be managerially accountable to the Health Authority, other than delivering services specified in contractual agreements.
Most contractors will, however, be current suppliers in existing units.
For them, the DHA will retain a ‘managerial’ responsibility as well.
Inevitable political interest in local development will also continue to complicate matters.
A contract which requires a supplier to close a NHS ward will occasion political comment which is likely to be directed at the Health Authority at least initially.
The effect will be to ‘strengthen’ the management line between contractor and supplier, since the former will remain locally responsible for services.
The injunction in the NHS Management Executive paper (op cit) that authorities will have to ‘ensure that they separate this activity (purchasing) from the management role they retain’(para 2) will tax members.
‘Chinese Walls’ are not easy to construct.
However, it is a dilemma that they will have to address if they are to take advantage of the clearer remit introduced by the reforms.
The preponderance of directly managed units in the new arrangements could affect the remit of authorities in another way.
Loyalties and identification with them will be strong, reinforced by the continuity with the old.
The de facto interpretation of purpose in these circumstances may be to use contracts to ‘sharpen up’ the performance of ‘our’hospitals and units.
There are some early indications that this is happening, for example, in the concern among district and regional managers to minimise the impact of GP practice budgets on ‘their’ hospitals.
The notion of alternative suppliers, competition and its corollary, earning one's revenue, is not everywhere welcome in the NHS.
In which case, the purpose of authorities may need clarification and reinforcement by ministers.
One way is to be more specific about the expected effects of internal markets.
These presumably include providers demonstrating a significant contribution to programmes to improve health status, falling unit costs, a greater diversity of suppliers and a substitution of some secondary care by general practitioners.
This would not preclude close working relations between purchasers and providers working closely to improve quality.
However, the basis of relationships might change from a continuation of historical commitments to performance.
It might also encourage the emergence of suppliers for specific services and, thereby, competition.
Clarification of member roles?
The discussion has so far focused on the corporate purpose and thereby role of authorities in the new NHS.
Clarity and performance of corporate role  will in turn be facilitated by elaboration of expectations of individuals, executive and non-executive.
In the unreformed NHS, the ambiguities about corporate purpose were compounded by the difficulties individuals had in establishing a distinctive niche in the policy-making process.
Consequently, members were, understandably, seen in many organisations as an unnecessary and time-consuming tier of decision-making by managers.
Members frequently saw themselves (accurately) as a ‘rubber stamp’.
Similarly, generalised statements about their responsibilities in the new arrangements will be insufficient to correct this.
It will be necessary to go further than familiar, correct but general injunctions ‘to question and challenge, as well as support officers’(Sealey, 1990).
What does this mean in practice?
Policy-making is inevitably, and universally, a long, drawn-out process which involves many people within the organisation.
Customarily, the authority is only usually involved at the final stages when approval to go ahead is required.
The investment in proposals is naturally such that challenges inevitably produce defensive reactions.
Indeed, getting proposals through is a test of virility for some executives, so notions of change at a late stage in the policy-making process are unreal.
So far, more specific and explicit statements of what is expected of individuals have not materialised (March 1990).
The specification of the qualities expected of members provides only the most general idea of how they will fit in.
Additionally, previously mentioned problems with the model of boards of non-executives in the private sector means that incomers will not bring consistent or even very clear expectations with them on which to build.
Some elaboration of expectations, or a requirement that they be elaborated locally, will help to ensure a worthwhile contribution to a policy process which will otherwise naturally mostly exclude them.
The NHSTA study of non-executive directors unearthed an example of how this could be done (Ham, 1988).
A specific task of non-executives on the board was to audit thoroughly the impact of major investment decisions after an appropriate period.
Predictions about outcomes were compared with actual results with a view to learning from experience and thus improving future investment decisions.
The comparative detachment of non-executives is an advantage, given their lesser personal investment in predictions of benefits from particular courses of action.
If the advantages of the relative detachment of non-executives are to be maximised, there is merit in distancing them from non-contractual issues involving directly managed units.
It could underline their responsibility for health rather than supply and encourage them to view managed units as a rather than the supplier of services.
On the positive side, non-executives could be given specific, watching briefs on public health trends, consumer surveys, contract performance and links with community groups.
The management of business at meetings must facilitate the contribution of all members.
This was not always the case in the old system with overlong agendas and items which did not invite or need discussion.
A training manual for authority members, published by the NHS Training Authority and NAHA, had commended fewer items per meeting, focusing only on those central to business plans (Haywood & Ranade, 1988).
Ways in which the authority can  discharge its responsibilities for standard setting for all aspects of care will also require attention.
Additionally, an implication of the suggestions on the contribution of non-executives made above is the opportunity of reports by non-executives on the watching briefs.
The more considered use of valuable time also facilitates a planned and targeted contribution to particular stages of the policy process, including scrutiny of the crucial starting assumptions.
Possible tests of success in this facet of the changes is whether non-executives are clear about their contribution and whether decisions are more than the sum of executive preferences.
Effective preparation and support
The experience of reforms and re-organisations in the 1970s and 1980s is a reminder that implementation of change is problematical.
Structural alterations, exhortation and training proved insufficient to realise the objectives of the 1974 changes (Brown et al , 1975).
Changes in practice have to be worked for in an intensive and structured way.
The understanding and support of personnel cannot be assumed.
‘In the theatre the director is God…but unfortunately the actors are atheists.’
In the case of the NHS, it is not a matter of disbelief: it is more a matter of different interpretations of the faith.
So the reconstruction of authorities and clearer remits will not guarantee effective members, individually or corporately.
The ‘success’ of new-style NHS boards will be similarly dependent on preparations for members' responsibilities and appropriate support.
These, in turn, will be dependent on the chairman and chief executive.
Their appreciation of the potential contribution of other members and the ways in which this can be facilitated will be crucial.
An indication of this level of appreciation is the adequacy of arrangements for inducting new members to an organisation with distinctive characteristics.
We have referred earlier to the impact of the political accountability of the Secretary of State on the nature of the organisation, vitiating or qualifying customary management practices.
Additionally, there is the disabling effect of unfamiliarity with NHS language and decision-making processes, regardless of native wit.
The NHS is sufficiently large and self-contained to have its own interpretation of commonly used words.
For example, until now, ‘budgets’ have meant a slightly different thing in the NHS to the meaning a businessman would attach to it.
In the NHS it has meant allocations, based on last year's money usually updated for inflation with additional funds for anything new.
Practice was a long way from the standard understanding of the concept of budgets based on explicit workloads and levels of activity.
It is not just a matter of learning new acronyms (a formidable enough task) but appreciating differences in meanings and expectations rooted in its characteristics, without being captured by them.
A  re-occurrence of the ‘brief chat’ approach, leaving members to pick up the grammar and the context will not be a happy omen for the new authorities.
A structured induction is necessary to shorten the learning period and expedite informed contributions.
Another factor in the success of authorities is the ability of members to contribute to collective decision-making.
There is frequently a tacit assumption that the calibre of individuals on the board is the guarantee of quality in spite of the literature on team decision-making which cautions against such a sanguine view.
Team dynamics also have an influence on the outcomes and the contribution of members.
While the onus is primarily on the chairman to handle business so that expertise is fully exploited, there are ways of enhancing the skills of individuals.
Some familiarity with the business also helps, without subscribing to the view that only health professionals can really understand and run it.
There have been earlier references to the changing and elastic notion of priorities which takes some time to come to terms with.
Another is the notion of effectiveness in the NHS which has no familiar bottom line measures of success for the businessman newcomer to authorities.
Responsibility for developing standards will also require a greater interest than hitherto in the effectiveness of clinical care (Williamson, 1990), something that will require considerable briefing.
Briefings on epidemiology, morbidity, aids to decision-making such as Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALYs) as well as critical assessments of clinical and technological developments must also be built into preparations for, and continuing support of, members.
All this may sound obvious and low key: something that can be left to local people and needs no special emphasis in the introduction of major change.
The literature on policy failure should counsel caution about such a sanguine view.
Problems of implementation are formidable and attention to detail, such as the appropriateness of training and support activities, must be a crucial factor in success, something the NHS Management Executive does seem to have accepted generally.
A test of the adequacy of arrangements for implementation is whether this is extended to include members of authorities.
Tests of success: a checklist
A criticism of the 1990–91 NHS reforms was the absence of pilot schemes to test their efficiency before they were introduced generally.
We will have to make do with post hoc evaluations.
For this purpose, a checklist which commands some general support would be invaluable, if also potentially embarrassing.
It would discipline assessments of success and provide a means of remedying a weakness in government; insufficient learning from experience of reforms.
It would also have the incidental advantage of further clarification of expectations of managers.
What might be included in such a checklist for the reform of the DHAs?
The starting point is those aims which depend heavily on the particular contribution of DHAs.
DHAs, in spite of their importance in the general scheme, cannot be judged on the extent to which services improve.
Too many other factors intervene.
For example, where there are natural monopolies, it might be difficult for a well-intentioned and determined DHA to effect changes: indeed, it might find itself more pre-occupied with trying to  contain the natural inclinations of monopolists to raise prices without commensurate improvements in quality.
Or it might consider itself a success if it can stop providers passing on increases in input prices in full without trying to reduce them by greater efficiency.
The furore among providers about current government-funding policies which challenge the latter assumption suggests that this is a real danger.
Additionally, baselines for a general evaluation are not immediately obvious, and the aims of the changes are very general and capable of different interpretations.
Nevertheless, the aims of the changes have to be the starting point; the NHS should be:
(a)
more consumer orientated;
(b)
more efficient;
(c)
more concerned with the promo–on of health rather than the cure of ill-health.
The main means provided to DHAs to effect these changes are contracts for services between DHAs and suppliers; reimbursement formulas based on resident populations; resource management systems which align responsibility for incurring expenditure for its management more closely and provide information on costs of different activities; and medical audit.
The tests of the success of the new-style DHAs will be based on the progress made in these directions.
Table 1.1 takes the argument further, highlighting three aspects of member contribution in which tests of success might be fashioned.
The areas flow from the previous discussion:
using contracting to establish local markets and improve services:
establishing the position of the authority to ensure that is has significant local authority: and
corporate working.
For all three, some suggestions are made which could provide the basis for tests of effectiveness.
The important issue is not whether these suggestions provide a useful starting point for thinking about the ‘success’ of the new authorities but that such tests have to be devised before events start to unfold in order to enable sensible evaluations to be made.
In the absence of such a process, one prediction can be made with confidence: we shall again lose the opportunity to learn from inevitable problems of implementing complex organisational reform in the public sector.
Final comment
The authorities, not a tier of management, are required to achieve the government's aim of decentralisation of decision-making.
Most NHS managers and professionals and members will heartily endorse this intention, although some of the latter may well have preferred the electoral route.
However, success does depend on more than restructuring the membership.
More attention to selection, role clarification and preparation are equally important.
In other words, success, as in so many other things, will depend on how things are done, as well as on the merits of the proposal.
Planning and ‘internal markets’
Penelope Mullen
Introduction
The White paper Working for patients (DH, 1989a) states its objectives as:
to give patients, wherever they live in the UK, better health care and greater choice of the services available; and
greater satisfaction and rewards for those working in the NHS who successfully respond to local needs and preferences.
Among the most fundamental of the proposals designed to meet these objectives are changes in the method of allocating resources to health authorities and the separation of the provision of health services from their funding, using what many have termed an ‘internal market’.
How will these proposals affect health care planning — planning to meet the needs of the population, to secure equity and equality and to maximise health?
Allocation of resources
Working for patients proposes that regions, and eventually districts, will be funded on a weighted per capita basis (with an allowance to the Thames regions for higher prices in London).
The current ‘cross-boundary flow adjustment’ will be abolished, leaving districts to ‘pay directly for the services provided for their patients by hospitals in other Districts…’
(DH, 1989a, para. 4.11).
The history of the allocation of resources within the NHS has been problematic since its establishment.
The inheritance of the NHS, both in terms of capital stock and medical staff, was very unevenly distributed.
Resource distribution during early years of the NHS was based on previous funding with additions for specific developments, thus perpetuating and even exacerbating the inherited geographical inequalities.
The 1962 Hospital Plan (MoH, 1962) and the 1971 Formula (DHSS, 1970) did attempt to reduce these inequalities at the regional level, but the evidence indicated that inequalities within regions exceeded those between regions (Cooper and Culyer, 1970).
Prior to 1974, however, planning health care and equalising resources below the regional level was difficult, due largely to the absence, in the hospital sector, of a geographically based planning and management tier below the level of the region.
The pre-1974 sub-regional tier, the Hospital Management Committee (HMC), was responsible for running a hospital or a  group of hospitals and rarely had specific responsibilities to ensure that the needs of a defined population were met.
New opportunities for sub-regional planning came with the establishment in 1974 of Area Health Authorities (AHAs)‘with full planning and operational responsibilities…responsible for the provision of comprehensive health services…’ to a defined population (DHSS, 1972).
In 1976, the new NHS Planning System was introduced and, at the same time, but developed quite independently, the report of the Resource Allocation Working Party (DHSS, 1976), ‘The RAWP Report’, made proposals for improving geographical equity both between regions and within regions.
Regional target allocations were to be based on population, weighted by age, sex and SMR (as a proxy for morbidity), with compensation for treating patients from other regions by a ‘cross-boundary flow’ adjustment based on average cost per case by specialty applied to patient flows recorded two or three years earlier.
Actual allocations to regions would gradually be adjusted over several years so that they moved towards the target allocations.
The RAWP Report proposed that the ‘…same principles…should…be applied to allocations below Regional level’(DHSS, 1976).
Since its publication, the RAWP Report and its implementation have been the centre of considerable discussion, analysis and controversy (see Mays and Bevan, 1987) which is outside the scope of the discussion here.
However, the ‘cross-boundary flow’ adjustment has far-reaching implications for health care planning, in particular for equity and priorities, especially at the sub-regional level.
Whilst, over the years, there has been a considerable amount of work on costing such flows, a more important question from the point of view of planning is the fact that the home (exporting) authority is compulsorily required to pay for such flows whilst having no control over them (Brazier, 1986 & 1987; Mullen, 1986).
It is difficult for an authority to pursue its priorities and plan to meet the needs of its population, whilst part of its resources are being used to pay for outward flows which may not figure in those priorities.
Importing authorities, on the other hand, have complained that the cross-boundary flow adjustment does not fully compensate for the actual workload since, by using average costs, it does not fully cover the costs of treating high-cost cases.
In addition, it is based on historical data and, in any case, influences only their target allocation and not their actual allocation.
Further, various perverse incentives appeared to be built into the system (Bevan and Brazier, 1987) which are not conducive to good planning.
Indeed, not long after the RAWP Report was published Mullen (1978) suggested that:
One partial solution to the problem of accounting for intra-regional cross-boundary flows would be to allocate resources to authorities taking no account of the cross-boundary flows and to leave them to take the responsibility of paying for their own residents treated elsewhere…there would be far more flexibility for the Area planners to arrange health care for their population .
In view of the problems, over time many regions have modified or even abandoned the RAWP cross-boundary flow adjustment method for their subregional allocation.
The actual methodology employed in the new proposals for the allocation of funding has given rise to some concern (Mays, 1989).
Despite this concern, from the point of view of health care planning, the principle of funding authorities basically on a weighted per capita basis, with no allowance for cross-boundary flow, is to be welcomed.
However, do the proposals for the provision of services hinder or help health authorities in fulfilling their planning role?
Funding and the provision of services
Internal markets
As noted above, the proposals for securing and providing services involve an ‘internal market’.
The origin of this term is usually attributed to Enthoven (1985a), who explained his proposals thus:
Each District would receive a RAWP-based per capita revenue and capital allowance.
Each DHA would continue to be responsible to provide and pay for comprehensive care for its own resident population, but not for other people without current compensation.
It would be paid for emergency services to outsiders at a standard cost.
It would be paid for non-emergency services to outsiders at negotiated prices.
It would control referrals to providers outside the district and it would pay for them at negotiated prices.
In effect, each DHA would be like a Health Maintenance Organisation .
He also stressed that:
The theory behind such a scheme — which can better be called ‘market socialism’ than ‘privatisation’— is that the managers could then buy services from producers who offered the best value.
Enthoven, 1985b )
This concept of the ‘internal market’ was adopted by most contributors during the debate prior to the publication of Working for patients .
For instance, the Kings Fund Institute (1988) described the ‘internal market’ as having inter alia the following features:
Each district would receive a needs-based, per capita allocation.
It would be paid for services to outsiders at negotiated prices.
It would also control patient referrals to providers outside the district and would pay for them at negotiated prices .
Culyer and Brazier (1988) described the Enthoven model but argued that ‘since it is usually supposed that the competition for contracts would not be restricted to NHS institutions we prefer the term ‘provider markets’ to the more usual ‘internal markets’’.
They also pointed out that there ‘are many variants of the Enthoven plan that one could invent’.
However, statements from Ministers and interpretations in the press in the months leading up to the publication of Working for patients appear to describe a rather different concept of the ‘internal market’— a patient-led system.
For instance:
the ‘internal market’, under which GPs could send patients to the health districts with the shortest waiting lists, with the money for their treatment travelling with them.
(Brown, 1988 )
Even many months after the publication of Working for patients , Phillips (1989), in a feature article in the Guardian , referred to an ‘internal market in which GPs shop around for health services’.
This, and many similar references, suggests that this remains the popular conception of an internal market.
Classification of ‘internal markets’
There are then two very different proposals being described under the heading ‘internal market’, which Mullen (1989, 1990) characterised as:
Type I ‘internal market’ systems
With Type I systems, the health authority receives funding for its population; has a specific responsibility for the health/health care of that population; and, in various combinations, provides and/or purchases services from other providers, public or private, to meet the health needs of the population.
In the least ‘radical’ forms, the home authorities remain the main providers of services, but the purchasing of services from other health authorities is increased.
In the most ‘radical’ forms, the home health authority does not provide any services directly, but puts out contracts (with or without competitive tendering) for the entire range of provision.
With the Type I ‘internal market’ it is implied, although not always made explicit, that residents of the home health authority may be treated only by ‘approved’or ‘contracted’providers .
Type II ‘internal market’ systems
With Type II systems, the health authority receives funding for its population; may be a direct provider of services; but residents can seek treatment anywhere and their home authority is obliged to reimburse the provider.
This reimbursement may be either at cost or according to some laid-down scale or negotiated scale of charges.
Popularly when this type of ‘internal market’ is mentioned, it is in terms of‘patients being able to shop around to find the shortest waiting list, with their health authority being sent the bill’.
The National Association of Health Authorities (NAHA, 1988) described both concepts of the ‘internal market’,— the Enthoven model and also another totally different model, ie ‘Automatic and immediate cross-boundary  flow reimbursement’, which it stated ‘carries the internal market concept to its full fruition, involving transferring the initiative from the planners and treasurers, to the market customers (ie patients) and their advisers (ie GPs) with money following the patient’.
Culyer and Brazier (1988) also discuss the Type II model but classify it not as ‘internal market’ but as either ‘retrospective full cost reimbursement’or as ‘prospective reimbursement’.
Experience from other systems
The Type II system is very similar to an insurance-based system, where the insurance company reimburses the provider for care supplied.
The Type I system has been likened to a Health Maintenance Organisation (HMO), with the difference that the health authority is compulsorily responsible for all residents of a particular location, and thus has no choice over membership.
Some indication of the potential operation of the different types of ‘internal market’ can be obtained from examining these systems.
Insurance-based systems
Under most insurance systems, hospitals and health care providers supply services to insured patients and are then reimbursed for the services by the insurer either according to retrospective full-cost reimbursement, or according to prospective reimbursement.
With retrospective reimbursement schemes, the suppliers of health care receive payment in full from the insurer for all expenditure incurred.
Suppliers thus have an incentive to maximise income by encouraging as much activity as possible.
They have an incentive to maximise the number of patients treated, maximise the length of stay, maximise the number of surgical procedures performed and the number of diagnostic tests carried out.
Such a system is inherently inflationary as it encourages escalation of costs and there is no evidence that it gives any encouragement to the cost effective use of different procedures since the health care suppliers know that, whatever the cost, they will be reimbursed.
In an attempt to control escalating costs, the US Government and insurance companies turned to a prospective payment system, which is a form of prospective reimbursement.
Under this system, health care providers are reimbursed at a predetermined price for each defined unit of workload, regardless of the actual cost involved in providing that unit of workload.
The ‘unit of workload’ can be a day in hospital, a diagnostic test or a particular procedure, but more recently has been in the form of a case.
This was associated with the development of Diagnostic Related Groups (DRGS)— a method of ‘classifying inpatients into a manageable number of groups, which are both clinically meaningful and homogeneous in resource use’(Culyer and Brazier, 1988).
Providers are then reimbursed at a set price per case treated, according to the DRG into which the case falls.
Prospective payment systems have the advantage that health care suppliers are paid for the amount of work they do and are encouraged to control the cost per case.
However, incentives remain for suppliers to treat as many cases as possible; to treat the lowest cost patients within any group; to shift the cost of treatment to other  agencies; and to classify patients in the highest cost group possible — known as DRG creep.
Thus, with a prospective payment system, the funding agency still cannot control total expenditure unless it can control the number of cases.
Indeed, some insurance companies have tried to do this by requiring prior approval for treatment.
Health Maintenance Organisations
Health Maintenance Organisations (HMOs) were established in the USA in an attempt to control the escalating costs of health care.
Instead of health insurance which reimburses the costs of health care on an item-of-service basis, HMOs enrol customers for an annual fee and, in return, guarantee health care for that year.
‘HMOs usually employ their own primary care physicians…and either run their own hospital services or buy in from other suppliers’(Culyer and Brazier, 1988).
Costs are contained and efficiency encouraged since, unlike fee-for-service systems, there is no incentive on the part of the HMO to ‘oversupply’ services.
This is supported by evidence that hospital stays and admission rates are lower in HMOs than under fee-for-service systems (Petchey, 1987).
However, there have been arguments that the lower costs result from reducing the level of care and jeopardising outcomes, at least to the poorer members (Ware, 1986).
There is an incentive for the HMO to reduce utilisation of services employing, to some extent, general practitioners as gatekeepers.
In addition, because HMOs can effectively choose which customers to enrol, there is some suggestion of ‘cream skimming’, ie that HMOs are choosing to enrol customers who are lower than average users of services and have an incentive to discriminate against potentially high users of services (Petchey, 1987).
It must be remembered that the acknowledged success of HMOs in reducing costs should be viewed against the insurance-based systems they replace.
The lessons may not have the same applicability in the UK where health care costs are already much lower.
The White Paper proposals
‘Internal markets’ and the White Paper
Which model of the ‘internal market’ is proposed in Working for patients —Type I or Type II?
It has been suggested that the rhetoric is Type II, whilst the proposals are Type I. This may be considered an oversimplistic observation, but it would appear to contain some element of the truth.
What does a more detailed examination of the proposals in Working for patients and the accompanying working papers reveal?
District Health Authorities
The central proposals, ie that District Health Authorities should receive an allocation based on their population and should be responsible for providing or acquiring health care services to meet the needs of that population, are fundamentally Type I. However, there are several proposals in Working for patients which introduce elements of a Type II system into the activities of DHAs.
Firstly, there is the provision that ‘DHAs will need to allow for referrals by GPs to hospitals with whom no contracts have been placed, keeping some funds in reserve for this purpose’(DoH, 1989a, para.4.24), which is designed to overcome objections to the loss of GP freedom resultant on the Type I system.
The second ‘Type II’ provision relates to emergency services.
Working for patients gives the assurance that ‘the costs of emergency services and those requiring immediate admission to hospital can be met for every patient who needs them, irrespective of whether the patient is resident in a district which has a contract with the hospital’(DoH, 1989a, para.4. 18).
Thus ‘if emergency admission as an in-patient is required, the cost should be met by the district of residence.
This will require the hospital to levy a charge, which might initially be at nationally determined rates’(DoH, 1989c, para.2. 18).
The provisions for temporary residents are along similar lines (DoH, 1989d).
In respect of all these ‘Type II’ provisions, the working paper states that ‘Charges for patients receiving treatment outside their District and outside the scope of its contractual agreements…should be recovered direct from the District of residence or from the GP budget-holder’(DoH, 1989c, para.2.19).
In addition to the elements of a Type II system identified above, the provisions for cost-per-case contracts may also have Type II elements (DoH, 1989c).
In the absence of controls over referrals by non-budget holding GPs, the provision that under such contracts ‘payment would be on a case by case basis, without any prior commitment by either party to the volume of cases which might be so dealt with’, would appear very similar to a prospective payment system.
General practitioners as budget holders
Budget-holding GPs with budgets to purchase drugs, outpatient treatment and tests and a limited range of inpatient services will be working with an ‘internal market’ which is mainly Type I. There are some differences from the situation faced by DHAs in that such GP practices will be able to choose the population that they serve, but will not be responsible for the full range of services.
However, the proposals do contain some features of a Type I1 model.
These relate largely to the ability of budget-holding GPs to determine and control what hospital treatment is supplied to their patients.
In order to control and make best use of their budget, GPs must have full knowledge of the cost and scope of the services they are purchasing.
However, once the initial referral has been made by the GP the provider, the hospital consultant, makes the diagnosis and determines the treatment (DoH, 1989d, para.3.3).
Thus, as the BMA (1989) points out, ‘these costs would be beyond the control of the general practitioners but could fall on the budget’.
There is no provision for GPs to refer their patients for an ‘estimate’ before deciding whether or not they wish to proceed and pay for treatment — a provision which, whilst solving some of the problems outlined above, would create unacceptable ethical problems of its own.
Health care planning and the White Paper
Against this background, what are the planning roles of the different budget holders and providers?
Districts: ‘Working for patients ’ says little about planning but stresses that, having been freed from the obligation actually to provide services:
…
DHAs can then concentrate on ensuring that the health needs of the population for which they are responsible are met; that there are effective services for the prevention and control of disease and the promotion of health; that their population has access to a comprehensive range of high quality, value for money services; and on setting targets for and monitoring the performance of those management units for which they continue to have responsibility.
(DoH, 1989a, para.2.11 )
The DHA planning role is set out more fully in the guide for self-governing Hospitals:
3.2 Each DHA will have a responsibility to identify the total health care needs of its population and plan how these should be met.
It will draw up these plans in the light of national policies and local priorities and resources.
It will execute these plans by planning a coordinated series of contracts with selected providers and will then monitor them.
The process will necessarily be a dynamic one with DHAs updating their plans annually and modifying their pattern of contracts both to reflect changing needs and to respond to new services becoming available from current or alternative providers.
(DoH, 1989e )
The briefing pack accompanying Working for patients (DoH, 1989h) claims that at ‘Regional and district level planning will be able to respond more effectively to the health needs of the population rather than being tied to details of the operational delivery of services’.
In fulfilling its planning role,Working for patients reiterates that ‘Health authority funding will continue to be cash-limited’(DoH, 1989a, para.3.8).
Budget-holding GPs:
The planning role of budget-holding GPs is not clear.
As pointed out above, firstly, their budgets only cover a limited range of services and, secondly, unlike DHAs, GPs can select which patients to take on and thus include in their budget.
Therefore, it would appear that whilst they will have a practice planning role, they do not have a population-based planning role.
However, the operation of such practices could affect planning by their District(s).
Suppliers/providers:
The role of providers, ie directly managed units, self-governing hospitals and private suppliers, is stated to be the delivery of ‘contracted services within quality and quantity specification to one or a number of clients in return for agreed levels of income’(DoH, 1989f).
Thus, providers will not have any responsibility to plan to meet the needs of a  particular population, but will, of course, require business planning to secure and fulfil contracts and to attract and treat extra-contract referrals.
Health care planning with ‘internal markets’
As noted above, elements of both Type I and of Type II ‘internal markets’ appear in Working for patients .
What then are the implications for health care planning of the different types of ‘internal market’?
Planning with a Type I ‘internal market’
Planning role:
Through the placing of contracts, the planning of directly provided services, and control over where its residents may be treated, Type I systems give the home authority the potential to ensure that its priorities are pursued and that the planned balance between health care groups is maintained.
Thus, with Type I systems, authorities have considerable potential for health care planning to meet the needs of their populations.
Equality and equity:
However, if health authorities differ in their priorities and make provision for that health care which they consider to be a priority, then Type I systems can mean that residents of different health authorities find access to some forms of health care even more unequal than at present.
In addition, other inequalities may result.
There is evidence from HMOs that higher income groups gain greater health benefits from the system than do lower income groups (Ware, 1986).
However, another potential source of inequality, ‘cream skimming’, which arises with HMOs is removed since, unlike HMOs, DHAs are compulsorily responsible for all residents and thus cannot select only the lower risks.
However, DHAs could suffer the secondary effects of such selection if GP budget-holders choose to select only the lower risks leaving the DHA with the higher-cost patients within any category.
Since, at the same time, the DHAs budget would be reduced in respect of average costs, health authority planning would be faced with an additional challenge in redressing any inequalities which follow from such selection.
Expenditure control:
The very nature of Type I systems means that there is considerable potential for the home authority to control both total expenditure and relative expenditure on different health care groups and types of treatment.
Planning with a Type II ‘internal market’
Planning role:
With systems comprising solely a Type II ‘internal market’, the home authority would find itself very restricted in its health care planning role with little scope for ensuring that local needs and priorities are met.
This arises since patients are permitted to go anywhere for treatment, leaving the home authority to pay for this treatment, whether or not the  authority considers such treatment necessary for that particular patient, whether or not that type of treatment figures in local priorities, and whether or not there are ‘more deserving’ cases within the authority.
With such a system there seems little to prevent providers behaving in the same manner as providers elsewhere where reimbursement systems are in operation.
Providers would place no restraint on the services provided or number of cases treated, since they would be certain of payment.
The home authority, on the other hand, could find its funds being compulsorily diverted to services and cases it considered low priority.
Equality and equity:
The Type II model may lead to inequity between health care groups since large amounts of a health authority's budget would be compulsorily diverted to those areas where patients are more mobile and where providers find it most profitable to supply services, i.e. mainly elective surgery.
Other health care groups, especially the so-called priority groups, may lose out.
On the other hand, Type II systems by allowing patients to seek treatment anywhere, may avoid inequalities resulting from Districts having different priorities, since patients can override those local priorities by going elsewhere for treatment.
However, new inequalities could arise between those patients with the resources and knowledge to seek care outside their district and other patients without such resources and/or knowledge.
Overall expenditure control:
It is virtually impossible to conceive of a Type II system operating successfully with cash-limited Health Authorities.
All discussion of retrospective and prospective reimbursement systems points to the difficulties of controlling overall expenditure.
Recognising this difficulty, the NAHA proposals for work-load funding (NAHA, 1988) suggest that acute services should not be cash limited, and that regional planning would limit any unconstrained growth.
However, in practice, if a Type I1 system were operating, the effect would be that Health Authorities would find very large parts of their budgets being compulsorily removed to pay for a much higher consumption of acute (mainly elective surgery) health care, with a consequential diminution of money available for other services.
It can be argued that a fairly radical Type II ‘internal market’ has already developed in the care of the elderly, where much provision is private but much of the funding is public.
It is, however, debatable how far this model can be extended to the rest of the health service.
Firstly, care of the elderly is essentially ‘elective care’.
Secondly, the current pattern of provision grew up initially on the basis of ‘full cost reimbursement’ and latterly on ‘prospective payment’, in both cases financed from non-cash-limited public funds.
How far would it have developed with cash-limited funds?
Implications in practice
Of course, the proposals in Working for patients do not advocate a pure Type II system.
Indeed, what is advocated is largely Type I. However, the existence of elements of a Type I1 model, ie for emergency admissions, extra-contractual referrals and temporary residents, gives incentives to  providers which will be very similar to those under insurance-based systems.
Providers will have every incentive to treat as many patients as possible, in as high a cost category as possible, for ‘referrals by GPs to hospital with whom no contracts have been placed’(DoH, 1989a, para.4.24) and for referrals of temporary residents.
Under these circumstances, health care providers who do not have a contractual relationship with the home authority will have a financial incentive to ‘over-supply’ services, in the knowledge that they must be reimbursed.
The DHA would find that some of its carefully planned resources are being diverted to pay for services which may not figure in those plans.
Barr et al (1989) go so far as to suggest that ‘if the receiving hospital is allowed to ‘dump’ excess capacity by charging no more than short-term marginal cost it will, in effect, be ‘stealing’part of another District's budget’.
The provision that ‘if emergency admission as an inpatient is required, the cost should be met by the District of Residence’ whilst the hospital itself would bear the cost of A&E outpatient treatment within the block contract (DoH, 1989c, para.2.10) gives an additional incentive to providers to admit A&E cases as inpatients, possibly unnecessarily, where there is no contract with their ‘home’District.
Taken together, these various provisions could clearly lead to the cost-inflationary dangers associated with Type II systems.
In respect of non-contractual referrals by GPs, this point is recognised since ‘…an open-ended commitment on the part of DHAs to meet all non-contractual referrals would be incompatible with both the disciplines which the new system is intended to inject and with control of budgets’(DoH, 1989c, para.3.3).
It is stressed that ‘DHAs will need to develop sensitive procedures…but will have the right to refuse…if there is no satisfactory reason for a distant or expensive referral’(DoH, 1989 e ).
However, the difficulties encountered in attempting to implement what is basically a Type I system whilst retaining choice for GPs and patients are demonstrated in a more comprehensive description of the proposed provisions.
These reiterate that the ‘general principle is…that GPs should be free, when necessary, to refer non-emergency cases outside the contract with the same knowledge as in emergency cases that there is a contingency reserve available’.
The assurance is given that such extra-contractual referrals will go unchallenged by the DHA ‘unless it can be shown that the proposed referral is wholly unjustified on clinical grounds, or where an alternative referral would be equally efficacious for the patient, taking into account the patient's wishes’.
However, it continues, GPs cannot interpret the provisions for extra-contractual referrals as a licence to disregard the contract arrangements since DHAs are accountable for expenditures and ‘cannot therefore be put in the position of being a mere cypher and reflecting individual GPs' wishes regardless of their effect on other patient services’.
Thus, it continues, ‘a presumption of the right to make an extra-contractual referral cannot therefore be a guarantee that the DHA would in all cases agree to meet the cost’.
More specifically it is proposed that ‘…
DHAs should have a clinical panel whose advice can be sought on GPs’ pattern of extra-contractual referrals.
Although they should not be obliged to do so, GPs should be encouraged to consult their DHA when in doubt, and they should  have ready access for this’.
A duty is also placed on the provider in that ‘when a hospital receives an extra-contractual referral, it will need to discuss with the patient's DHA the financial arrangements and other terms…’
(DoH, 1989f, para.3.14–3.16).
There are few proposals to control other elements of a Type II ‘internal market’, ie extra-contractual emergency referrals and the treatment of temporary residents, although in many cases the dividing line between emergency and non-emergency is very narrow.
However, it is stressed that ‘Authorities will be expected to monitor attendance to ensure that A and E referral is not used as a substitute for out-patient referrals’ by budget-holding GPs (DoH, 1989d, p.3.8).
In practice, the effectiveness of DHA planning will be strongly influenced by the strength of the elements of Type II which it faces.
Careful plans could be disrupted if unplanned Type II elements consume a large part of an authority's resources.
However, some problems for planning arise from the operation of a Type I system itself.
These are concerned mainly with contracting and the gatekeeper role.
Contracting:
With Type I ‘internal markets’, some or all the health care services for an authority's residents will be purchased on the basis of contracts.
The letting and operation of such contracts could have a profound effect on health care planning.
Various types of contract can be devised, ranging from population-based contracts, through block contracts, to cost-per-case contracts, all of which contain their own perverse incentives.
With population-based contracts, ie contracts to provide a defined population with its full requirements for a specified range of services, the incentive to the provider is to treat as few patients as possible, to undersupply and to reduce the level of service to the minimum specified in the contract.
With block contracts, which specify the number of cases to be treated, the provider has an incentive to select the cheaper cases within the categories specified and to minimise the level of service per patient.
With cost-per-case contracts, the provider has an incentive to maximise the number of patients treated, whilst minimising the cost per patient.
In all contracts, there is an incentive to shift the costs on to other services outside that contract, for instance, from hospital care to community care.
Further problems arise from the creation of ‘packages’ of services or care, a corollary of contracting and tendering for services.
Much of the debate on the ‘internal market’ appears to relate to elective surgery, which lends itself to ‘packages’of care.
It is easy to grasp the concept of tendering for the oft-quoted ‘200 hip replacements’ and, apart from dangers such as adverse selection, this appears relatively non-problematic.
However,Working for patients proposes to put the entire health service out to tender — in discrete parcels.
How a contract could be agreed for, say, general medicine, other than on a population basis is difficult to envisage.
If the contract is made for, say, 100 pneumonia cases or for 100 fractures (or 100 births), what happens to the 101st case that comes along?
Thus where the home authority does not directly provide any services, a Type I ‘internal market’ would need to involve a mixture of types of contracts, including  population-based contracts.
However, the Working for patients proposals do not appear to envisage such contracts.
Some proposals for block contracts (DoH 1989f) at first sight do appear to be population based, eg ‘the DHA might, for example, require a specified number of beds to be available to a DHA's residents whenever required for a defined area of treatment together with the appropriate facilities for treatment’, but this does not indicate who is responsible when these beds are all occupied and more (emergency) cases arrive.
Other problems may arise as a result of contracting.
Firstly, what is the position of a Health Authority which, having identified a need for a particular service, cannot find a provider?
This could prove to be a particular problem for DHAs left without any relevant directly managed services.
Secondly, individual health authorities would enter the ‘internal market’ with different historical endowments of facilities and would be unlikely to be able to compete equally for contracts.
Thirdly, problems might arise from the interdependence of services.
Is it really possible to ‘contract-out’ some specialties and still retain a comprehensive service?
The gatekeeper role:
Whilst the home authority can plan and contract for the services it identifies as being required to meet the needs of its population, it is not clear who will decide which individuals will receive these services.
In other words, which party, the purchaser or the provider, will determine which patients shall be treated on the contract?
If it is left to the provider, there will be strong incentives to select the lower cost, least complicated cases, within the contracted category.
The Department of Health (1989f) proposes as a ‘minimum, the contracting parties should consider specifying:…the criteria for admission and discharge of in-patients and for day/out patient referrals’.
However, it is difficult to see how such criteria can be formulated to ensure that treatment is received by those individuals that the home authority would have chosen.
Lilford (1989) sees the ability of the home authority to choose who receives treatment as a major benefit to be gained from the system, stating that ‘some patients will still go without treatment, but commissioning agents will help patients with the greatest need or best prognosis.
Therefore, instead of the budget running out, say, after nine months of the year, the commissioner will preselect for the greatest perceived need’.
However, Lilford gives no indication as to how this preselection might work.
Some HMOs ‘employ’ GPs to act as gatekeepers, and currently in the NHS, GPs act as the initial gatekeeper to secondary care, with consultants and other hospital doctors acting as the final gatekeeper.
It is not clear whether this system will work in compliance with the plans of the home authority when funding is separated from provision through contracts.
GPs are neither employees nor agents of the home authority and have no contractual, and little moral, duty to act as the authority's gatekeeper.
Indeed, since GPs will feel that their primary duty is to their own patients, there will be no incentive to attempt to limit their patients’ share of the contracts.
This could cause problems with volume contracts, but particular problems would  arise with cost-per-case contracts.
With contracting, hospital doctors will be the agents of the provider, not the purchasing authority, and again cannot be expected to take on the gatekeeper role.
In support of the feasibility of contracting, instances are cited where Health Authorities, aiming to clear or reduce waiting lists, have contracted with another authority or the private sector to provide a number of treatments, usually elective surgery.
However, in such instances, the patients treated had already been ‘approved’ by both gatekeepers, the GP and the consultant.
Proposals put forward by Maynard et al (1986) for GP budgets would overcome this problem, since GPs would act as gatekeepers to their own budgets.
However, if GPs were given budgets for the whole range of patient care for their patients, various problems could arise including incentives to undersupply, especially if GPs were permitted to retain budgetary savings.
Bevan (1984, 1989) avoids this particular problem in proposing a simulated HMO based on GPs choices.
Under this ‘simulated market’, districts would receive a population-based allocation and would pass this allocation ‘down to GPs in the form of notional budgets for hospital and community health services; GPs would exercise choice, as in the model of Maynard et al;but that choice would be made against the notional budget, where GPs stand neither to lose nor to gain financially from how their actual use of services compares with their budget’(Bevan, 1989).
Markets and planning
The ‘market’ proposals in Working for patients could have other implications for health care planning, irrespective of the relative strengths of the Type I and Type II models.
Many of these relate to the characteristics of the health care services that could be obtained to meet the needs of the population identified by the planning authority — the DHA.
Volume of services
Many of the benefits intended to flow from the implementation of Working for patients appear to be predicated on the assumption of an increase in the total volume of services provided.
This is made explicit in an executive letter which states that the ‘objective of increasing the efficiency of the NHS will only be realised if competition delivers more in the value of savings and/or quality improvements than it adds to transaction costs’(DoH, 1989g).
Obviously, the hoped-for benefits such as reduced waiting lists can only be brought about by an absolute increase in available services or by a transfer of resources from other services.
Clearly, it is hoped that greater efficiency will achieve a higher volume of services.
There is also evidence from the US that ‘substantial savings are achievable through the transfer of services from low volume, high cost, low efficiency centres’.
On the strength of this Petchey (1989) concludes that  ‘there is the potential for some cost saving even if we are unable to begin to quantify it’.
However, there are countervailing forces which might result in a lower volume of services.
Firstly, there is the cost of the increased staff required just to work the proposed system.
The commentary to the Bill to effect the proposals (HMSO, 1989) states that, in addition to a short-term increase in staff, there will ‘…be a permanent increase, provisionally estimated to be 3000, in the number of certain specialist staff at hospital level, including finance, personnel and information technology staff…the new arrangements…will require an estimated 485 extra staff in Regions, FPSAs (current FPCs) and health boards.
The Prescription Pricing Authority…will require 350 extra staff initially’.
Secondly, there is a risk that higher prices charged by monopoly suppliers will result in DHAs being able to purchase a lower volume of services than provided at present.
As Barr et al (1989) put it, ‘We must expect the new independent hospitals to act like any profit-maximising firm.
They will attempt to differentiate their products.
Having many expensive specialist facilities this will not be difficult.
We would expect them to corner discrete specialist areas of care and charge monopoly rent for the cases they treat.
There will be no effective competition.’
This danger has clearly been anticipated and one of the working papers states that ‘…the Secretary of State will need reserve powers to prevent a self-governing hospital with anything near to a monopoly of service provision from exploiting its position, for example by charging unreasonably high prices for its services’(DoH, 1989b, para. 2.15).
However, self-governing hospitals (NHS Trusts) will have power to fix pay levels and few have suggested that this will result in a general fall in pay — indeed, a general increase in pay levels is anticipated in an attempt to attract scarce staff (Maynard, 1989).
Much of the scope for pay reduction within the NHS has already been exploited in the competitive tendering for support services.
Increased costs will result in increased prices unless entirely compensated by increased efficiency.
In the circumstances, it is not clear what will be considered ‘unreasonable’ but, for a DHA with a fixed budget, even a 10 per cent increase in prices would lead to a 9 per cent decrease in services which could be purchased — a serious blow to planning.
Thirdly, a possible source of increased prices lies in the dividing up of services for the purpose of contracting.
Many services offered by health providers can be considered as joint products.
Thus it is possible that, as a result of letting out contracts for individual services possibly to different suppliers, the aggregate cost of the individual contracts (each of which would have to be independently viable) will exceed the combined cost of the original integrated services.
However, this effect, if it does exist, could be outweighed by the greater efficiencies mentioned above.
Waiting for services
One of the stated aims of Working for patients is the reduction of length of time waiting for treatment.
Indeed, one criterion for the placing of contracts and for monitoring providers will be the length of waiting lists and the delay  in treatment.
However, it is possible that the rationing function of waiting lists will simply be moved to an earlier stage in the treatment cycle.
A provider, being judged on the length of waiting lists, will simply accept for treatment the number of cases provided for in the contract, quite properly refusing further cases unless reimbursed on a cost-per-case basis.
Refused cases will not appear on the waiting list.
Further, by controlling the rate of acceptances for treatment, it will be possible for the provider to guarantee immediate treatment.
Balance of services
Differential increases in prices might cause problems for planning by causing imbalances.
Indeed for some treatments there may be no service available since the providers consider it unprofitable.
Markets imply a willing seller and a willing buyer.
Location of services
The proposals, both Type I and Type I1, involve ‘purchasing’ services from outside the home authority, possibly at a considerable distance.
Despite the provisions for core services, this could lead to problems for a DHA in planning equitable, integrated and accessible services for its resident population.
Studies have shown that a proportion of patients are willing to travel to receive elective surgery more speedily, but there is little evidence on this question in relation to other services.
For instance, Lister (1988) asks: ‘what comfort would it be for elderly and severely ill patients to hear of ‘competitive’ NHS hospitals with vacant beds in Liverpool or Devon?’
Culyer et al (1988) stress that ‘care will have to be exercised to ensure that very sick and elderly patients are not treated or cared for long distances away from their homes and families’.
Brotherton & Harris (1988) point to increased difficulties in arranging back-up services and in discharging patients into community health services, if their hospital services had been provided far from their home locations.
Type of services provided
It is noted above that the main planning focus for suppliers will be business planning to enable them to secure and  fulfil contracts.
Except in those cases where contracts are population-based, which is not apparently envisaged in the new proposals, providers will have a responsibility only to the patients they treat and will have no responsibility for any particular population.
As Troop & Zimmern (1989) express it, ‘at the hospital or service end the objective is entirely different.
Its aim is efficient and effective service provision.
It is the ‘provider’ of services.
Its unit of concern is not the population but the patient episode and a well run hospital will know exactly, for each category of patient, the cost of care and its outcome’.
A criticism that has been levelled at clinicians in the past is that they are concerned only with the patients they actually see and not with the wider population.
As a result, considerable effort has gone into attempting to relate individual clinical decisions and actions to wider health and resource issues.
Indeed most providers would now claim that they do take account of the wider population.
However, the introduction of proposals which structurally divorce the providers of services from wider population considerations, may be considered by some to be a retrograde step and, in practice, may affect the type of care delivered.
Locality planning
Over recent years, there have been various developments in health care planning with the aim of better meeting the needs of particular populations.
One such development is locality planning, which aims to plan integrated services for a community at a more local level than the district.
How such planning would fare under the new proposals is not clear.
One solution would be for the district to allocate the resources to the locality for it to secure the services required.
However, even if this were permitted, the necessary expertise for contracting is unlikely to be available at the local level.
Philosophy of health and health care
The underlying philosophy of health and health care provision, inherent in any system, will have a profound influence on the nature and achievements of health care planning.
This is a major area which can only be touched on here.
The emphasis in Working for patients on services to individual patients, and provisions such as‘Life-style consultations’ in connection with the 1990 Contract for GPs, can be viewed as a reinforcement of the individualistic view of health.
This view has come under criticism from some commentators (Navarro, 1976; Doyal 1979) since, they claim, it leads to treating the causes of ill-health as being individual, requiring individually orientated therapeutic responses or prevention through individuals changing their own way of life.
Thus, it is claimed, the economic and political environment is absolved from responsibility for disease and collective responses are rendered unnecessary.
Another related factor is the move towards treating health care provision as a tradeable commodity.
Navarro (1986) claims that ‘capitalism attempts to replace services pure and simple with commodities that can be bought and sold on the private market’ and rather more strongly, Waitzkin (1983) suggests that ‘from the standpoint of potential profit, there is no reason that corporations should view medical products differently from other products.
The commodification of health care and its associated technology is a necessary feature of the capitalist political-economic system.’
Conclusions
If the proposals in Working for patients are implemented, the planning roles of the various parts of the health services would change considerably and would be more differentiated than at present.
The planning role of providers, whether directly managed units, self-governing hospitals or the private sector, would largely revolve around business planning to secure and  fulfil contracts.
Population-based planning relating to identifying the needs of a population and ensuring these needs are met — generally to promote the health of a defined population — will be the province of Regional and District Health Authorities.
The resource allocation proposals in Working for patients , ie funding regions and districts on a weighted population basis, without compensation for cross-boundary flows should, despite considerable misgivings about the actual methodology employed, assist Districts in their planning role.
However, below districts, the proposals for the separation of funding from the provision of services — the ‘internal market’— could prove more problematic for planning.
Two distinct types of ‘internal market’ have been identified, both of which have considerable implications for population-based planning, for the pursuit of priorities, and for equity and equality whether between geographical area, social groups or health care groups.
Both types of ‘internal market’ are present in Working for patients and there is evidence of tension between the two types of provision.
The eventual outcome for planning to meet needs, to secure equity, to maximise health, will depend very much on the relative strengths in practice of the two types of ‘internal market’.
The White Paper and the finance function
Tony Cook
Introduction
Like many other aspects of the National Health Service, the finance function has changed, and is continuing to change over time.
In recent years, that pace of change has been particularly rapid.
This chapter aims to assess the Working for patients White Paper in the light of the changing nature of the finance function.
It will consider, first of all, the state of the finance function as it stood at the end of 1988, and assess what changes had recently taken place, what were in progress and what further developments could logically have been anticipated.
In that context, we will then turn to the White Paper and consider its proposals as they affect, specifically, accounting and finance.
We will examine its financial aims and objectives, how they impact on the finance function, some of the problems of implementation, and whether they are consistent with the changes already in hand.
Finally, some conclusions are drawn as to the desirability of the changes proposed in Working for patients .
It is also important to note, at the outset, the distinction between financial accounting and management accounting.
Financial accounting concerns the need to have systems in place which ensure that financial transaction (such as the payment of wages) are properly conducted and that appropriate records are maintained.
Management accounting is concerned with ensuring that appropriate financial information is provided to the management of the organization in order that they can manage it as well as possible and (in the public sector) deliver the greatest Value for Money.
The developing finance function before Working for patients
Figures 3.1 is a familiar, and a very useful one for explaining the financial structure of the NHS in England .
It was first published by the Department of Health in 1983, and was then updated in successive annual reports of the NHS in England (DHSS, 1986).
However, it has not officially been published for the last couple of years and the figures shown for 1986/87 are unofficial ones culled from the published NHS annual accounts (DHSS, 1988).
The figure shows the nature of expenditure (hospital running costs, capital expenditure, general practice expenditure) and shows clearly the split which currently exists between the Hospital and Community Health Services (on the left of the figure) and the Family Practitioner Services (on the right).
Figure 3.1a is a variant Fig. 3.1 in which the organisations responsible for committing expenditure are shown.
Thus, on the right-hand side, there is a box for the Family Practitioner Committees (FPCs) which are responsible for making payments to the practitioners.
On the left, there are boxes under both ‘revenue’ and ‘capital expenditure’for Regional Health Authorities (RHAS), District Health Authorities (DHAs) and Units.
Note the relative sizes of the boxes.
Under ‘running costs’ there is a small box for RHAS and a large box for DHAs indicating that the bulk of expenditure is actually incurred by the District Health Authorities.
Under ‘capital expenditure’, the situation is reversed as it is the Regional Health Authorities who are responsible for planning, designing and building the major capital schemes.
In both cases, units are shown as ‘dotted line’ boxes indicating that very little expenditure is actually paid for by the units, even though, of course , they are where the bulk of resources are deployed.
In Figure 3.1a the organisations are shown as solid lines, and the direct payments to them as broken lines.
Figure 3.2 is also familiar.
It originates from the Korner 6th Report (NHS/DHSS, 1984) and shows ‘How money is spent in a hospital day by day’.
Note the three levels of expenditure analysis described as ‘subjective’, ‘departmental’ and ‘patient care’.
Let us consider the ongoing development of NHS finance within this framework.
Prior to 1974, hospital accounts were generally maintained only on the traditional income and expenditure account basis which showed only a ‘subjective’ analysis of expenditure (ie salaries for doctors, salaries for nurses, expenditure on drugs, etc).
This corresponds to level 1 in Fig. 3.2.
Following the 1974 NHS reorganisation, we had the introduction of what is now referred to as the departmental system of budgeting (as in level 2 in Fig. 3.2).
While it has been refined and improved in several respects, this departmental system of budgeting is still the main tool of financial management on the vast majority of NHS hospital sites.
Moreover, as Maynard has demonstrated (Maynard, 1984), it has proved to be effective in enabling health authorities to live within their means.
Recent cases, where health authorities have overspent, have usually stemmed from a failure to properly install and operate such a system.
In value for money (VFM) terms if the only financial objective is the achievement of ‘economy’ then the NHS is well served by the present departmental system of budgeting.
However, we need to address the wider issues of VFM.
If we accept the ‘three es’ definition of VFM — economy, efficiency and effectiveness,— then financial information systems need to be developed which will promote ‘efficiency’and ‘effectiveness’in addition to economy.
It is in this wider context that the departmental system of budgeting becomes inadequate.
In particular, it is subject to three well-documented limitations.
They are:
1
It provides no analysis of expenditure by health care category — however defined.
Thus, for example, if we wished to know how much we are spending on orthopaedic surgery, the departmental analysis of expenditure will not tell us.
This is because part of that expenditure is incurred in the operating theatres, part in the wards, part in the X-ray department, etc.
However, the departmental system of budgeting contains no mechanism to identify those individual parts, nor any mechanism to bring them together to give a total for orthopaedic surgery.
This limitation is crucial, of course, to our ability to plan expenditure in health care terms.
2
Doctors — in discharging their clinical duties — make decisions which commit resources for which they are not the budget holders.
Thus, when a doctor asks for an X-ray or path lab test, or prescribes drugs, or decides that a patient should remain in hospital for a further two days, he is making a financial as well as a clinical decision.
However, he is not presumed to be financially accountable for such decisions.
3
The corollary to point two is that it is budget-holders — such as the chief pharmacist or chief pathologist — who are expected to manage their departments within a predetermined budget, although the level of activity in their departments is outside their control.
The chief pharmacist, for example, has no control over the number of prescriptions that come into his department.
However, he cannot refuse to dispense a prescription on the grounds that to do so would make him overspend against his budget.
Knowledge of these limitations is not new.
The Royal Commission Report of 1978 (Royal Commission on the NHS, 1978) identified them, and the last decade has seen several initiatives to develop improved financial information and to overcome them.
All of these initiatives share the common approach of adding an additional — clinical — analysis of hospital expenditure.
We can, therefore, conceive of a simple three-dimensional model (Fig. 3.3).
Alternatively on Fig. 3.2 the development may be seen in terms of moving from level 2 — departmental analysis of expenditure, to level 3 — patient care analysis.
Clearly, as with the existing ‘subjective’ and ‘departmental’analyses so the clinical analysis of expenditure may be provided in greater or lesser degrees of details.
Conventional wisdom — as illustrated for example in the Korner 6th Report — has come to identify five possible levels of analysis for the clinical axis:
1
To client group (mental handicap, maternity, the elderly, etc)
2
To clinical specialty (orthopaedics, paediatrics, obstetrics, etc)
3
To consultant (and his clinical team)
4
By disease category (hip replacements, appendicectomies, strokes, etc)
5
To the individual patient 
In fact, attention has been paid at different times, and in different initiatives, to developing financial information appropriate to each of the above levels of analysis.
For example, analyses of expenditure to client group have been available at the national level since the mid-1970s.
These have been calculated by a technique misleadingly known as ‘programme budgeting ’.
This involves making very broad brush assumptions about how costs can be allocated to broadly defined client groups.
Such figures are of limited value in that they contain no guide as to whether the resources have been spent efficiently or effectively.
Likewise, the title is misleading in that it is not a true budgeting system.
Nevertheless, limited though their value may be, the NHS in England has not made consistent use of programme budget figures (unlike Scotland where the Health Boards have produced historical and projected figures to assist health care planning).
From the 1987/88 financial year, Health Authorities have been required to produce ‘specialty costs’.
These are, by definition, calculations of average costs per case at specialty level, prepared at the end of each financial year on historical bases.
The technique, has been existent for some years, and should provide information which may be of use in identifying high levels of expenditure within a particular specialty within a district, and should be of value in assisting local planning.
If we can now move down the clinical axis to level 5 — that of the individual patient — there have been various trials in techniques of patient costing;designed by definition, to calculate the cost of treating each patient.
Of particular interest here is the work of the Financial Information Project which has been in existence since 1979.
There are arguments in favour of analysing costs down to the individual patient.
However, it should be recognised that while it is possible to analyse costs retrospectively to the  individual patient, it is not possible to plan prospectively for the individual patient.
It is not possible for example to predict that Mr Smith will have a heart attack or that Mrs Williams will fall over in the snow and break her leg.
We can not therefore budget down to the level of the individual patient.
Thus all three of these techniques: programme budgeting, specialty costing and patient costing, are of some value but do not overcome all the limitations of departmental budgets.
Consequently, recent developments have concentrated upon what may be described as systems of ‘clinical budgeting’.
In the UK, there have been three initiatives of note, and variants have concentrated on three levels — specialty, consultant and disease category — in our clinical analysis.
These three initiatives are CASPE, ‘Management Budgeting’ and ‘Resources Management’.
CASPE — an acronym for Clinical and Service Planning Evaluation — is a small research group based at the King's Fund College.
It was established in 1979 and has developed systems of clinical budgeting — perhaps with varying degrees of success — at a small number of NHS hospitals.
A key feature of the CASPE approach has been the emphasis on the planning rather than the control aspect of budgeting through PACTs (Planning Agreements with Clinical Teams).
Discussions were held with consultants and agreements drawn up as to what would be the expected workload for the clinical team and what resources they may require to process that workload.
The early CASPE trials were actually discrete information systems developed with little finance department involvement.
In such cases, the district treasurer would have argued that financial control over the hospital remained with the traditional departmental budgets.
The development of ‘Management Budgeting’ was one of the recommendations of the Griffiths Report of 1983.
In a supporting paper, Blyth (1983) argued that the objective was:
‘to develop management budgets involving clinicians at unit level with the emphasis on management rather than accountancy.
The aim is to produce an unsophisticated system in which workload related budgets concerning financial and manpower allocations and full overhead costs are closely related to workable service objectives, against which performance and progress can be compared.’
That is the key paragraph in a paper which logically argued the case for a better budgeting system, and set out a number of principles on which it should be based.
By and large, those principles were soundly based although one could take issue with the question of ‘full overhead costs’.
This does not follow what is generally accepted as good industrial/commercial practice.
The paragraph also contains a clue as to why management budgeting has been perceived, by some, to be a failure in that it talks of an ‘unsophisticated system’.
It is possible to have a system in which ‘workload related budgets concerning financial and manpower allocations, etc but it is not going to be ‘unsophisticated’.
In that respect Blyth was unrealistically optimistic.
Nevertheless, the overall principle is important.
There is a need for financial and manpower allocations, related to workable service objectives, against which performance and progress can be compared.
In the light of Griffiths, the DHSS funded four ‘demonstration districts’.
These, too, have had their successes and failures.
They have demonstrated that it is possible to construct systems of clinical budgeting in acute hospitals.
However, they have also thrown up a number of problems.
The need to have adequate supporting information systems in such key areas as patient administration, radiography, pharmacy and pathology is one of the technical problems.
Even more important, however, are the organisational and behavioural issues: what are the correct managerial relationships between the medical, nursing and paramedical professions?
What are the training requirements created by the development of these systems?
Above all, to what extent can clinicians be persuaded to accept that they are financially and managerially accountable for their decisions?
And, if they do, how should their organisational structure be incorporated into the managerial hierarchy of the hospital?
In so far as management budgeting was seen to be a failure, it was because it was perceived to be too much of a finance-led exercise which did not adequately tackle the organisational and behavioural issues.
Hence we had the move, in 1986, to Resource Management.
HN (86) 34 (DHSS, 1986) initiated the change of title and the very real change of emphasis.
It identified four lessons which had been learned from the Management Budgeting experience:
1
Doctors and nurses need to be centrally involved in management arrangements.
2
Doctors and nurses need to be centrally involved in specifying the information requirements of the new systems.
3
Effective financial management support is vital.
4
The pace at which management budgets are introduced will need to be carefully judged.
Six acute hospitals were identified to be pilot sites for the Resource Management Initiative (RMI).
From a narrow accounting point of view, the significant change was that they were to be geared to the introduction of patient ‘case-mix planning and costing’.
Such a system requires that patients suffering from similar diseases and requiring similar treatment regimes should be grouped together.
The budgeting system then becomes capable of reflecting the complexity of cases handled, rather than the simple numbers of patients treated.
In terms of our levels of analysis on the clinical axis, we are now moving from level 3-consultant, to level 4-disease category.
Although still in its infancy, there have already been several approaches to case-mix accounting.
For example, at Southmead Health Authority — one of the original Management Budgeting demonstration districts — the approach was to ask to each of the participating consultants to define the 10 or 12 case types which probably made up 80 to 90 per cent of their regular workload.
For each of those case types a treatment pattern was identified and costs were applied in order to build up a treatment cost for the typical patient.
Such an approach is perfectly logical from a local management accounting point of view.
However, it suffers from the drawback that each consultant is defining his own case type and will do it differently from another consultant in another hospital.
It therefore makes comparisons difficult.
Internationally, the most widely used approach is based on the international disease classification developed at Yale University.
Under this approach, all acute patients can be allocated to one of 475 Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGS).
Already this system has been extensively used in the USA where, increasingly, the Medicare system is reimbursing hospitals on the basis of a price per DRG.
In the UK, all of the new Resource Management sites are basing their development of case-mix accounting on DRGS.
Yet another American approach is being developed at Johns Hopkins University.
This recognises that, even within the same disease category, some patients are more severely ill than others and require correspondingly more extensive — and more expensive — treatments.
This approach, therefore, introduces severity ratings whereby patients' illnesses are then classified into one of four categories of severity, within the same disease category.
It should be recognised that we are still in the early days of case-mix accounting.
However difficulties arise simply because we are dealing with patients in a hospital rather than products in a factory.
Inevitably, therefore, even within one category, some patients are more severely ill than others, some have more complications, some respond to treatment better than others, etc, etc.
Crucially, therefore, the task is to identify groupings which make both medical sense — in that all patients in that group are clinically similar — and accounting sense — in that treatment of all such patients will require similar resources.
Although cumbersome, the expression ‘resource homogeneous diagnosis related groups’ well illustrates the problem.
This problem has not yet been solved satisfactorily, but there is no reason to believe that it is incapable of solution.
Probably it will require more categories of patients, coupled with some form of severity ratings.
Nevertheless, there are examples in the industrial/commercial world of organisations with several thousands of product variants.
With modern data processing facilities, the numbers of categories are not likely to be a problem.
Once we have definable categories of patients, each of which can have a defined treatment regime, it then becomes a fairly straightforward task to build up a defined treatment cost.
Such an exercise involves setting standard costs for hospital units such as‘bed/days’ and ‘operating theatre hours’, etc.
This information can now readily be produced within existing clinical budgeting systems.
In management accounting terms, this is simply a standard product cost.
Most industrial/commercial concerns will have such standard costs calculated for their ranges of products.
They would regard them as essential information necessary to plan their activities, to prepare operating budgets and to assist in pricing their products.
All of the developments described above are concerned with the running costs, or ‘revenue’ expenditure in the NHS.
Similar developments are in hand in respect of capital expenditure.
Currently, the NHS is much criticised because it does not have a comprehensive inventory of its fixed assets.
It  does not therefore have commercial-type balance sheet which shows the value of those assets, nor does it take a ‘depreciation’ or ‘leasing’charge for the use of those assets into its income and expenditure account.
However, as with revenue expenditure, recognition of these weaknesses is not new.
They too were identified in the Royal Commission and, similarly, there has been a series of developments in the intervening decade.
Three are particularly significant.
Firstly, we have had the introduction in 1981 (DHSS, 1981) of a more formal and comprehensive Investment Appraisal Mechanism known as the Appraisal of Options Procedure.
This has since been refined with the issue of the revised Capricode (DHSS, 1986) manual in 1986.
Secondly, we had the Ceri Davies Report of 1983 advocating the need for Health Authorities to develop an estate management plan (DHSS, 1983).
Thirdly, we had the 1985 Report by the then Association of Health Service Treasurers on managing capital assets in the NHS (AHST, 1985), in the light of which work is under way at three DHAs on setting up comprehensive asset systems.
Now, no one could argue that all the problems of financial management — particularly as an aid to achieving the maximum VFM from limited resources — have been overcome in the NHS.
Indeed, the opposite is the case.
Across the whole of the NHS there has barely been a scratching of the surface.
However, all of the developments under way— involving both capital and revenue expenditure — share three particular characteristics: they are evolutionary, they are on going and they are incomplete.
They are evolutionary in that, although many of the ‘trials’, ‘pilot studies’ and ‘demonstrations’have had different origins, there has frequently been a common thread linking one to another, and lessons learned from one have been applied in another.
They are ongoing in that they are still at an early stage and in that the process of applying them right across the whole of the NHS will take several years-probably up to the end of the century.
Finally, they are incomplete in that, even on the pilot sites, many issues have yet to be addressed.
Four, in particular, can readily be identified:
1
In the case of the RMI, there is a need to co-ordinate activities in the acute hospitals with activities in community units and in family practitioner services to ensure — overall — the best VFM.
2
There is a need to introduce more comprehensive variance analysis to explain differences between ‘budgeted’ and ‘actual’expenditure.
3
There is a need to tie together developments in revenue accounting with developments in capital and asset accounting to ensure that the impact of capital is properly accounted for.
4
There is a need to develop flexible budgeting to ensure that actual expenditure is measured against a budget which has been flexed to take account of actual workload (recognising both volume and mix factors).
Flexible budgeting is normal practice in the industrial/commercial environment.
In the context of acute hospitals in the NHS, it is the logical next stage to follow case-mix accounting, and could be introduced with some changes to the funding structures of the NHS.
The case for flexible budgets has been extensively argued by this writer elsewhere (Cook, 1988; Cook & Perrin, 1988).
Several advantages can be identified, perhaps the most important of which is that it would remove the financial disincentive which currently exists for doctors, hospitals and Health Authorities to treat more patients.
Clearly then, at the end of 1988, there was a full and ongoing agenda for financial management within the NHS.
Equally clearly, it would have considerable implications for the staffing and structure of finance departments.
However, that agenda did have the advantage that it could be developed on an evolutionary basis, and that further innovations could be incorporated without major upheaval.
Figure 3.4 shows the main elements of the current and evolving structure of the typical NHS finances function deployed between RHAS, DHAs, Units and FPCs.
Those elements currently in place are shown in roman type.
The Resource Management Initiative-which impacts primarily at Unit level — is shown in italics.
Finally, we can add these further developments which can reasonably be anticipated (underlined).
Certainly, there is a need for a substantial impact of additional resources, and the NHS will need to be more successful in attracting key staff such as accountants and computer staff.
There is, however a logical progression from present finance functions through to further developments.
It is in this context that we need top assess Working for patients .
Working for patients — the White Paper
The White Paper has created a new agenda: There is one big financial feature which is unchanged.
That is that ‘the NHS is, and will continue to be, open to all, regardless of income, and financed mainly out of general taxation’.
That, of course, is crucial.
However, there are many other changes within the White Paper which clearly do impact on the financial structure and the need for better financial information and management.
Indeed paragraph 1.17 of the White Paper lists five important aims of the changes proposed, four of which are financial:
1
To improve the information available to local managers, enabling them in turn to make their budgeting and monitoring more accurate, sensitive and timely.
2
To ensure that hospital consultants — whose decisions effectively commit sums of money — are involved in the management of hospitals; are given responsibility for the use of resources; and are encouraged to use those resources more effectively.
3
To contract out more functions which do not have to be undertaken by health authority staff and which could be provided more cost effectively by the private sector.
4
To ensure that drug prescribing costs are kept within reasonable limits.
Amongst the specific changes which will impact on the finance function are:
1
The separation of responsibility for purchasing health care from that of providing health care.
RHAS and DHAs will have planning, commissioning and monitoring roles, while as many operational roles as possible will be delegated to the hospitals.
2
Hospitals to be able to apply for self-governing status within the NHS as NHS Hospital Trusts.
They will not be funded directly but will earn revenue from the services they provide.
3
NHS Hospital Trusts will be run by a Board of Directors — including a Director of Finance — on ‘business-like’ lines.
It will therefore be free to retain surpluses and build up reserves, or to manage temporary deficits.
4
The assets of those hospitals becoming Trusts will be vested in the Trust.
Hence:
(a)
The Trust will be given an interest bearing debt initially equal to the value of its assets.
(b)
Interest on this debt will be paid to the Department of Health.
(c)
The Trust will be able to dispose of its assets as it thinks appropriate.
(d)
The Trust will have borrowing powers, subject to an overall financing limit.
5
NHS Hospital Trusts will be free to negotiate the pay and conditions of their own staff, and to acquire their own supplies and services locally.
6
There will need to be contracts negotiated between purchasers and providers for hospital services.
These contracts will need to specify services supplied and prices and will probably be in three forms:
(a)
Block contracts for certain essential ‘core’ services.
(b)
‘Cost and volume’ contracts specifying a price for a minimum level of service, with additional cases treated over that minimum to be supplied at agreed prices.
(c)
Cost per case contracts.
7
A new system of resource allocation replacing RAWP and enabling money required to treat patients to be able to cross administrative boundaries.
8
A system of ‘capital charges’ to be introduced to reflect health authorities' use of existing capital assets and any new capital investment.
The charges will be set to cover the costs of interest and depreciation.
9
Family Practitioner Committees to be accountable to RHAS and to receive their funding from them.
10
Large GP practices to be able to apply for their own practice budgets to enable them to purchase a defined range of services direct from hospitals.
11
There will be closer monitoring of FPS drug expenditure.
RHAS will distribute funds to FPCs on a ‘RAWP-like’ weighted capitation formula.
FPCs will, in turn, monitor expenditure through ‘Indicative Budgets’ for GP practices.
12
FPCs to continue the development towards actively managing — as opposed to purely administering — the FPS.
This is a formidable new agenda to be imposed — and implemented within a very short time-scale — on top of the existing programme.
Space does not permit a detailed examination of each of these proposals.
However, within this chapter, 1 do intend to comment on four aspects.
Firstly, there is the need to consider how the White Paper's proposals impact on the funding structure of the NHS.
Secondly, we need to consider the consequent impact on finance departments.
Thirdly, some proposals do warrant a more detailed examination with regard to their desirability and practicability.
Finally, I will draw some overall conclusions on the White Paper.
The funding structure
Figure 3.5 shows the funding structure of the NHS in England after the implementation of the Working for patients proposals.
Clearly, it shows a very much more complex structure than exists at the moment (see Figure 3.1a).
In fact, the top half of the diagram is not very different.
The basic funding continues to come from the general taxation pool, supplemented by some income drawn from national insurance      contributions and some direct charges.
The most significant change, therefore, in the top half is that funds for the Family Practitioner Services will pass through the Regional Health Authorities, before being distributed to the Family Practitioner Committees.
The RHAS take centre stage with the DHAs beneath them on the left and FPCs on the right.
There is, however, one further difference affecting the top half of.the diagram.
That is that the interest payments that NHS Hospital Trusts make will go back to the Department of Health.
They, in turn, must then be distributed back into the system to ensure that the overall level of funding provided by the government is unchanged (line–.
–).
Hence the amount provided for the Hospital and Community Health Services (HCHS) revenue must be supplemented by the amount of the NHS Hospital Trusts' interest payments.
It is in the bottom half of the figure that the dramatic changes occur.
Firstly, on the bottom line it is necessary to add three additional ‘boxes’: one for NHS Hospital Trusts, one for GPs with practice budgets (GPPBs), and one for private hospitals.
We can then show the direct payments (line ––––) which are similar to those which are currently made although there are some differences.
We have already noted that FPCs are to receive their funds from RHAS, there will also be payments from RHAS to GPPBs.
Practice budget holders, however, will continue to receive some payments from their FPCs.
Finally, even with Directly Managed Hospital Units the intention is that more funds will be devolved directly down to the Units.
Secondly, we need to add the capital charges.
These are represented by line —.
The intention here is that they should operate down to individual budget holders.
Accordingly, we need to show capital charges returning from directly managed units, back through DHAs to RHAS.
As with interest charges, these then have to be redistributed.
Hence the distribution of HCHS revenue funds from RHAS to DHAs and to GPPBs needs to be enhanced by the capital charges element.
Thirdly, we need to consider the Indicative Drug Budgets to be introduced to control GP drug prescribing costs.
The actual payment to pharmacists will continue to be made as at present.
Indicative Drug Budgets will act as an aid to monitoring the prescribing costs of GPs rather than as a direct cash payment to them from which they pay the pharmacists.
They, therefore, flow down from the FPCs to the (non-practice budget) GPs with the actual expenditure incurred flowing in the opposite direction.
In the case of GPPBs, the drugs element is included within the practice budgets.
However the practice remains accountable to the FPC for its drugs expenditure.
The indicative drug budgets are shown as line —..— in figure 3.5.
Finally, we need to add the purchased services — these are shown as line…in the figure.
The intention is that DHAs will purchase some of their services (under three alternative forms of contract) from NHS Hospital Trusts and from private hospitals.
Similarly, GPPBs will purchase certain types of hospital treatment from NHS Hospital Trusts and from some Directly Managed Units and from some private hospitals.
However, they will simply place the orders, shown as line —, while the actual flow of cash is from FPCs (line…).
The impact on finance departments
Clearly, this is a very different funding structure from that which exists at present and which is illustrated in Fig. 3.1a.
The first point we must consider then is simply the mechanics of making it work.
Neither existing or potential finance departments (Fig. 3.4) are designed to handle this funding structure.
Consequently, there needs to be a massive overhaul.
It will be an immense task.
Already it has been considered by groups within the Healthcare Financial Management Association (Webb, 1989), and at some length by Prowle, Jones & Shaw (1989).
Consequently, I do not propose here to go into the main sections which will need to exist —‘post-WFP’— in Fig. 3.6.
It is the main sections which will need to exist —‘post-WFP’— in Fig. 3.6.
It is going to involve a substantial input of accounting (and, of course, data  processing) resources particularly where they do not exist now: in directly managed hospitals, in NHS Hospital Trusts, in the Family Practitioner Committees, and in the GP Practices.
Moreover, what is particularly regrettable about this requirement is that it is for largely financial accounting facilities to address such issues as:
How do we collect the income which is due to us?
How do we pay for clinical services which we are purchasing?
How do we pay for the goods and services which we need?
How do we pay the wages?
It is, in fact, a diversion of resources away from the priorities which existed at the end of 1988 which were to develop the management accounting skills of the NHS: particularly to promote the better use of resources through the RMI.
(Certainly,Working for patients will in due course also require management accounting skills but these will be used to address different issues — such as how to ‘price’ contracts for clinical services — from those previously on the agenda.)
Thus, despite the fact, that WFP will require a substantial input of accounting resources these will be largely committed to the bureaucratic tasks of co-ordinating transactions between A and B. Given particularly the government's record in the early 1980's of denouncing the ‘excessive, administrative costs of the NHS, that seems incredible.
Some specific proposals considered
Pricing, costing and the resource management initiative
A fragmented NHS, in which various organisations buy and sell clinical services from one another on a ‘businesslike’ basis, requires information for pricing.
The White Paper makes the bland assumption that this will be provided by the Resource Management Initiative.
There are two major misconceptions here.
Firstly, there is the issue of the timetable for ‘rolling out’ the RMI to the 260 major acute units.
WFP makes the statement that the RMI will be ‘extended and accelerated’ with the aim of building up coverage to those units by the end of 1991/92, ie March 1992.
There was never any prospect of that happening and now the commitment has been downgraded to one whereby work will have started on all the sites by that date.
That can, of course, literally be satisfied by the Unit General Manager (UGM) preparing a piece of paper which is simply a statement of intent.
However, 1 doubt whether anything more substantial will have been achieved on many units by that date.
My view has always been, and still is, that the extension of the RMI will still be with us in the year 2000.
A more serious misconception is that the RMI is designed to provide the appropriate information for pricing.
This was never the intention of the RMI.
As we have already discussed in this chapter, the case-mix accountancy developments within the RMI are still in their infancy.
The six pilot sites are concentrating on the use of Diagnosis Related Groups which cover only adult acute inpatients.
Consequently, all the other categories (paediatrics, long-stay patients, outpatients, etc) are not covered.
In addition, there is much evidence that DRGS are not the appropriate classifications for pricing purposes even within adult acute in-patient cases.
Certainly, they do not correspond to the categories identified within WFPs, GP practice budgets.
Prowle, Jones & Shaw (1989) suggest that Treatment Related Groups might be more appropriate.
TRGs is a concept, first identified by Gambling (1987) in which patients are classified more according to the treatment they receive than according to their clinical classification.
What is clear is that any newly appointed Director of Finance in an NHS Hospital Trust will be concerned about his inability to price his products.
Thus, once he has overcome his immediate problems of how to pay the wages, he will then require the development of an internal standard costing and budgetary control system which does give him the information he requires.
However, this will be seen as being an accounting/commercial exercise and will be in a very different form from the RMI.
(Significantly, however, such systems will inevitably incorporate flexed budgets.)
There will not be the same emphasis on the involvement of doctors and nurses in management arrangements and information requirements.
We will be back to the failings of Management Budgeting.
Consequently, there is a view that, far from extending and accelerating the RMI,Working for patients , will actually retard it.
Finally, work is under way at the Department of Health establishing national guide prices for certain categories of patients.
These can never be anything more than very rough and ready guidelines.
The essence, of course, of WFP is that competition should exist between providers.
That is totally inconsistent with the idea that they should charge some nationally calculated prices.
Capital charges
The White Paper is proposing, from April 1991, the introduction of a system of capital charges.
They will have three objectives:
1
To increase awareness in health service managers of the cost of capital.
2
To create incentives to use capital efficiently.
3
To see NHS provision evaluated on a basis broadly comparable with the private sector.
Note, however, that funds for NHS Capital Investment will continue to be provided by the Exchequer as a separate allocation within the overall programme.
Capital charges will therefore impact on the distribution of revenue funds to health authorities.
The nature of the capital charges is outlined in the main White Paper and then shown in more detail in Working Paper 5 and in Working Paper 9.
This is a difficult area and no one would seriously argue that current NHS practice is satisfactory.
Indeed, the need for Health Authorities to hold comprehensive asset registers is no more than basic accounting — obviously they should be created.
However, the authors of WFP have not thought the matter through and have come up with a set of proposals which will simply divert attention away from the real agenda which does exist for NHS capital accounting.
A number of reservations can readily be identified.
Firstly, Working Paper 5 (para 1.6) states that ‘Authorities will need to keep asset registers and calculate capital charges for each functional unit so that budgetary and costing systems also reflect managerial responsibility for assets’.
This implies that capital charges will go right down to the departmental level in the budgetary control system.
Now, in the private sector, not all companies take depreciation into their management accounts.
There is a very sound reason for this in that depreciation is not a cash item  and is one over which the departmental manager has little control.
Let us assume, for example, that a budget is agreed for a department and includes depreciation (or capital charges) of £12,000 for the year.
After month 1, the operating statement reads: Depreciation: Budget £1000, Actual £ 1000
After month 2, it reads:
Depreciation: Budget £1000, Actual £1000
Month 3, likewise:
Depreciation: Budget £1000, Actual £1000
By now, the item is beginning to lose its impact and, by month 6, it will have no significance whatsoever.
Moreover, the incentive to the departmental manager will completely disappear when he/she realises that there is no virement: Thus, even if he can reduce his capital charge by £500 per month, this will not give him an extra £300 to spend on other items.
Quite simply the basic case for capital charges has not been made.
Certainly, objective No 2 has not been achieved.
Secondly, the capital charges are to include depreciation and an interest element.
That of course is not comparable to the private sector where the Return on Capital element falls in the margin between calculated ‘costs’ and selling prices.
In addition assets are to be revalued every three years, and Working Paper 5 explains how this will happen.
This, too, is not private sector practice.
The private sector has, in fact, been struggling with the intricacies of inflation accounting for the last 25 years and have, by and large, abandoned the idea as being too difficult.
Certainly, there is no requirement in private hospitals to revalue their fixed assets every three years.
Hence, far from seeing NHS provision evaluated on a basis broadly comparable with the private sector, the authors of WFP have swung the balance in favour of private hospitals.
Object 3 is not achieved.
Thirdly, there is the issue of how precisely capital charges will impact on the funds that DHAs actually receive.
Working Paper 9 purports to show this but is sadly, incomprehensible.
It does not give an example of how revenue expenditure is allocated down to Regions, Districts and Units, and the ‘before and after’ cases of their allocations showing the impact of capital charges, and how they will change when Districts or Units actually increase or decrease their employment of fixed assets.
A much better example of how the basic allocation is to be done is shown in Prowle, Jones & Shaw, and I reproduce it in Table 3. 1 with acknowledgement to them.
We then need to address the issue of how the funding will change if one authority is able to divest itself of certain fixed assets .
Let us assume that DHA 1 does that and its capital charge reduces from £2.2m to £2.0m.
The impact is shown in Table 3.2.
DHA 1 does, in fact, see its revenue allocation increase from £117.8m to £117.95m. but at the expense of DHAs 2 and 3 .
That clearly is not going to be acceptable to those authorities.
Let us now assume the opposite case.
DHA 1 has been waiting patiently for a new DGH for 25 years.
At long last, it is built and its capital charges increase from £2.2m per annum to £3.0m.
The effect of this (Table 3.3) is to reduce its revenue funding by about £600,000 per annum while DHAs 2 and 3 enjoy an increased allocation of funds of about £300,000 per annum each.
Quite simply this system is not satisfactory.
In fact, with regard to fixed assets there are two important requirements to ensure that they are deployed efficiently.
Firstly, there is the need to get the original investment appraisal right.
Here the NHS has made considerable progress in recent years since the introduction of the Appraisal of Options Procedure.
Secondly, there is the need to create a funding structure whereby managers are encouraged to treat as many patients as possible.
If they can do that they will be using their resources (including fixed assets) efficiently.
Flexed budgets coupled with case-mix accounting promises that.
Unfortunately, capital charges based on fixed assets actually divert attention away from an area where NHS managers can make more efficient use of capital: that is in the control of working capital .
Decisions affecting fixed assets are, by their nature,ad hoc and occasional.
The control of working capital is an everyday activity and managers should direct more attention say to stock levels of consumable items.
Capital charges are useless in this context.
Hence the proposals fail on their No 1 objective.
Thus while there is a major agenda for capital accounting in the NHS,Working for patients does not provide the solution.
GP practice budgets
It is perhaps the Family Practitioner Services which offer the biggest challenge to those seeking to promote better Value for Money.
Working for patients makes a number of structural and organisational changes — including the appointment of FPC general managers — which are to be welcomed.
They may be seen as steps in the transition from the Family Practitioner Services being purely ‘administered’ services to being an actively managed service.
In this context, the government's earlier White Paper Promoting better health CM 249 (1987) is more significant.
To the management accountant, the challenge offered by the FPS is tremendous.
Previously the finance function within the FPCs has been largely a ‘pay and rations’ operation of paying to the doctors, dentists, pharmacists and opticians the allowances to which they are entitled in the ‘Red Book’(DHSS, 1989).
Now we have the prospect of organisations which must establish objectives, identify priorities within those objectives, allocate resources and then monitor expenditure against and the achievement of those priorities and objectives.
This, within a total turnover, in England of £6 billion.
It is a very exciting challenge and one which is long overdue.
Sadly, the GP practice budget proposals are a diversion from this.
What they will do is give the GPs a role to play in allocating resources to the hospital services and will contribute nothing to the delivery of better VFM within the family practitioner services.
At best, they will be a smokescreen diverting attention away from how the GPs deliver their services.
At worst, they will be a cumbersome and bureaucratic nightmare which involves sending patients to distant, low-priced hospitals.
Indicative drug budgets
In contrast, the proposals for indicative drug budgets are not so much wrongly conceived as incomplete.
GPs make many decisions which have financial consequences and all the arguments for clinical budgets to be applied to hospital doctors can also be applied to GPs.
Certainly, to the accountant, there is no reason why those doctors who are high spenders in their prescribing habits, should not be held to be financially accountable for their decisions.
However, GPs make many other decisions which have financial consequences.
They ask for pathology tests to be conducted by the local hospitals, they call on the community health services, and they refer patients to hospital for inpatient treatment.
Consequently, it is correct to assess the standard of service being provided by a GP, against the resources he is committing.
However, there are dangers in examining their drug spending patterns  in isolation, particularly where the express aim of WFP is ‘to apply downward pressure on drug expenditure’, without assessing the other factors and whether such constraints really do deliver better VFM.
As a first stage in developing better financial management in the FPS, ‘Indicative Drug Budgets’ do have a role to play.
However, they are no more than a first stage.
Conclusions
In this chapter, I have tried to assess the provisions of WFP in the light of the financial management agenda that existed at the end of 1988. 1 have endeavoured to look at the principles behind its proposals, rather than the detailed systems requirements necessary to make them work.
In diagrammatic form, the White Paper is proposing to change the funding situation of the NHS from that shown in Figure 3.1a to that shown in Figure 3.5.
Similarly, the impact on the finance function will require a transition from Figure 3.4 to 3.
The White Paper places great emphasis on the fact that currently ‘hospitals which offer the best VFM are not rewarded for doing so.
Indeed, hospitals may be penalised for this efficiency if they succeed in treating more patients than they had budgeted for’.
However, that defect — which is considerable — can be overcome by introducing flexed budgets as an extension to the RMI.
Therefore, the only additional benefits which can be identified in Figure 8.5 are those which might accrue from the competitive structure which the government is proposing to create.
Clearly, the additional costs of such a structure are enormous and as yet unquantifiable.
There is no evidence that the benefits from ‘competition’ outweigh the administrative cost involved.
What is clear is that they the system will only work if hospitals really do need to compete with one another to obtain their business.
That means that there must be some slack in the system, and the government will ensure that this is so by continuing to cash limit the NHS in total.
It is therefore — by definition — setting out not to use all the NHS facilities to the greatest extent.
As long as there is a waiting list for hospital treatment, that is not maximising VFM.
As a final thought, let's recap on the introduction of Resource Management and the lessons which had to be learned from the earlier Management Budgeting experience.
They were identified in HN (86) 34:
1
Doctors and nurses need to be centrally involved in management arrangements.
2
Doctors and nurses need to be centrally involved in specifying information requirements.
3
Effective financial management support is vital.
4
The pace at which new financial systems can be introduced needs to be carefully judged.
The current plans for Working for patients contravene all four.
Assessing efficiency in the new NHS
Mike Drummond
Introduction
Increased efficiency is one of the major objectives of the White Paper Working for patients (DH, 1989a).
The document proposes a number of efficiency promoting measures, including the establishment of an ‘internal market’ for health services with contracts between ‘purchasers’and ‘providers’, a voluntary scheme for those general practices that wish to manage their own budget and indicative drug budgets for all general practitioners.
Since the pursuit of increased efficiency is one of the major objectives of the proposals, this begs the question of how efficiency will be assessed.
Another chapter in this volume (Mullen, 1990) points out that the functioning of the internal market in health care is not a simple matter.
One cannot necessarily assume that the operation of market principles per se will automatically lead to efficiency.
Indeed, there is considerable evidence from the literature (Evans, 1985) that this is not the case, whether the patient is the direct consumer of services, or whether the doctor acts as an agent on the patient's behalf.
There has been relatively little formal assessment of the efficiency of alternative health care programmes or treatments in the United Kingdom (Ludbrook & Mooney, 1983; Drummond & Hutton, 1987).
Authors point to a number of possible explanations including the lack of appropriate evaluative skills, the lack of available data and the lack of appropriate incentives.
Indeed, the only formal requirement for economic evaluation of alternative plans or programmes at the current time is that of option appraisal for schemes where one of the options is a capital scheme with an initial outlay of £10 million or more (DHSS, 1981).
In such cases, the Regional Health Authority needs to submit a formal evaluation of the costs and benefits of options with its approval in principle submission to the Department of Health (Akehurst, 1989).
In addition, the Department of Health undertakes, or commissions, evaluations of health technologies at the national level (Buxton et al , 1985) and has issued guidance on the economic evaluation of medical equipment (DHSS, 1988).
However, it has neither been thought desirable nor feasible to require formal evaluations of alternative programmes, treatments or technologies at the local level.
Rather, the emphasis has been on reviewing health authority performance on a more aggregate level, through the  development of performance indicators (DHSS, 1983), supported by the review process.
There is no equivalent exhaustive review of family practitioner services, which are a major focus of the recent White Paper and the subject of an additional White Paper on primary health care (DH, 1989b).
This paper examines the prospects and problems of assessing the efficiency of health care alternatives in the light of the recent White Paper.
In particular, it considers the following issues:
(a)
what methods are available for assessing the efficiency of health care programmes and treatments;
(b)
in what ways are the White Paper proposals likely to encourage assessment of efficiency;
(c)
what monitoring systems should be put in place to assess whether more efficient health care provision has been secured as a result of the White Paper?
Methods for assessing the efficiency of health care programmes
The methods of economic evaluation have been well documented elsewhere so will only briefly be described here (Drummond, 1980; Warner & Luce, 1982; Drummond et al , 1987).
There are several related techniques, all having the common feature that some combination of the inputs (resources consumed) by health care programmes are compared with some combination of the outputs (improvements in health obtained).
The particular techniques differ mainly in the extent to which they measure and value in improvements in health.
Some techniques, such as cost analysis and cost minimisation analysis , proceed on the basis that the alternatives under consideration have been shown to be equivalent in effectiveness.
Others, such as cost-utility analysis and cost-benefit analysis , measure health improvements in quality-adjusted life-years and money terms respectively.
The most widely used technique is cost-effectiveness analysis, where the costs are measured in money terms and the improvements in health assessed in the most convenient natural units, such as‘years of life gained’ or ‘disability days avoided’.
(The various forms of analysis are outlined in Fig. 4.1).
There are two features of economic evaluation that merit particular emphasis in the light of the White Paper proposals.
First, assessment of efficiency explicitly requires consideration of both the resource use and the improvements in health obtained from the use of health care interventions.
Therefore, improvements in efficiency need to be distinguished from cost-cutting measures, where no consideration is given to the reduction in the effectiveness of the programme when the resource commitment is reduced.
Therefore, in the context of contracts for clinical services, or the establishment of community drugs formularies, the lowest cost option is not necessarily the most efficient.
Secondly, assessment of efficiency implies a wide consideration of the costs of health care programmes.
For example, the consideration of cost is not restricted to the hospital, but includes also the costs in primary care and those borne by patients and their families.
In the past, there has been a tendency in the NHS to shift costs from Health Authority to family practitioner committee budgets, through the earlier discharge of patients from hospital, or through restrictions in drug prescribing on hospital discharge.
(Conversely, long waiting times for an outpatient attendance or for hospital admission also shift costs from secondary care to primary care.
In the average district general hospital a significant proportion of medical admissions are emergencies.)
A key aspect of the White Paper proposals is the Health Authority and family practitioner budgets will be more interrelated.
At the level of the Regional Health Authority, they will be combined.
In addition, those general practices wishing to administer their own budgets will have included in their budgets a component to cover certain hospital-based treatments.
However, this will fall short of the health maintenance organisation (HMO) concept in the USA, where all the health care of enrollees is a charge on the HMO (Drummond & Maynard, 1988).
Nevertheless, the White Paper proposals should, in principle, change the behaviour of key actors, such as general practitioners, in respect of the costs they consider relevant to their decisions.
Impact of the White Paper proposals on the assessment of efficiency
It was mentioned earlier that, with the exception of option appraisal, the application of economic evaluation methods is limited in the NHS to date.
In 1987, Drummond & Hutton undertook a review of the economic appraisal of health technology.
They found that 50 economic appraisals had been published, covering a wide range of topics.
This is still minute in relation to the number of health technologies used in the NHS, however.
It is possible that Drummond and Hutton's review underestimates the total activity, since many appraisals may be undertaken within health authorities and such reports do not always enter into the public domain.
This could be the case, but there is no evidence to suggest that the amount of ‘in-house’ appraisal is extensive.
Indeed, in situations where Health Authorities have had easy access to the skills of economists, as through the York Health Economics Consortium (University of York, 1990), demand has been high, suggesting that the appropriate skills for the assessment of efficiency have been lacking in the past.
It is much more likely that the majority of assessments are currently undertaken either informally or indirectly.
For example, the managers in most authorities trust their clinical staff to be applying the most appropriate treatment technologies, either in their day-to-day practice, or in submitting bids for the development of clinical services.
The extent to which this trust is misplaced is unknown.
Managers mainly comfort themselves in the knowledge that physical and financial resources for clinical work are in short supply in the NHS.
This is therefore likely to encourage clinicians to search for more cost-effective procedures.
However, it is known from the research into performance indicators that clinical teams with similar levels of resources produce different amounts of services (Yates & Davidge, 1984).
Also it is conceivable that cash limits, whilst being effective in capping overall expenditure, may militate against the adoption of new, cost-effective, procedures if these necessitate financial outlays.
The discussion above has related mainly to the services under the management of health authorities.
Even less is known about the assessment of efficiency in family practitioner services.
General practitioners are largely free to employ the treatment technologies, mainly pharmaceuticals, that they see fit, with no overall budgetary limitation.
Similarly, there are no restrictions on referrals to secondary care, although long waiting times act as a limitation in practice.
Given the current arrangements in primary and secondary care, it is hardly surprising that there has been so little assessment of efficiency to date.
There is little or no formal requirement and few incentives.
If the White Paper proposals are implemented, the incentives will change quite considerably.
The next sections of the paper examine a number of the key proposals in relation to the impact they may have on the assessment of efficiency.
The internal market in health care
For the first time, an element of competition will be injected into the provision of health care through the NHS.
District Health Authorities, through their role as purchasers, will enter into contracts with a number of agencies, including their own directly managed units, to secure health services on behalf of their population.
The extent of choice available to the DHA purchasers will vary from one location to another, but is being broadened through the advent of self-governing NHS Trusts and the existence of a number of private hospitals.
The providers, be they directly NHS managed or self-governing, will not be guaranteed a budget as at present.
Rather, they will attract funds as a direct result of the contracts placed.
in addition to the contracts placed by Health Authorities, others will come from those general practitioners who opt to manage their own budget.
The precise extent to which competitive forces will come into play is as yet uncertain.
One current concern of district general managers is the apparent paradox between, on the one hand, the need to secure good value for money in health care for the population served and, on the other hand, the need to ensure that one's own directly managed units do not fail (Crump et al , 1990).
The view taken by the district on the relative importance of these two needs is likely to be a large influence on the competitive pressures faced by a given unit, as is the existence locally of other public or private providers and the number of GP budget-holders.
However, although the extent of competition will vary from place to place, all providers need to begin thinking about their business plan.
Namely, what markets are they seeking to serve and how are they going to serve them.
Since the price at which services are marketed will also be a factor, one would expect that the business planning exercise will prompt an examination of the treatment technologies being employed and their relative cost-effectiveness.
Some providers have already gone as far as to produce prospectuses outlining their services.
Though these documents do not necessarily show evidence of cost-effectiveness thinking being employed in their production, they are the first sign that market forces are having an impact.
Contracts for clinical services
The White Paper working paper on funding and contracts for hospital services envisages three broad classes of contract;block contracts , under which the GP or DHA would pay the hospital an annual fee in return for access to a defined range of services;cost and volume contracts , under which hospitals would receive a sum in respect of a baseline level of activity, defined in terms of a given number of treatments or cases, and cost per case contracts , where payment would be made to the hospital on a case by case basis, without any prior commitment of either party to the volume of cases which might be so dealt with.
Although the precise management arrangements for each type of contract will differ, the contracting procedure will incorporate several key steps, many of which offer the opportunity for assessment of efficiency.
In particular, someone, maybe the DHA or the individual GP, needs to decide whether contracts are to be let for particular services or not.
Once this has been decided, a contract specification needs to be written outlining the services to be provided, the treatment technologies to be used, the volume of cases to be treated, the standards to be achieved (in clinical effectiveness and quality of care) and price.
Finally, a monitoring system needs to be put in place to see that the work specified in the contract has been undertaken to the required standard within the agreed financial amount.
Any deviations from the terms and conditions of the contract would thus have to be justified.
These decision points are discussed in turn below.
Deciding whether or not to place a contract
In reality, the scope for choice here will depend on the nature of the clinical service concerned and the room for political manoeuvre.
For example, the provision of emergency services locally may not be a matter of choice, although there are, no doubt , choices relating to the nature and extent of emergency cover, eg number of accident and emergency units in a given geographical area and the extent of 24 hours a day, 7 days a week cover.
For certain types of elective operation, there is likely to be much more scope for choice in whether or not to let contracts.
There is scope here for economic evaluation to inform priorities for health care.
For example, Williams (198) pointed out that coronary artery bypass grafting for severe angina with left main disease gave much better value for money (£ 1040 per Quality-Adjusted Life-Year (QALY) gained in 1983–84 prices) than CABG for mild angina with two vessel disease (£12,600 per QALY gained).
Under the current arrangements, the priorities within open heart surgery are decided solely by the clinicians concerned.
The DHA merely decides the level at which it is prepared to fund its surgical unit.
One would expect that, all things being equal, clinical priorities would determine that the most serious cases are operated upon first, with broader and broader indications being accepted as funding becomes more widely available.
However, this is not currently an explicit agreement between management and the clinical staff.
Indeed, it is possible that clinicians would treat cases which they find particularly interesting or challenging from a clinical viewpoint, rather than those which offer the most returns (in terms of health improvement) in relation to the cost.
Many surgical waiting lists comprise large numbers of simple, low cost, procedures.
For example, an analysis of ophthalmology waiting lists has shown that the vast majority of patients are waiting for cataract extraction (Drummond & Yates, 1988).
However, crude calculations of the cost per QALY gained from cataract extraction show this to be a high value for money procedure (Drummond, 1988).
A similar situation exists in orthopaedics, where hip replacement has been demonstrated to give good value for money (Williams, 1985).
Under the new arrangements, DHAs and GPs will be able to decide which clinical needs should be met first through their ability to place contracts.
In that respect, the White Paper represents a major shift in decision-making about health care priorities.
The extent to which DHAs and GPs will exercise their new power remains to be seen, although the waiting list initiative (IACC, 1989) demonstrates that the letting of contracts with units, or the threat of taking the funds elsewhere, has led to change in behaviour of secondary care physicians.
However, one benefit for DHAs and GPs of the present system is that difficult rationing decisions are taken by hospital physicians and are seldom made explicit.
In that respect, physicians take on an additional burden beyond their immediate remit.
It may be that DHAs, in particular, will find the explicitness that accompanies the placing of contracts difficult to contend with.
It will now be their responsibility to explain to the public why some cases are priorities and others not.
Economic evaluation and the calculation of comparative costs per quality-adjusted life-year gained is one way of providing such an explanation.
It remains to be seen whether Health Authorities will take tough decisions and then seek to justify them, or whether they will seek ways to preserve the existing system, where rationing decisions are not made explicit.
In practice, this would lead DHAs to opt more for block contracts, or cost and volume contracts with very flexible arrangements for overruns.
Deciding upon the contract specification
Under the current arrangements, the hospital physicians largely decide on the method of treatment and (implicitly) the cost.
It has been pointed out (Akehurst and Drummond, 1989) that, while managers take some of the decisions controlling resource allocation, such as the nature of the ‘hotel’ facilities in hospitals, the major resource allocators are the doctors.
They decide when to admit the patient, the nature of the diagnostic workup, the treatment technologies to be employed and when to discharge.
With the advent of contracts, a specification for the care to be provided will be drawn up.
The level of detail in this specification is currently not clear, and there are at present very few examples of contracts (Drummond, Marchment & Crump, 1989; Central Birmingham Health Authority, 1989, Department of Health, 1990).
Drummond et al (1989) argue that it is important to specify contracts in considerable detail, including the client group to be served, the treatment methods to be applied, the standards of care to be achieved and the arrangements for monitoring.
Since a key feature of the contract will be the stated price, this gives an excellent opportunity for comparisons of options.
For example, different treatment technologies may have different cost-effectiveness.
Taking a simple case, there may be evidence that day-care or short-stay surgery is just as effective, but of lower cost, than traditional surgery (Russell et al , 1977); Waller et al , 1978).
Therefore providers ought to be able to agree to contracts  for these services at a lower price.
Costs may also vary with volume.
Although this has been relatively under explored by economists (Labelle, 1987), presumably those providers concentrating on certain clinical services may be able to agree large contracts at a lower implied unit price.
An example of this would be the concerted efforts to clear the cataract backlog (Thomas et al , 1989).
Finally, there may be occasions where there is an explicit trade-off between higher costs and higher quality.
This may be in terms of amenities in hospital wards, or in the actual clinical care provided.
For example, some surgical implants may have a greater durability or offer greater freedom of movement to the patient than others.
In cataract surgery, a posterior changer intraocular lens offers a greater quality of eyesight than aphakic spectacles (Davies et al , 1986).
Here, part of the contracting process will be for the purchaser to make explicit decisions about the level of quality required.
In essence, this requires assessment of whether the extra benefits exceed the higher costs.
Providers may decide to offer a range of options at differing price.
Economic evaluation, with its explicit assessment of costs and health improvement, is again well placed to offer essential data to inform these choices.
In the past they have been made implicitly by the providers, although general practitioners may have adjusted their referral patterns based on knowledge about their patients' preferences and clinical practice in given hospitals.
Such ‘consumer choice’ exercised through the GP, has probably been most prominent in the field of maternity care to date.
One concern is whether competition in health care will drive out quality.
The evidence on this, mainly from the USA, is mixed (Drummond, 1990).
However, if economic evaluation were used more frequently in choosing between treatment technologies such ‘trade-offs’ between cost and quality would be made more explicit.
Also, economic evaluation would ensure that an appropriate range of costs is considered when cost comparisons are being made.
Deciding upon contract monitoring arrangements
Although an important feature of the contracting procedure, this is one where economic evaluation currently has little to offer.
Most evaluations of health technologies are performed ex ante and there are few examples of situations where researchers have investigated whether the preferred option as indicated by their study has performed well in practice.
However, it is clear that the monitoring of contracts is not a costless exercise and it is known from more aggregate economic studies that the administrative costs of health care systems embodying a significant market element are much higher than those of the NHS (Maxwell, 1985).
Therefore, there is a role for the economic evaluation of alternative monitoring arrangements; namely, does the increased cost of more comprehensive monitoring generate benefits in the closer adherence to contract specifications?
Practice budgets for general medical practitioners
Under the terms of the White Paper, practices serving at least 11,000 patients will be able to manage their own budget.
(Under certain circumstances the DH have indicated that this limit could be dropped to 9000.)
The budget will cover various hospital services (such as a defined group of surgical inpatient and day case treatment covering most elective procedures, outpatient services and diagnostic investigation of patients and specimens) and practice services and prescribing.
In general concept, the practice budget scheme is similar to that of the Health Maintenance Organisation (HMO) in the United States.
Whilst not nearly as extensive, it embodies several of the same incentives, such as to improve the range and quality of one's own services in order to attract more patients and to review carefully the appropriateness of utilising certain hospital services.
Whereas the White Paper working paper dealing with this topic points out that ‘the scheme will be structured to ensure that GPs have no financial incentives to refuse to treat any category of patients’, it is well known that, in the USA, HMOs reduced the number of hospital admissions dramatically.
They also made much greater use of other health care professionals, such as nurse practitioners (Drummond & Maynard, 1988).
Whether or not these changes, whilst reducing costs, also brought about a reduction in the quality of care is open to debate (Ware et al , 1986).
Much of what was said above about contacts for clinical services also applies to GPs operating their own budgets.
They will have an interest in knowing that the treatment technologies used in the secondary care sector are the most cost-effective available.
Additionally, GPs will be able to consider whether it is more cost-effective to refer patients to the hospital at all, or to handle the care themselves.
An obvious issue would be the substitution of careful management by the GP ambulatory care, rather than requesting hospital admission.
Also, some GPs already undertake minor elective surgery.
Perhaps this will increase if it can be shown, in a cost minimisation analysis, to be equally effective but of lower cost.
Another major item of GP care is pharmaceutical consumption.
This component of the practice budget allocated by Regions will be in accordance with the principles outlined for indicative budgets (discussed below).
However, it may have extra meaning for GPs operating the practice budget scheme if increased expenditure on drugs means that other items of expenditure, such as elective admission to hospital, are reduced.
For example, It has recently been shown that a new drug (misoprostol), if used prophylactically, can reduce the incidence of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) associated ulcers in those patients taking these drugs for their arthritis (Graham et al , 1988).
Should the GP prescribe the additional drug?
This question could be answered by a economic evaluation of the prophylactic use of misoprostol.
Similarly, prescribing long-term medication for elevated blood pressure or serum cholesterol will reduce the number of fatal and non-fatal coronary heart disease events.
An economic evaluation could investigate the costs and benefits of such actions (Drummond & McGuire, 1990).
Indicative prescribing budgets for general medical practitioners
The working paper dealing with this topic argues that ‘it is generally recognised that some prescribing is wasteful or unnecessary expensive.
The objective of the new arrangements is to place downward pressure on expenditure on drugs in order to limit this waste and to release resources for other parts of the Health Service’.
Despite this forthright tone, later parts of the document point out that ‘the scheme will be structured in a way that patients will always get the drugs they need’ and that ‘it will ensure that budgets reflect the costs of patients needing a greater volume of drugs or more expensive drugs…’‘so that there will be no disincentive to practices to accept such patients or to begin to prescribe expensive medicine to such patients, if there is a clinical need to do so’.
The development of indicative prescribing budgets needs to be considered alongside two other initiatives; the feedback of information on prescribing behaviour to GPs through PACT (prescribing analyses and cost) and the development of community formularies.
Therefore, whereas prescribing budgets will inevitably be set in the aggregate, taking into account local social and  epidemiological factors, both PACT and formularies are much more likely to lead the GP to consider why a particular drug, and not an alternative including no drug, should be given in a particular instance.
Both PACT and formularies will give information to GPs on drug costs.
This is to be welcomed.
However, Drummond (1989) has pointed out that there are dangers in drawing up formularies in a too simplistic way, merely considering the comparative costs of the drugs themselves.
First, it is possible that a too narrow definition of comparative costs would be used.
This should not only consider the costs of the drugs but the other medical care that is required.
For example, a slightly cheaper drug may require a more expensive route of administration, require more frequent patient monitoring, or lead to more side-effects.
Secondly, it is possible that costs in the longer term may be ignored.
This is particularly true of drugs that are used prophylactically, such as lipid lowering agents.
These may require additional costs now , but the costs of coronary heart disease occurring in the future may be reduced.
(Although in an economic evaluation, costs occurring in the future have less weight, since they are discounted to present values.
See Drummond (1980) for more discussion.)
Thirdly, it is possible that differences in the effectiveness of drugs will be ignored in the quest for cost-cutting.
It was mentioned earlier that one must distinguish between economic efficiency and cost-cutting.
Therefore, it is conceivable that a higher cost drug would be worthwhile, compared to the alternative, if it had much higher effectiveness.
Nevertheless, some branded products may offer only marginal advantages over much cheaper generics.
It can be seen, therefore, that the choice of drug is not a simple matter.
Certainly, greater efficiency would not be achieved by the use of the cheapest available product in each case.
Thus, there is a clear role for  economic evaluation — in investigating the relative cost-effectiveness of prescribing options.
Some studies have already been undertaken (Drummond, Teeling Smith & Wells, 1988) and others are in progress.
It is unrealistic to expect GPs to fund such studies, although some have been undertaken by central government (Anderson, 1989).
It is much more likely that the pharmaceutical industry will support such analysis as it perceives its interests as being threatened (Drummond, 1989/90).
Discussion: What monitoring arrangements are required to ensure efficiency?
One of the main objectives of the White Paper proposals is to increase the efficiency of the NHS.
Many of the right kinds of incentives will be put in place, but will decision-makers respond by carefully considering their options within an economic evaluation framework, or will by respond in a more ad hoc manner?
That is, it may be easier to agree a price for a contract for clinical services than to assess cost or cost-effectiveness.
This final section outlines the monitoring arrangements that will be required to ensure that important efficiency issues are being considered carefully by DHAs and FPCs.
They could quite easily form part of the agenda for the annual review of these institutions in their new roles.
First, analysis should be carried out of how Health Authorities decide which contracts to place.
Will this be based on historical precedent, or will a real effort be made to consider which investments in health care will give the best value for money?
What, if any, analysis will support such decision-making processes.
Secondly, contract specifications (and successful contracts) should be scrutinised in order to assess how careful the purchaser has specified the requirements and whether there is any evidence that, through the contracting process, cost-effective medical technologies are being encouraged.
For example, is day-case surgery specified where this would be appropriate, or is the choice of treatment technology left to the provider?
Thirdly, the processes by which HAs review contracts should be assessed.
In particular, what attitudes do HAs take to contract deviations in respect of the cost, volume and quality of care?
Fourthly, the approaches used by FPCs to promote cost-effective prescribing should be monitored.
For example, in stimulating the development of community formularies, or in setting indicative budgets, do they take a broad view of cost (beyond the price of the medicines themselves) and do they consider the relative effectiveness of medicines?
Fifthly, the efforts made by FPCs to promote cost-effective behaviour by those GPs opting to manage their own budgets should be monitored.
For example, do they support GPs wishing to develop cost-effective alternatives to hospital admission and do they help GPs find the best value for money alternatives in placing contracts with hospitals for non-emergency admissions.
Clearly, the proposals in the White Paper represent the most fundamental change in the NHS since its inception.
Others have highlighted the need for monitoring the changes brought about by the proposals (Judge, 1989).
Since one of the major objectives of the White Paper is to increase the efficiency of the NHS, it is important that health care objectives are evaluated from an economic viewpoint and that monitoring arrangements are put in place to ensure that HAs and FPCs rise to the challenge.
This paper has outlined the ways of assessing efficiency, the ways in which the White Paper proposals present new opportunities and the monitoring arrangements to ensure that HAs and FPCs seize them.
Resource management: a fundamental change in managing health services
Peter Spurgeon
The proposals contained within the government's White Paper Working for patients initiated widespread and quite heated debate.
In both the political arena and in the public domain reactions have been sharply divided.
In particular, the suggestions about self-governing Trusts, contracting for services and general practice budgets have proved particularly contentious.
Without doubt, the proposals may properly be described as controversial.
The wider debate has, to some extent, tended to overshadow the resource management issue, which may be somewhat ironic as the resource management initiative, announced in 1986, may well prove to be the most fundamental change of all.
Embedded in the White Paper is the assumption that resource management is up and running, and fully operational.
The reality in many districts is that RMI is still some way off.
Nevertheless, effective self-governing Trusts and positive contract specification might rest upon the sort of information implicit in a resource management system.
The discussions of RMI have been less public and less political but, within the health service, and in the professional groups, in particular, the reaction has been quite intense.
Clinicians, most notably, have been guarded in their enthusiasm about becoming embroiled in management.
There are, of course, an increasing number of exceptions but concerns still exist about the time involvement of clinicians and whether it represents the most valuable use of their time.
Perhaps, more cynically, some clinicians are uneasy about information on their activities and costs being readily available fearing that RMI will ultimately be a means of control or reduction in their allocated budgets.
At a more general level, there seems to be considerable confusion about just what is meant by RMI, what does it entail and what are the benefits to the patient.
This is exemplified at a rather trivial level by the fact that almost every programme or course in support of RMI begins with seeking participants' views as to just ‘What is RMI’.
The outcome of such an exercise  is usually a great range of concepts and confusions.
In some ways, of course, this is healthy because RMI is not a single entity, nor is there a single way of implementing RMI.
It is, in fact, an approach to managing health services and the range of views is largely reflecting just where individuals are within an organisation, the key tasks that concern them and their own approach to implementation.
The aim of this chapter is to explore the nature of RMI, and to understand something about the key elements (information, cultural change).
Hopefully, through the discussion, the basic dichotomy as to whether RMI is an expensive irrelevance of little value to patient care, or is, in fact, a fundamental change in the way health services are managed will be clarified.
The basics of RMI
As an earlier chapter discussing financial aspects of health care has made clear, RMI is not new.
It has evolved as an idea from a previous initiative in 1983 known as management budgeting.
Lack of appropriate data systems, lack of involvement of clinicians and a basically top-down, finance-led approach, did not result in a great deal of success for this initiative.
RMI has been able to benefit from this experience, in part, fortuitously because of the progress in information technology.
More critical, though, was the clear indication that the key resource allocators, ie doctors and nurses, must be an integral part of developing any such approach.
Not only must the users of such a system find the data relevant and credible, they must also be motivated to use it to improve the overall performance of their activities.
Here is the key to successful RMI and a hint as to the major cultural change that is implied.
Both these aspects will be discussed later in some depth.
A further advantage of RMI over previous approaches was that it is consistent with the growing influence of general management.
Some general managers had been rather unfairly linked with cost containment and cutbacks.
To some degree, managers do have a responsibility to control costs or rather to optimise the use of available resources.
Managers and clinicians had rather come to view each other as protagonists in the constant battle for resources.
Patients must come first has always been the rallying cry of the clinicians, almost as if , for managers, the opposite held true.
However, RMI offered a way of integrating the two perspectives so that the measurement of service quality and the effective control of costed inputs could finally be brought together.
The opportunity presented by RMI is nicely summed up in a paper by Black, Dearden, Mayhew and Nichol (1989) in which they say ‘Resource management enables clinicians and managers to see directly what the cost of various patterns of care are, to consider alternatives and make decisions in a more informed way — at the level of patient, the service or service mix.
Visible connections between inputs, care, processes, outputs and the management of the whole can be of immense benefit to professionals and managers striving to make improvements against the odds.
RMI may be summed up rather simplistically but powerfully as being about the linking of clinical activity, data, for both volume and quality (at individual patient and case-mix level) to resource utilisation such that costs can be identified on a projective basis.
This statement is not quite the same as the official DHSS objectives for RMI but it represents a reasonable paraphrasing.
The key objectives of the DHSS are essentially:
(a)
the medical and nursing groups must have a genuine sense of ownership in the management process
(b)
patient case-mix and costing systems must be evolved to allow for comparisons of resource utilisation and
(c)
the accuracy of basic patient activity data must be improved so that it commands the confidence of the user.
These statements, if fully operationalised, represent a major change in the way health services are managed.
For the first time, the system will be capable of identifying just what it is doing (activities) and what each element of the process costs.
This, of course, is almost the natural management approach of the private sector, exemplified by the manufacturing industry where output of products and costs of manufacture are absolutely crucial information.
Many have, and will, continue to argue that the private sector model cannot be transferred to health care.
Indeed, Spurgeon and Barwell (1990) have raised a number of queries as to the appropriateness of utilising management processes relevant to one situation in a totally different context.
Nevertheless, it seems, in the light of pressures for greater public accountability, that the health service cannot mount a credible argument as to why it should not be clear about just what activities it is performing and what they cost.
It is important, though, that the fears of clinicians who see such information as a threat and prelude to cost containment are addressed.
The same data, if used properly, can offer a more exciting challenge of ensuring that the most cost-effective decisions are taken and actually enhance patient care rather than reduce it.
The access to data about treatment outcome and quality of care should be a major incentive for clinicians.
Those responsible for implementing RMI need to ensure that it is these latter opportunities that are projected and not an attack on clinical judgement.
The manner of implementing RMI on a national level is through a series of phased programmes.
An initial set of six acute sites were identified as pilots for RMI beginning in 1987, although one was not formally adopted as a pilot site until 1988.
Following this group, a further 20 units have been identified for the next group and these 20 come from within a batch of fifty who will form the subsequent groups.
Clearly, one of the potential advantages of this approach is that successive RMI implementations can learn the lessons of earlier sites and hopefully avoid problems and thus speed up the total process.
As part of this learning exercise, a team from Brunel  University has been asked to monitor and evaluate the first six field sites.
An interim report (Buxton, Packwood and Keen) was published in 1989.
Rather than consider comments on each individual site, some more general points about RMI overall may be made.
Implementing RMI
One particularly helpful observation made by the report was the identification of three key features which, although not exactly prescriptions for success, are certainly aspects that need to be incorporated.
The first of these concerns management arrangements and is concerned with how far organisational structures facilitate the RMI process in terms of issues such as ownership, accountability, incentives and support to users.
The second area is located around the development of information systems involving considerations such as meaningfulness, accuracy and accessibility of data.
The third and final category is almost a superordinate to the other two in that it asks how all the changes implied in the first two aspects are being handled.
The value of the structure lies in indicating that parallel progress on all fronts is an important ingredient of successful implementation.
Approaches that have tended to over-emphasise the cost aspects of RMI and to make it appear as a finance-driven system tend to alienate the service provider groups and often meet with resistance at clinician level.
Similarly, an overemphasis upon bringing doctors into the management process can lead to frustration if good reliable sources of information delivery are not being developed at the same time.
Grasping this notion of parallel development on all fronts can alleviate many of the misconceptions about RMI.
In this way, RMI does not become about computer systems, or medical audit or about attaching costs to everything.
RMI must be an integrated process or it is likely to fail.
Does this mean therefore that RMI has to be a massive concentrated effort to bring everything on-stream at the same time?
This approach, often labelled the ‘big bang’ approach, is not essential and, indeed, can be counterproductive.
Individuals can be overawed by the thought of the very large system.
It can appear to be totally dominated by technology and moreover it is expensive.
It is of course quite possible to develop an integrated system based on a single hardware base.
The key to success with such an approach is planning and communication such that everyone involved understands what is happening and their own role within the total picture.
Many sites have advanced on an incremental basis by developing one area on a small-scale system.
This, too, is entirely reasonable but it does require that attention be paid to compatibilities of systems so that future system integration remains possible.
One begins to see why some staff are confused by RMI.
For example, seeing a desktop PC arrive on the unit general manager's desk — is this RMI?
Or others may be asked to participate in lengthy discussions about what  information needs they have — if this is RMI where is the computer?
It all serves to emphasise the point that RMI is an approach, or process of management and all these elements have a part to play but in a co-ordinated, integrated fashion.
Let us examine what lessons have been learned about RMI from existing sites and also what are the emerging issues that the service will need to tackle to make the most of the opportunities offered by RMI.
Managing the organisational and cultural transition
In the past, the NHS has perhaps been guilty of seeing structures and organisational change as the outcome measures of new initiatives.
The fallacy of course in this thinking is that any organisational structure is the means not the end.
Therefore, whatever arrangements evolve, they should have, as an underlying principle of their design, the goal that they will assist the organisation or unit to achieve its objective.
The initial and overriding goal, in terms of RMI, is to ensure that the service providers (doctors, nurses, other professional groups) are fully integrated into the management process.
To a large extent, the discussion has centred around bringing doctors into management and, perhaps as the primary and key resource allocator, this is appropriate.
It is important, however, that the other groups do not feel either overlooked or subservient to the medical power base.
Despite the emphasis laid by the Griffiths Report (1988) on the need to involve doctors in management, the degree of success in this respect was until quite recently very limited.
For many general managers, the key to their own success was either how to involve doctors and obtain co-operation or how to overcome intransigence from doctors when trying to bring about change.
The Templeton series on district general managers confirmed the importance of this issue but also the lack of progress.
The traditional system for involvement of clinicians at District level incorporates some element of divisional structures for different specialities coming together as a representative body as the Medical Executive Committee.
Although the MECs are often influential bodies and have a valuable information role, they are not typically felt to be good decision-making bodies enabling doctors to make prompt and positive contributions to management.
At a unit level, some of the RMI pilot sites have utilised arrangements based around this traditional structure, with medical staff committees playing a representative role.
However, such a model is likely to be satisfactory only where certain key conditions apply — most notably, a small group of consultants, a strong high profile UGM and limited conflict of interests about allocation of resources.
As these conditions disappear, so an alternative structure is required.
In most RMI contexts, this new structure has become almost universally a version of the clinical directorate model.
This concept was originally pioneered at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore in 1973 and consisted  of a medical director supported by a nurse and an administrator.
In the UK, the concept of the administrator has been replaced by the term business manager and the directors are, again, nearly all doctors but not exclusively.
There is a natural logic to such a structure in that management can reasonably be said to be about making the best use of the resources available and, to this extent, is a normal part of the clinical process.
Individual clinicians are constantly taking management decisions.
Indeed, Horsley, Vaughan, Hessett and Allen (1989) argue that consultants are always involved in management at different levels — patient, staff, representing colleagues.
Many clinicians are therefore suitable to make the transition into management implied by the directorate structure.
Moreover, management issues do arise naturally when clinicians work together in teams, perhaps with nurses and other professional staff.
Judgements about staffing requirements, levels of workload, achievable standards, and so on, require managerial as well as clinical skills.
The idea of the clinical directorate is that the groupings of service providers can be given responsibility for organising their work including its planning and budgeting control.
The aims of the clinical directorate structure may be described as follows:
1
Accountability — many of the changes in the NHS over recent years have had an implicit, if not explicit, goal of strengthening the notion of line management.
Unit and individual accountability, IPR, regional review and performance indicators are all in this mould.
However, the traditional position of the doctor does not fit well the concept of line management in that the greatest power, expertise and control rests with the ‘worker’ not management.
The clinical directorate model seeks to rectify this by equating authority with responsibility, power with accountability.
2
Decentralisation — by delegating responsibility and authority for operational decision-making and resultant resource consumption implications to the appropriate level of service delivery, the clinical directorate structure seeks to improve the quality of that decision-making.
The service-specific-disciplinary management team is in the best position to make well-informed decisions.
In addition, it provides the logical level at which to undertake quality assessment, audit and utilisation review activities.
3
Clinical efficiency — monitoring the cost-effectiveness of resource consumption is clearly central to the theory underlying the development of the structure.
By placing responsibility for costs in the hands of clinicians, expenditure control can be made more sensitive to the clinical priorities.
As many clinicians will point out, utilisation review at its best should be as much about good clinical practice (ie clinical efficiency) as about cost containment.
4
Focus — clinical directorates offer a management structure that is based on the delivery of a given service to a group of clients.
This is in contrast to the traditional structure based upon professional hierarchies.
This, in turn, provides a basis for analysis of case-mix and volume and their subsequent management.
Many clinicians have seized the opportunities implicit within the clinical directorate structure believing that in a cash limited system the most positive response to any threat to clinical freedom is to become involved in the discussions stemming from the financial restriction.
A rather sophisticated version of this view is that RMI represents a legitimisation of the tension and debate between managers and clinicians as to who shall have the dominant perspective.
All professionals will have, as an objective, the desire to provide a service to their client at the highest possible standard using whatever resources may be required.
The corporate objectives of managers may often appear in conflict with this and hence the tension between the two groups.
RMI will be about the quality, quantity and cost of services to be delivered and hence provides the perfect vehicle for the debate between clinician and manager to be conducted and resolved.
The critical step is for clinicians to be willing to enter the arena and to participate.
Just how is this participation to be ensured?
One approach that seems appealing at a common-sense level is to facilitate the evolution of natural groups of clinicians who work together because their specialities and interests are common.
These individuals can then form the basis of a directorate with a positive desire and will to co-ordinate since it will clearly be seen as a way of enhancing their effectiveness.
Moreover, as in the pilot sites, such groups might initially be encouraged to develop the concept of quality profiles for individual patients.
In effect, these become projected standards of care and treatments that attach to patients of a particular group.
Not only does this allow the clinical group to monitor and modify their own treatment programmes but subsequently through the introduction of costing systems enable clinicians and managers to come together to plan case-mix and future service patterns.
Issues surrounding clinical directorates
The basic model is one of a clinical director (usually a clinician) responsible managerially for the operational work of all the staff within the directorate.
Assistance is typically provided by a nurse manager and by a business manager; these ‘assistants’ have concerns with the collection and interpretation of information, the planning and monitoring of directorate activity.
An immediate potential problem presents as possible ethical infringement upon the doctor-patient relationship.
This could be a dilemma for both the clinical director and other consultants within the directorate.
For the latter group, there may be concerns as to how they can accept being responsible and accountable to another doctor in their dealings with patients.
Whilst, for the director, there exists possible conflict between maximising provision for patient care at an individual level and the need to monitor and control expenditure at a directorate level.
Such concerns can create new and significant demands upon the staff management skills of new clinical directors.
Indeed, it is, for many, a major adjustment since the prevailing  medical culture suggests that, once doctors acquire consultant status, they are self-contained, autonomous individuals accountable to no one other than their patients.
This is stated in a rather extreme manner to make the point.
Nevertheless, the notion of collective decision-making about patient care, about priorities and treatment options, is quite alien.
There is, of course, much work to.be done in the services as a whole to support and develop the skills of new clinical directors.
Some early clinical directors might be considered ‘natural managers’ but a more planned provision of training in aspects such as service planning and review, objective setting, information handling, financial and staff management is required to ensure a continuity of appropriate clinical directors.
There are equally significant changes implied in the role of general managers.
UGMs, in particular, must be willing to see real devolution of power to the directorates.
Any sense that directorates are a mechanism to control and constrain doctors is likely to provoke problems.
For some UGMs, this change will be threatening especially as, with the advent of contracts for services, some districts toy with the idea of placing contracts directly with the clinical director, effectively by-passing the unit manager.
This, though, is unlikely to be the norm and there is a challenge to unit general managers to re-define their role and relationship to a series of clinical directors.
An enhanced co-ordinating role is available to those capable of meeting this challenge, especially as the number of districts and units reduces and UGMs come to represent larger conglomerations of provider groupings.
Perhaps even more vociferous concerns have been expressed by nurses and para-medic groups who fear the medical domination of the current structuring of clinical directorates.
Despite, in many instances, retained professional lines of accountability, the decision-making about resources to deliver nursing care, or to engage para-medic services, lies with the director.
Under financial pressure, the concern is that a clinical director may seek to contain his/her budget by cuts in such support services.
A recent paper by Norman, Quinn and Malin (1988) expresses concern as to the degree of involvement of nurses in the resource management process.
A key aspect for nurses, in particular, but for RMI, overall, is that progress be made on the concept of collaborative care plans whereby the whole team agree a pattern of treatment and therefore resources that will be needed by a particular patient.
The advent of more examples of non-medical clinical directors may well reduce this concern, as will the development of specific service contracts where each group will have committed to buying or providing an agreed package of care and support.
Despite these issues, the clinical model appears to be gaining ground as a basis for structures to support RMI.
This is not surprising since experience at the pilot sites has thrown up some important benefits and opportunities.
Where directorate systems work well, there seems to be an increase in staff morale and greater co-operation between professional groups as they cohere around an integrated programme of patient care.
Furthermore, the directorate provides the foundation for a co-operative problem-solving approach involving clinicians and managers.
There appear to be some important challenges for sustaining and developing the concept further:
(a)
Maintaining corporate identity.
Ironically, as directorates become successful, so there is a greater sense of identification and loyalty to the particular directorate rather than to the hospital unit.
Such feelings can, of course, be very positive but must not develop to the extent that they produce an unhealthy rivalry and competitiveness.
This issue is increasingly important as unit configurations change and the purchaser/provider distinction becomes more developed between DHA unit.
(b)
Adjusting to a more rational service planning process.
As the process of contract specification develops, and the role of public health expands, so there exists the potential to alter current patterns of service to ones that may more appropriately reflect population need and assesses outcome.
This may prove a major challenge to clinicians expecting to carry on much as before.
(c)
Emphasising quality of care.
RMI has, as an objective, the involvement of clinicians in management.
This may, or may not, attract sufficient doctors to want to be involved.
But what should stimulate the medical profession is the tremendous opportunity offered by RMI for medical audit and progress in assessing the quality of the service.
Developing information systems
The information area is another instance where RMI has become entangled and confused with a number of information initiatives in the NHS over the past few years.
Again, it is not totally inappropriate that this sort of overlap should exist since RMI must build upon the data that exist within the service; it cannot be separate and unrelated to that which currently exists.
Much has been said about the ‘information revolution’ in the NHS.
More has been said than has actually happened.
There are all sorts of contributory reasons for this situation although there is a steady pressure to change the future.
Initially, it is probably fair to say that the NHS has always been a prolific collector of data, usually fairly basic data and almost always for bureaucratic purposes whether to satisfy regional or national demands for returns.
However, much less well developed has been the nature of using information for decision-making.
Managers have not, on the whole, been predisposed to numerically oriented analysis, clinicians have not pushed for cost or outcome data preferring to focus upon patient care processes and cash inputs have been on the basis of fairly crude recurring allocations.
Cash limits have prompted increasing efforts to determine the sources of particular expenditure, and there have been initiatives in the financial area whether to improve collection of descriptive information or on cost-effectiveness programmes.
Much of this has, though, been rather narrow, confined to financial staff and therefore having limited impact upon managers and clinicians.
This rather piecemeal approach has been paralleled in terms of how the NHS has acquired hardware and software systems.
Districts and units have taken initiatives but often they have not been co-ordinated within a district and certainly not as a national service.
Overall, there has been no clear information strategy.
Recently, a number of initiatives have been launched to counteract this situation.
In particular, the NHS Management Board have developed an Information Management and Training Strategy (1989) which attempts to identify training and support requirements for staff within the NHS.
Regions too have attempted to develop their own information strategies.
However, two overriding problems remain:
1
Too often technology becomes the dominant feature of information system development, frequently to the detriment of the resultant system.
2
Data proliferates in the NHS with more and more being collected, but without the same effort being put into asking why it is being collected and what it is to be used for.
Thus we have a situation where data is not transformed into information, ie what staff need is information that addresses a specific need or objective of their job, and what typically they receive is a mass of data not properly tailored to their needs and so difficult to penetrate that it falls into disuse.
Clearly, then, the primary need when dealing with the information issue is to establish clearly what various staff need to do their jobs and then to see how to provide this more limited selection of information in a form that is easily available and accessible.
A number of systems exist for helping to determine information requirements, for example, Task Analysis (Spurgeon and Barwell, 1989) which is a technique that moves from a statement of work objectives to an identification of the information needs that underpin these tasks.
RMI needs to ensure in the way that it tackles the information aspect that it can incorporate properly the ‘user-led’ aspect of information specification.
This approach, of course, has the added and considerable value of involving the users of the systems (doctors, nurses, managers) in specifying what they want to get from it.
Not only is this likely to increase the likelihood of relevance of the information, it also enhances user commitment.
Furthermore, there exists the prospect that, through this approach, RMI could acquire a proper emphasis on the quality and outcome of patient care.
There is a danger that this opportunity may be missed.
Of the present pilot sites, relatively little progress has been made in terms of collecting outcome information.
In part, this is a result of the relatively early stages of RMI, but it is an aspect that must be addressed and addressed with a sense of priority.
In addition, as Coombs and Cooper (1990) stress in their report, unless sufficient involvement of clinicians is ensured in developing the system, then, often by default, the result is a finance-led system.
Their view is that this will lead to clinical resistance and ultimately to a failure to implement.
Most of the existing pilot sites have opted for a fairly large-scale computer-based system with a central system that stores for case-mix purposes, the data from a number of locally based feeder units.
A ‘core’ of data seems to be defined by existing systems, eg pathology, theatres although, of course, with some site variation.
Once again the potential for data as opposed to information is in operation.
One is beginning with what exists not with what is needed.
Of course, the latter will relate and feed off the wider data base, but good systems development practice says that this should be identified at the outset.
In fact, the emphasis of the pilot sites appears to be activity data as supplied through operational units.
Surprisingly little has been done on identifying the needs of managers.
It is important that the managerial information does not become seen as equivalent to cost data.
Otherwise, there is the inevitable perception that managers simply want information to control costs.
Managers have a much wider opportunity than this, since good information should enable them, virtually for the first time, to have a valid input in the pattern of the service within a unit for which they are responsible.
Considerable support is required to help managers see how they can analyse and utilise RMI information for more effective decision-making.
One of the key features of RMI must be the capacity for clinicians, nurses or the clinical directorate to identify prospective care plans.
These will be in effect, a statement of the treatment and care a patient should receive with associated standards attached.
An essential ingredient of this is the ability to categorise each patient by disease type or treatment group.
The typical approach to this problem is to utilise some version of the DRG (Diagnostic Related Group).
Jenkins, Mckee and Sanderson (1990) describe DRGS as one form of classificatory scheme for hospital inpatients.
Each patient belongs to one group only and this is determined by his/her principal diagnosis and/or surgical operation, in conjunction with factors such as age and sex.
The concept of DRGS was developed in the USA and some British clinicians have been critical of the appropriateness, and at least believing that more work is needed to make them usable in the NHS.
The DRG structure is one of many systems available.
Views differ as to suitability of various systems and it may well be that different systems and models emerge.
It is a matter for conjecture as to how far the prospect of different classificatory structures will ultimately prevent the sort of comparisons such systems are meant to facilitate.
There is a danger that the size of the NHS will again produce a range of systems and, subsequently, years of argument as to whether the data deriving from one system can truly be compared with another system because the items included are not common or are not grouped in the same way.
It is a situation which cries out for centralised resolution of the type the large  commercial organisation can impose.
It is unlikely to be forthcoming in the NHS.
Nevertheless, some sort of classificatory scheme to group patient types seems to be essential.
In essence, such schemes should facilitate the following positive aspects:
(a)
Examination of treatment patterns and associated costs
(b)
Examination of variations in case-mix between hospitals, specialities and/or consultants.
But perhaps the key aspect that will appeal to doctors in considering DRGS is their contribution to medical audit.
As long as proper outcome data is collected there is clearly scope for patient care to be at the forefront of discussion of RMI.
This seems the appropriate priority to attract resource users to participate in developing such a system.
Whilst the potential here looks considerable, there is just a slight concern that initial reaction has been that medical audit requires a rather more in-depth review of each case than is provided by routine data collection approach.
Furthermore Maynard (in press) has pointed to concerns about DRGS as cost pricing systems without having equally clear statements about quality of care.
The latter may prove difficult to achieve until good data is available both on outcome and on a more subtle classification of initial severity of the case.
The very word ‘routine’, as mentioned earlier, highlights some of the initial teething problems of RMI systems.
As with all information systems, the effectiveness is largely dependent upon the quality of data entering the system.
The susceptibility of coders handling large quantities of technical data is self-evident.
In the USA, where RMI type systems have gone much further, the quality of coders is very high.
It is not surprising then that training initiatives have been launched to support and develop medical records staff in the UK.
Alongside this training need is the concern about the shortage of high-quality information technology staff to develop and monitor the progress of RMI systems.
The ultimate success of RMI on a national basis may depend upon the recruitment of such staff and, subsequently, on their ability to provide information in an accurate way, and in the form specified by the ultimate system user.
The overall costs of implementing RMI are also beginning to be a worry and it seems likely that there will be a slowing down of large-scale implementation with a preference being given to smaller more gradualistic approaches to providing information needs.
Managing change
The previous two aspects are clearly the main thrusts of RMI but combining them together successfully and reducing negative fall-out within the organisation is, in effect, the third aspect, that of managing the cultural change that new systems will inevitably produce.
There are many texts on organisational change and this is not the appropriate place to develop these theoretical models (see Spurgeon and Barwell, 1990).
Nevertheless, implementing RMI is going to change the culture of the NHS and reorganising this means that there is almost certain to be resistance.
There may be, in some instances, some local ‘champions’ who are willing to lead and to encourage others to participate.
Obviously, where these exist, it is important to use the opportunity and to consider how they can best be integrated with the more reluctant mass.
Failing this, there are still things that managers can do.
Broadly, these roles fall into two main areas, communication and training.
Communication
The roles of some key staff are likely to be affected by RMI and this may be perceived as a threat.
It is essential that everyone is kept informed about what is involved and just how the new system will impact upon them.
In this way, individual operations can be shaped to be realistic rather than at odds with the likely outcome.
Similarly, the relationship between staff, notably doctors and managers, may change with new senses of power and control developing.
Only by involving every group in the evolution of these structures can problems be avoided.
Training
Information technology is, in itself, threatening to many.
Acquisition of basic skills throughout a department needs to be planned and phased such that new systems are on-line with individual staff feeling comfortable and confident of their abilities to cope.
Any hint of difficulties is likely to spread and make others resist the on-set of the ‘new fangled’ equipment.
Allied to this is the appropriate acquisition of resources both human and technical, to support the developments.
Once again the phasing of this support is vital to the smooth introduction of information systems.
Finally, Mathew (1989) drawing upon Canadian experience, suggests that the management of cultural change is the key to utilising resource management as an agent of improved health care for patients.
He lists some vital organisational factors in creating this positive perception:
(a)
Commitment to patient care and resource management must be emphasised as mutually supportive goals.
(b)
Resource management must be demonstrated to be linked to a client orientation, hence the criticality of involving users in specifying care and quality parameters.
(c)
The information resulting from resource management must be seen as an open system available to be discussed in a safe atmosphere but one which seeks for improvements.
In conclusion, this chapter has presented a case for RMI being a fundamental change in the way health care is managed.
It represents a tremendous opportunity and challenge, but these will only be obtained if the development of organisational change and information systems is properly integrated and managed.
Developing managers for the 1990s
David Thompson
Managers and development
The central theme of this chapter is that the challenge of developing managers for the 1990s is posed by the changing nature of NHS management itself.
While management development can, and should, influence management, it will only be successful if it responds to the state of management.
This vital factor was most clearly recognised by policy-makers in the mid-1980s.
If management is clear and confident about its purpose and tasks, the climate for management development is favourable.
If management is confused or harassed, tired or demoralised, management development is an uphill task (Williams, 1988 )
In this context, management development can be seen to be any learning experience undergone by those holding managerial roles in an organisation .
Such experience may be a highly visible educational programme, with recognised qualifications although no specified organisational outcome; it may be a training event focused on particular skills and understandings; it may be an almost unrecognised flash of insight at the workplace, prompted consciously or unconsciously by others.
It is well to share this perception that learning is at the heart of development because, even after nearly three decades of activities in the NHS, development is still associated by many managers with ‘going on courses’.
There is much more to it than that.
If development is the heart, the managerial organisation forms the skeleton.
As the NHS enters the 1990s, its organisation can be seen to be undergoing a ‘third wave’ of change.
The first wave occurred after 1974, when a comprehensive change established an integrated structure within which the service could be efficiently administered.
The intention was that managers should provide a positive and supportive climate for professionals to deliver health care.
This traditional view has been summed up as follows:
The efficient control of expenditure is the cardinal management virtue.
Those who pursue this approach tend to be relatively unconcerned with changes in the social and economic environment.
They will implement policies but take few initiatives themselves.
Their view of management rests on the assumption that a consensus exists on values and priorities within the Service.
(NHS Training Authority, 1986 )
The Griffiths Report published in 1983, heralded the onset of the second wave.
This was characterised by the assertion that management is concerned with:
levels of service, quality of product, meeting budgets, cost improvements, productivity, motivating and rewarding staff, research and development, and the long term viability of the undertaking.
(Department of Health and Social Security, 1983 )
Griffiths found that the absence of ‘general management support’ meant that there was no driving force ‘seeking and accepting direct and personal responsibility for developing plans, securing implementation and monitoring actual achievement’.
This constituted an altogether more active management, which had to concern itself with professional matters.
These two waves were not, of course, neatly divided in time.
The general management approach of the second wave was recognised and practised by some managers some time before the appearance of the Griffiths recommendations, especially after the structural ‘tidying up’ of 1982.
We now contemplate the onset of the ‘third wave’ which may flood through the main part of the 1990s.
If the recommendations of the White Paper Working for patients are implemented according to the present timetable, then managers are going to have to decide whether to become primarily ‘purchasers’ or ‘providers’of services.
This will have profound implications for established roles and relationships, and the development of people with talent to fill the roles.
A failure of reform?
This chapter looks forward to the ‘new wave’ and the new decade, but it would be imprudent to plunge into precepts without dwelling on the departing decade of the 1980s.
In trying to identify future managerial changes and their impact, it is instructive to consider the nature of the changes which accompanied the second or general management wave.
As the Griffiths reforms were being implemented, expectations were high.
The first wave approach to NHS management was seen to be increasingly inappropriate to the needs of the service and society at large.
There were many new external pressures to be considered.
Britain's population was ageing; consumer expectations were rising; advances in medical technology continued to outstrip the capacity of the service to fund new developments.
There was seen to be an urgent need to give much greater recognition to the potential contribution of NHS managers.
One of the biggest challenges to this new-look management was to cope with the ‘tribalism’ of the service; the tendency of professional groups to cherish their historic rights to govern their own affairs.
This was recognised as requiring much more than a technical management process.
Managers were having to cope with plural and often competing professional expectations and priorities, in pursuit of which professions were prepared to use their power and resist management initiatives.
A reading of the Griffiths Report itself suggests that the success of the second wave can be judged by three criteria:
The implementation of new general management structures;
the involvement of professions, primarily medical staff, in the management process;
and increased responsiveness to community and consumer views.
Making judgements against these criteria has not, however, proved straightforward.
The perceptions of many commentators have been coloured by vested interest; the findings of researchers have been qualified by conceptual and methodological variation.
There are very different interpretations and models of general management and different approaches to studying the field.
Hard evidence is difficult to come by, but what there is suggests that the impact of general management varies markedly across issues and districts.
The general pattern seems to be, however, that ‘second wave’ change has achieved its first objective — the implementation of new structures — but has largely failed to achieve the ‘cultural’sea-change: the involvement of clinicians and a new approach to consumers.
Although it took years rather than months, new general managers were appointed throughout the NHS and steadily reorganised their Health Authorities along general management lines.
This entailed frequent cutting across traditional professional lines of accountability, in nursing, in other professions allied to medicine and in support services.
In one respect, however, the government's stated intention was noticeably frustrated; only 38 appointments to District General Manager (DGM) posts were made from outside the NHS, and many of these were from the armed forces rather than the private businesses the government wished to tap.
113 of the DGM appointments came from the ranks of former NHS administrators.
This tended to mute the speed of change (Stewart and Dopson, 1988).
The significance of the new appointments and structures has been emphasised by several commentators, especially those with a general management perspective.
But the main impression is that the introduction of general management had mainly changed NHS management itself.
Two committed commentators have observed:
The most obvious achievements are the appointments of 1000 general managers and the implementation of new management structures….
But if general managers were the prerequisite for revolution, they are not, themselves, the substance of revolution.
(Jarrold, 1988 )
The relationships between senior staff in health authorities has altered profoundly.
It is easy, however for managers to assume that such changes have similarly profound effect on those who provide care and treatment.
(Wall, 1989 )
This view is supported by two of the main research studies.
An ESRC project has noted phrases such as‘quickening pace’, ‘clarification of responsibilities’, ‘less low-level paperwork’, ‘an aura of special authority’ as the  main benefits of change (Harrison, Hunter, Marnock and Pollitt, 1989).
The Templeton tracer study concluded that DGMs welcomed their new role because it offered ‘more choice in what work is treated as a priority’ and that, in spite of pressures and constraints, there was a greater flexibility in attitude in tackling these problems (Stewart, 1989).
Beyond the reshuffle of managerial roles and relationships, the impact of general management can be hard to perceive.
The ESRC research makes fascinating, if rather depressing reading.
The researchers were unable to find much evidence of change at all, especially in the areas targeted by Sir Roy Griffiths: the involvement of clinicians in resource management and greater sensitivity to the consumer.
Consumerist initiatives often still lurk in the shadows.
For a few (general managers) they are inspirational, but for many they remain superficial, the focus of entrenched  scepticism .
Neither have Management Budgets and Resource Management brought much new light, at least not yet.
With hindsight, the Griffiths analysis appears to have seriously underestimated the complexity of such innovations…
The deepest shadows, however, cloak the relations between general managers and the medical profession.
On almost every issue we investigated the consultants emerge as the most pessimistic, critical or even dismissive group…doctor/manager relations are not greatly changed since pre-Griffiths days.
(Harrison, Hunter, Marnock and Pollitt, 1989.)
Hardly any of the 400 respondents in this study were aware of a major cultural shift.
Most felt that patient services had, if anything, declined under general management — although not necessarily because of general management.
The greatest impact during the ‘Griffiths era’ had been made by the overriding concern in central government with balancing the books.
This had forced general managers of the second wave into the reactive mould characteristic of their predecessors in the first wave.
The Warwick Survey of eight health districts recognised:
With the introduction of general management, an attempt has been made to address the clinician-management interface directly and to challenge formally, at least in theory, the tight grip of doctors over the NHS as an organisation.
(Pettigrew, McKee and Ferlie, 1989 )
The researchers were not able to make early judgements about the ‘success’ or ‘failure’of this attempt and noted that the most striking find was diversity of impact.
They found ‘radical departures’ in one district and ‘minimal change’in another, with other districts falling in between.
If it is accepted that general management is still gathering momentum, more may yet be to come.
But the picture so far is of less than total transformation.
What does this survey of the impact of the second wave tell us about the likely impact of the third wave in the 1990s and the consequences for developing managers?
Five main issues emerge for discussion.
Coping with the pace of change
Firstly, it is likely that the NHS will survive, albeit in perhaps a very different shape in 2000 to that in 1990.
So we are talking about developing managers for the NHS, rather than for the ‘health care industry’.
Nevertheless, political priorities will continue to dominate.
A predominance of central funding will always leave the last word with government.
Whatever the fortunes of the major political parties, it is likely that managers will be coping with rapid change.
It is interesting to speculate on the nature of this change if the Labour Party is able to form a government in 1991 or 1992.
Some clues can be found in the recent Report of Labour's Policy Review for the 1990s,Meet the challenge, make the change .
This rejects the philosophy that the market can deliver health or community care efficiently, effectively or fairly.
It also rejects what it perceives as the present Conservative Government's narrow view of health:
The future of the NHS cannot be considered in isolation from policies relating to prevention, public health and ‘care in the community’(Labour Party 1989)
Labour proposes to integrate all three under the banner of a National Health Initiative which will embrace the health impact of government policies in such areas as income, employment, transport, housing and environmental protection.
The emphasis would be on promoting good health by such measures as giving people the right to a ‘National Health Check-up’.
This would be linked to a new framework for community care, which would include, for the first time, a Minister for Community Care, a greater partnership between local authorities and providers, and a service contract to ‘customise’ care for all individuals.
The Review Report recognises that the NHS has been chronically underfunded during the 1980s and that extra resources are needed for reform and modernisation.
These resources would be allocated through the development of ‘activity-based’ budgeting.
But the main thrust of proposals for the NHS itself concern quality.
Recommendations thus include the establishment of a ‘Charter of Patients' Rights’, a ‘Health Quality Commission’ and a ‘Health Technology Commission;’There will also be a ‘quality agenda’for primary care, especially the family doctor service.
Finally, Labour would aim to create greater democratic accountability.
In the short term, this would involve giving local government representatives, health workers and voluntary bodies a greater influence within the NHS.
In short, a Labour Government in the 1990s would operate from completely different assumptions to the Conservative Government of the 1980s: there would be more integration, greater emphasis on quality and on democratic accountability.
This amounts to a considerable change for NHS managers .
Alternatively, of course, a Conservative Government may stay in power, with, or without, the same Prime Minister.
In this case, the blueprint remains the White Paper Working for patients .
In this Paper, the government recognises that the problem of coping with rising demand and ever-widening ranges of treatments will not simply be solved by injecting more and more money.
It is clear that the organisation of the NHS — the way it delivers health care to the individual patient — also needs to be reformed….
[The government]is convinced that it can be done only by delegating responsibility as closely as possible to where health care is delivered to the patient — predominantly to the GP and the local hospital.
(Department of Health 1989a ).
The overall structure will be reformed ‘on business lines’, but delegation will be achieved by establishing self-governing trusts and encouraging large GP practices to hold their own budgets.
As services become more ‘contracted’ rather than managed, an internal market of purchase and supply will be created.
This will stimulate a spirit of enterprise and entrepreneurialism.
It remains to be seen how far the structural changes will result in a ‘cultural’ change within the NHS.
Evidence from the first and second waves of reform does not give great comfort to reformers.
The NHS has always shown strong  centripetal tendencies: central funding, standardisation and formalisation of structures and procedures, a policy of equality of access and service nationwide.
Undoubtedly, these tendencies will remain.
But they have been eroded in recent years, and it is likely that this erosion will continue although, as before, it will have varied impact according to issue and (geographical) place.
But, if self-governing hospital Trusts take the shape envisaged in Working for patients and the associated Working Paper 1 there should be considerable ‘freedoms’ and legal status to make local arrangements.
This would cover budgets, contracts, pricing, income generation, asset acquisition and disposal, borrowing powers, build up of surpluses and reserve, management structures and, perhaps most importantly, freedom to employ and direct all their staff, including doctors and nurses, on their own locally determined pay and conditions (Department of Health, 1989b).
The impact of these local freedoms is likely to fragment the NHS organisation still further.
While managers will pursue broadly the same tasks, they will do so in an increasing variety of ways.
As the framework of an internal market is established, managers will tend to polarise into ‘buyers’ and ‘sellers’with consequent changes of role and behaviour.
New skills and understandings will be required.
In short, a Conservative Government in the 1990s would emphasise market mechanisms to allocate resources to need, would encourage competition in order to offer consumers more choice and quality.
The pace of change which accelerated in the 1980s would continue unabated in the 1990s .
Change in the 1990s must also be envisaged within the wider context of an integrated and more open European Market, which is likely to cause all manner of stresses and strains to British society and economy.
For the NHS, the main impact may well be on the labour force, as staff of all types have greater freedom to use their qualifications and experience wherever the rewards are perceived to be.
Faced with increased rates of change from the factors discussed above, managers in the NHS will need to feel competent, confident and adequately rewarded as they lead the NHS into the 1990s.
This adds to the importance of investing in the development of managers of the right calibre.
Management development therefore moves centre stage, and this is for two reasons.
First, politically driven deadlines impose task-oriented imperatives on managers.
For example, within eighteen months of the time of writing, managers must implement the complex provisions of two White Papers, as well as their local plans for service provision and development within tight financial disciplines.
The White Paper Working for patients brings with it a whole new world of purchase and supply, with business skills at a premium.
The White Paper Caring for people demands a degree of inter-sectorial collaboration rarely met before in community-based services.
Managers will need education and training to achieve the targets set.
They will require new knowledge and skills, and management developers must orchestrate the necessary acquisition.
This will call on the full repertoire of techniques of learning.
There will be times when courses, seminars, workshops and secondments will be the appropriate vehicles for transmitting the relevant material, especially when new practices have been tried and tested.
But, as managers grapple with the unknown, they will need opportunities to reflect and share their experiences: action learning sets, time out events, case studies may be more appropriate here.
They must be encouraged, in Revans words, ‘to ask fresh questions’(Revans 1978).
The second reason for the central importance of management development comes from the human cost of change.
As the pace accelerates, there will be increased pressures on staff at all levels, and, inevitably, there will be casualties.
It is for skilled management developers to use their expertise in the management of change to mitigate the worst effects.
Glascott has noted that:
Working for patients has been criticised for failing to emphasise the importance of people and not being more specific about the need for personnel management.
(Glascott, 1990)
The changes of the 1990s pose an urgent challenge for the whole personnel function in planning for recruitment and retention, pay flexibility and increased employee expectations, but it is for management development specialists, within the wider personnel function, constantly to remind task-driven managers of Metzger's words, quoted by Glascott, ‘people breathe life into programmes’(Glascott, 1990).
One way of doing this is to ensure that specialists implementing technical changes, eg the Resource Management Initiative, pay heed to the behavioural changes they expect to promote in managers and staff involved.
Better information is a powerful tool, but its power comes from the way people behave: information in isolation is useless.
Another way of keeping people on the agenda is to create an awareness of the ‘shock’ of change.
This involves helping staff through the possible stages of individual crises identified some time ago in the USA, eg the phases of ‘shock’, ‘defensive retreat’, ‘acknowledgement’, ‘adaption and change’ Fink, Beak and Taddeo, 1971).
This is a highly skilled and sensitive business, but it is a capacity which will be in increasing demand from management developers: it involves combining the skills of the counsellor with those of the management consultant.
If managers fail to meet task deadlines, there is a strong risk of organisational breakdown, with dire consequences for the human component.
The values dilemma
The transition from a ‘corporate’ team management to a more ‘individual’single-authority general management seems likely to continue at least into the early 1990s.
The new breed of thrusting, entrepreneurial leaders will spread under a regime of (relatively) high pay and lower job security through mechanisms such as Performance Related Pay and fixed term or rolling contracts.
While this may lead to more ‘successful’ management at local level, it will also make ‘failure’more visible, with local communities suffering some of the consequences, as some health care facilities go ‘out of business’.
A challenge for the central NHS Management Executive, from its new home in Leeds, will be to decide how far to retain the traditional ‘Beveridgian’ corporate spirit of the NHS, with its principles of universal access to high-quality services, and how much to allow a ‘Darwinian’fragmentation.
The course of this debate will be the key to developing managers in the 1990s.
It is unlikely to be resolved in black and white terms.
Therefore, managers in the early 1990s will need to be able to handle the ambiguities of competing value systems.
This became a challenge for managers in the 1980s who had been recruited in the more consensual 1960s and 1970s, and it will remain a feature of the next decade.
Management developers will need to help managers to work comfortably within a clash of values.
Some of the conflict will be negative and sterile, impeding the work of delivering services, but some of it may be constructive and positive, where there can be genuine debate about the balance between patient care priorities and securing value for tax-payers’ money.
To some extent, a post-White Paper NHS offers scope to reduce a managers dissonance.
The ‘Darwinians’ can find their homes in Self-governing Trusts, to compete in the market to offer excellence of service.
The ‘Beveridgites’ may be most comfortable in Health Authorities whose job is to ensure that services are available for their populations.
The range of managerial roles — always varied — will tend to polarise around ‘purchasers’ and ‘suppliers’; a consequence for management developers is the need to pay more attention to recruitment, assessment and career guidance in the new decade.
The centre — local debate
The tensions in political priorities and prevailing values find an echo in decisions about the appropriate balance between centralised and localised infra-structure for management development.
Since the early days of management development in the NHS, in the 1960s, there have always been valuable initiatives at the centre and in localities.
Activities were, as always in NHS management, varied as to geographical spread and personal commitment, but, in the main, there was a clear division between local effort for local benefit, and central sponsorship for the general good.
For example, NHS National Education Centres offered general development programmes at middle and senior levels for which any suitable manager could be nominated.
Junior and first line managers tended to be provided for locally by health authority specialists and/or local colleges.
The advent of the NHS Training Authority in 1985 gave a great boost to management development nationally.
The publication of the Review Report Better management, better health (BM, BH) in 1986 was an occasion of great significance.
It constituted the first comprehensive review of management development since the mid-1970s, and the first time that management development requirements were discussed nationally in the context of an explicit notion of ‘management’.
The major achievement of BM, BH was to move ‘development’ closer to the central concerns of ‘management’, and away from the province of the management development specialist.
This was asserted in its definition of management development as:
any influence or experience that helps to improve managerial effectives (NHS Training Authority, 1986)
The message was hammered home in its Action Plan which asked Health Authorities:
to ensure that Management Development is a central issue in the Annual Review Process and in the production of strategies and plans.
(NHS Training Authority, 1986 )
Additionally, each Health Authority had to identify a local person with responsibility for implementing management development strategies.
Stimulated by this policy initiative and other favourable encouragement, there was an apparent upsurge in development activity.
New programmes were launched nationally: Individual Performance Review, National Accelerated Development Programme, etc, and the enduring problem of preparing clinicians to participate in management was tackled.
Locally, it is estimated that more than half the 200 Health Authorities in England and Wales designated a responsible officer, and that there was a greater volume and variety of activity than ever before: traditional courses were supplemented by a new range of imaginative options, to which more managers than ever before had access.
(Thompson and Edmonstone, 1988)
There was, however, a serious contradiction in the Training Authority's approach.
In keeping with the emerging philosophy of the NHS, there was a concern to obtain better value for money by encouraging a ‘market’ amongst management development suppliers.
From September 1987, the traditional ‘block grants’ to a cartel of National Education Centres were withdrawn and the market was thrown open to any supplier to compete for contracts.
At national level, the Training Authority could thus ensure that its contracts were let to suppliers who would work to tightly drawn specifications.
Locally, Health Authorities were encouraged to buy what specialist management development they felt fitted their needs, and to meet the full cost of their requirements.
Programmes would wither away if they did not command sufficient local support.
The essential contradiction lay in the incompatibilities of ‘command’ policies and ‘market’practice.
Nationally endorsed policies suggest a need for consistency and co-ordination in implementation.
Consistency is difficult to achieve if the policies are in competition with other priorities at local level.
In practice, management development proposals find it hard to claim managers' interest in the face of demand for improved patient care, professional training, etc.
So the manager or ‘customer’ may choose not to buy on this occasion.
At the supplier end, education providers are encouraged to behave commercially, with the penalty coming from lack of co-ordination.
They will naturally seek competitive advantage and be reluctant to share their experience and expertise with their ‘rivals’.
With prices honed to the bone, very little surplus is available for ensuring a solid infra-structure and the means of continuity.
A central organ such as the Training Authority naturally finds it difficult to relax its hold completely but, unless it can ‘command’ the situation, it falls to the mercies of local ‘market’economies.
A notable example of this occurred when the Authority attempted to implement a process of ‘accrediting’ management centres and ‘recognising’Health Authorities who met appropriate standards.
In 1987, a working party produced a very worthy Report for the Training Authority outlining a six-step process involving self-appraisal, a Review Team visit and adjudication by an Accreditation/Recognition Panel.
This scheme found no favour with either purchasers or providers of management development.
The process was seen to be too cumbersome and costly to provide much useful guidance to purchasers, who, in any case, preferred to back their own judgement.
Providers felt that a good ‘product’ or service would be bought with, or without, the Training Authority's stamp of approval.
Unless the Training Authority backed its proposals with hard cash, it found itself drawn increasingly into the market in a rather ambiguous purchase/supplier role.
A further and more complex instance of this has  been the National Accelerated Development Programme (NADP).
The merits of the programme itself are debated below, but in spite of considerable resources expended, the programme has never taken on its comprehensive scope.
While many of the components came into existence, they were never coordinated into a proper national programme.
Thus the NADP became synonymous with three General Management Development Schemes (GMTS) and never deployed the full range of intended options, especially the use of ‘designated ‘posts’.
The processes of Individual Performance Review and Personal Development Planning functioned only fitfully, and were distorted by their association with Performance Related Pay.
While many individuals gained from GMTS programmes, others were inhibited by the inexperienced use of assessment centres to identify ‘fast track’ potential.
The national impetus became diffused into regional effort, with consequent fragmentation and inconsistency of standards.
At the other end of the managerial hierarchy is the ambitious Management Education Syllabus and Open Learning (MESOL) project sponsored by the Training Authority and devised by the Open University and the Institute of Health Services Management.
The aim is to invest in a distance learning system and materials appropriate for some 70,000 NHS managers at the threshold of their managerial careers, with a take up of 3000 participants per year, at a cost somewhere between £ 100,000 to £300,000 for initial development.
At the time of writing, the future of this project is in doubt.
The Training Authority has controlled the development of system and materials through direct funding but it has now to be marketed to the NHS in competition with a multitude of alternatives, many of which are long established and closely adapted to local needs.
It will not be easy but, even if it emerges as a successful project in the early 1990s, it will have succeeded because it suited the market, rather than because it was implemented as national policy.
Depending on the evolution of management during the early 1990s, the confusions building up in the Training Authority's role may need to be unravelled: either it is strengthened as an effective arm of central policy, or it is abolished so that the market — created by itself — can have freer play.
It will then be up to local Health Authorities and Hospital Trusts to decide for themselves what to invest in management development, if Conservative Government remains.
If a Labour Government takes over, it is likely that the Authority will be integrated into a more comprehensive view of a planned NHS and its role strengthened.
A ‘demand-led’ strategy?
Whatever the future of the NHS Training Authority during the 1990s, there will be a continuing need for policy guidance for development from the centre.
At the very minimum, the NHS Management Executive will need the availability of skilled advice.
The source of this advice will be an indicator of the cultural shift in the NHS: will the advice be tendered by a single expert of directorial status on the Executive — a ‘general management’ culture — or collectively by an Authority in the traditional manner — a ‘consensus’culture?
Three policy issues will dominate the early 1990s.
The first one will focus on what might be called ‘competition policy’.
It will be necessary to decide on the amount of resource to be invested in management development, and what mechanism should be used to allocate these  resources .
At present, the reins of central control in management development have been slackened, and Health Authorities locally have been freer to decide for themselves.
This has faced management development proposals with hard competition from patient care and professional imperatives.
The generalised and longer-term values of the former are always likely to be seen to a disadvantage against the more immediate and more publicly ‘acceptable’ benefits of the latter.
It is for the Management Executive to consider the merits of investment in its managers and, as necessary, to ease the competitive situation locally.
The temptation is to establish a structure which relies on the initiatives of experts-Training Authorities, Regional Training Departments, Management Development Advisers.
This is one of the messages in the White Paper Working Paper 10 concerning Education and Training (Department of Health, 1989c).
The history of the 1970s and 1980s suggests that this approach —a ‘supply-led’ strategy — will have only limited success.
An alternative — and theoretically the more sound approach — is a ‘demand-led’ strategy in which general managers are committed to investment in development because they can see its importance.
This suggests that pressure from the top should be exerted through the hierarchical line of accountability, through mechanisms such as Annual Review and, in the post-White Paper era, specific clauses in contracts.
Given the commitment of general managers, resources will be found and expertise deployed where it is wanted by the managers.
To what extent is this a threat to the management development specialist?
In the short term, it may upset established practices.
But, in the longer term, it promises to move the specialist closer to the levers of power, which have often eluded his or her grasp, leaving a sense of being on the periphery of events.
Nor need specialists be passive spectators during any transition in strategy.
They can and should influence events.
One of the challenges is to engage more convincingly in the process of evaluation.
This has always constituted something of an Achilles Heel: it has been impossible to prove the value of development activity in most cases.
It remains an act of common sense or even faith.
The problems of evaluation are well known, and a number of approaches are available in the writing of Easterby-Smith and others (Easterby-Smith, 1981).
The task for the NHS developer is to be more careful in evaluating learning and to make the findings more visible to policy-makers.
A weakness of the last comprehensive review in Better management, better health was that it did not make explicit the value of development activities.
The important Part 1 of the Report demonstrated the need for development with admirable clarity, but there was no ‘bridge’ to the recommendations on good practices.
It was assumed that they would meet the need.
In future, management developers are going to have to make the connection much clearer, and the evidence of evaluation will be vital.
The second policy issue will focus on the continuing saga of involving clinicians in management.
Overt attempts to achieve this date back to at least the ‘cogwheel’ Reports of 1967–69.
It was a central plank of the Griffiths recommendations, and the evidence referred to earlier in the chapter indicates that success has been only fitful and Scattered.
The case for clinician involvement has been rehearsed many times and is taken as established here.
The fundamental problem appears to lie in the balance of power within the NHS as an organisation.
Clinicians have been accustomed to having the prime influence over the deployment of resources and to enjoying considerable freedom to pursue their professional activities.
As agents of government, managers have been gradually given more ‘structural’ power to control the ‘expert’power of the professional.
Among wise men and women, there is a respect for the contribution of clinicians and managers.
Among the unlucky and the foolish, there is the potential for damaging conflict.
The question of the balance of power will be debated and decided at a political level.
The current focus of controversy is the implementation of the White Paper Working for patients .
For managers, the issue manifests itself at a more procedural level, and is now revolving around resource management.
This issue was the subject of the previous chapter and will not be discussed here, except to identify the implications for management development.
These turn, in part, on a conceptual question: who are the managers?
To what extent are the managers those with an identifiable managerial responsibility, such as general managers, senior managers and indeed clinical directors?
Or are they all those who ‘manage’ resources, which must include all senior clinicians.
It would seem only prudent and realistic to adopt the wider definition, otherwise the management developer risks ignoring substantial numbers of powerful people who ‘make things happen’ in health care.
There then arises a vital tactical point: who is the client?
Increasingly, specialists whether employed inside or outside the NHS, are working to contract with an identifiable client.
The most straightforward approach is to take the narrow course of satisfying the client.
But the experienced specialist has professional skills and insights which suggest that better results in the longer term could come from challenging some clients on their analysis of the situation.
Some of these clients can misread political realities, others may perceive that they are ‘involving clinicians’ in management whereas they could also be seen to be merely ‘indoctrinating’.
The clinician/management issue is probably the greatest challenge to management developers — and others, of course— in the 1990s.
The third policy issue is of a nature more specific to management development.
In determining priorities for investment in the 1990s, what emphasis should be given to ‘elite’ programmes such as the National Accelerated Development Programme (NADP) and its constituent General Management Development Schemes (GMTS).
This is clearly not a once and for all time decision.
Programmes can be deployed to meet urgent needs at certain times.
Sir Len Peach as NHS Director of Personnel in 1987, stated  that the NADP should be seen within a five-year time-scale to meet the vital need for a supply of high-calibre general managers from within the NHS.
Elite programmes may be characterised by their focus on a relatively small number of selected managers at a relatively high cost per person.
Since the Noel Hall Report of 1957, the NHS has been conscious of the need to make special arrangements to ensure its share of good-calibre school leavers and graduates.
In an increasingly competitive market, there is evidence of quantitative and qualitative success.
There are also signs that the GMTS process is helping to identify talent from internal sources to meet the requirement for future general managers.
The success of such initiatives indicates the benefits are targeting.
The disadvantage comes from the potential neglect of 98 per cent of NHS managers who do not join one of the accelerated programmes.
Most managers thus depend for their development on a mixture of exhortation from above, the interest of their immediate seniors and self-help.
In highly competitive ‘market’ conditions locally, patient care requirements are likely to command priority over development needs.
The strengthening of general or ‘line’ management commitment to development may go a large part of the way to overcome local inertia.
This can be successful especially where an imaginative approach to development is adopted.
Such activities do not always have to command a high up-front cost, as in the case of the off-the-job courses.
Coaching, learning sets, job rotation and acting up, reading, etc may not cost much in cash, although there is always an opportunity cost and the expenditure of individual effort.
An innovative initiative to the ‘elite-v-mass’ dilemma has been the MESOL programme referred to earlier: an attempt to put central resources into the development of 70,000 junior and middle managers, especially those just embarking on managerial careers.
As an attempt to target the ‘mass’ rather than the usual ‘elite’, this Training Authority effort deserves to succeed.
Its problem is that, as mentioned before, it goes only half-way: system and materials development are fully funded, but most students must secure local sponsorship and funding.
The lessons of such experiences as NADP/GMTS and MESOL seem to be that the issues are as much about targeting and fully funding as about elitism.
Any programme targeted on an explicit need can be justified if it is followed through with adequate resources.
Clearly, such resources will always be less than the total need for management development, so hard decisions about selective investment will continue to be required.
Formality and informality
The 1970s and 1980s have witnessed a striking growth in the range of development options available to NHS managers.
The traditional short, off-the-job course, first used in the mid-1960s, has become a flexible and sophisticated tool, joined by a host of less formalised techniques.
In the later 1980s, the predominance of the short, ‘continuing education’ event has given way to a polarisation between formal ‘educational’programmes, such as Certificates in Management Studies and MBAs, and informal work-place, problem-solving learning, often associated with consultancy.
The former approach offers the student a continuity of learning, although often within an academic rather than a practical framework.
The value of the latter often comes from relevance to managerial concerns, but its immediacy can often drive out its usefulness as a source of learning.
Between the mid-1960s and mid-1980s, there was a range of centrally funded short Development Courses available on a national basis to eligible managers from all disciplines at middle and senior levels.
They were sponsored successively by the DHSS, NHS National Training Council and NHS Training Authority.
The latter body intended that the programmes should become self-financing, but the National Education Centres who were the major providers found that employers were not attracted by full-cost funding.
At best, these courses integrated the twin goals of relevance and continuity providing a set of learning experiences over 4 to 6 months which enabled several thousand NHS managers to have their first and, in many cases, only systematic opportunity for development.
With the almost total demise of these courses, the running has been taken up by the education sector with an increasingly comprehensive variety of accredited programmes.
Academic barriers to learning in the form of ‘gateway’ qualifications have been progressively  diminished until even the most hidebound institutions have evolved ‘open-access’programmes.
Recent evidence suggests that more NHS managers than ever before are studying by one mode or another for certificates, diplomas, graduate degrees and postgraduate degrees in relevant managerial subjects.
Since many of these are financed by their Health Service employers, there is at least prima-facie evidence that these employers will be looking for outcomes in terms of enhanced performance.
At the informal end of the spectrum, learning opportunities have crept even nearer to the workplace.
All too often, however, progress depends on the energy of individual managers and the support of their superiors.
Techniques such as Individual Performance Review and Personal Development Plans can help, but will not guarantee any action.
But, just as there is less and less surprise at managers studying for masters and doctoral qualifications, there is equally diminishing resistance to informal learning events involving learning sets, time out reviews, even one-to-one coaching.
Perhaps the demand for high-calibre and competent managers throughout the 1990s will guarantee the continuation of this ‘twin-track’ strategy of formal and informal development, guided by policies and monitoring from the centre.
There is, however, a strong case to be made for the retention of management development expertise available to the NHS.
Much of the ‘provision’ can be, and is being, bought in from independent or semi-independent contractors.
But, there is a need to ensure a capacity for expert advice which will depend on the continuous involvement of experts with the complexities and problems of the NHS.
There is a central role for specialists who can integrate the formal with the informal, who are able to influence the centres of power, and are committed more closely to the missions of the NHS than just financial reward.