

ALDERSON, Jack
205 appearances
42 Southern League
150 Football League
13 FA Cup
Jack Alderson was one of a number of excellent goalkeepers to have served Crystal Palace FC, and is the only one to have gained full England International honours while with our club.
Jack was a native of Crook in County Durham and played for the local amateur side as a junior before signing for Newcastle at the age of 17.
When the 1st World War broke out, he joined the Army and, while he was stationed at Woolwich, he was spotted by Palace's secretary/manager, Mr Edmund Goodman.
Jack played a few wartime matches in the London Combination for Palace at their new home at The Nest and then signed professional forms for the club when he left the Forces.
Jack's first-class debut for the Palace was the first Southern League match when soccer opened up again after the War, against Northampton Town at The Nest on 30 August 1919 (2–2).
He went on to play in all 42 League games that season and helped the club to finish in a respectable third position but, statistically at least, his best season with the Palace was 1920–21 when, along with all the other Southern League clubs, we were admitted to the Football League — and promptly won the newly-formed 3rd Division at the first time of asking!
Jack Alderson appeared in every League fixture and his record of only conceding 34 goals in a full League season was to remain far and away the best by any Palace goalkeeper for over half a century.
Palace didn't find Division Two at all easy in the early 1920s.
The fact that we stayed in it for four seasons was not a little due to the.
presence of Jack Alderson between  out posts.
He gained applause and admiration at many grounds when 'keeping Palace, in matches which opposing forwards should have had well won, or when refusing to give and allow the score to reach humiliating proportions.
And this fine goalkeeper improved as he went along.
In his last season with us, 1923–24, he became a phenomenal penalty saver: between December and March he saved spot-kicks at Derby, The Wednesday, Clapton Orient and Bury and fully deserved the acclaim he received.
There can be little doubt that, had Jack Alderson been with a more glamorous or more successful club, he would have gained many more International caps than the single honour awarded to him when he played for England against France in Paris on 10 May 1923.
England triumphed 4–1 and Jack was only beaten in the last 90 seconds when the game was well won.
ALLEN, Ronnie
109 appearances
100 Football League
7 FA Cup
2 FL Cup
Although Ronnie Allen was only 5ft 8 inches tall, he played equally effectively as centre-forward or at outside-right, and he had appeared in both positions for England during his time with West Bromwich Albion.
He joined the Palace in the summer of 1961, and immediately struck up a superb and exciting partnership of ball-playing skills with Johnny Byrne, as newly promoted Palace made an immediate impact upon Division Three.
It was, however, after Palace had acquired Cliff Holton and Dickie Dowsett that we saw Allen at his vintage best, spraying the passes and plying the crosses from which those big fellows scored the goals which first of all kept us in Division Three, and then took us up to the 2nd Division in 1963–64.
Ronnie was also Palace's captain for that promotion season.
Ronnie returned to his native Midlands to become senior coach at Wolves in March 1965, have completed exactly 100 League games for us and having made himself a popular fellow here at Selhurst Park.
ANDREWS, Cecil or ‘Archie’
105 appearances
104 Football League
1 FA Cup
Archie Andrews' real name was Cecil, but this good-natured footballer was inevitably nicknamed after the ventriloquist's famous dummy of the period.
Archie usually performed as a combative left-half for the Palace, but he was also occasionally drafted into the front line, to play as a makeshift centre-forward to most useful effect, because his considerable height gave him a distinct advantage in that department and he scored on his first two outings for us in the number nine shirt.
Archie always gave one hundred per cent for the Palace and was a firm favourite with the fans of the mid '50s, but he was regarded as surplus to Manager Cyril Spiers' requirements when the new boss instituted his Youth Policy.
However, the left-half position was never satisfactorily filled after Archie's departure, until it was taken over by Johnny McNichol some five or six years later.
BAILEY, ROY
119 appearances
118 Football League
1 FA Cup
Roy Bailey made his Palace debut at the age of just 17 years, but he only became our regular goalkeeper after his spell of National Service had ended early in 1953, and then it soon became clear that Roy was a goalkeeper of the highest quality, even though he was performing in a Palace side that was almost invariably struggling.
A tremendous favourite with the fans of the time, Roy was both handsome and spectacular, and a most worthy member of the gallery of fine goalkeepers who have served Crystal Palace down the years.
He was awarded a benefit match with Jack Edwards on 17 October 1955, when Leyton Orient were our visitors, but in March 1956 he inevitably moved on to a club where the immediate prospects were considerably brighter then at Selhurst Park.
Roy signed for aspiring Ipswich Town, then still of the 3rd Division, but helped them into Division Two the next season and then on to the 1st Division Championship.
Perhaps Roy's finest goalkeeping feat while he was with the Palace was in a Reserve match at Luton in 1950, when he saved a thrice-taken penalty magnificently each time!
BANNISTER, Jack
129 appearances
117 + 3 Football League
3 FA Cup
6 FL Cup
Manager Dick Graham brought Jackie Bannister to Selhurst Park on a free transfer from Scunthorpe United in July 1965, having assessed this combative wing-half or full-back at close quarters when the pair were at The Hawthorns in the early 1960s, and Jackie certainly became a valued member of Palace's 2nd Division defences under Mr Graham in the second half of that decade, missing only one game in two seasons between August 1966 and May 1968.
He also developed a penchant for scoring goals against Division Two rivals, Plymouth Argyle.
He did so at home and away in 1965–66, and then hit another when they were visitors at Selhurst Park in February 1967.
A hard tackler and a great distributor of the ball, Jackie was strong in the air too, while he stood out in our defence with his shock of black hair but, to the disappointment of many Palace fans, he moved to Luton Town in October 1968 and finished his career with Cambridge United.
BARBER, Phil
288 appearances
211+27 Football League
14 FA Cup
13+6 FL Cup
15+2 FM Cup
At the close of the 1990–91 season's business, Phil Barber was Palace's longest-serving current player and had joined the select troupe of men to have played over 250 games for The Eagles some fourteen months previously, so that is fair to say that there has seldom been a more popular fellow to wear the Palace colours.
Phil joined the Palace in February 1984 for a modest £10,000 fee from Aylesbury Town, but he soon established himself as a valuable member of our League side, playing either on the left of midfield or up front as a striker, and he must probably be reckoned to be the best signing made for our club by manager Alan Mullery.
Tough, modest and possessing an ideal temperament, Phil is renowned for always giving of his best for the Palace cause.
Known as ‘Fizzer’ to his colleagues and our fans, Phil played in every game of Palace's promotion season of 1988–89 and only an injury, sustained on his 1st Division debut at Queens Park Rangers, prevented him from completing full appearances in 1989–90, although he was an ever-present member of the team that reached the 1990 FA Cup Final and so nearly seized the famous trophy.
Phil was again unlucky with injuries in 1990–91 when a fractured rib in November reduced his contribution to modest proportions, but his distinguished career already assures him a permanent place in the Palace annals.
BARRON, Paul
108 Appearances
90 Football League
5 FA Cup
13 FL Cup
Paul Barron was a capable goalkeeper, who joined the Palace in the summer of 1980, as part of the complex deal which also brought Clive Allen to Selhurst Park and took Kenny Sansom to Highbury but, for the £400,000 rated Barron — and all Palace's players — 1980–81 was a miserable season.
Managers came and went at an alarming rate; there was Board Room take-over; gates began to dwindle and the Palace were candidates for relegation from well before Christmas.
However, the following term Paul really did justify his large transfer fee and had an excellent run of performances, missing only two games, so that the big, blond goalkeeper was virtually without challenge as our Player of the Year for 1981–82.
He left us just before Christmas 1982, in a sudden transfer to West Bromwich Albion, after appearing in all seventeen League matches of 1982–83.
BATEMAN, Ben
180 appearances
75 Southern League
97 Football League
8 FA Cup
The first thing to be said about Bateman is that he was a Londoner!
In Palace's early days, and at least until the end of the 1920s, almost all the playing staff came from the North of England or the Midlands but Bateman was a popular and welcome exception.
Prior to World War One Bateman served Palace admirably while remaining an amateur and in 1913–14 he gained Amateur International honours for his country and then toured Denmark and Sweden with the England Amateur XI.
1913–14 was the season in which Bateman made his Palace debut as a young man.
At 5ft 10½ inches and 13 stone he was big for a winger but he made 29 Southern League appearances for us that season out of a maximum of 38, and scored two valuable goals at Cardiff (where we won 2–1) and at Swindon (where we won 2–0).
His position was at outside-right, although later he occasionally switched wings, and his place as a regular, though unpaid, member of our 1913–14 side tells us that he was a credit to his club and craft because Palace only conceded the Southern League championship to Swindon Town on goal average at the end of a thrilling season.
Bateman made only 9 appearances in 1914–15.
He was among the first to respond to the call to the colours in the 1st World War and the outcome was clear.
With substantially the same staff as the previous year, but without their exciting right-winger, Palace slumped to 15th in the table.
Bateman was a school-master by profession but after the war he signed professional forms for Palace.
Another indication of his value to the side was that the club and his colleagues were prepared to approve his occasional absences from the team at distant away matches because his commitments at school prevented him from making the Friday journey.
He put in 37 appearances in our final Southern League season, and again scored a couple of goals away from home — at Luton (Palace won 4–1) and at QPR (we won 3–2).
Unfortunately he could not do the same at Newcastle in the FA Cup and, although he got leave of absence from school for the match, we were unable to prevent the Geordies from avenging their 1907 defeat.
Ben Bateman (far right, seated), poses with his colleagues for the 1922–23 Palace team photograph.
Bateman's fine turn of speed and immaculate crosses were seen at their best in Palace's drive to promotion from the newly-formed Football League Division Three.
Time and again he laid on centres from which Ted Smith and then John Conner, our regular centre-forwards, were able to score.
Bateman was unable to put his name on the League scorers' list in spite of 32 appearances but he did get an important goal for Palace that season.
It was in the FA Cup 1st Round tie at The Nest against first division opponents Manchester City and it came five minutes after half-time to put us ahead; we went on to win 2–0.
In 1921–22, Palace's first-ever season in Division Two, Bateman missed only five matches, and he scored his usual brace of away goals — at Barnsley (lost 1–3) and Bury (won 2–1 for our first win there).
This Division Two season must rank as Ben Bateman's best for Crystal Palace.
Not only did he prove himself the master of a number of accredited and experienced Division Two full-backs but he was in his usual place of outside-right in Palace's best-ever Cup victory when we walloped Everton 6–0 at Goodison on 7 January 1922.
Bateman laid on our opening goal for Whibley after only four minutes, hit the bar himself, and made our fourth goal, which was scored by Menlove, in the second half.
Ben Bateman's Palace Career
BELCHER, Jimmy
137 appearances
127 Football League
10 FA Cup
Jimmy Belcher was a cultured wing-half or inside-forward from the West Ham football academy.
Upon signing for us he immediately became a pillar of the Palace side and our leading scorer with 12 goals in 1954–55, as Manager  Cyril Spiers sought to introduce younger players to an ageing Palace staff.
Jimmy was creative in attack, as you would expect of any  protégé nurtured at Upton Park, and he possessed a fierce shot.
In defence he was steady and reliable even if, in a way, his sophisticated refined play was out of its element in the hurly-burly of 3rd Division South football; Jimmy always appeared to be better suited to a more leisurely pace than that which usually pertained at Selhurst Park in the mid-1950s.
In fact, hindsight leads one to suggest that Jimmy came to the Palace 20 years too soon — he could have become an inspiration in Malcolm Allison's footballing team of the mid-1970s.
It was a mark of the respect Jimmy gained here that, when we ran an article about him in the Spring of 1977 in our Palace Programme, it evoked a larger response from our fans than any other in that series.
Jimmy Belcher
(Northcliffe Newspapers)
BERRY, Peter
161 appearances
151 Football League
10 FA Cup
Fleet-footed Peter Berry joined the Palace as a Junior straight from school in 1949 and became a versatile forward, who appeared in four front-line positions during five seasons at Selhurst Park, once he had graduated to the League side.
Normally Peter played at outside-right, but a combination of events led him to have several useful and productive spells at centre-forward, and he also played at inside-right and at outside-left for us.
Peter's older brother, Johnny, was also a right-winger.
He was one of the Busby Babes at Manchester United, but was badly injured in the 1958 Munich Air Disaster, but Peter bravely played for the Palace at Reading on the Saturday after the crash, even though Johnny's life was still in danger.
A resourceful and pacy winger, with a strong shot, Peter deservedly earned the affection of all the Palace clientele of the mid-1950s, but these were troubled days at Selhurst Park and fans of that period are left with the feeling that we never really saw Peter Berry consistently produce the level of football of which he was undoubtedly capable.
BIGG, Bob
114 appearances
109 Football League
5 FA Cup
The Palace had been unable to fill the outside-left berth adequately after George Clarke's long reign had come to an end, but there was no doubt in any supporter's minds that a worthy successor had at last been found when Bob Bigg made his Palace debut.
It was in the opening match of the 1934–35 season at Aldershot (2–2), where the young amateur capped an impressive display by scoring our first goal of the season with a header on the half-hour.
Like his illustrious predecessor, Bob was a powerful raider in his own right — he finished his first season as second-highest Palace scorer to the great Albert Dawes — and he was a supplier of plentiful openings to his colleagues.
Partly no doubt because Bob had been brought up in Thornton Heath, he was popular with local fans, but his popularity also stemmed from the fact the he made or scored vital goals precisely when they were needed.
None delighted Palace supporters more than the hat-trick he scored on the opening day of 1935–36, to enable the Palace to beat Cardiff City 3–2 — and Palace record-keepers will wish to note that this is the only occasion upon which a Palace winger has netted a hat-trick on the first day of the season.
Unfortunately, Bob Bigg's Palace career was greatly reduced by a badly broken leg sustained at Newport in February 1937, which kept him out of first-team action for fully 21 months, and some of the contemporary pundits reckoned that his absence cost us the single promotion place from Division 3 South in 1938–39.
BLACKMAN, Jack
99 Football League
106 appearances
7 FA Cup
Jack Blackman was a strong, aggressive, bustling centre-forward who joined the Palace from 3rd Division rivals Queens Park Rangers at the end of October 1935, during a flurry of transfer activity at Selhurst Park.
He was an astute purchase, for he came to us as a proven goalscorer and immediately lived up to his reputation by netting upon his debut against Millwall here at Selhurst Park (5–0) and going on to hit 19 League goals from 27 outings for us in the remainder of that season.
Then, when Albert Dawes moved to Luton Town, Jack became our leading goalscorer and he topped the Palace's scoring charts in 1936–37 and 1937–38; almost certainly, his most satisfying strike for us was the goal he scored in Palace's 3–1 win at Shepherds Bush against his old club on May Day 1937 in the last match of that season.
Jack hit 52 goals for the Palace from 99 League outings before the 2nd World War and that is an impressive record by any standard, but he continued with us during the makeshift wartime arrangements and again produced a steady supply of goals — including a hat-trick in Palace's first official wartime fixture at West Ham (6–2).
After a short spell with (Guildford City after the war, he returned to Selhurst Park in 1947 and became our assistant trainer.
In 1950 he was appointed Trainer to Palace's League team and was twice nominated in that capacity to the Division 3 South eleven in the annual representative matches against their northern counterparts.
BLAKEMORE, Cecil
141 appearances
133 Football league
8 FA Cup
Cec Blakemore was a Stourbridge lad, but it was from Redditch that he joined the Palace in December 1922.
Cec was a clever, goalscoring inside or centre-forward although, as his career records show, he took some time to come to terms with the standard required in Division Two of the Football League.
However, with the Palace back in the 3rd Division South in 1925, Cec had what was certainly his best season with us and hit two hat-tricks among his tally of 19 goals, which made him our second highest scorer that term.
The following season Cec was again our second-best scorer and his partnership with Percy Cherrett produced 48 League goals while helping the Palace to sixth place in the table.
Cec then refused the terms offered by the club in the summer of 1927 and moved to Bristol City, but his 54 League goals for the Palace still keep him well within the top fifteen scorers in the history of our club.
BLYTH, Mel
219+3 Football League
12+1 FA Cup
254 appearances
19 FL Cup
Big Mel Blyth joined the Palace from Scunthorpe in the summer of 1968 as a wing half-back, but a case could easily be made to justify dubbing him as Manager Bert Head's most important signing, for Mel developed into a magnificent back-four man, where his stature of 6ft 1 inch and nearly 12 stones made him a natural central defender.
It was with Mel helping to dominate matters at the heart of the Palace rearguard that our club earned its first-ever place in Division One in 1969, and then, alongside evergreen John McCormick, Mel matured into one of the best uncapped centre-halves in the top flight.
However, it was as a goalscorer that Mel gained an undisputed niche in Palace's history as the scorer of our first-ever goal in Division One, when his fine, dipping header put us into the lead and on the way to a 2–2 draw with Manchester United on the opening day of season 1969–70.
He then startled champions-elect Everton with an early goal when we met them at their Goodison Park headquarters a week later (1–2).
Mel was a permanent fixture in our 1st Division defences and, over the four seasons 1969–73, only John Jackson appeared for us more times than he did, while his 151 1st Division games for us tell of a stalwart and dependable defender who could be relied upon in every situation.
Everyone at the Palace was pleased when Mel won an FA Cup winner's medal with Southampton in 1976, but he re-appeared briefly in our colours on loan in the winter of 1977–78 and his extra half-dozen games took him into the elite group of those who have played over 250 first class matches for our club.
Mel Blyth portrayed, for the camera and in airborne action in a pre-season friendly against St Mirren in August 1970.
BRIGGS, Harry
157 appearances
150 Football League
7 FA Cup
Harry Briggs was a burly centre-half from Shotton in County Durham who came late into Football League soccer when he joined the Palace in 1947 at the age of 23 years, but he developed into a pillar of our defence in the early 1950s as well as becoming club captain.
Commanding in the air, a great header of the ball and a strong tackler, Harry was the epitome of the ‘stopper’ centre-half and, in spite of playing for a struggling club, he was always loyal to the Palace.
He could be relied upon in all circumstances to give of his best for us, even though, in all honesty, we were seldom more than a pretty poor bunch throughout the period he was with us.
Harry led our team by example — although perhaps what some of his colleagues needed was a skipper who could also drive or cajole them to better things — but it was a mark of the respect in which he was held by Palace supporters that his well-deserved Benefit in 1953–54 was so well attended.
BRIGHT, Mark
227 appearances
181+3 Football League
12+1 FA Cup
14 FL Cup
16 FM Cup
Mark Bright joined the Palace from Leicester City in November 1986 in a £75,000 deal and it was the goals from this cultured striker, along with those from partner Ian Wright, which took the Palace back to the 1st Division in 1989, while also helping to make the twosome Palace's top scorers in the League's higher divisions, as well as one of the most prolific striking partnerships in the country at that time.
‘Brighty’ earned the Golden Boot award for the highest scorer in Division Two in 1987–88, in which he hit 24 goals, and his efforts in the following promotion term, in which he played in every match, took him into the select group of men who have netted over 50 League goals for our club.
His 12 strikes in the 1st Division in 1989–90 were an important feature of Palace's creditable showing there, while our fans will of course always remember that it was Mark's crashing drive at the start of the second half that began our recovery against Liverpool in the FA Cup semi-final and, ultimately, helped to take us to Wembley.
As Palace impressed in Division One in 1990–91, Mark's prowess gained further recognition when he scored The Eagles' decisive goal against Liverpool in the televised Football League match on 30 December, but Palace fans had by then long since ceased to need any persuading that this intelligent and hard-working centre-forward is among the best in the country.
That confidence in Mark was further vindicated as the season progressed.
He was seen as a supreme First Division predator, with a sequence of seven top-flight goals in just ten games in the mid-winter months as Palace pursued Arsenal and Liverpool at the top of the table; he was also offered additional encouragement with recognition at the England B level.
BROUGHTON, Ted
100 appearances
96 Football League
4 FA Cup
Ted Broughton joined the Palace in the summer of 1948 to occupy the outside-right position, which had never been satisfactorily filled since the war.
Ted was a clever, tricky player with neat ball-control.
He was difficult to dispossess and he liked to beat his man and create space for his crosses by craft rather than by sheer pace.
His skill on the ball meant that he was occasionally useful in an inside berth, but the Palace were seldom more than a struggling outfit while he was with us and it is doubtful if many Palace fans ever saw him at his best.
Ted's career ended abruptly with a badly broken leg in a Football Combination match and he joined his home town club, Bradford Park Avenue, as assistant trainer in 1954.
BULCOCK, Joe
146 appearances
137 Football League
9 FA Cup
Joe Bulcock was a Burnley-born full-back, who joined the Palace from Exeter City in the summer of 1909, having previously played for Bury.
He made an immediate impact here, missing just three Southern League matches in his first season and being selected to represent the Southern League against the Football League at Stamford Bridge in April.
He then went to South Africa with the FA summer touring side and played for the national team in one of the representative games.
Strong and sturdy and ideally suited to the tough demands of the Southern League, Joe was our first-choice left-back for four full seasons and a considerable favourite with our fans before injury gave talented Horace Colclough the chance to succeed him.
Joe moved to Swansea Town in February 1914, but was killed in France during the 1st World War.
BURRIDGE, John
88 Football League
7 FA Cup
102 appearances
7 FL Cup
‘Budgie’ was Palace's extrovert and excellent goalkeeper through the period in which Palace sought and grasped the 2nd Division championship in 1978–79 and a stable security in Division One the following year.
Burridge cost the Palace £40,000 when he joined the club from Aston Villa, but he became part of the Palace's best-ever defence, for the 24 League goals conceded in 1978–79 were the lowest for a single season in the club's history while John's 21 ‘clean-sheets’ that season was also the best-ever by a goalkeeper here.
But ‘Budgie’ was more than a fine professional: he was a marvellous personality.
The fans absolutely loved him and would throng the terraces to witness his extrovert pre-match warm-up sessions, in which he entertained and even amused the supporters before returning to the dressing-room as mud-stained and soiled as if he had been playing in a game.
It was a mark of the esteem in which John Burridge was held at Selhurst Park, both as a goalkeeper and as a showman, that whenever he has subsequently returned here with his later clubs he has invariably been accorded a warm welcome, both from Palace fans and from his former playing colleagues.
BURRIDGE, Peter
124 appearances
114 Football League
6 FA Cup
4 FL Cup
Peter Burridge had captained Millwall to a 4th Division promotion in 1962 and had thereby brought himself very much to the attention of Palace's astute managerial team of Arthur Rowe and Dick Graham, both as an inspirational skipper and as a regular scorer of important goals.
Manager Arthur Rowe signed him for the Palace, but it was under Dick Graham that Peter reached the climax of his playing career.
Burridge became Palace's top scorer in the two seasons after he joined us and his 20 League goals in 1963–64 were a key reason for our further progress to Division Two.
Nimble and sprightly, Peter was the ideal foil to his colleague, big Cliff Holton, who also notched up 20 goals for us in that 31 d Division season.
Towards the end of his time with us, Peter began to develop a midfield role in the craftier confines of Division Two, but it is for his goalscoring exploits that Palace fans chiefly remember him.
LEFT: John Burridge.
(Universal Press Agency) RIGHT: Peter Burridge
BUTLER, Hubert
124 appearances
16 FA Cup
Hubert Butler joined the Palace from Chorley in the summer of 1928, having previously played for Blackpool, with a reputation as a proven goalscoring inside-left, even if his Palace debut was in the disastrous (and record) defeat (1–8) we sustained at Northampton the following October.
It is significant that the Palace were able to make two serious challenges for the 3rd Division South title in the four seasons that Hubert was with us.
In 1928–29 he was an ideal supplier of chances for Len Griffiths and Harry Havelock, while also providing 10 League goals himself from 16 appearances (including a hat-trick at Brighton just before Christmas) and helping the Palace to their best run in the FA Cup for years.
In 1930–31 Butler netted 14 goals in 39 games to support the efforts of' Peter Simpson and George Clarke.
Butler's role at Crystal Palace was thus largely a supportive one and he seldom gained much publicity, but fans of the time recognised him as a useful contributor to the Palace cause.
1929/30 team included Hubert Butler in his debut year.
BYRNE, Johnny
259 appearances
239 Football League
18 FA Cup
2 FL Cup
Johnny Byrne was Palace's chirpy young prodigy of the early 1960s and as such gained the prototype nickname of ‘Budgie’, partly on account of his ceaseless chatter out on the pitch.
He was very much the prime reason for Palace's success in climbing out of Division Four in 1960–61 and Johnny's 30 League goals for us that season remain Palace's post-war scoring record for a single season to this day.
Johnny's silky touches and ball playing skills, nurtured by the great Arthur Rowe, drew huge admiration from Palace fans and he inevitably became a target for the bigger clubs, but he was still with the Palace when he gained his first full England International cap (against Northern Ireland at Wembley on 22 November 1961) and Palace's first such honour in thirty-eight years.
When Johnny moved to West Ham for £60,000 plus the return of the ill-fated John Brett in March 1962, the fee was the biggest between British clubs at that time, and his career flourished amid the glamour and publicity of the 1st Division.
In the spring of 1967, and to the delight of all Palace fans, Johnny came back to us, added another 36 appearances and five goals to his Palace aggregates but then, almost a year later, moved on again to Fulham.
His 259 Palace appearances keep him high on our all-time charts while his 90 League goals still remain the club record in the post-war era.
Quite simply, at his peak, Johnny Byrne was one of the most gifted footballers Crystal Palace FC has ever known.
Johnny Byrne in 1960, as Jim Mercer saw him, and receiving the appreciation of Palace fans on his return to Selhurst Park in December 1990.
Callender, Billy
225 appearances
203 Football League
22 FA Cup
Billy Callender, Palace's regular goalkeeper from 1926–32, was thought by some of his contemporaries to have sufficient skill and character to follow his illustrious predecessor, Jack Alderson, not just as the Crystal Palace custodian but also the full England International Side itself.
Billy joined the Palace staff in October 1923 as a 19-year-old from his local club, Prudhoe Castle in Northumberland, and saved a penalty against West Ham reserves in his first match for us.
He gained unchallenged possession of the goalkeeper's jersey in the Palace dressing room in January 1926 and earned a place in a Football League representative side later than year.
He was only missing from Palace line-ups from that time as a result of injury or illness, though his playing record demonstrates that he was prone to neither, and it was while we had Billy Callender in goal that Palace came closest to returning to Division 2 in 1928–29, when we finished as runners-up to Charlton on goal average.
Billy was awarded a Benefit on Wednesday 15 April 1931 against the Combined Universities, but a knock in the League match on the previous Saturday prevented him from playing — so he appeared as linesman instead!
That was typical of Billy Callender and his popularity at Selhurst Park knew no bounds.
Sadly, the story of Billy Callender ended, not in triumph in an England eleven, but in tragedy.
His beloved fiancée was stricken with polio and, over a two year period, her health steadily deteriorated.
Billy refused to allow this to affect his performances in the Palace goal and he never played better than in his last two League games for us at the end of the 1931–32 season.
A fortnight later Billy's fiancée died.
With no football to relieve his loss, Billy took it hard and, on Tuesday 26 July 1932, the day after the team had reported for trailing for the new season, he was found dead in one of the dressing rooms.
He had hanged himself.
Those who knew Billy Callender still speak of him with affection and regard all these years later.
That in itself is a full measure of the standing and ability of the Palace goalkeeper who, but for one of life's tragedies, might have reached the highest honours in the game.
CHARLTON, Stan
135 appearances
121 Football League
14 FA Cup
Stan Charlton joined Crystal Palace FC from Exeter City in the summer of 1928, linking up again with his former manager at St James Park, Fred Maven, who had moved up to London from Devon in November 1927.
Stan had played for Exeter against us in the previous three seasons' fixtures and had invariably acquitted himself well in those matches, so Palace fans knew that Mr Maven's transfer fee was well spent.
Stan made his Palace debut in the opening match of the 1928–29 season alongside another new boy, Tom Crilly, when the Palace beat Watford 3–0 and both men received rapturous reports.
Charlton and  Grilly went on to play together as Palace's full-backs for four seasons, and it was no coincidence that in two of them Palace made serious, if unavailing, attempts to restore 2nd Division status to Selhurst Park, finishing as runners-up in both 1928–29 and 1930–31.
Stan became our skipper in the second game of his Palace career at Walsall and he retained the captaincy throughout his time with us.
He was also renowned as a fearsome penalty-taker, and was certainly one of the most popular players to appear for our club.
STAN.
CHARLTON 40 STATION ROAD WEST CROYDON
Permanent Waving Our Speciality
BOBBING SHINGLING SHAMPOOING
AT LOWEST PRICES
Support an Old Favourite
LEFT: Billy Callender, CENTRE: Stan Charlton's subsequent career — from an advertisement in a Palace handbook and RIGHT: as a player.
CANNON, Jim
660 appearances
568+3 Football League
42 FA Cup
43+1 FL Cup
3 FM Cup
Big defender — Jim Cannon is the man to whom every appearance record at Crystal Palace FC belongs and in view of this will be regarded by many of our fans as the greatest Palace player of all time.
IL is a judgement with which it is difficult to quibble.
A single-club man, Jim began his career with the Palace back in 1970, and scored on his League debut against Chelsea in the 1st Division derby match at Selhurst Park against our South London rivals (2–0), in front of a near 40,000 crowd on 31 March 1973.
Jim appeared at left-back throughout Palace's magnificent run to the FA Cup semi-finals in 1975–76, but then made full appearances at centre-half, alongside Ian Evans, in our 3rd Division promotion side the following season.
Jim became team captain in succession to Ian in October 1977 and led us up to Division One in 1978–79 as 2nd Division champions, then to the top of the Football League on 29 September 1979, scoring as spectacular a goal in our 4–1 trouncing of Ipswich Town as any football follower could ever hope to witness.
Jim received a first and thoroughly well-merited Testimonial in November 1980, cruised past Terry Long's previous club record of 442 League appearances in April 1985 and proceeded to notch up his 500th League game for us at Birmingham on 18 October 1986, his 550th League match at Hull City on 19 December 1987 and his 650th overall (ie: including major Cup ties) upon the occasion of Oldham Athletic's visit to Selhurst Park on 5 March 1988.
Later that season he joined the select band of Palace players who have been awarded two Testimonials or Benefit matches by Crystal Palace FC.
Altogether Jim's career with Crystal Palace presents an amazing catalogue of magnificent service.
He was our Player of the Year three times (another club record!) in 1978, 1985 and 1987 and fully earned the undying admiration and gratitude of Palace fans.
Jim Cannon — The complete Career record
The Jim Cannon gallery: Neil Everitt's magnificent pictures show Jim in typically assertive action, in casual mood with manager Steve Coppell, and receiving his award from Terry Long on behalf of the Palace club, after he had passed Terry's appearance record in the autumn of 1984.
CHATTERTON, Nick
142+9 Football League
181 appearances
15 FA Cup
15 FL Cup
Nick  Chatterton is the son of Palace's former groundsman, Len Chatterton, and these two are the only father and son besides Johnny and Shaun Brooks to have played for Palace sides.
Norwood-born, Nick was our tenacious, skilful and hard-running midfield man,(though occasionally he would play out on the right wing for us) who had first caught the eye of Malcolm Allison.
He became an integral feature of Palace's FA Cup side which reached the semi-final as a 3rd Division club in 1976, and of that which won promotion under Terry Venables the following season.
It was a surprise to most Palace fans that Nick chose to leave Selhurst Park when Steve Kember rejoined our staff in November 1978.
He moved to our neighbours, Millwall and had a successful career with the Lions, finishing up at Colchester United.
CHILVERS, Geoff
118 Football League
123 appearances
5 FA Cup
Sutton-born Geoff Chilvers had been with the Palace as a Junior in the early days of the 2nd World War and had appeared at Selhurst Park in an interesting schoolboy game that was used as an experiment with numbered players, but his extraordinary claim to footballing fame, which will delight fans with a statistical quirk in their nature, is that he made his debut with a League club as a 16-year-old in a match where his side scored double figures.
It was actually against Brighton (10–1), here at Selhurst Park on 3 January 1942 in a wartime London League match, but even so, there can be few, if any, other players whose careers began so early and so explosively.
Geoff was a sturdy wing-half with a refinement and vision of play which were perhaps a little too sophisticated for the Palace teams of his day, where we were forced to perform in the hurly-burly of the old 3rd Division South, and in the end his career was finished by a nasty knee injury sustained in mid-1952–53.
Choules, Len
258 Football League
21 FA Cup
280 appearances
1 FL Cup
Len Choules was always one of Palace's unsung heroes, yet his Football League appearances for us have only ever been exceeded by fifteen men.
Len was unquestionably one of the  best defenders in the 3rd Division South in the mid-1950s, but in addition he was a talented fellow who could turn out in a surprising number of positions (he actually played in seven different ones for us, and that in a day when ‘utility’ players were unusual) and his Palace career spanned ten seasons.
Len possessed that amazing ability that is sometimes found in footballers, to ‘hang’ in the air for a fraction of a second, so enabling him to obtain greater power and better direction from the ensuing header.
Thus Len made a fine central pivot, though he began as a full-back and appeared in every defensive position for the Palace.
But it also made him invaluable as an occasional centre-forward.
In fact, this was where Len had played as a boy, but he had clearly not lost his goalscoring knack, for he immediately obliged with a goal when he first wore the number nine shirt for the Palace against Gillingham in October 1953.
Len's mop of unruly fair hair always made him stand out in a crowded goalmouth but, even over 30 years later, he continues to stand out in the memories of Palace fans who saw him play for our club.
CLARKE, George
274 Football League
299 appearances
25 FA Cup
After John Whibley left the Palace in 1923 the outside-left position became something of a problem for manager Edmund Goodman, but he filled it, some two years later, with a stroke of absolute genius, by obtaining the signature of George Clarke from Aston Villa.
George was a Derbyshire lad from Bolsover who had played for Welbeck Colliery in the Central Alliance and later for two seasons with Mansfield Town.
The auburn-haired left-winger moved to Aston Villa in August 1922 for £500 but found himself unable to win a regular first team place at Villa Park, because of the brilliant form of Villa's English International winger, Arthur Dorrell.
So, when Mr Goodman enquired about him, George was eager to come to Selhurst Park and most Palace historians agree that, had he done so even a month before the end of 1924–25, the Palace would never have been relegated from Division Two.
George immediately became a fixture in the Palace side and, but for an occasional injury, he remained there for seven seasons.
He was a magnificent winger: a ball player with plenty of craft, but fast, clever and with a lethal shot — skills that have etched his name for all time into the Palace record books.
He remains to this day the third highest League scorer in the history of our club with 99 goals in Division 3 South — for only two centre-forwards, Peter Simpson and Ted Smith, have ever improved on that figure, and of course no winger has ever approached it.
George also holds the record for the number of goals scored in a single season from the flank with a fabulous 22 goals in 1927–28.
Probably George's best performance for Palace was a truly excellent hat-trick in awful conditions when Palace rallied from 1–3 down at half-time against Southend on 13 November 1926, to win by 5–3.
George subsequently scored two more hat-tricks for Palace, both at home, against Bournemouth in February 1928 and when Exeter were our visitors in December 1931.
Again, this is indicative of George's prowess, for no other winger has bettered this record and only one, Bob Bigg, has equalled it.
But George's main contribution to the Palace was as a provider of chances from which our centre-forwards could score their goals.
Big Percy Cherrett fed off him for two seasons but it was Peter Simpson who  benefited most from the work of the talented left-winger and it is no coincidence that Peter scored more goals in each of the three seasons in which Clarke was his team-mate than in any of the succeeding campaigns.
George Clarke — prince among Palace wingers!
COLLINS, Nick
152 appearances
143 Football League
9 FA Cup
Nick Collins was born at Chopwell in County Durham but came south to find coalmining work in the small Kent coalfield and began playing football for the attractively named Canterbury Waverley, and it was from there that the Palace signed him, in spite of opposition from Arsenal, in late August 1934.
Palace always had good quality wing-halves before and after Nick Collins, but he certainly ranked among the best of them.
Strong and sturdy — he stood 5ft 8 inches and weighed 1 O l/2 stones — Nick possessed a venomous tackle and a shrewd, creative footballing brain.
He made his debut a week or two after joining us and soon settled down at left-half, making the berth his own, but he was not seen at his best until Palace manager Tom Bromilow signed Les Lievesley from Torquay.
These two men, with veteran George Walker between them, became one of Palace's most famous middle lines and a potent reason for a serious challenge for the 1938–39 3rd Division South championship.
Nick actually captained the Palace on occasions in Walker's absence, and he went on to play regularly for us throughout the first three wartime seasons, before his duties in the Royal Navy prevented him continuing his Palace career.
However, after the war Nick joined Yeovil Town, and was a member of the side which enjoyed such early post-war success in the FA Cup, including the famous victory over Sunderland in January 1949.
CONNER, John
104 appearances
37 Southern League
61 Football League
6 FA Cup
John Conner was only a little fellow at 5ft 8 inches and just 11 stone but, in spite of his lack of stature, he had gained Scottish Junior International honours and was renowned as a powerful header of the ball.
Indeed, not only were his 29 League goals (out of a total of 70) the major contribution towards Palace's promotion to Division Two in 1920–21,(our first season in the Football League), but many of them had been scored with his head.
John was also extremely fast and nimble, and he possessed a remarkable body-swerve which could prove most disconcerting to opposing defenders.
His shooting was strong and effective — and much admired.
Formerly with Sunderland, John joined the Palace from Belfast Distillery after the 1st World War and immediately cracked 18 Southern League goals in his 37 appearances in 1919–20, proving the ideal partner for veteran striker Ted Smith.
As Ted's star began to wane, John became the Palace's leading scorer, to set them on the way to higher things and immediately topped our scoring chart again in our first season in Division Two, 1921–22.
COLLYER, Harry
263 Southern League
281 appearances
18 FA Cup
Harry Collyer was a local boy from nearby Bromley, who joined us in September 1906 for what was only our second season, after impressing in a pre-season trial game.
He signed professional shortly afterwards, made his Southern League debut on Boxing Day at Watford's Cassio Road ground and went on to assist the Palace to become a respected Southern League side while also gaining several personal honours during his career.
Harry was a rugged little full-back and he sported a distinctive ‘Pentonville’ style hair cut.
He began at left-back, but it was on the right that he really excelled and became recognised as a quality player by friend and foe alike.
Once he had settled into the right-back position he was impossible to move from the Palace first team (unless illness or injury intervened, and the career chart shows that there was only one season when that happened to any serious degree), and he appeared there regularly until the 1st World War brought an end to competitive football and threw everyone's affairs into confusion.
The best demonstration of the quality of Harry Collyer came in the 1909–10 season when he appeared in the English International Trial match.
Not surprisingly, Harry was unable to displace the famous and immensely popular England captain, Bob Crompton of Blackburn Rovers, from the national side, but the fact that a comparison was even made indicates just what sort of player Harry Collyer was.
In the 1912–13 season Harry was awarded Representative honours, when he played for the Southern League in all three inter-league fixtures against the Football League, the Scottish League and the League of Ireland.
Several clubs from the Football League sought to tempt Harry away from the Palace, but without success, and he became the first Palace player to be awarded a Benefit by our club — it was the Southern League encounter with Coventry City at the Palace on 12 October 1912. 9,000 fans turned up and the Palace won 3–0.
When Harry Collyer joined Crystal Palace FC ours was a club that had not yet so much as played a 1st Division match in the Southern League.
When the 1st World War broke out, eight years later, Harry was still there, the longest-serving member of the playing staff, having helped our favourites to rise within an ace of the Southern League championship and become an established and respected club.
Harry Collyer's Palace Career
CRILLY, Torn
126 appearances
116 Football League
10 FA Cup
Tom Crilly came to Crystal Palace in the early summer of 1928 along with two other men from Derby County — Jimmy Gill, a speedy little inside-right and Harry Thoms, a veteran centre-half.
Unfortunately for them Palace injuries prevented the other two players from making any more than token contributions to our promotion hopes of the late 1920s and early 1930s, but Tom Crilly, a full-back by profession, more than made up for those disappointments.
Crilly, formerly of  Hartlepools United, made his debut for us alongside another new boy named Stan Charlton, from Exeter City, in the opening match of the 1928–29 season.
Palace beat Watford 3–0, with these two men performing really well together and beginning another of Palace's long-serving full-back partnerships.
Crilly and Charlton in the late 1920s were as  familiar , popular and talented as Little and Rhodes and Little and Cross had been earlier in the decade and, although Tom was dogged by ill-health, he played 18 League games for us in 1928–29 and 20 in 1929–30.
However, Tom Crilly's best season for us was without question the 1930–31 season, when the Palace made their second assault on the 3rd Division South Championship in three years, only to finish in the runners-up position, just as we had in 1928–29.
Crilly was a lynch-pin of our defence that season — only Bob Greener played more games than Tom.
Crilly also netted his single goal for us this season in the infamous Christmas Day rout at Brentford (2–8), equalising The Bees' early opener with a reply from the penalty spot.
CROSS, Charlie
237 appearances
221 Football League
16 FA Cup
Charlie Cross was Palace's regular left-back from 1922–1927 and our right-back for 1927–28.
He was one of several men from the Midlands in Palace sides of the early and mid-1920s and had joined us from Coventry City in July 1922, as part of a complex six-player exchange deal negotiated between the clubs by Palace boss Mr Edmund Goodman.
Cross soon secured his place in the Palace line-up and he held it for a long time, but his partnership with Jack Little for three seasons was a much-admired feature of the Palace defence.
Tough, fit, not in the least prone to injury and highly consistent in his performances, Cross was the epitome of the ideal player, and he was versatile too, in a time when this was not really expected of a footballer, for he moved across to right-back after the signing of Scotsman Bobby Orr, who much preferred to play at number three, in 1927.
Cross played many fine matches for Crystal Palace.
However, perhaps his best one, and the most important from the club's point of view, was that of 12 January 1924 when the Palace met and beat the might of Tottenham Hotspur in the (old) 1st round of the FA Cup at The Nest.
Cross's immediate opponent was none other than the great ‘Fanny’ Walden and the Spurs side was laden with internationals.
Charlie completely blotted the great man out of the match and, with this vital piece of their armoury missing, Tottenham were nonplussed and the Palace went on to win with two goals scored by Billy Morgan, who had joined the club as part of the same complex deal as Cross himself in 1922.
DAVIES, Bill
208 appearances
194 Southern League
14 FA Cup
Bill Davies was a Welsh International winger who played for The Palace in nearly 200 Southern League matches in two spells with the club from 1907, until the 1st World War forced a conclusion to fully competitive football in 1915.
Bill will always hold a unique place in the Palace annals because he was the first player from the club to gain international honours, when he was selected for Wales to meet Scotland at Dundee on 7 March 1908 (1–2).
Later that year Davies was signed by West Bromwich Albion, but after two seasons at The Hawthorns, he returned to the Palace and continued to play consistently well for us as we really began to make an impact on the Southern League.
Like several of his contemporaries, his best season with us was 1913–14, when we only missed out on the championship itself on goal-average.
Equally useful on either wing (though he featured more frequently for the Palace on the left flank), Billy's versatility was an extremely valuable part of the Palace attack in those early years of the club, and only three players made more Southern League appearances for us than he did.
DAWES, Albert
156 Appearances
149 Football League
7 FA Cup
Albert Dawes signed for Crystal Palace FC from Northampton Town on the Wednesday before Christmas 1933 and, in two periods with the Palace before the war (interrupted only by a fifteen month spell when he helped Luton Town to the 3rd Division South championship in 1937), he became Palace's third highest goalscorer of all time in the Football League — only Peter Simpson and George Clarke have improved upon Albert's total of 91 League goals.
Albert was without question a brilliant marksman.
His powerful shooting, sometimes from long range, was spectacular and effective and we do well to remember that Albert played in the days when the leather ball grew heavier and heavier, soaking up any moisture there may have been in or on the pitch and possibly finishing up weighing several pounds.
It was some player indeed who could unleash a power-drive with a ball that was more like a cannon-ball than a football!
There are several reasons why.
Albert Dawes would earn himself a permanent niche in any Palace hall of fame.
On 1 September 1934 he hit five goals against Cardiff City and only Peter Simpson has bettered that in a single match for us.
In 1935–36 Albert came within a single goal of achieving something no Palace player has yet managed — topping the Football League list of goalscorers — for he hit 38 goals and only W.G. Richardson of West Bromwich got 39.
Later that same season Albert was honoured by the FA when he was selected for the England squad for the International against Scotland at Wembley on 4 April.
Unfortunately for Albert he was made 12th man and, with no substitutes allowed in those days, spent the match idle on the players' bench.
During the 2nd World War seasons, as his career drew to a close, Albert became a magnificent utility player for the Palace, turning out in any position: as a full-back one week, a winger or striker the next, then as centre-half the next!
In fact, during 1943–44 Albert played in every outfield position at least once and he still scored goals that set the fans' interest alight.
DAWES, Fred
237 appearances
222 Football League
15 FA Cup
Fred Dawes was born in Frimley Green in the heart of Surrey.
From his earliest days he followed his father's interest in soccer and captained his school team at the age of 10, playing with his elder brother Albert in the forward line.
By the time Fred was 16 he was on the books of Aldershot and had played in friendlies against the Army and Clapton Orient.
After the latter match there was a flurry of interest in him from Football League clubs and Fred soon signed for Northampton, where he played for seven seasons before moving to Palace in February 1936.
By now Fred was a full-back.
He made his Palace debut at Clapton Orient (0–1) on 26 February and made 13 appearances for us in all the remaining matches of the season.
In those matches Fred had teamed up again with brother Albert, who had come to the Palace from Northampton in 1933.
Fred Dawes played as club captain in every League match of 1936–37 but was badly hampered by injuries in 1937–38 when he was limited to just 15 appearances.
His best season with Palace was, undoubtedly, 1938–39.
He was an ever-present member of the team that was beaten for promotion by Newport County and a margin of three points in a thrilling campaign.
And Fred scored his brace of League goals for the Palace in this season too — one of them, at Exeter, was a 40-yarder!
After the Second World War — during which time Fred served as a Special in the Metropolitan Police and later in the Royal Artillery — he put in another 111 League appearances and thus became the only Palace player to make a century of appearances on each side of the war.
He was awarded a Benefit against Bournemouth in Division 3(S) on 22 March 1947, although Palace lost the match 0–1.
Fred continued playing until October 1949 when his career was brought to an abrupt end by a dreadful head injury incurred at Bournemouth.
George Irwin, former Palace goalkeeper and manager in the immediate post-war season summed him up admirably: ‘Fred is a good, honest, clean player and a credit to the Palace side’.
Those who saw Fred play will fully agree with those sentiments.
The association of Fred Dawes with Crystal Palace lasted a further 18 months.
He was appointed Assistant Manager to Ronnie Rooke and, after Rooke's resignation at the end of November 1950, Dawes became joint-manager with Charlie Slade.
It was a poor situation in which to have to assume control: Palace were rock bottom of the League with only nine points from 18 matches and had crashed 1–4 at home to Millwall in the 1st round of the FA Cup; their seventh consecutive defeat.
There was to be no heroic, story-book recovery.
Palace faced re-election at the end of our worst-ever season with a dismal playing record, and with as many players appearing in the side as there were goals scored — 33 in each case!
With a swollen overdraft there could be no outlay on new players — it was in fact a case of salvaging some small return from huge expenditure early in 1950.
Inevitably the first two months of 1951–52 promised little or no improvement and the directors decided that Dawes and his colleague would have to go.
It was a shabby finale for a grand and loyal Palace servant.
One is left with the reflection that Fred Dawes gained an excellent reputation with Crystal Palace even though we were, in all honesty, a poor quality outfit while he was here after the war.
I am sure that if he had been with one of the stronger or more  glamorous clubs at the time, his name would now be held in respect by a far wider clientele than those relatively few of us who were privileged to see him play his heart out for Crystal Palace.
Mike Deakin is seventh from the left, top row.
DEAKIN, Mike
152 appearances
143 Football League
9 FA Cup
Mike Deakin joined the Palace from Bromsgrove in October 1954 and was among the clutch of bright young men Manager Cyril Spiers discovered among the smaller, often non-league clubs, and then drafted into Palace's League side in the mid-1950s.
Deakin was one of those who completely justified his boss's faith in him and was, in fact, Spiers' first signing for the Palace.
Deakin was a striker who found the net regularly and the evidence suggests that, had he been at a bigger club, he would have benefited from a better service and become a prolific scorer.
As it fell out he was one of the few successes at Selhurst Park at a particularly difficult time for the Palace club.
Mike's style was somewhat ungainly but he always gave one hundred per cent and his 23 goals in Division Four (from just 34 appearances) in 1958–59 established a post-war scoring record, only improved upon at our club by Johnny Byrne and Roy Summersby in the promotion season of 1960–61, Mark Bright in 1987–88 and Ian Wright in 1988–89.
Thus it is that fans of that period recall Mike Deakin and his wholehearted displays with pleasure and affection.
DUNN, Ronnie
175 appearances
Ronnie Dunn first took the interest of the Crystal Palace management when he appeared in goal for the British Army in a thrilling 5–4 clash with their French counterparts at Selhurst Park on 23 February 1929, and again when the Belgian Army provided the opposition a year later.
After Ronnie left the Forces he signed, first as an amateur, then professionally for the Palace, to become the regular understudy to Billy Callender in season 1931–32.
Dunn, in fact, made his debut in an excellent 3–0 win at Brighton on 9 September, where his fearless display and accurate clearances were a feature of the game.
It was to Ronnie Dunn that there fell the unenviable task of taking over as Palace's number one goalkeeper for 1932–33 after Callender's tragic suicide, but the young man was emotionally and physically equipped to do so.
He missed just one game that season because of a dose of ‘flu and was regarded as having a fine future.
Sadly that promise was never properly fulfilled.
Dunn remained at Selhurst Park for another four seasons and was our first-choice goalkeeper until 1936–37.
During this period the Palace only once finished outside the top half dozen clubs in our Division, but the old 3rd Division South was a hard school, with no margin at all for mistakes, loss of form or sheer misfortune, because only the top club was promoted — the rest were as good as nowhere.
Thus, along with several of his contemporaries at the Palace, Ronnie Dunn was only really appreciated by the Palace fans and not on the bigger stages that his prowess deserved.
Palace supporters from the 1930s will recall Ronnie with no little esteem.
For most of his career with us he was producing form that was not far short of Alderson or Callender — and that is some company to be in.
EDWARDS, Jack
239 appearances
223 Football League
16 FA Cup
Jack Edwards was Palace's stocky, teak-tough full-back throughout the 1950s and became a great favourite here at Selhurst Park.
Jack's opportunity to break into the limelight came when Fred Dawes was so badly injured that he could not play again: Jack's debut was as demanding as any Palace debut could be — at Millwall!
But, along with everyone else, he had a tremendous game and played his part in one of Palace's best-ever away performances in the old 3rd Division South, helping us to gain a splendid 3–2 victory and earning himself an accolade from Palace Manager, Ronnie Rooke, who said that Jack ‘came through with flying colours’.
Fearless and aggressive, Jack become one of Palace's youngest captains when he took over as skipper in 1956, his determination and enthusiasm admirably suiting him for the role.
Jack was never flurried, his cool, unruffled play was a hallmark of his game, along with some immensely powerful clearances.
Jack shared a Benefit match at the Palace with goalkeeper Roy Bailey in October 1955 and later had a successful career in management, guiding Exeter City to promotion from Division 4 in 1964.
EVANS, Ian
163 appearances
137 Football League
16 FA Cup
10 FL Cup
Ian Evans first came to the Palace in September 1974 as The Eagles sought to adjust to life in the 3rd Division, after plummeting straight through Division Two in 1973–74, and he quickly established himself as a favourite among the fans at Selhurst Park with his wholehearted displays at the centre of our defence.
Captain of the 1975–76 team that won an FA Cup semi-final place for the first time in the club's history, and then of the side which gained promotion to Division Two the following season, Ian's future with us looked rosy indeed.
But an appalling injury sustained in a tackle with George Best (then of Fulham) on 1 October 1977 put Ian out of action for two full years.
In a curious way Ian's enormous courage and determination in overcoming the double fracture — which many pundits feared would become a permanent disablement — won him the hearts of all Palace followers.
This, allied to the respect and admiration he had already gained here as captain of our 1977 promotion team and as a member of the full Welsh International side, established an empathy between Ian and the fans which made him part of the folk-lore of Crystal Palace Football Club.
In fact it took a revolutionary medical technique for Ian to be able to play again, but only for the Palace Reserves, for the first team were, at that time at least, more than holding their own in Division One.
And so Ian went north to Barnsley but, after completing another century of appearances for The Tykes, his link with Palace was re-established in June 1984 when he joined Steve Coppell as Assistant Manager here at Selhurst Park, and helped to fashion the team that restored 1st Division football at The Palace in 1989, although by the time of Palace's promotion, Ian had taken over as Manager of Swansea City.
ABOVE: Edwards (Northcliffe Newspapers) and BELOW: Ian Evans scoring his first goal for the Palace in spite of the attentions of the Grimsby Town defenders.
Dave Swindlehurst looks on.
FEEBURY, Albert
164 appearances
66 Southern League
92 Football League
6 FA Cup
Albert Feebury was a big, powerful wing-half, who joined the Palace in the summer of 1914, having previously played with Nottingham Forest and Coventry, and was another of Manager Edmund Goodman's successful signings from the Midlands.
Feebury's best seasons with the Palace were those immediately after the 1st World War for, when competitive football restarted, Albert made full appearances for us in our final season in the Southern League and then missed just one match in Palace's 3rd Division championship team of 1920–21.
Indeed, the captaincy of that side fell to Albert in mid-season after the retirement of Ted Smith and so he became the first Palace skipper to lead our club to a Football League championship.
Albert was the epitome of the wing-half of the 1920s because, not only was he a ferocious tackler and a prolific feeder of his forwards, but he could come upfield himself to great effect and possessed a smashing shot of his own, so that the ‘Feebury specials’ of the period generated a great deal of enthusiasm among Palace fans — and no little anxiety to opposing goalkeepers.
After Palace's promotion to Division Two Albert was plagued by injuries, but he appeared in our historic 6–0 FA Cup rout of Everton at Goodison Park in January 1922 so he probably did not complain.
His League career was terminated by a particularly nasty injury sustained at Sheffield just before Christmas 1923, as ten-men Palace went down 6–0 to The Wednesday and, after recovering, he moved to Folkestone the following summer.
FINNIGAN, Tony
94+11 Football League
7+1 FL Cup
118 appearances
2 FM Cup
Tony Finnigan was a nimble-footed, industrious player with the Palace in the mid-1980s, who appeared in several widely differing positions.
Tony began in midfield, where his creative skills were a considerable asset but, by the end of his first full season with The Eagles, 1985–86, he had settled in at right-back.
That was where he began in 1986–87, but he had a spell on each wing later that season and donned the left-back and centre-forward shirts as well.
The irony of all this is that ‘Finn’, as he became known to us all, had been an apprentice here at Selhurst Park in the late 1970s.
He had also won 12 England Youth caps and appeared in the World Youth Cup Finals in Australia in October 1981, but neither here, or subsequently at Fulham, could he make sufficient impact to be taken onto the professional staff.
Eventually, after a spell in Scandinavia, he met Steve Coppell and pleaded with the Palace boss for a trial.
Steve agreed, and was rewarded with a versatile and creative player who was a useful asset to the club at a rather difficult time.
ABOVE: Tony Finnigan celebrates his late winner against Millwall (2–1) on 4 October 1986; RIGHT: in caricature, LEFT Garratt.
 GARRETT , George
185 appearances
George Garratt was a sparkling outside-right who hailed from Newcastle and came to the Palace in the summer of 1908 from West Bromwich Albion, after formerly playing with Aston Villa (where, of course, he was well known to Edmund Goodman) and Plymouth Argyle.
George's forte was tricky and clever wing play, whereby he consistently gained sufficient, room to put across a steady stream of accurate and testing crosses, from which other forwards regularly  benefited .
He was tough and strong, disciplined and unselfish — he was the epitome of the goal-maker, whose efforts were recognised by his colleagues and opponents and by the discerning fan, but were perhaps not so well appreciated by less perceptive onlookers or pressmen.
George's career record also demonstrates just how reliable he was.
He seldom missed a match through injury, and he was versatile enough to play on either wing equally effectively, although his own preference was for outside-right.
George's merits were recognised within the game with a number of minor representative honours, and when he left us he had a spell with Millwall before returning to the Midlands to play for Kidderminster.
LEFT: George and RIGHT: Billy Gilbert challenges Sheffield Wednesday goalkeeper Bob Bolder.
Paul Hinshelwood (far right) awaits developments.
GEORGE, Ron
125 appearances
122 Football League
3 FA Cup
Ron George was Palace's sturdy full-back for several seasons in the early 1950s.
Perhaps Ron did not have the greatest technical ability, but his commitment was never questioned and he could play pretty effectively on either flank so that he was therefore a useful defender.
His appearance record shows that, once Ron had gained a position in the team, he became difficult to displace and probably his best spell with the Palace was as a regular member of the team that finished 1952–53 with such a creditable run of performances.
GILBERT, Billy
273 appearances
235+2 Football League
17 FA Cup
19 FL Cup
Billy Gilbert was Palace's tough-tackling central defender and occasional full-back from 1977 to 1984, and was a vital member of our 2nd Division championship side of 1979.
Billy came to the attention of Palace devotees when our Junior team proceeded to the Final of the 1977 FA Youth Cup and then beat Everton over two legs, but he came into the League side in October that year as deputy for injured skipper Ian Evans, and was the undisputed possessor of Palace's number six shirt by the end of that 1977–78 season.
After gaining another Youth Cup winner's medal in 1978, Billy became a dominant central defender alongside Jim Cannon and was a key member of the side that took the Palace back into Division One in 1979 with the best defensive record in the club's history; Billy also gained the first of his eleven England Under 21 caps that season.
Billy was a tower of strength in Palace's two years in the 1st Division, 1979–81, missing only five of our 84 games there, and then his sturdy and dependable displays helped to keep us from further embarrassment after we had returned to Division Two, so that every Palace fan was sorry to see Billy opt to leave us for Portsmouth in the 1984 close season.
GILES, David
100 appearances
83+5 Football League
5+1 FA Cup
 F +1 FL Cup
David was one of those frustrating, enigmatic footballers who perform brilliantly in opposition against you, but who never reproduce such quality of performance when they become a player at your club.
David Giles gained a deserved reputation among Palace fans after playing three superb games for Swansea City against us in the FA Cup 3rd round in January 1980 but, having joined us eighteen months later, he lacked the sparkle that had been so evident then.
Still, David was also an honest and capable footballer and, even if his Palace career was not to reach his previous level, he played some useful games for us and was probably at his best in the autumn of 1983, when he also scored some valuable goals, including one late winner against his home town club, Cardiff City.
GLAZIER, Bill
106 Football League
113 appearances
5 FA Cup
3 FL Cup
Bill Glazier was Palace's aptly named and superb goalkeeper throughout most of our sojourn in Division Three, 1961–64, and he was ever-present during our praiseworthy recovery under Dick Graham in the second half of 1962–63, then in the magnificent promotion season of 1963–64 when the number of goals conceded was easily the lowest in our Division.
When Bill left us in October 1964 for Coventry, with whom we had been promoted just six months previously, it was for the then record fee of £35,000 for a goalkeeper and he repaid that fee to the Sky Blues in a distinguished career of 395 matches over the next decade.
GRAHAM, Dick
164 appearances
155 Football League
9 FA Cup
Dick or Doug Graham originated from Corby in Northampton and, even as a young lad, was soon picking up honours for his performances as a goalkeeper.
He played for his County boys' team at the tender age of 11 years and by the time he was 13 he was reserve for the England Boys International team against Scotland.
He made his first appearance for Northampton Town at the age of 15 in a London Combination match with QPR and while he was with The Cobblers he was spotted by Tom Bromilow, a former Palace manager, who was then with Leicester City.
Graham served in the RAF during the Second World War and it was under the war-time ‘guesting’ arrangement that he first turned out for Palace.
So well did he play that Palace signed him from Leicester as soon as the opportunity arose.
At 6ft 1in Graham was ideally built for the job of goalkeeper.
He made his official Palace debut in the FA Cup tie with QPR on 5 January 1946 and was between the posts when Palace met Mansfield for the first post-war League match on 31 August 1946.
However, it was in the second League match after the war that Graham made his first claim to a place (albeit an unfortunate one) in Palace's record-book.
Palace went to Reading and poor Dick Graham had to pick the ball out of our net no less than 10 times as Palace slumped to our highest scoring League defeat.
Only Billy Callender has also let through double figures for Palace.
He let in 11 when we lost 4–11 in a Cup-tie at Manchester City in 1926.
It is interesting and significant to notice how Palace's early post-war fortunes coincided with Graham's appearances in goal.
When he was able to make a full number of appearances, or a large proportion of them, Palace did reasonably well — best was 7th in 1949–50 when Graham missed only four games — but when his back injury prevented him from appearing regularly the side suffered badly and we finished bottom of the League twice in three seasons with Graham making only 26 (1948–49) and 11 (1950–51) appearances respectively.
He was a brave goalkeeper and every Palace fan rued the day when it was announced that he would have to give up his career.
But, if Graham's career with Palace as a player was never crowned with great success his later time with us as Manager certainly made up for it.
It was under Dick Graham that Palace won promotion to Division Two to leave the lower reaches of the Football League for the first time in 39 years.
Graham was thrust into the Palace Manager's seat when Arthur Rowe was taken seriously ill in November l 962, and with the club in grave danger of returning to the Fourth Division.
Things looked gloomy but Graham's astute signing of big Cliff Holton plus the good fortune of a mid-winter break caused by tundra-like weather gave Palace the breathing space they required.
Palace had an excellent second half to the season, climbed out of danger and finished in 11th place.
Then, in spite of a 1–5 reverse at Coventry on the opening day, Graham inspired his men to the threshold of the Third Division Championship and made 1963–64 one of Palace's best seasons ever.
He was only thwarted from winning the trophy by a remarkable second-half hat-trick by Bob Ledger, Oldham's balding outside-left, in the final match of the season at Selhurst Park.
Graham stayed until January 1966 and saw Palace to Second Division maturity and stability.
Palace fans of 1964–1973 owed a great deal to Dick Graham, who was the man who brought Palace back to the ‘big-time’ after years of obscurity, and who gave Palace the opportunity (so admirably taken by Graham's successor, Bert Head) of achieving the dream of everyone connected with the Palace club — a place in Division One.
GRAY, Andy
153+1 Football League
17+1 FL Cup
206 appearances
11+1 FM Cup
Strong, colourful midfield player or striker, Andy Gray had been with the Palace as a schoolboy during the Terry Venables era at Selhurst Park, but disappeared into non-league soccer so that it was actually from Dulwich Hamlet that Manager Steve Coppell initially signed him for The Eagles in November 1984.
He scored a useful goal for us on his first full appearance to help us to victory at Grimsby the following month.
In fact, in his early days as a Palace professional Andy featured largely as a striker and he was Palace's top scorer in 1985–86 with 10 League goals, but it was in midfield that his career really blossomed.
He left Selhurst Park for Aston Villa in November 1987, amid a storm of controversy, for just £150,000, but Steve Coppell brought him back to the Palace from Queens Park Rangers in a £ l/2 million deal upon the eve of our return to Division One in August 1989.
Capped at Under 21 level for England, Andy's powerful and creative displays have stood the Palace in fine stead and he has again become a great favourite with our supporters, while his long-throw technique, developed largely during our first season back in the top flight, added another potent weapon to our armoury.
In company with Geoff Thomas, Andy has made the Palace midfield one of the most respected in the country and everyone who witnessed our FA Cup semi-final and 1st Division victories over Liverpool in 1990 will recall with pleasure the manner in which the Palace pair dominated their illustrious opponents.
GREENER, Bob
293 Football League
317 appearances
24 FA Cup
Bob Greener was a tough, sturdy, driving wing-half who joined the Palace in 1921 from Birtley in County Durham.
Initially Bob was understudy to club skipper Albert Feebury but, when the captain was hurt just before Christmas 1923, Bob was ready to grasp the opportunity to make the number six shirt his own.
He missed only a couple of the remaining League fixtures that season and starred in Palace's superb 2–0 FA Cup victory over Spurs at The Nest, outshining even Spurs' legendary Arthur Grimsdell on the day!
Bob went on from there, season in, season out, to the end of 1931–32, by which time he had made 293 League appearances for Crystal Palace (a club record at the time, but of course they did not make much of such things in those days) and even today, almost 60 years later, there are fewer than only half a dozen Palace men who have played more times for us than that.
The famous Corinthians provided the opposition for his richly deserved Benefit on 13 March 1929 (3–3) and Bob had also been a key member of the sides which missed the single promotion place from Division 3 (South) by the closest of margins in 1982–29 and 1930–31.
After a season with York City Bob returned to Selhurst Park as assistant trainer.
He later became the senior trainer, served the Palace under ten managers and was one of a few staff left at Selhurst during World War Two.
He left the club in a financial purge at the end of 1954–55 but was invited back in 1969 to help out with the groundstaff.
Gladly, willingly, he accepted and he again became a familiar figure at our ground as he had been all those years before.
Bob Greener died in February 1970 and the club he loved and had served so well printed a moving obituary in the Programme for 21 February 1970.
This record of his playing career and long association with our club is another appreciation of him.
ABOVE: Andy Gray in competitive action against Huddersfield (4–0) during Palace's 4th round FA Cup success over The Terriers in January 1990.
LEFT INSET: Bob Greener and RIGHT: Gray.
GREENWOOD, ROY
111 Football League
116 appearances
5 FA Cup
Tousle-haired Roy Greenwood played three or four games for the Palace as an amateur in October 1954, but was immediately invited to sign professional forms a month later.
Straightaway, he made a niche for himself as our left-back, and his fearless diving headers made him a tremendous favourite with the Palace fans, who dubbed him ‘Chopper’ in recognition of his decisive interceptions with his unruly fair hair.
After he had had a spell at Southern League Bedford Town, Palace awarded Roy a Benefit match on 15 March 1961 in token of his services to our club.
An eleven of former Palace players turned out to assist Roy's cause — and beat the then current League side 3–2!
Drama in the Palace-Watford (0–0) match at Selhurst Park on 16 March 1957.
Roy Greenwood (number 3) watches anxiously as the visitors get the ball into the Palace net, but the referee had blown for a foul and the linesman's flag is raised.
HAMILTON, Jimmy
180 Football League
196 appearances
16 FA Cup
Jimmy Hamilton was Palace's regular centre-half for six seasons and appeared in the defence over the period of eight Football League campaigns between 1923–24 and 1930–31.
He became from Hetton-le-Hole, a quaintly named colliery village in north east County Durham and played as a back for Ferryhill and later Eppleton in the Wearside league which, at that time, was a prolific nursery for Football League clubs.
During the first World War  Hamilton served with the Coldstream Guards (he stood just on 6ft) and he spent the latter part of his service at Caterham Barracks from where he signed for Palace when he was ‘demobbed’ in December 1922.
He made his debut for Palace on 27 October 1923 when Palace won 1–0 at Bradford City but he really came to the fore when an injury to Bob Greener left a vacancy in the half-back line for the 3rd Replay with Notts County at Villa Park, in Palace's longest ever Cup-tie in February 1924.
Dick Cracknell moved to left-half and Hamilton came in at centre-half for a the stern test against the 1st Division side.
Hamilton played well, Palace won 2–1 and his claim for a first team place had been properly and completely justified.
Altogether in his Palace career, Jimmy Hamilton made 16 FA Cup appearances at centre-half and, later, at right-half and he scored our last goal in the 7–0 rout of Luton in the 3rd Round Replay in January 1929 to equal Palace's best ever FA Cup score.
In his early days with us Hamilton was one of those attacking centre-halves who made for great excitement, supporting his forwards and ever-ready to have a go at goal.
But the game changed during his career — first the off-side law was altered, which discouraged such positive play from the centre-half and then, at the turn of the decade, the purely defensive role of the number 5 was being developed (and later perfected, by Arsenal).
One of Hamilton's best games for Palace was undoubtedly the last match of 1924 at the Wednesday's ground in Sheffield.
In terrible conditions underfoot and with a raging rainstorm Palace held out under terrific Wednesday pressure (their sides of those days were always packed with internationals) and won with a goal scored just before half-time.
Hamilton was at the heart of our defence that day and every one of them were heroes, but it was Hamilton who subdued Jimmy Trotter (later the manager of Charlton) who was Wednesday's most dangerous forward.
A nasty eye injury in the home match with Blackpool on 28 February 1925 caused a haemorrhage and Hamilton was out of the side for the rest of the season: Palace collapsed like a punctured balloon.
The defence which had been suspect all season became vulnerable and the forwards simply could not score goals, so poor Palace fell out of the bottom of Division Two.
Some players wanted out — but not our Guardsman centre-half.
He stayed with Palace, totted up 180 league appearances and tried all he knew to get us back to Division Two.
He did not succeed but it was not for lack of trying.
Everyone knows that a Guardsman never surrenders.
Jimmy Hamilton's Palace Career
LEFT: Paul Hammond, CENTRE: Harry Hanger in airborne grace at the Crystal Palace in a Palace-Swindon game.
BELOW: Bill Hand.
(Northcliffe Newspapers)
HAMMOND, Paul
117 Football League
17 FA Cup
142 appearances
8 FL Cup
Paul Hammond was the Palace goalkeeper charged by Malcolm Allison to succeed the legendary John Jackson, and it was a measure of Paul's ability that, eventually, he was able to do that successfully in spite of the attitude of some sections of the Palace crowd, which opposed his selection.
Probably the best measure of Paul's capabilities is that he was an ever-present member of the side which took the Palace to the 1976 FA Cup semi-finals and of the promotion team of 1976–77 until he chose to leave us for Tampa Bay Rowdies in February 1977.
HAND, Bill
101 Football League
110 appearances
9 FA Cup
Bill Hand was a little fellow with a little name — he only stood 5ft 6ins in his stockinged feet — but he was tough and sturdy and could play on the wing or at inside-forward and did so to considerable effect for the Palace in the early 1920s.
Bill was signed for the Palace by Manager Edmund Goodman from Sutton in Ashfield in the Central Alliance in the winter of 1920.
He made a useful contribution to Palace's successful run-in to that season when we won some dour, tough games to record the 3rd Division Championship in its inaugural season.
Bill was seldom able to put together a consistent run of appearances in our 2nd Division seasons 1921–25 but, when he did play, his graft and pluck were always appreciated by our fans and the press of the time because Palace continually struggled in Division Two and the hard-working, tenacious attitude which Bill always showed was a valuable asset against powerful and more skilled opponents.
Bill also had the happy knack of scoring goals for the Palace when goals were badly wanted.
For example, on his first appearance in the 2nd Division for us, against Blackpool at The Nest on 22 October 1921, he hit the single goal that gave a weakened Palace side victory, he got another one the following week in an excellent 3–1 win at Blackpool which was our first away from home in the higher division, then returned to Selhurst the next Saturday and headed the goal that disposed of Clapton Orient in a rugged London derby.
It was also Bill Hand that rapped the winner past Albert Iremonger to defeat Notts County in a third replay of the (old) 2nd round FA Cup-tie against Notts County back in 1924.
Quite a fellow was Bill Hand!
HANGER, Harry
167 Southern League
177 appearances
10 FA Cup
Harry Hanger joined the Palace from Bradford City in the summer of 1909 and his stylish performances at wing-half were an attractive feature of Palace sides until the outbreak of the 1st World War.
Harry's control of the ball was renowned.
‘No player…has shown greater ability to retain possession of the ball…his passes are invariably accurate and reach a forward so that the latter can make rapid headway’ eulogised a Palace scribe back in 1913, by which time H.H. (as he was popularly called) had become our club captain — indeed it was while Harry was our skipper that we had our best Southern League season and went within an ace of winning the Championship in 1914.
Honoured by the Southern League, Harry was awarded a Benefit by the Palace in season 1914–15, but whether this was ever taken up is uncertain because the designated game against Croydon Common could not be played on its original date, and by that time Harry was away in the services, where he was killed in action during the 1st World War.
HANLON, Wally
126 Football League
130 appearances
4 FA Cup
Wally Hanlon was Palace's dapper little outside-left throughout the early 1950s and a huge favourite with the fans for his canny wing-play and superb ball control.
With his shorts flapping around his knees and his  wispy , thinning hair he was almost a caricature of a footballer, but Wally could mesmerise his opposing full-back or swerve past him at a deceptive pace, before putting across an accurate, teasing centre.
Wally received a Benefit at the end of 1953–54 and almost 4,000 admirers turned out to see the Palace beat a London XI by six goals to five!
HARDING, Ted
151 Football League
156 appearances
5 FA Cup
Croydon-born Ted Harding had played for the Palace first team as early as October 1942 and he became the longest-playing survivor of our 1946–47 Football League side, for he was still appearing for us in April 1953.
Ted was a sturdy and dependable full-back who could be relied upon to play on either flank.
He usually turned out for the Palace at right-back and was the composed and effective successor to the brilliant Arthur Hudgell, epitomising the honest footballer who would always give of his best for his club whatever the situation.
Because of this, and his local roots, Ted was another popular player with the Palace fans of the period.
HARRISON, Bernard
92 Football League
100 appearances
8 FA Cup
Bernard Harrison was Palace's last right-winger in the 3rd Division South and a product of Manager Cyril Spiers' youth policy of the mid-1950s.
He is also one of a select band of Palace players who have also appeared in the County Cricket Championship, having done so 14 times for Hampshire between 1957 and 1962.
Fair-haired, but perhaps somewhat slight of build for the rigours of the lower reaches of the Football League, Bernard was certainly a fast and cagey winger, and his talent was recognised when he was selected for the 3rd Division South representative side against the 3rd Division North, in the fifth and final match between them at Selhurst Park on 30 October 1957.
HARRY, Albert
410 Football League
440 appearances
30 FA Cup
This diminutive, bow-legged Palace forward of the 1920s and early 1930s was one of those performers whom the fans immediately took to their hearts.
A man of character, he was always able to give one-hundred per cent effort for his club and his team and as a winger (in a football age when wingers were as plentiful as mid-field players are today), endowed with skills which drew admiration from press, colleagues, supporters and opponents alike, throughout his career.
Harry signed for Palace after Manager Edmund Goodman had seen him play for the amateur side, Kingstonian, in a Surrey Charity Shield Final at The Nest early in the summer of 1921, when Palace had just won promotion to Division 2.
Harry had learned his football in the Army and he was a menacing, attacking centre-forward.
After returning from India he joined Kingstonian and played for Surrey and three times for the Athenian League.
Harry played in eight of the last nine Palace Football League matches of season 1921–22 and scored two goals for us in the last eight minutes on his debut to help Palace defeat Bury 4–1 at The Nest on 25 March, but all these appearances were in the inside or centre-forward positions.
Manager Goodman quickly spotted that Harry's lack of inches (he only stood 5ft 6in) were something of a handicap when playing down the middle in Second Division football and successfully transferred him to the outside-right spot.
Harry was a little diffident to begin with, but he soon settled down and made his first appearance for Palace at outside-right when he came into the side for season 1922–23 on 30 September at Leicester.
He scored two goals from the wing that season — at Bradford City (drew 1–1) and home to Rotherham (won 4–0) while making a total of 24 appearances.
Harry's great merit was that, once he had been given the ball, he was a speedy and direct raider.
He had a hard shot in either foot and his ball control was excellent.
By the next season 1923–24, the outside-right position was Harry's own — and he held on to it for another decade.
The player with whom Albert Harry is often mentioned is Peter Simpson, that prolific goal-scorer of the first half of the 1930s.
Those who were lucky enough to see these two players in the same Palace team for four and a half seasons were certainly among the most privileged of the club's patrons.
They blended together from the first and there can be no doubt that Harry's forceful play on the right wing was one of the prime reasons why Simpson was able to crack in so many goals.
Harry himself scored 53 League goals for Palace and two in the FA Cup; how many he laid on for other forwards we can only guess at.
Harry put in 410 League appearances for Crystal Palace and that stood as a record for over 30 years until it was overtaken by Terry Long in the late 1960s.
Most of the time Harry was playing for Crystal Palace we were a Third Division club and so it is not surprising that most of the great achievements to which he helped to take us were in the FA Cup.
He was in his customary position for the 2–0 defeat of ‘Spurs in the 1st round at The Nest on 12 January 1924.
He played in the team which beat Notts County 2–1 after three replays in the next round.
He led to Chelsea's downfall at Selhurst Park on 30 January 1926 in the cup-tie which set up our attendance record of 41,000 and stood for nearly 40 years, and he took part in the 7–0 annihilation of Luton Town in a replay on 16 January 1929 in what was Palace's equal best-ever Cup win.
Albert Harry played his last League match for Palace at Brighton on 24 March 1934 and he left the club at the end of that season.
We have had heroes in our time at Crystal Palace but there was only one Albert Harry and those who had the pleasure and privilege of seeing him play were lucky indeed.
HEWITT, Charlie
151 Southern League
162 appearances
11 FA Cup
Charlie was a bustling, enthusiastic bundle of driving energy who played at inside-right for the Palace throughout the five seasons up to the end of fully competitive football in 1915.
Charlie came to us in October 1910 from West Bromwich Albion, having gained previous experience with Middlesbrough, Liverpool and Tottenham.
He scored on his debut, against Plymouth up at The Palace on 15 October when we romped to a 6–1 win, and went on to play in every remaining match that season.
He accumulated a highly creditable and extremely valuable 39 Southern League goals for us, so that he is our fourth highest Southern League goalscorer.
Charlie's combination with George Garratt on our right wing was a pleasing feature of Palace teams of the period, while Charlie himself was twice selected to play for London against Birmingham in inter-city representative matches.
HILAIRE, Vince
239+16 Football League
16+1 FA Cup
293 appearances
21 FL Cup
Vince Hilaire was a supremely talented winger who came to the fore in Palace's great FA Youth Cup-winning side of 1977, and then matured in Division 2 in 1977–78 while helping the club retain the Youth Cup at the same time.
Quicksilver, darting and with wonderful balance and control, Vince was seen at his best at Selhurst Park in Palace's progress to the 2nd Division Championship in 1978–79.
In Division One he was subjected to a lot of dubious physical challenge and then, as Palace managers came and went, Vince's role was constantly changing, so that he became something of an enigma to Palace fans who would one week marvel at his sinuous skills and near-perfect control but then despair at his virtual anonymity the next.
Just eleven players since 1905 have appeared in Palace colours more often than Vince but, in reviewing his career with us, one is left with the feeling that, while it promised to climb the highest peaks of success, it in fact merely reached the approaches.
HINSHELWOOD, Paul
271+5 Football League
26 FA Cup
319 appearances
17 FL Cup
Paul Hinshelwood began his career as a striker, but in November 1976 undertook a new role as a full-back in a remodelled Palace defence.
He blossomed in his new position and his partnership with Kenny Sansom was a feature of Palace's progress from Division Three to Division One in the late 1970s.
The defence of which Paul was an integral part created new records for the club in both promotion seasons 1976–77 and 1978–79, and it was only a torn cartilage at Wrexham in October that prevented Paul from making full appearances in that latter 2nd Division Championship season.
It was in his adopted position of right-back that Paul gained two England Under 21 caps and he is one of only a handful of players who have appeared for the Palace in ten post-war seasons, while his 319 games for the club place him firmly in the top five all-time appearances for us.
But perhaps the best measure of Paul's ability was that, although he never sought publicity or acclaim, he was voted Palace's Player of Year for two consecutive seasons, both of which were spent in Division One, in 1979–80 and 1980–81.
Paul Hinshelwood's Palace Career
LEFT: Paul Hinshelwood and his Player of the Year Trophy.
RIGHT: One of Palace photographed Neil Everitt's many celebrated pictures shows Paul (left) joining the reception party after a Palace goal.
Supporters may enjoy working out the other members of the group!
LEFT: Phil Holder in typical combative action with Brian Horton in the Palace-Brighton FA Cup-tie on 20 November 1976.
RIGHT: Cliff Holton
HOLDER, Phil
93+2 Football League
11 FA Cup
112 appearances
4+2 FL Cup
Phil Holder was a rugged little midfield ballwinner and this barrel-chested, chirpy fellow was a useful asset in our 1975–76 run to the FA Cup semi-final and then in the 1976–77 promotion team.
Strong and sturdy, Phil was a valuable player to have around in those 3rd Division days of hustle and bustle, where his competitive spirit was constantly driving the Palace forward to success.
He later had a spell in charge of Palace's Youth side and is still an occasional but welcome visitor to Selhurst Park.
HOLTON, Cliff
101 Football League
112 appearances
5 FL Cup
Following supremely successful spell as a regular goalscorer at Arsenal, Watford and Northampton, Cliff Holton became Palace Manager Dick Graham's answer to the perilous situation we were in as midwinter 1962 approached.
Cliff had a magnificent physique, was always commanding in the air and possessed a fearsome shot — and Palace fans knew his quality from previous encounters, when he had opposed us for Watford and Northampton.
He made his Palace debut on Boxing Day, teaming up for the first time with Dickie Dowsett and Ronnie Allen, and helped the Palace romp to a thrilling 3–0 victory over Millwall on a freezing surface.
A few weeks later he scored the first of three hat-tricks he hit for the Palace when we toppled his former club, Watford, by 4–1 at Vicarage Road.
Cliff's contribution to the Palace cause would have been worth recording if it had stopped there at the end of 1962–63, with Palace safely in mid-table but, twelve months later, and courtesy of 20 goals from the big man himself, we were back in Division Two after an absence of 39 years.
Cliff's tally of 20 League goals in 1963–64, when he was joint-top scorer with Peter Burridge, has only been exceeded since 1961 by Mark Bright in 1988 and Ian Wright in 1989, but Cliff again headed our list of scorers in Division Two in 1964–65 with 11 more goals, and he did so in spite of spending several games at centre-half.
When Cliff was transferred back to Watford in early May 1965 our supporters were much displeased but today Cliff is remembered at Selhurst Park with enormous pleasure by those who were privileged to see him play, and he was, without question, one of the most inspiring players ever to have appeared in the Palace colours.
HOWE, Bert
192+1 Football League
212 appearances
12 FA Cup
7 FL Cup
Bert Howe was a consistent, reliable and determined full-back, who signed for us just after Christmas 1958 and first appeared for the Palace in the dark days of the 4th Division, but who proceeded to help us secure a place in Division Two.
After his National Service (1960–62), Bert became a regular member of the Palace side, making 101 consecutive League appearances between October 1962 and December 1964, including every game in our promotion season of 1963–64.
Once the Palace had reached the 2nd Division, Bert demonstrated his solid ability, coping admirably with some talented opposing wingers from that Division and, by the time he left us for Orient in January 1967, he had accumulated well over 200 appearances for the club.
HUGHES, Jimmy
200 Southern League
209 appearances
9 FA Cup
Big Jimmy Hughes was Palace's bulwark at centre-half throughout the decade 1910 to 1920, and only the 1st World War prevented him from amassing a huge total of appearances for the club.
As it is, with four seasons lost to the War, Jimmy reached 200 Southern League games, so that even today he is comfortably within our top forty all-time appearances, while only Joe Johnson and Harry Collyer played more often for us in the Southern League.
Jimmy was terrific at centre-half.
It is no coincidence that Palace's best Southern League seasons were while he was marshalling our defence.
He was dominant in the air, tough in the tackle and a feature of his play was the stream of stylish, sweeping passes he delivered to his wingers after he had won the ball, so that it was no surprise at all when he was chosen to represent the Southern League.
The Palace awarded Jimmy a Benefit in 1914–15 (along with Harry Hanger and Bob Spottiswood), but unfortunately the designated local derby against Croydon Common had to be deferred until we were playing at Herne Hill, and it is uncertain what arrangements were made on the players’ behalf.
Jimmy continued with the Palace after the War, but he was hurt in a London Challenge Cup-tie and was forced to retire from the game shortly afterwards.
HUGHTON, Henry
133+5 Football League
11+1 FL Cup
137 appearances
1 FM Cup
Henry Hughton was snapped up on a free-transfer for Palace from Orient and was arguably one of Manager Alan Mullery's best signing for the club, because Henry's amazing versatility became extremely useful in several difficult seasons at Selhurst Park.
Henry actually played for the Palace in nine differently numbered shirts, including the goalkeeper's jersey on one occasion, when George Wood was injured during a game against Shrewsbury (2–2, on 6 November 1984) and although Henry never actually wore a number five shirt for us he played alongside Jim Cannon in central defence at Fulham in March 1985.
Henry's wholehearted displays in such a variety of roles, allied to his self-effacing modesty, combined to endear him to all Palace fans of the mid-1980s.
INNERD, Wilfred
111 Southern League
133 appearances
22 FA Cup
Wilfred Innerd was a Geordie who joined the Palace at the club's inception in 1905 and played a major part in its establishment.
He usually featured at wing or centre-half, though he could provide cover for several forward positions so that, until he was badly hurt during Palace's tremendous FA Cup victory over Wolves in January 1919, he was seldom absent from our team.
Innerd took over as Palace's captain in 1906 after Ted Birnie had left us and he led us to several marvellous FA Cup triumphs, including the fabulous 1–0 Will at the home of his former club, and League champions, Newcastle United in January 1907.
He also holds the unique record of having appeared in every one of the club's first 22 FA Cup ties.
Irvine, Alan
108+1 Football League
4 FA Cup
12 FL Cup
2 FM Cup
127 appearances
Alan was Palace's pacy winger, who brought a welcome touch of sophistication to our attack with his talented displays over three seasons in the mid-1980s.
Alan was able to beat defenders both by scorching speed, or by sorcery and guile, before delivering a telling cross or a powerful shot, and he was involved in many of the goals we scored during his period with us.
But he was also capable of scoring brilliant efforts himself and his tally of 14 Palace goals have included some really spectacular efforts — none more so than the one which beat Nottingham Forest in a 3rd round cup-tie here on a snow covered surface in January 1987.
JACKSON, Cliff
100+6 Football League
5 FA Cup
8+1 FL Cup
120 appearances
Cliff Jackson was a west country boy who was discovered by Bert Head in his native Swindon, but it was from Plymouth that Mr Head brought Cliff to Selhurst Park in September 1964.
First as a winger, then as an out-and-out striker, he played an immensely valuable role in the Palace sides of the later years of that decade, culminating in the promotion team of 1969, in which he was the top scorer with 14 goals, while his five 1st Division goals in 1969–70 were only improved upon at the Palace by proven striker Gerry Queen.
Cliff was always a whole-hearted player and, with his carefully cultivated sideburns, was held in high regard by Palace fans.
Opponents too, often surprised by his pace and the accuracy of his shot or cross, held him in high esteem.
JACKSON, John
346 Football League
18 FA Cup
381 appearances
24 FL Cup
If there is one position in which Crystal Palace have always been well-served it is that of goalkeeper.
But even among such illustrious company as Alderson, Callender, Wood, Martyn and Glazier there is one goalkeeper that stands out and that is John Jackson, who has a prodigious 346 League and 42 FA and League Cup appearances to prove it.
Jackson was born in Hammersmith and while at St Clement Danes School played for London, and then England, Grammar Schools.
He signed for Palace on 8 March 1962 and progressed through the Junior ranks for a couple of seasons.
He made his debut as Bill Glazier's deputy, at Swindon in the second match of Palace's first season in Division 2 for 39 years.
Unfortunately Palace did not play well.
We lost 0–2 but events were taking shape which were to bring the young goalkeeper to the fore: Coventry City swooped for Glazier's signature in mid-October at a record fee for a goalkeeper of £35,000.
Manager Dick Graham immediately went back to his former club, West Bromwich Albion, and purchased Welsh International, Tony Millington to take over but, by the end of the year it was Jackson who was earning praise in the Palace goal after standing in for the injured Welshman and making his home debut against Cardiff on 28 November 1964, and by the end of the season ‘Jacko’, as he became popularly called, was in undisputed possession
In Palace's next four Second Division seasons John Jackson was a model of consistency.
He put in total League appearances of 38, 38, 42 and 42 respectively and was one of only three ever-present players in the team that took Palace into Division I in 1968–69.
In the First Division Jackson really came into his own.
He played 138 consecutive League matches in the top flight before he missed his first game, through sickness, at Wolverhampton on 14 October 1972.
No other Palace player ever attained one season's maximum appearances in our first three Division 1 seasons —‘Jacko’ did, all three times.
And, with all due respect to the other players, it was, frankly, as well that he did, because time and again it was his superb displays that salvaged precious points for Palace against the odds; points which, at the end of the season, made all the difference between survival and relegation.
No doubt all those of us who saw him play have treasured memories of particular occasions when John Jackson performed as a man inspired to keep Palace's goal intact.
My own personal, favourite recollection of him was at Maine Road, Manchester, on Wednesday 11 March 1970.
Manchester City had just won the League Cup and this was the night of their gala celebrations.
With ‘Jacko’ in great form the defence weathered the early and emotional surge of City pressure, gained control of mid-field and then Gerry Queen scored from close in.
The second half was pretty hectic but Jackson's confidence spread to the entire defence and the star-studded City forward line grew more and more frustrated as their celebration night went sour.
In the end not even Jackson could keep Palace in the 1st Division.
He had played in 164 of the 168 Division One matches that Palace had contested.
He had the misfortune to be a great goalkeeper in an age of great goalkeepers; Gordon Banks, Peter Shilton and Ray Clemence, to name but three.
Surely, in a different generation, John Jackson would have gained more honours than his single appearance for the Football League.
Jackson was a surprise omission at the start of 1973–74 but he came back after two matches.
Then he was dropped five games later and it became obvious to all that the goalkeeping hero of the finest days the club had ever known could not be long in going — and on 16 October 1973 he moved over to Orient for a £30,000 fee.
ABOVE: ‘Jacko’ the heroic — under intense pressure at Goodison Park, Everton — INSET: thwarts an effort from Denis Law of Manchester United, as relief shows in the face of John McCormick during Palace's first-ever match in Division one on 9 August 1969 (2–2).
JEFFRIES, Derek
107 Football League
122 appearances
6 FL Cup
Derek Jeffries was bought for Crystal Palace for £100,000 in September 1973 by Manager Malcolm Allison, who h, ad also been his boss at Manchester City, to help boost Palace's struggling midfield as we sought desperately to come to terms with life after relegation to Division Two.
However, Derek was actually seen at his best when playing in the ‘sweeper's’ role, which grew to prominence while he was at the Palace, or when lining up at centre-half alongside Ian Evans in Palace's run to the FA Cup semi-final in 1976.
Always a footballing footballer, even when under pressure in defence, Derek's quality was there for all to see and the appreciation of the Palace fans was shown when they elected him as our Player of the Year in 1975.
JOHNSON, Joshua (‘Joe’)
276 Southern League
295 appearances
19 FA Cup
Joshua (nicknamed ‘Joe’ by the Palace fans) Johnson was our club's goalkeeper from early December 1907 until the 1st World War brought an end to competitive football in 1915.
He joined us from a Derbyshire side near his native Tibshelf and made his Southern League debut at Bristol Rovers oh 7 December — and what a debut it turned out to be!
The River Frome had burst its banks after torrential rain and the Rovers' ground was absolutely waterlogged.
The Palace were also forced by injury to field a somewhat weakened side — but our new goalkeeper played a magnificent match, kept his team in the game in spite of intense Rovers pressure, saved a penalty, and the Palace only went down 1–2 to a very late goal indeed.
Joe played in every remaining Southern League match in that 1907–08 season and in our three FA Cup ties — and he was only missing from the Palace defence by reason of injuries during the next seven seasons.
When the war brought an end to Joe's Palace career he had played 276 Southern League games for us — the highest in the club's history, but when they are seen in context they assume even greater value, for not only were the maximum possible appearances lower than in our present day (only one of Johnson's seasons with us included a 42 match programme) but goalkeepers were subject to much more physical attention than is permitted today.
The shoulder charge was commonplace and the buffeting he received required him to be strong and brave.
No wonder many of the early goalkeepers were men of huge proportions.
John stood 6ft tall and weighed in at 13½ stone, so he was ideally equipped for his onerous responsibilities although, like many big men, he was a quiet and serious fellow — a Sunday School teacher who frequently declined to play on Good Fridays or Christmas Day.
Johnson's prowess was quickly recognised and, when the first representative match was staged between the Southern League and the Football League, on 11 April 1910 at Stamford Bridge (Y-2), it was our man who was between the posts for the Southern League.
The days of the Palace in the Southern League may appear remote today.
But even at this distance we can clearly recognise in Joe Johnson a player who made a sterling contribution to the Palace cause in the early and formative years of our club.
LEFT: Derek Jeffries; ABOVE: Joe Johnson and BELOW: Bobby Kellard.
KELLARD, Bobby
121+2 Football League
7 FA Cup
137 appearances
7 FL Cup
Tough little Bobby Kellard made two distinctive contributions to Crystal Palace FC.
He had been a nippy winger in Palace's promotions side of 1963–64 and then acquitted himself well as we consolidated in Division Two, so he was a welcome recruit at Selhurst Park in mid-September 1971, when Bert Head was restructuring his team in a successful attempt to ensure 1st Division survival.
By this stage of his career Bobby was mainly employed in midfield.
His industry and skill were again amply demonstrated and he was soon appointed captain.
He missed just one of the remaining matches in that testing 1971–72 season and contributed three mighty useful goals from the penalty spot.
It had taken £50,000 to bring Bobby back to the Palace from Leicester, but it was money well spent, for his presence was regarded by many as one of the major factors in Palace's 1972 survival — and we recouped f 12,000 of it when Bobby bustled off to join Pompey just after Christmas.
KEMBER, Steve
255+5 Football League
15 FA Cup
291 appearances
16 FL Cup
Steve Kember is a Croydon lad and has always been a great favourite at his local Football League Club, for which he signed as an apprentice in 1963 and full professional in 1965.
In his first spell with the Palace, Steve matured under Dick Graham, Arthur Rowe and Bert Head and quickly became an important part of Palace's sides in the late 1960s, when his talented inside-forward or midfield displays were one of the hallmarks of Palace performances.
He was an ever-present in the promotion side of 1968–69 that gained a place in Division One.
Then, when playing in the top flight for us, he shone as brightly as any of the great players who opposed him and gained his first England Under 23 cap in October 1970 in recognition of his undisputed talent.
Steve succeeded John Sewell as Palace's captain, but in September 1971 he moved over to Chelsea for a fee quoted as £170,000, as Bert Head sought funds to reshape his squad for 1st Division survival.
But, following an impressive career with Chelsea and Leicester, Steve returned to Selhurst Park in October 1978, when Terry Venables paid £40,000 to add Steve's experience to the precocious skills of a young team seeking to put Palace back into Division One.
Steve missed just one of our remaining games and his influence was an important feature of Palace's 2nd Division Championship.
Steve continued with us in  One until the following March, when he crossed the Atlantic to play for Vancouver Whitecaps for a couple of seasons, but he joined the Palace for a third time in the summer 1981 as our Youth Coach and was then appointed Manager in mid-November, charged with keeping the side in Division Two, following relegation from Division One.
Although he succeeded in that task he was surprisingly replaced in mid-summer 1982 by Alan Mullery.
KURZ, Freddie
148 Football League
154 appearances
6 FA Cup
Having seen Freddie Kurz ‘guest’ successfully for the Palace during the War seasons of 1944–46, including scoring a hat-trick on his Palace debut against Queens Park Rangers on 28 August 1944 (7–4), Palace supporters of the period petitioned the Board to secure the free-scoring centre-forward on a permanent basis.
When the Palace were drawn to face Rangers again in the 3rd round of the FA Cup in January 1946, in which no ‘guests’ were eligible to play, the club hurried the petitioned move through, at what was then a club record fee of £5,000.
Freddie did not manage to keep us in the Cup against the powerful Rangers outfit but, usually playing at centre-forward, he steadily repaid that fee several times over during the first five post-war seasons, for not only has his tally of 48 League goals only been exceeded by six players here at The Palace since then, but his goals were scored in struggling Palace teams, which only once finished in the upper half of the League table.
He was our leading goalscorer in 1947–48 and 1948–49 with 18 and 12 goals respectively.
LEFT: Steve Kember performs an aerial ballet.
RIGHT: Kurz.
LEWIS, Jack
124 Football League
130 appearances
6 FA Cup
Jack Lewis was a brilliant attacking wing-half whom Palace obtained for nothing more than a signing-on fee from West Bromwich Albion in the summer of 1938.
Like many players of that era, Jack's footballing career was badly restricted by the war, but he was available to help us to our regional championship of the 3rd Division South in the first half of 1945–46 while, upon the resumption of League Football in 1946–47, he shone as a half-back of real quality in a none too great Palace team and his performances quickly drew attention from several 1st Division sides.
Jack was tall and strong, a ball-winner, always constructive and eager to set his forwards in motion with an accurate and penetrative pass.
In the end, of course, lack-lustre Palace could not hold him and, although discerning fans then thought he could have played in a much higher grade, he subsequently had a successful career with stronger clubs in the 3rd Division South, Bournemouth and Reading.
Ironically, while Jack was with the latter, he had a fabulous season as a goalscoring wing-half and it was two goals he scored against the Palace in early April 1952 which equalled the former record of 14 goals by a half-back established by Arthur Grimsdell.
Jack finished that season with 15, to create his own record.
If only he could have done it with the Palace!
LITTLE, Jack
42 Southern League
200 Football League
261 appearances
19 FA Cup
Jack Little was Palace's first choice right-back for some seven seasons, on the resumption of fully competitive football after the end of the 1st World War, but he was well-known to followers of the sport in the wider Croydon area for considerably longer, because he had been a regular member of the Croydon Common side, which won promotion from the 2nd Division of the Southern League in 1913–14 with a remarkable defensive record of only conceding 14 goals in 30 matches.
Although Jack played a handful of games for the Palace towards the end of the 1918–19 wartime competition, his first proper competitive game for us was in the opening fixture of the 1919–20 Southern League season on 30 August against Northampton Town (2–2) and it was at his old home ground, The Nest.
Jack's full-back partner was ‘Dusty’ Rhodes, while behind them was the fabulous Jack Alderson and these three heroes played an amazing sequence of exactly 100 consecutive matches together (including cup-ties and friendlies) helping the Palace into the Football League in the process and then into the 2nd Division as the first champions of the newly formed 3rd Division in 1920–21.
It is worth noting that over half Jack's 242 League appearances for Crystal Palace were in Division Two of the Football League — and only Roy McCracken made more appearances than he did in those four seasons, 1921–25, so there is no doubt that Jack was a loyal club servant in a demanding period.
Jack's last game for the Palace first team was on Easter Saturday, 3 April 1926, when he helped Palace to a 1–1 draw at Gillingham, but 7,000 fans turned up for his Benefit match at Selhurst Park a little over a year later to show their appreciation of as fine a player as ever wore the Palace colours.
LOCKE, Gary
84 Football League
101 appearances
9 FA Cup
7 FL Cup
1 FM Cup
Gary was a steady, reliable, unspectacular right-back, who joined the Palace at Alan Mullery's instigation in January 1983 and certainly helped to bolster our somewhat suspect defence in the trying days of the early mid-1980s.
Gary also managed a goal for us, which brought him, as well as Palace fans, great delight for it was against his former club, Chelsea, upon his return to Stamford Bridge with the Eagles in November 1982 (2–2), and as his career with us drew towards its close, he also performed capably in the centre of our defence.
LONG, Terry
432 +10 Football League
30 FA Cup
480 appearances
8 FL Cup
Terry Long joined Crystal Palace on 12 May 1955 from Wycombe Wanderers — and did not leave until the autumn of 1973, some 18 years later.
Terry was, originally at least, a wing-half who had captured the eye of manager Cyril Spiers, and, after a season (1955–56) of coming to maturity and settling down to the demands of League football, he put together a run of 214 consecutive League appearances (234 with major Cup competitions) which was a club record at the time and has only once been exceeded by the great John Jackson.
Terry's run ended just a month before the end of 1960–61, Palace's first promotion season for 40 years, and his splendid and regular performances were a key feature in that success.
He continued as a cornerstone of our defence as we were remodelled, first by Arthur Rowe, then by Dick Graham in Division 3, so that only Terry himself and George Petchey of the 1961 team were members of the 1963–64 squad which put the club back into Division 2 after an absence of 39 years.
Terry was a great club man — he simply had no desires to play for anyone else — and no-one at Selhurst Park wanted him to do so.
Accordingly his faithful service here was rewarded with a Testimonial in October 1966 and a crowd of over 17,000 attended.
Although Terry was a steady and capable defender, he could and did play at inside-forward.
He did not often score goals, but no-one who saw it will ever forget the one he hit from fully 25 yards in the floodlit friendly against Real Madrid.
Another was the last goal he scored for us, on 30 September 1967 when, in front of a record crowd for a League fixture of 30,006, Terry struck the only goal of the match against QPR, to put the Palace on top of the 2nd Division for the first time in our history.
Terry was still making League appearances for us in 1968–69 when Palace again gained promotion, this time to the elite of the 1st Division but, to his disappointment and the chagrin of all Palace followers, he was never able to turn out for us in Division One.
However, he was an integral part of the club and his appointment as assistant manager to Bert Head in 1972 was just reward for this likeable man.
Terry Long was always a welcome visitor to Selhurst Park, but it was an enormous pleasure to everyone connected with Crystal Palace when he agreed to make a public return here in October 1984 to give recognition to Jim Cannon, who is the one man to have played more games for us than Terry himself did.
Terry Long's Palace Career
MCCORMICK, John
194 Football League
225 appearances
10 FA Cup
21 FL Cup
Big John McCormick had had a distinguished career in Scotland, where he had been on the verge of international honours while playing with now defunct Third Lanark and at Aberdeen, but it was, amazingly, as a makeweight that he came south to Crystal Palace.
Centre-forward Tom White was Manager Bert Head's primary target at Pittodrie, but he brought John McCormick back with him as well from the Granite City for a mere £1,500 — and it was the craggy defender who became such a staunch and resolute pillar of Palace rearguards and helped guide the club through to 1st Division security.
Not only did John make full appearances in Palace's promotion side of 1968–69, but he absolutely relished the challenge of Division One and, unless you saw him there for the Palace you will simply never know just what he did for us.
With Mel Blyth alongside and John Jackson in goal, John was part of the triumvirate who did most to keep us in Division one for four seasons.
John made international strikers appear anonymous; he constantly inspired his colleagues, drawing every ounce of energy and application from them; his headed clearances saved us in scores of tight situations and his red hair stood out like a beacon.
And it was only after John had given up playing that Palace at last fell out of the 1st Division, so it was only right that in September 1974 the club gave him a richly deserved Testimonial for his magnificent services.
Some makeweight!
MCCRACKEN, ROY
175 Football League
190 appearances
15 FA Cup
Roy McCracken came to the Palace from Belfast Distillery in the summer of 1920 and, until he had the misfortune to break a leg in December, he was our first-choice right-half in our promotion-seeking team of 1920–21.
Although the break was a nasty one, McCracken came back successfully at the beginning of 1921–22 when the Palace made their debut in Division Two and he played more games for us in that division than anyone else during our four year tenure there 1921–25.
Roy's performances earned him a deserved reputation as a neat and clever footballer and he came to be regarded by press and public alike as one of Palace's most consistent performers during the six years he was on our staff.
Roy won four full International caps for Northern Ireland, is the only Palace player ever to have appeared for that country and was the first 3rd Division player to be selected for a full international.
LEFT: Harry McDonald and RIGHT: Johnny McNichol, Palace's lottery manager in 1973.
MCDONALD, Harry
140 Football League
146 appearances
6 FA Cup
Harry McDonald was a strong, sturdy left-back, but he possessed a turn of speed that was unexpected in a defender and which frequently surprised his opposing wingers, so that he was our first-choice number three for over three seasons.
Interestingly, Harry had come into the game unusually late because he was already 24-years-old when chief scout Charlie Slade spotted him playing for.
Ashton in Lancashire, and urged Manager Ronnie Rooke to sign him — there was to be no doubting the quality of Mr Slade's judgement on this occasion, as Palace fans of the early 1950s will agree.
Harry always looked immaculate and unruffled, and he was one of those players upon whom the Manager, his team colleagues and supporters can always rely for a composed and controlled performance.
McNICHOL, Johnny
189 Football League
205 appearances
1 FL Cup
Johnny McNichol came to Selhurst Park in March 1958 as Manager Cyril Spiers' last desperate attempt to prevent the Palace from becoming founder members of the new national 4th Division, which was to be formed from the clubs in the bottom halves of the regional 3rd Divisions of 1957–58.
Johnny was immediately made captain, a position he held for nearly five years, and scored on his debut, but even Johnny's seven goals from the 12 remaining games could not keep us out of the new basement division.
Johnny was an old-fashioned inside-forward (the position in which he had won a League championship medal with Chelsea in 1955), but he gradually moved, via wing-half, to full-back and it was from there that he skippered Palace's first promotion side for 40 years, taking us out of Division 4 in 1960–61.
Johnny had another couple of seasons as a player, but he retired after a nasty fractured cheekbone and broken jaw early in 1962–63, only to turn to the commercial side of the game and build a new and successful career there.
It was Johnny who set up the first weekly pools and bingo competitions at the Palace and it is from those humble beginnings that the massively valuable present-day lottery has grown.
By the time Johnny moved back to Brighton he had spent over 20 years at Selhurst Park and during that time he had made an invaluable contribution to Palace's progress both on and off the field, for which he will long be remembered with gratitude.
MANDERS, Frank
97 Football League
102 appearances
5 FA Cup
Frank was a local boy from Camberley in Surrey who signed for the Palace on his 17th birthday in June 1931 after having caught the eye of our then Manager, Mr Jack Tresadern.
Frank soon became a prolific scorer for the Reserves but he graduated to the first team as the ideal foil to the great goal-scorer, Peter Simpson, having begun by deputising for the master when Peter was out injured.
Frank developed into a useful striker, stylish, poised and unselfish.
Inevitably, he came under the scrutiny of the bigger clubs and Spurs and Brentford made offers, but he eventually moved rather suddenly in October 1935 to Norwich City, when the Canaries paid their record fee to obtain his services, and he played for the Carrow Road club until the war.
MURPHY, Jerry
214+15 Football League
269 appearances
22 FL Cup
Jerry Murphy was an outstandingly talented young footballer, who first came to the attention of Palace fans in the midfield of the successful youth side which won the FA Youth Cup in 1977 and 1978 under the managership of John Cartwright.
The following season Jerry was a vital member of the Palace team which won the 2nd Division Championship and then went on to take the 1st Division by storm.
Jerry also earned three full International caps for Eire (qualifying on his father's nationality), but once the Palace began to lose their way his laconic and delicate style became on occasions at least, something of a luxury our side could ill-afford, and when he became a free agent in 1985 he chose to move over to Chelsea.
NEBBELING, Gavin
173 appearances
145+6 Football League
5 FA Cup
8+1 FL Cup
8 FM Cup
Gavin Nebbeling was a tall, upright, South African central defender who played for the Palace throughout the 1980s, but his career was continually dogged by injury and this rather limited his value, although his League appearances exceeded 150 by the time he moved on to Fulham in the summer of 1989.
Quiet, steady and composed, Gavin was an ideal partner for skipper Jim Cannon at the heart of the Palace defence and, if the early '80s were a time when our back four was often under a lot of pressure, Gavin played his part in Palace's revival at the end of the decade although, in spite of skippering our successful 1988–89 side for a few matches mid-season, he incurred yet another injury and was prevented from playing in all but the final three games.
ABOVE and LEFT Gavin Nebbeling (Universal Press Agency) and RIGHT Peter Nicholas (Fleet Photos) and…
OPPOSITE RIGHT in action against Grimsby Town.
OPPOSITE LEFT: Archie Needham
NEEDHAM, Archie
121 appearances
102 Southern League
19 FA Cup
Archie Needham was a talented and extremely versatile footballer, who came to the Palace from Sheffield United when our club was formed in 1905.
To begin with, Archie featured at inside forward and was easily the leading scorer in our first season, with 20 goals in the Southern League 2nd Division fixtures, and as such was a primary reason for Palace's elevation to the 1st Division for 1906–07.
Midway through 1906–07 Archie was deployed at right-back in the Palace line-ups, although he had a few outings on the right wing, and he played throughout our fabulous progress to the FA Cup quarter-finals.
Then, by the spring of 1908, Archie had become our regular, goalscoring, left-winger, while in 1908–09 he divided his appearances between outside-left and left-back.
The moment for which Archie will always be remembered by Palace fans was when he scored our fourth and conclusive goal after a marvellous run from the centre-circle to defeat the FA Cup-holders, Wolves (4–2) in a thrilling replay up at the old Crystal Palace in January 1909.
NICHOLAS, Peter
174 Football League
199 appearances
11 FA Cup
14 FL Cup
Peter was a magnificent, driving, defensive midfielder, whose whole-hearted commitment to the club endeared him to every Palace fan.
He was in the Palace Junior team which won and then retained the FA Youth Cup in 1977 and 1978 and was a regular member of our 2nd Division Championship side of 1978–79.
Arsenal paid a bargain £40,000 for Peter in March 1981 after our 1st Division return had gone sour and we badly needed the cash, but he came back to Selhurst Park on loan in October 1983 and his tenacious and skilful experience was a key reason for our 2nd Division survival in that difficult season.
However, Peter was anxious to be on the move again in the winter of 1983–84, so Luton signed him for £15,000.
Peter was one of three Palace players to have won 14 full International caps while registered with the club, and Palace fans will always wish him well in his career for both club and country.
NOAKES, Alf
195 Football League
209 appearances
14 FA Cup
Alf Noakes was a tough little full-back who served the Palace loyally and well over six seasons in the mid- and late 1950s.
Alf was able to play on either flank of our defence and indeed, on occasions early in his career, in various positions further forward, but it was at left-back that he settled to give of his best from 1958 to 1961.
It was in that position that Alf was an important member of Palace's first promotion side for 40 years, when we climbed out of Division 4 in 1960–61 and, with his Cup-tie appearances, be comes one the group of only forty or so men to have played over 200 games for our club.
OWENS, Ted
172 appearances
164 Football League
8 FA Cup
Ted Owens was one of the stalwarts of Crystal Palace FC during the inter-war period, when his resolute performances at right-back during the latter half of the 1930s made him a firm favourite.
Ted was signed for the Palace by Manager Jack Tresadern from Preston in the summer of 1934 and had a magnificent first season, only prevented from making full appearances by an injury sustained in our Christmas Day fixture at Torquay.
He was first choice at number two until the 2nd World War called a halt to fully competitive soccer — and well beyond.
Ted will always be remembered at Selhurst Park for his full-back partnership with Fred Dawes for three and a half years before the war, when the pair played 106 matches together in the League and Cup for the Palace.
Perhaps the best indication of Ted's strength, ability and character will be gained by relating the occasion of his single, but so important, goal for the Palace.
It was in the 2nd round of the FA Cup in December 1937 when the Palace had had to make the long trip to Accrington on one of the rare times when the draw for this round was not made on a geographical basis.
For Ted Owens and for the Palace the dismal afternoon was made even worse when our right-back was crippled by a knee injury after only 11 minutes.
Ted returned to the fray after a scoreless first half and played at outside-right.
Twelve minutes after the break he moved into the middle during a rare Palace break and was in just the right spot to hammer home a left-wing cross to give Palace a great victory and set up a 3rd round tie against Liverpool!
PARDEW, Alan
159 appearances
112+2 Football League
8+3 FL Cup
16 FM Cup
Versatile midfielder ‘super Alan Pardew’ joined The Eagles from Yeovil Town for a mere £7,500 in 1987 and made tremendous progress with the Palace, so that he missed only one match during our 1988–89 promotion season, for which his drive, energy and cultured right foot provided an invaluable component, and just two games upon our return to the 1st Division in 1989–90.
During that Division One term, Alan was Palace's joint third-top scorer, with six priceless goals, while it was he who notched Palace's extra-time winner against Liverpool in the FA Cup semi-final, to secure our first-ever appearance in an FA Cup Final and earn everlasting fame among Palace supporters.
Alan reached his 100th League game for the Palace when Arsenal came to Selhurst Park on Faster Saturday 1990, can always be relied upon to give one hundred per cent in the Palace cause and is now a firmly established 1st Division player.
PARRY, Oswald
142 Football League
150 appearances
8 FA Cup
Oswald Parry, a tall, strong, blonde Welshman, with a lock of hair perpetually curling across his wide forehead, came to Crystal Palace from Wimbledon in the summer of 1931.
He brought with him something of a reputation as a centre-half, but his Palace career, spread over five seasons, was spent largely as a full-back.
Parry made his debut in the fourth match of 1931–32, when he helped the Palace secure a superb 3–0 victory at Brighton, and he became a regular member of our side that season.
He began at left-back, got switched to centre-half, but by the end of the campaign was firmly established at number two.
Oswald's best season at the Palace was probably 1933–34, when he topped our list of appearances with 39 games, although perhaps his finest display for the club was in that season's 2nd round FA Cup tie at Stockport, when the Palace came from behind to win 2–1.
After this he was a little unlucky with injuries and left us at the end of 1935–36, having served honourably and well.
He joined Ipswich Town, for whom he made over 150 appearances, helped them to gain League status and re-appeared at Selhurst Park with them in 1938–39, and then again after the war.
ABOVE: Oswald Parry is third from the left in the back row in this 1931 Palace team group; BELOW: David Payne shoots for goal in the Palace match at Old Trafford on 11 April 1973; OPPOSITE: David celebrates with a Palace fan upon our promotion to Division One on 19 April 1969.
(Sport and General)
PAYNE, David
281+3 Football League
16 FA Cup
318 appearances
18 FL Cup
David Payne had supported the Palace from the Whitehorse Lane terraces as a boy and joined the club as an apprentice on 1 January 1964.
He signed as a full professional on 26 October 1964 and made his senior debut at Leicester (0–0) in a 4th round League Cup-tie just over a week later.
David became a regular member of Palace's 2nd Division side during 1965–66 and in three seasons rarely missed a match, although a mid-season injury at Millwall kept his appearances in our 1968–69 promotion team down to thirty.
David was not a big man but, like several Palace midfield players and defenders, he excelled under intense and almost continuous pressure in Division One.
As the situation required, David would play almost anywhere — he actually wore eight different numbered shirts for us in four seasons in the 1st Division — and rarely, if ever, even in such illustrious company was he outshone.
Indeed, it was in that elite Division that David's tireless workrate, intelligent and selfless running and accurate distribution proved him to be a footballer of high calibre.
Sir Alf Ramsey included David as substitute in his England Under 23 side against Wales at Swansea on l November 1967, but Palace fans of the period will contend that David was worthy of further honours He eventually left us for orient in August 1973; his departure was regretted by the fans, who had always held this likeable young man in immense respect and affection.
David Payne's Palace Career
PEMBERTON, John
105 appearances
80+2 Football League
8 FA Cup
6+1 FL Cup
8 FM Cup
John Pemberton was Palace's genial and gutsy full-back throughout our promotion drive to Division one in 1988–89 and then in The Eagles' progress to the FA Cup Final and Replay of' 1990 Indeed, his surging run in the semi-final against Liverpool at Villa Park, which took him past several defender s, before he delivered the cross from which Mark Bright put the Palace on terms and on the way to our stunning victory, will probably remain for ever in the memories of those who saw it, even though he impressed enormously in the two Cup Finals against Manchester United's sophisticated and costly imports.
John came to the Palace in March 1988 from Crewe Alexandra for a £60,000 fee and, while capable of filling several defensive roles it was as our right- or left-back that he featured regularly, although always wearing number two, so that he was undoubtedly among manager Steve Coppell's most astute signings.
PETCHEY, George
143 Football League
7 FA Cup
153 appearances
3 FL Cup
George Petchey was a driving, inspirational wing-half and certainly one of the best in that position in the old 3rd Division South, but he joined the Palace in the summer of 1960 to play for us under Arthur Rowe.
George helped the Palace to gain promotion from Division Four in his first season at Selhurst Park, during which he made full appearances for us, and he continued as a first-team regular under Dick Graham, to become one of only two men to appear in both the 1961 and 1964 promotion sides.
His strong and aggressive displays were a feature of Palace's progress back to Division Two, but his playing career was brought to a premature end by a troublesome eye complaint and his final match with us was the 6th round FA Cup-tie against Leeds (0–3) on 10 March 1965.
After Dick Graham left the Palace in January the following year, George assisted Arthur Rowe and then Bert Head in the role of team coach, helping to mould the side that earned 1st Division status in 1969.
Eventually, after eleven years with the Palace, George became the manager at Orient and a feature of his time at Brisbane Road was his regular purchasing of Palace players (eg Phil Hoadley, Gerry Queen, John Jackson) to help keep his club in Division Two.
QUEEN, Gerry
127 appearances
101 +7 Football League
7 FA Cup
11+1 FL Cup
Gerry Queen came to the Palace from Kilmarnock in July 1969 for a £45,000 fee, as Manager Bert Head sought additional and experienced striking power for the 1st Division battles that lay ahead.
Gerry was probably Mr Head's most effective signing for Palace over our four years in the top flight 1969–73.
Gerry scored on his Palace debut in our 2–2 draw with Manchester United on the opening day of 1969–70 and went on to become our top scorer that season.
On his day Gerry was as good a centre-forward as any in the land and would almost certainly have won a string of Scottish International caps had he been with a more successful club.
He possessed considerable skill, had grace and power and was strong in the air, yet he was also willing to battle to the last whistle.
The value of Gerry Queen to Crystal Palace can perhaps be measured by the fact that he was easily our top scorer in Division One between 1969 and 1973, with 24 top-flight goals, while his 1– strikes in 1969–71 represented a quarter of our total tally in those two seasons.
RHODES, Ernie
142 appearances
47 Southern League
89 Football League
6 FA Cup
Full-back Ernie Rhodes hailed from Tees-side, but he joined the Palace as a young man in the summer of 1913, making his Palace debut in the ensuing season, although it was after the Great War that he made his major contribution.
He appeared in all but the initial match of 1919–20 to make the left-back position his own, and then in every one of the 3rd Division championship seasons of 1920–21.
An impressive feature of the early post-war Palace sides was the triumvirate of Alderson in goal, Little and Ernie Rhodes at full-back, and those who watched them play for the Palace will tell you of an understanding between them that bordered on the uncanny.
Soon after the start of Palace's 2nd Division career in 1921–22 it was calculated that Ernie and his colleagues had played precisely one hundred consecutive matches together (including cup-ties and friendlies).
A presentation was made by the club to each of them to mark a record that is without parallel in Palace history and is certainly unusual in football's annals overall.
Ernie was built in the strong mould of the traditional full-back of the time, but he was cool under pressure and had a keen eye for a volleyed clearance to avert any threatening danger, so that it was entirely fitting when the Football League honoured him with a place in one of their representative sides in the autumn of 1921.
ROUSE, Vic
257 appearances
238 Football League
17 FA Cup
1 FL Cup
It is a clear indication of the quality of Vic Rouse's goalkeeping ability that he succeeded the great Roy Bailey between the Palace posts, then went on to set up a club record 238 Football League goalkeeping appearances (since exceeded only by the invincible John Jackson), and that it then took another goalkeeper destined for the 1st Division in Bill Glazier to oust him.
Vic goes down in football's annals as the first international player to be chosen from the ranks of the 4th Division (for Wales against Northern Ireland in Belfast on 22 April 1959), but Palace fans should know that this was no freak selection, for Vic had impressed many with his splendid performances and was in a run of 143 consecutive League games with just a single absence for us.
During that sequence Vic made full appearances throughout our promotion season of 1960–61, thus helping us to progress for the first time in forty years, while a feature of his game in that successful season was the accurate and powerful throw he developed, by which he frequently set up a fast Palace counter-attack.
Vic was a great favourite with fans and it was an enormous pleasure when he returned to Selhurst Park in May 1982 in charge of the Metropolitan Police side.
SALAKO, John
150 appearances
77+38 Football League
11 FA Cup
8+2 FL Cup
1 +3 FM Cup
Nigerian-born John Salako came up through the Palace's Junior ranks as a pacy winger who could also score goals but, since The Eagles' last return to the 1st Division, John has shown himself' capable of fulfilling other roles, by performing splendidly at left-back in the latter stages of the 1989–90 season, notably in the FA Cup semi-final against Liverpool and in the Wembley Finals.
Curiously, of John's first hundred Palace appearances, almost half were as a substitute and, although he demonstrated great potential, he never really established himself as a regular member of our side until the autumn of 1990.
Having done so, he won the Barclays Young Eagle of the Month award for our region twice in four months, having impressed no less a seasoned observer than the great Bill Nicholson of Tottenham and England.
Perhaps John's best game for us was the FA Cup 3rd round replay at Nottingham Forest in last January 1991, when he provided the cross from the right wing from which Ian Wright volleyed our opener, and then scored our last-gasp equaliser, which showed considerable vision and no little technique, to catch the Forest goalkeeper off his line with a dipping, curling shot from some 45 yards' range.
Equally, his brace against Manchester United in our last match of 1990–91 (co-incidentally also his own 150th Palace appearance) demonstrated that he was on the verge of international recognition, with the second one, struck from fully 30 yards, bringing the big crowd to its feet in salute.
The exciting promise John had revealed over the previous eighteen months was rewarded by a place on the England tour of Australasia in June 1991 where he demonstrated his capacity to excite the crowd and to bemuse the opposition by featuring prominently in all four matches, thereby staking a claim for a regular inclusion in the national side.
SANSOM, Kenny
197 appearances
172 Football League
11 FA Cup
14 FL Cup
Kenny was probably the most polished and was certainly the best full-back so far to play for Crystal Palace, and his distinguished career with us, Arsenal, QPR and England proves his quality.
Kenny made his League debut for the Palace at Tranmere in May 1975 at just over 16 years of age and is the second youngest player ever to appear in the Palace first team.
Within two years Kenny was captain of the England Youth team, had skippered the Palace Juniors to the FA Youth Cup triumph of 1977 and become an ever-present member of the Palace's side that won promotion from Division Three.
Indeed, Kenny only missed one match in three seasons 1976–79 (when he missed a train to Bristol Rovers!), and altogether had a run of 156 league games with just that one omission.
Kenny then excelled in the higher sphere and helped the Palace to gain the 2nd Division championship with the club's best-ever defensive record, and to reach the top of the Football League in September 1979.
He was also the only player to make full appearances in both Palace's promotion seasons of the late 1970s.
Kenny won nine full England International caps while he was a Palace player, with another eight for the Under 21's and two for England B. He was our Player of the Year in both 1977 and 1979, an (l it took a record fee to take him to Arsenal in an exchange deal in 1980, when he and Clive Allen were each valued at £1 million.
SEWELL, John
258 appearances
228+3 Football League
12 FA Cup
15 FL Cup
John Sewell has a unique claim to a place in any gallery of Palace heroes, because he was the popular and talented skipper of the team which took our club into the 1st Division for the first time in its history, back in 1969.
His career in the upper echelons of the Football League seemed to have ended when John moved from Charlton to Crystal Palace on 25 October 1963 after nine years at The Valley.
John soon made a niche for himself in Palace's defence, making his debut at home to Bristol Rovers (1–0) the day after his signature had been obtained, and scoring his first goal for us in the 8–2 FA Cup demolition of Harwich and Parkstone three weeks later.
Sewell made 18 consecutive League appearances for Palace, and was captain on occasions, but he then received a nasty injury in the match at Millwall on 22 February and Palace had to fight their way into Division Two without his able assistance.
John had made a few 1st Division appearances with Charlton, but undoubtedly the climax of his career came when he captained Palace to promotion to that premier division of world soccer at the end of 1968–69 — and then maintained his high level of performance by helping to keep the Palace in the top flight for the two remaining seasons in which he stayed with the club.
There can be no doubt that Sewell's efforts in assisting Palace to retain that place in Division One were magnificent.
Often playing with or against men ten years his junior, this immaculate footballer (who dressed as smartly off the pitch as he played on it) always looked fresh and resilient, and his presence was a boost to the confidence of every Palace side.
He made 70 1st Division appearances for us — during that time our defence was usually under considerable pressure, most of the matches were tense affairs, and the strain on the captain was that much greater.
His 70 appearances were only improved over that period by the evergreen John McCormick, goalkeeper John Jackson and the much younger Mel Blyth, and they tell us something of the fitness and sheer determination of the man.
Sewell's perky and attractive character was always apparent and it was also demonstrated by his two pairs of First Division goals — scored, one may add, at a time when Palace goals were really at a premium.
He hit one against Liverpool (H 1–3) and another to secure a point at Manchester United (1–1) in 1969–70, while in 1970–71 he stunned Leeds with a late equaliser (H 1–1) and at Ipswich his penalty set us on the way to a 2–1 win.
John Sewell's Palace Career
SHAW, Richard
104 appearances
66+8 Football League
8 FA Cup
9+2 FL Cup
10+1 FM Cup
Richard Shaw is the latest qualifier for the growing list of Palace Centurions, having reached his hundredth Palace appearance as the 1990–91 season drew towards its conclusion.
In fact, Richard's hundredth game  co-incided with a red-letter day in the Palace annals, for it was the occasion of our Zenith Data Systems Cup Final victory over Everton at Wembley, in which the young defender had an exemplary afternoon and was a worthy member of the team that gained our 4–1 success.
But, while that event was the climax to date of Richard's career with the Palace, he has been with us since his schoolboy days, for he is one of the products of the currently highly resourceful youth development programme at Selhurst Park, and his mature performances in defence earned Richard the Palace Young Player of the Year award in 1986.
He then went on-to become a valuable back-up member of the squad that took Palace to promotion in 1989 and, after a useful spell on loan with Hull City in midwinter, returned to claim the left-back position for the remainder of the season, gaining himself the Barclays Young Eagle of the Month award in March 1990, sharing in some excellent 1st Division results, the FA Cup semi-final victory over Liverpool and two Wembley appearances against Manchester United.
Still only 21 years of age in the summer of 1991, Richard is one of the youngest players to complete their first century of Palace appearances.
He missed only two fixtures in 1990–91 and obviously a grand future lies ahead of him.
SIMPSON, Peter
195 appearances
180 Football League
15 FA Cup
Peter Simpson, who must rank as one of the best centre-forwards in the history of the club, first came to the notice of Crystal Palace patrons when Palace met Kettering Town in the 1st Round of the FA Cup on 24 November 1928.
Jimmy Wilde, our centre-half, made an excellent debut for us in preventing Simpson from scoring but manager Fred Maven and Secretary Edmund Goodman knew immediately that this was a man who could do great things for Palace.
Simpson signed for Palace in the summer of 1929 and came into the team for the fifth match of the 1929–30 season, on 14 September for the home match with Norwich City.
He scored our equaliser with a hard, low shot from Harry's cross after half an hour; headed our second from Clarke's centre six minutes after half-time and pressurised Jarvie, the Norwich goalkeeper, into conceding a third (which was subsequently credited to Simpson) to sew up the match for Palace.
Simpson was born in Leith on the outskirts of Edinburgh in 1906 and became prominent with St Bernards in the 2nd Division of the Scottish League.
Kettering persuaded him to come South and he helped them win the Southern League (Eastern) Championship in 1927–28 and 1928–29.
St Bernards had placed a fee on this transfer should he go to a Football League club so Palace had to settle with them and with Kettering, but his eminent place in the club's history assures us that if Palace had had to pay a dozen clubs, it would have been money well spent.
Peter Simpson has become famed as a Palace goalscorer.
Indeed he was that — but he was much more.
His distributive skills were prodigious: he fed Harry and Clarke on Palace's wings with rare ability and they returned the compliment with a stream of centres and crosses.
Simpson read and paced a game brilliantly, his high scoring feats (even in an age of high scores) tell of a man who could always find the split-second of time, the extra half-yard of space or ounce of energy to beat an opponent.
By March 1930, with a mere 26 league games plus one FA Cup appearance for Palace to his name, and an average of exactly one goal per match, Simpson had attracted the attentions of the big clubs.
Sunderland certainly wanted him; Everton probably too.
Fortunately the Palace directors put a prohibitive price upon his transfer, and he stayed with the club, set up a new goal-scoring record of 36 league goals in his first season (from just 34 appearances), topped the Division 3(S) charts for that campaign and his output was only exceeded by two men in the entire Football League.
In 1930–31 Simpson did absolutely magnificently.
He rattled up  no less than 46 league goals (an all-time club record which seems to be invincible), including six in succession in the 7–2 defeat of Exeter on 4 October.
He went on to top our list of goalscorers for each of his first five seasons (another record) and, between September 1929 and April 1935, played in 180 league and 15 FA Cup matches for us, scoring a fabulous 153 League and 12 FA Cup goals to establish a tally which no-one in the club has ever approached before or since.
LEFT: Peter Simpson RIGHT: makes life uncomfortable for the Norwich goalkeeper on his Palace Debut (3–2) on 14 September 1929.
The Peter Simpson era at Selhurst Park ended with a knee injury in 1934–35.
He lost some of his sparkle after this and his final game for us was at Swindon on Easter Monday 1935 when he scored our goal in a l-l draw.
He was transferred to West Ham in the close-season and after two seasons there went on to Reading for whom he played against Palace on 22 January 1938.
He put in a superb second half, scored twice and Palace had to come home defeated by 2–3.
Palace staged a Benefit match for Simpson on Wednesday 31 October 1934, against the popular amateurs, The Corinthians.
It was wretched luck that the weather that day was so awful that only 1000+ turned up to see Simpson well played by Bernard Joy and Palace win by 3–2.
After his retirement Simpson took over a newsagent/tobacconists shop in West Croydon and he died in March 1974 aged 69 years.
At Crystal Palace Football Club at least, Peter Simpson is immortal.
Peter Simpson's Palace Career
SMITH, Ted
192 appearances
155 Southern League
25 Football League
12 FA Cup
Ted Smith was a marvellous goalscorer for Crystal Palace on both sides of the Great War and, if that awful event had not reduced the impact of his career with us, it is almost certain that he and not Peter Simpson would have been our leading goalscorer of all time.
Ted joined the Palace from Hull City in December 1911 and immediately scored a hat-trick on his debut (one of only four Palace men ever to achieve this feat) at West Ham on 30 December (6–1), and then repeated the feat a week later when Bristol Rovers came to The Palace (4–1).
He simply went on from there: he topped our list of goalscorers for the remaining four pre-war seasons, and again in 1919–20 and during that period his record was the equal of any in the game.
Birmingham-born Ted was burly and strong, weighing in at 12½ stone and standing some 5ft 9½ inches tall.
As a header of the ball he was phenomenal and it is amazing how many of his goals came from his head, while he possessed an extremely powerful shot — and remember that in those days the leather ball collected any moisture on the pitch and could finish up weighing several pounds!
Ted's efforts for our club were fully recognised by everyone at Crystal Palace and he was awarded a Benefit in 1920–21.
It was the match against Gillingham (4–1) on 5 March — 12,000 fans turned up, the band played ‘For he's a jolly good fellow’ and Ted kicked off for us, even though a persistent injury prevented him from playing after New Year's Day.
After the Great War he became our captain.
Now it is rare for a centre-forward to skipper a side (and I don't think that has happened on more than one occasion at the Palace since) so that only an exceptional player would do so.
Ted captained the Palace through the first half of our 3rd Division championship season of 1920–21 before injury prevented him playing, and then in our opening games in Division Two.
‘A Jolly Good Fellow’ indeed!
Ted Smith's Palace Career
A superb action picture of Ted Smith scoring with a diving header against Reading at the Crystal Palace in November 1913 (5–1).
Bill Davies, who provided the cross, can be seen over on the right wing.
SPOTTISWOOD, Bob
189 appearances
178 Southern League
11 FA Cup
Bob Spottiswood was a strong and pacy right half-back who played for his native Carlisle United before coming south to appear for Croydon Common for the 1908–09 season.
After just one term with The Robins, he signed for the Palace.
He became a huge favourite with pre-war fans, who loved his fiercely determined performances, and it was while Bob was playing for us that we came closest to clinching the Southern League championship, being denied on goal average alone by Swindon Town in 1913–14.
Bob's abilities were recognised by the Southern League authorities, who selected him for one of their inter-League games during 1912–13 and he was awarded a Benefit by the Palace in 1914–15, along with his half-back colleagues, Jimmy Hughes and Harry Hanger.
Unfortunately, the Palace had been forced to move to Herne Hill by the time the match against Bob's old club, Croydon Common, was staged, and it is not known what arrangements were made on the players' behalf.
 STEBBINGS , Gary
118 appearances
95+ 7 Football League
6 FA Cup
7+1 FL Cup
1+1 FM Cup
Gary Stebbing was a stylish England Youth international and sometime captain who joined the Palace straight from school in 1983 and played in a variety of midfield and defensive positions for us over a five year span.
Gary's neat and composed approach was enjoyed by the discerning fans but some Palace supporters found it difficult to accept this refined talent in the hustle and bustle of the Second Division of the mid-1980s.
However, Gary is assured of a permanent place in Palace annals, because he became only our third player ever to appear in all the different numbered outfield shirts, when he wore the number three Jersey at Barnsley on 23 August 1986.
ABOVE: Gary Stebbing heads for goal in a friendly against Hapoel from Israel in August 1984; INSET: Bob Spottiswood.
LEFT: Alan Stephenson; RIGHT: Roy Summersby; OPPOSITE: Dave Swindlehurst nets in spectacular fashion against Ipswich Town (4–1) on 29 September 1979.
STEPHENSON, Alan
185 appearances
170 Football League
8 FA Cup
7 FL Cup
Alan Stephenson was a tall, stylish, slimly-built but strong centre-half, who played for the Palace with grace and power in the tough footballing days of the mid-1960s.
Alan was dominating in the air and solid and reliable in the tackle, so that he was a perfect defender for a team marshalled by Manager Dick Graham and he made a major contribution to Palace's progress, deservedly becoming Palace's captain while also earning England Under 23 honours.
Alan actually began with Palace as an amateur, after travelling across London upon hearing that trials were being held at Selhurst Park, and he made his debut as a 17-year-old in March 1962.
He forced his way into our 3rd Division promotion team, playing alongside Brian Wood in an early dual central defender's role, and from then onward missed only an occasional game through injury for four years in Division Two, before joining West Ham in March 1968 for a club record fee of around £80,000.
SUMMERSBY, ROY
190 appearances
176 Football League
13 FA Cup
1 FL Cup
Roy was a tough, chunky inside-forward who joined the Palace from neighbours Millwall when we were struggling to make an impact on the 4th Division leadership.
Fast and clever, Roy was a typical inside man of his day, but he was better than most and had a successful career with Palace, providing the ideal foil to the mercurial Johnny Byrne and helping to make us a respected side in Division 3 before leaving for Portsmouth in the summer of 1963.
Roy has two claims to attention in the Palace records.
First, he is one of a select band of Palace players (only four in all) to have made over a hundred consecutive appearances for the club immediately following his debut, and his run of 123 games has only ever been beaten by Johnny McNichol (153).
Then there is Roy's goalscoring tally.
His 25 League goals in 1960–61 put him as runner-up to Johnny Byrne in that promotion season and he remains only behind Byrne's figure of 30 for the highest number of strikes in a post-war League season of up to 46 games.
And his 59 League goals are still within our top five since the war, although all the others had rather longer Palace careers than he did.
SWINDLEHURST, Dave
221+16 Football League
276 appearances
22 FA Cup
Dave Swindlehurst was Palace's big, strong goalscorer as we forced our way back to the 1st Division limelight from the obscurity of the 3rd between 1974 and 1979.
Brave and good in the air, Dave consistently proved his ability to find the net at all levels, but perhaps the goal for which he will be best remembered by Palace fans of the period was that which he scored at Elland Road, Leeds, in January 1976 when 3rd Division Palace dismissed the mighty Yorkshire outfit on our way to our first FA Cup semi-final.
It was his gloriously struck header that arrowed its way into the top corner of Leeds' net to settle that 4th round tie.
For a long while, Dave was second only to Johnny Byrne among our post-war goalscorers though, of course, all but a handful of ‘Budgie's’ goals were scored in the lower divisions.
In spite of his size, and like many big strikers, Dave was a sensitive fellow and pre-match tension was a real problem for him in his earlier days, but he overcame that worry successfully and went on to make a substantial and positive contribution to Palace's return to the big-time, before moving to Derby County in a £400,000 deal in the spring of 1980.
TAYLOR, Peter
122 Football League
11 FA Cup
142 appearances
9 FL Cup
Peter Taylor was a fast, stocky, goalscoring winger, who was brought to the Palace by Malcolm Allison for a fee of £100,000 from Southend United.
Peter went on to repay that sum several times over and was certainly Malcolm's best signing for The Eagles.
Peter usually wore the number 11 shirt but frequently operated down the right flank.
Speedy, and with neat control, his shooting was accurate and his use of dead-ball situations intelligent and effective.
While he was with the Palace, Peter gained four England Under 23 caps (two of them in matches staged at Selhurst Park) and scored in every game.
He also won four full England caps and netted on his first two appearances.
Peter hit the national headlines with spectacular displays in Palace's fabulous run to the FA Cup semi-final in 1976, when he was our on-field inspiration in magnificent away victories at Leeds, Chelsea and Sunderland.
It became inevitable that he would move to a bigger club.
In September 1976 he joined Spurs for £200,000, but his career there never fully fulfilled its earlier promise.
TAYLOR, Tony
222 appearances
142+3 Football League
11+1 FA Cup
14+1 FL Cup
Tony Taylor was a tough little Scotsman who joined the Palace from Morton on the last day of October 1968.
Bert Head brought many fine footballers to the Palace from north of the border but none was of more value to the Palace than Tony.
His hardworking, selfless style rarely caught the attention of the media but Palace patrons of the time thoroughly appreciated Tony's worth.
Tony's successful partnership with Steve Kember was a key reason for our 1969 promotion to Division One, and for our subsequent continued presence there, but Tony also played for us in a variety of positions, from attacking winger on his debut, to left-back.
In fact he became known as Tony ‘play me anywhere as long as you play me’ Taylor!
Thus Tony put in more 1st Division appearances for the Palace between 1969 and 1973 than anyone except John Jackson and Mel Blyth, but many Palace fans thought that he was at his best at left-back.
Certainly he played extremely well in that position after Peter Wall was injured for most of 1972–73 and in the first half of 1973–74, and it was from that position that he captained the Palace side.
THOMAS, Bob
96 Football League
6 FA Cup
Bob was a clever inside or centre-forward who joined the Palace in September 1952 for a substantial £3,000 from Fulham.
He was certainly one of manager Laurie Scott's best signings and was an immediate choice for our team for over two seasons, coming out as Palace's top scorer in 1953–54.
Bob was a fine dribbler, with a distinctive hunch-shouldered gait, and was a neat header of the ball, but he fell out of favour when Cyril Spiers arrived and introduced a policy of replacing the more experienced men with younger players.
THOMAS, Geoff
177 appearances
134+2 Football League
11+1 FA Cup
15 FL Cup
13+1 FM Cup
Geoff Thomas has been Palace's inspirational, attacking midfield supremo, and occasional centre defender, since he joined us from Crewe Alexandra for just £50,000 in June 1987, and he became our club captain in succession to Jim Cannon twelve months later
Fair-haired, tall and with a distinctive upright stance, Geoff's powerful running, strength and cultured style soon made him a firm favourite with Palace fans, who voted him our Player of the Year in his first season.
Injuries reduced his availability in 1988–89 but he captained The Eagles through the following season upon the club's return to Division One, while also scoring vital goals against Portsmouth and at Cambridge in our tremendous run to the 1990 FA Cup Final, where his performances impressed observers.
Geoff continued to progress last season in the 1st Division when, in company with Andy Gray, our midfield continually outplayed high-ranking opponents, so that the Palace reached the top three places before Christmas, and Geoff himself was honoured with an England B cap in an international in Algeria.
Typical of Geoff's talent was the opening goal he scored to set us on the way to a Wembley victory over Everton in the Zenith Data Systems Cup Final in April 1991, cleaving his way though The Toffees' defence to head home from a corner and, perhaps partly because of Palace's and Geoff's success at Wembley, he was awarded his first full International cap when England travelled to Turkey for the European Nations Championship tie on May Day 1991.
In the light of this catalogue of achievements it was almost inevitable that Geoff should gain his second Player of the Year award from out discerning supporters, while the fact that he earned it in Palace's most successful season of all time is a clear demonstration of both his immense value and huge contribution to our club.
Confirmation of this was to be found in Geoff's continued success in the full England international side when he appeared in Graham Taylor's starting line-up for both the post-season matches at Wembley and then distinguished himself in all four games on the Australasian tour.
TURNER, Billy
302 appearances
281 Football League
21 FA Cup
Billy Turner signed for Crystal Palace from Bromsgrove in the summer of 1925 with a reputation as a skilled but tough little inside-forward.
He came into the Palace side at the start of 1925–26 and, injuries or illness apart, was a fixture there for the next eleven seasons, so that he is still within our top eight all-time appearances.
Billy was not a great goalscorer, but everyone who saw him play for the Palace is agreed that he helped to make hundreds of them for us.
There was no doubt that right-winger Albert Harry played much better with Billy there beside him and, under Turner's neat and shrewd direction, our forwards became quite devastating.
Billy became known to Palace fans as ‘Rubber’ and certainly his resilience and adaptability were an unusual feature of the game of those pre-war days, for later in his career he played in the wing-half positions and then, towards the end, as a full-back.
The fact is that, in an age when players were never encouraged or expected to be adaptable, the only positions that Billy did not fill for us at one time or another were those of goalkeeper, centre-forward and centre-half.
Billy was one of those players whose consistency improved as his career progressed.
But it was not just long service that endeared him to Palace fans, for Billy was an enthusiastic player, full of pep and fight, with the ‘never say die’ attitude that supporters love to see.
He was not a showman or flamboyant: he simply won the hearts of the Palace clientele with his whole-hearted and full-blooded displays.
Perhaps the most fitting tribute to Billy Turner came from a former Palace Manager, Jack Tresadern.
He was asked by a pressman one day which position he considered to be Billy Turner's best.
To which Mr Tresadern replied ‘Everywhere!
He's 100% wherever you play him!‘
Billy Turner's Palace Career
WALKER, George
111 appearances
102 Football League
9 FA Cup
George Walker, a tall, well-built centre-half, was a Scottish International with 29 caps who joined the Palace from Notts County early in the summer of 1936 for a fee of £500.
George made 41 splendid appearances in his first season with us (including the first of three consecutive l -0 wins he helped us to gain at Meadow Lane, the ground of his former club) and took over the club captaincy from Fred Dawes in November.
This was at Fred's suggestion and with the acclaim of all the players, and tells something of the charisma of the man
George was a first-rate skipper and a masterful centre-half.
He was a fine supplier of telling, passes to his forwards while his confidence and authority were magnificent.
His career with us ended abruptly when he incurred a nasty knee injury in the game at Watford in the last day of 1938 and was unable to play again that season, so that there are still fans at Selhurst Park who will tell you that that loss cost Palace the single promotion place to Division
Two for 1938–39, when we finished as runners-up to Newport County.
WALL, Peter
167+10 Football League
15 FA Cup
208 appearances
15+1 FL Cup
Peter Wall was a fast and clever full-back whom Manager Bert Head brought to Selhurst Park to add proven 1st Division quality to Palace's defence in the summer of 1970, in an attempt to avoid further embarrassment for the club in Division One.
For two seasons Peter thoroughly demonstrated his value for us in pretty testing circumstances.
An intelligent player, who read the game well, Peter was a considerable asset in the top flight but, in only the third match of 1972–73, he had the misfortune to break his leg in a tackle with his former Liverpool team-mate Tommy Smith, and it was a year or more before he was really able to play properly again, and that represented a real loss to the club.
Peter overcame this adversity in fine style and his later career with us was highlighted by his regular appearances throughout 1975–76, in which he played in all eight Cup ties in Palace's great run to the FA Cup semi-final, and then the following season, when he was captain at times after the loss of Ian Evans.
WALSH, Ian
133 appearances
101+16 Football League
11 FA Cup
2+3 FL Cup
Ian was a bright young striker who, after helping the Palace Juniors win the FA Youth Cup in 1977, forced his way into the League side and became a key member of our 1979 2nd Division Championship line-ups, scoring several invaluable goals, including the first one in the decisive victory over Burnley which clinched the title in the final game of the season.
With The Eagles in  Division One, Ian became a regular choice for the full Welsh International squad and he is one of three Palace players to have gained 14 full caps for their country while with the club.
WHIBLEY, John
150 appearances
55 Southern League
91 Football League
4 FA Cup
John Whibley was a quiet lad from Sittingbourne in Kent.
He was tall and willowy, but he was a winger of quality who had deputised ably for Welsh International Bill Davies before the 1st World War and, when fully competitive soccer resumed in 1919, he was Manager Edmund Goodman's automatic choice at outside-left.
Whibley's effectiveness can be measured by the fact that he retained his position on the Palace flank while assisting us from Southern League also-rans to 3rd Division champions, and to a dignified place in Division Two.
John's slight built made him a tantalising opponent, but he had scorching pace and neat control, while also possessing the ability to cut inside and shoot powerfully for goal himself, so that he could always be relied upon to contribute several useful goals each season.
The Palace was Whibley's only League club and, when he left us at the end of 1922–23, he returned to his home town to play for Sittingbourne.
WHITTLE, Alan
122 appearances
103+5 Football League
10+1 FA Cup
3 FL Cup
Alan was a fast, tenacious and clever, blond striker who joined the Palace in October 1972 when Bert Head was desperately seeking scoring power to keep the Palace in the 1st Division.
Alan obliged with a debut goal in the 5–0 rout of Manchester United, one of the Palace matches which will live forever in the memories of those who saw us demolish the Old Trafford outfit.
Regrettably for the Palace, Alan found it difficult to adjust to 2nd and then 3rd Division football, where his undoubted skills were given short shrift by our opponents and, although he always gave of his best, he was equally always a heavily marked man.
WHITWORTH, George
118 appearances
111 Football League
7 FA Cup
George Whitworth was a brave, strong centre-forward from Wellingborough.
He had ‘guested’ for the Palace effectively during the 1st World War and proved his ability in the best possible way for Northampton Town against us in the two seasons immediately after it so, when Manager Edmund Goodman needed a duality centre-forward to replace Bert Menlove, who had moved to 1st Division Sheffield United in March 1922, he acted with decision and haste.
George made his Football League debut for the Palace up at Bury — he equalised for us before the break, hit the bar soon after the interval and then set up Ben Bateman for the winner.
Some debut!
It was after Frank Hoddinott joined us in 1923 that Palace fans (all too briefly) saw Whitworth at his best.
Now playing at inside-right, Whitworth was top scorer with 16 goals, but he also combined with Frank so effectively that we had a comfortable 2nd Division season, and then he headed our scoring chart again in 1924–25.
George moved to Sheffield to play for The Wednesday in the summer of 1925 but his 48 goals for us in the higher divisions, scored generally when we were far from being a great side, were easily our best tally in the period 1921–5 and have only ever been bettered by Mark Bright and Ian Wright.
WILDE, Jimmy
293 appearances
270 Football League
23 FA Cup
‘Jimmy’(his real name was William Charles) Wilde was a Palace first-team regular for eight full seasons from 1928–29 and club captain for six of them.
Tall, slim, elegant, and totally dominating at centre-half; Jimmy joined the Palace on 2 October 1928 and for his debut was plunged into the testing FA Cup-tie against the Southern League (Eastern Section) Champions, Kettering Town whose centre-forward had already gained quite a reputation — one Peter Simpson, no less!
But Jimmy played Peter in immaculate style; the Palace went through 2–0 and Jimmy had earmarked that centre-half spot for his own.
The Palace immediately embarked on a 17 match unbeaten run in Division 3 South (never since improved upon in a single season) and from mid-table became possible even likely, champions.
Unfortunately, Jimmy and his colleagues were pipped for the single promotion place by Charlton Athletic on goal average alone, in the most exciting finish to a 3rd Division South season in the history of our club, but it is perfectly possible to argue that, had Jimmy Wilde become available to Palace just one or two matches earlier, Palace would have crowned his first season with us with success.
After his fine first season, Wilde continued to make a pleasing and positive impact on the 3rd Division scene.
He became recognised as one of the most accomplished half-backs in the Division and his displays won him the approval of the fans on many grounds besides our own.
He usually appeared at centre-half but, when the management or playing policy required it, he could and did produce constructive, driving performances in both the wing-half berths.
After Jimmy ceased to be a first-team player he continued with the club, playing in the Reserves for a couple of seasons.
This was to prove of considerable value to the Palace, because there was a young lad there who  benefited greatly from the nurturing that an experienced campaigner like Jimmy Wilde could provide, before being eventually transferred to a 1st Division club for a record fee — Arthur Hudgell.
Jimmy Wilde — one of the great unsung heroes of Crystal Palace, until today!
WILLIAMS, J.W. or ‘Ginger’
149 appearances
142 Southern League
7 FA Cup
James Williams was a stocky, well-built young Welshman who could fill any forward position but was at his best at inside-right or centre-forward.
He came to the Palace from Birmingham City in the summer of 1909 and played so well for us that, by the spring of 1912, he had earned two Welsh International caps, when he partnered the legendary Welsh wingers, Billy Meredith and Ted Vizard.
Williams soon became a great favourite with the Palace crowd, who christened him ‘Ginger’, although some of the local press gave him another nickname —‘The Palace Terrier’.
This described him aptly for us: he was an eager, neat and busy little footballer who possessed a snappy tackle and plenty of enthusiasm and determination — just the sort of fellow that a successful side needs.
The Palace Handbook, rather more portentously, says of ‘Ginger’ that ‘activity is the keynote of his policy on the football field and he has developed effective footwork and combines well with a partner’.
That was real praise in the pre-1st World War days.
Ginger's greatest single claim to fame is that he set up a record for an inside-forward that has never been beaten at our club, when he scored five goals in the game against Southend at The Palace on 25 September 1909.
That was some going– but we would have a place for him in any Palace gallery even without it.
LEFT: Brian Wood; RIGHT: George Wood punches away from the head of Paul McGrath of Manchester United (0–1) during exciting goalmouth action in the League Cup-tie here at Selhurst Park on 24 September 1985.
WOOD, Brian
142+1 Football League
5 FA Cup
152 appearances
4 FL Cup
Brian Wood was the strong, solid, ever-dependable central defender who made a tremendous contribution to Palace's promotion to Division Two under Dick Graham in 1963–64, but who then had the misfortune to suffer a badly broken leg in a third round FA Cup-tie in January 1965, from which he never fully recovered while with us.
It was Dick Graham who paired Brian with Alan Stephenson to form probably the earliest and certainly one of the most effective central defensive partnerships at the Palace.
WOOD, George
192 Football League
221 appearances
17 FL Cup
3 FM Cup
Scottish International George Wood joined the Palace in the summer of 1983 from Arsenal, with a reputation as a fine goalkeeper and quickly demonstrated his class and skill.
George was ever-present for nearly three seasons, became only our second post-war goalkeeper to put together a run of 100 consecutive League games (John Jackson was the first), while his hundred appearances straight from his debut was the first achieved by a Palace player for over a quarter of a century.
He was not simply a fine goalkeeper, an imposing figure between the posts and a great club man — he was also exceptionally brave.
Following a nasty knee injury against Shrewsbury in November 1984, when he was carried from the field with his leg cut to the bone, George played again, with massive strapping and padding the following Saturday, and in all the ensuing games, in considerable pain and in spite of his injury.
A top-class goalkeeper is expected to be both courageous and consistent.
George Wood, the gentle Scotsman in the Palace goal, provided full measure of both.
WOODGER, George
176 appearances
160 Southern League
16 FA Cup
George Woodger, an inside or centre-forward of the highest quality, played for the Palace in our earliest years and quickly became the first Palace ‘superstar’— and that in an age when today's publicity was unthinkable.
George was a local boy from Croydon, and that in itself was a rarity, for virtually all the Palace staff in our first few seasons were professionals from the north of England, whom manager Jack Robson had brought with him from Middlesbrough.
Woodger made his Palace debut on 1 November 1905 at Swindon in a United League game, helped us to a 6–1 win and scored two goals.
He soon became a permanent fixture in our Southern and United League teams and his delicate ball-playing skills rapidly earned him the quaint nickname ‘Lady’, and a special place in the affections of Palace supporters.
Upon the Palace being accepted into the 1st Division of the Southern League, Woodger continued to progress as a valuable goalscorer, as well as developing and displaying a full range of skills.
His best season with the Palace was undoubtedly 1907–08, during which he staked his claim for a full England cap and was England's reserve against Scotland.
Sadly for us, George found it necessary to reach the top via a Football League club and he moved to Oldham in September 1910, for a fee variously quoted as between £450 and £800, in order to gain his England recognition.
WOODRUFF, Bobby
139 appearances
123+2 Football League
4 FA Cup
9+1 FL Cup
Bobby rejoined his former Swindon boss, Bert head, at Selhurst Park and became a prominent member of Palace's sides in the late 1960s.
His chart of appearances shows that he made full appearances for two seasons after joining us and only a broken collar-bone prevented him from making an even more impressive contribution towards our promotion to Division One in 1969–70.
Bobby had an excellent goalscoring record with the Palace and his 18 League goals in both 1966–67 and 1967–68 were not approached in the top divisions by a Palace player for fully twenty years.
Bobby was a magnificent header of the ball and graceful too, so that many of his goals were spectacular, picturesque affairs, which stand in the memory to this day, while he also possessed a prodigious long-throw, which the Palace exploited most successfully and was the League's prototype for this tactical ploy.
WRIGHT, Ian
269 appearances
202+19 Football League
9+2 FA Cup
19 FL Cup
15+3 FM Cup
Mercurial striker Ian Wright joined The Eagles from Greenwich Borough in 1 985 and quickly made his mark with us as a highly effective ‘super-sub’ in his first season, scoring nine times to finish as Palace's second-highest scorer with Phil Barber.
When Mark Bright arrived on the Palace scene the following year the duo soon established a marvellously successful striking twosome and it was largely their goals which took the club to the promotion play-offs and a return to Division One in 1989.
Ian's 27 goals that season represent the club record in the higher divisions of the Football League, while his 87 (correct to the end of 1990–91) is also a best in Divisions One and Two in the Palace club history and, towards the end of February 1991, he became our most prolific post-war marksman, ahead of Johnny Byrne.
A twice-cracked shin-bone reduced Ian's initial impact on his bow in the First Division, although he completely proved his worth among that august company and was called up for England B duty in December 1989, before the injuries were sustained, but no one, friend or foe alike, will ever forget his dramatic appearance, again as a ‘super-sub’, in the FA Cup Final of 1990.
Ian equalised for the Palace a few minutes after coming on to the field, then put us ahead in extra-time for one of the most telling substitutions in the annals of the great competition
Last season Ian gained full International honours, completed his century of Palace goals to join the select group of just five men to have achieved that feat for us since the club's foundation back in 1905, and scored twice as Palace beat Everton 4–2 to win the Zenith Data Systems Cup Final at Wembley, while his virtuoso hat-trick, scored in just eighteen minutes during the second half of Palace's penultimate game of 1990–91, at Wimbledon, demonstrated in magnificent style that when Ian is on form there is no more dangerous or exciting player than he in the entire Football League.