

REGIONAL STUDIES
Gas Prospects in the Variscan Thrust Province of Southern England
J. C. M. Taylor
V. C. Illing and Partners, Cheam, England
SUMMARY: Recently published seismic and other investigations into the Late Carboniferous — Early Permian thrust and fold belts of the Appalachians, the Franco-German border, and to a limited degree so far of southern England, suggest that Variscan deformation is characterised by thin-skinned tectonics.
This provides a rationale for recognising flat-lying thrust slices and mapping them in the subsurface.
It also implies that the over-ridden rocks may not have been subjected to the excessive burial or the degree of disturbance once assumed.
In the Variscan province of southern England the existence of potential source and reservoir rocks can be expected on regional grounds.
Consideration of the likely burial and thermal history suggests there may be areas where gas if not liquid hydrocarbons from Palaeozoic source rocks could be preserved.
Further geochemical, geophysical and petrophysical investigation seems warranted
Introduction
It has been common practice for petroleum geologists to regard the pre-Permian rocks of England south of the so-called Variscan Front as economic basement.
The degree of disturbance and in some cases alteration of the rocks at outcrop in Cornwall, Devon and South Wales is not encouraging.
If the relatively steep dips of some of the exposed reverse faults were to continue deep into the crust, the region to the south could legitimately be regarded as unprospective.
There seemed little reason to expect conditions to be more favourable further east under Mesozoic cover; few wells enter the thrust sheets which are expected there, and none are deep enough to prove what lies beneath them.
A number of developments suggest that this pessimistic attitude should be re-examined.
In the past five to ten years general interest in the deep structure of fold belts has led to the publication of the results of a number of seismic reflection surveys from around the world which provide useful analogues.
Many interpretations emphasise the ‘thin-skinned’ tectonic style of the examples investigated.
Hydrocarbon exploration in overthrust belts is encouraged by these results because the highly disturbed and sometimes metamorphosed rocks of the near-surface have been shown to overlie extensive areas of flat-lying and relatively undisturbed strata, separated by a fundamental detachment zone which is commonly at a depth of only a few kilometres.
The structural style, thermal history, and pressure gradients in these belts can be favourable to generation, trapping, and retention of hydrocarbons (Gries 1983; Angevine and Turcotte 1983).
Recent advances in knowledge of thrust belts based on seismic and drilling have been made easier to apply to frontier areas by published descriptions of typical geometries, improved understanding of the mechanisms involved, and the establishment of standard terminology (see, for instance: Hossack 1979; Berger and Johnson 1982; Butler 1982; Boyer and Elliot 1982).
The adaptation of similar ideas to extensional regimes (Wernicke and Burchfield 1982; Gibbs 1983, and this volume) may prove particularly fruitful in unravelling the hidden structure of southern England.
Warples' (1980) adaptation of the Lopatin (1971) method of calculating source rock maturity, though open to theoretical objections, gives results which in many cases accord well with observed hydrocarbon occurrences, and has provided the petroleum geologist with a ready rule-of-thumb means of taking the time factor into account.
This approach has been usefully extended to investigate the disturbance of the palaeogeothermal gradient caused by superimposing one rock slab onto another during overthrusting (Edman and Surdam 1984; Furlong and Edman 1984).
The hydrocarbon prospects of the Variscan thrust belt in southern England can be examined from two angles: by analogy with results in the better explored lateral equivalents of the belt on the Continent and more particularly in eastern North America, and by an attempt to reconstruct the geometry and burial history of the pre-Permian rocks in the area of interest  from the limited local clues available.
The purpose of this paper is to use published information to follow up these lines.
FIG. 1.
Appalachian-Variscan province resorted to post-orogenic position, showing locations of deep wells with production in U.S.A., with significant gas shows in France and Belgium.
Exploration History
Eastern North America
The essential unity of the stratigraphy and tectonics of the Palaeozoic on opposite sides of the North Atlantic was pointed out by Bailey (1929), and developed in two important papers by Waterschoot van der Gracht in 1938 (a and b) which anticipated many of the conclusions of plate tectonics, and charted the course of the Variscan Front under southern Britain and Ireland.
The relationships between the Variscides of Europe and the Appalachians of North America — and indeed between parts of the Appalachian province itself — are still a subject for controversy at a detailed level (see Dewey 1982; Rast 1984; also several papers in Hutton and Sanderson 1984), but it seems that useful, if cautious, parallels can be drawn between the partly concealed Variscides of Europe (including southern England) and the well exposed and much studied southern Appalachians (Fig. 1).
In the southern Appalachians, Cambrian to Devonian sediments were crumpled and thrust northwestwards over Carboniferous and older strata at the end of Carboniferous time to form the Plateaus and Valley and Ridge provinces.
Southeast of this elongated zone these sediments had already been overthrust by Precambrian and Palaeozoic igneous and metamorphic rocks of the Blue Ridge and Piedmont provinces.
The notion that the surface thrusts might flatten at depth was voiced long ago (Hayes 1891), and received support from Rich (1934), Rodgers (1949) who introduced the term ‘thin-skinned’— and others, and also as time went on from drilling in the Valley and Ridge province, where roughly 1000 mostly shallow wells have been drilled.
The tectonic style of the Valley and Ridge province, involving rootless folds and a master decollement near the sediment/basement contact, was described in detail by Harris and Milici (1977), who also discussed the implications for hydrocarbon exploration.
They emphasised that the pattern of Conodont Colour Index (CAI) values determined by Epstein, Epstein, and Harris (1976) show that the observed thermal maturity developed before thrusting, which placed more thermally mature rocks over less mature strata.
The thin-skinned model was confirmed two years later for the adjacent Blue Ridge and Piedmont provinces by the publication of the results of the COCORP seismic profiles (Cook et al .
1979; Harris and Bayer 1979).
These showed that the crystalline rocks comprise an allochthonous sheet generally 6–15 km thick, pushed at least 260 km west over Palaeozoic sediments which are themselves 1–5 km thick.
Seismic confirmation has since been extended to other areas (Cook et al.1981; Iverson and Smithson 1983; Brown et al.1983).
Stimulated, perhaps, by previous exploration successes in the much younger overthrust region of the Canadian Rocky Mountains, these results at first led to over-sanguine hopes about the hydrocarbon possibilities of the central and  southern Appalachians as a whole.
Ellwood et al.(1980), however, argued that when the maximum depth of burial (estimated at 12 km) and age are taken into account, the sediments underlying the Piedmont, though not as altered as the surface rocks, are likely to have been raised to the greenschist phase of metamorphism and so presumably have little remaining hydrocarbon potential.
This nevertheless leaves the concealed area perceived to be prospective roughly double that formerly thought to be the case (Harris et al.1981).
Exploration interest was boosted in 1979 by the results of one of the first deep wells drilled east of the Appalachian Front in West Virginia (Fig. 1).
Columbia Gas Transmission Corporation's Mastellar Coal No. 2 tested gas at 88 million cu ft/day (2.5 million cu m/day) from the Devonian Oriskany Formation below 8500 ft (2600 m)(Patchen et al.1980).
The discovery well a mile away had tested at only 9.7 million cu ft/day (275 thousand cu m/day), and this result proved to be significantly higher than most later discoveries.
About a dozen other tests have been reported, mainly in West Virginia, but also in Pennsylvania, Virginia, and Tennessee.
They have shown average production rates of only about 2.5 million cu ft/day (70 thousand cu m/day) each.
Poor permeability seems to be the main problem.
Four of these wells have been in the foreland, the remainder in the overlying thrust sheets, generally within about 50 km of the Appalachian Front.
CAI values in this zone fall in the range 1.5 to 5.
So far drilling depths have been moderate, between about 4000 (1200 m) and 11000 ft (3350 m).
The Oriskany has been the commonest producing formation, and few wells have tested the Cambrian and Ordovician section where porosity associated with unconformities may be significant.
Possible source rocks include various Devonian shales, a thin black shale in the Silurian Tuscarora Formation, and the Ordovician Martinsburg and Edinburg Formations.
Thus, although the bonanza expected by some has not yet materialised, exploration has far from exhausted the possibilities, and the results have at least demonstrated beyond question that gas accumulated and survived in producible quantities in the Eastern Overthrust Belt, despite the disturbed condition of the strata and the passage of time.
A number of tests to 10000 ft (3000 m) or more are currently drilling or planned in West Virginia and Pennsylvania.
Western Europe
Exploration of the Variscan thrust province in Belgium, southern Germany, and northern France has also been taking place, though on a much smaller scale than in North America, and so far without commercial success.
Massa and Oudin (1980) give an interpretation of the stratigraphical, geochemical, and seismic data in Northern France and Belgium made available by changes in legislation.
Exploration in the region south of the Brabant Massif in Belgium has been summarised by Bless, Bouckaert, and Paproth (1982).
Variscan tectonics on both sides of the Atlantic have recently been discussed in Hutton and Sanderson (1984); for a more general introduction to the geology of Western Europe see Ziegler (1981).
FIG. 2.
Generalised depths to prominent seismic event in southern England, Wales, and part of Western Europe; possibly the Variscan sole thrust zone.
Compiled from the following sources: South Wales and parts of Bristol Channel — Brooks et al.(1983); Devon and Cornwall — Brooks et al.(1984); western central southern England — Chadwick et al.(1983); Franco-Belgian and southern German borders — Meissner et al.(1981).
South of the Brabant Massif the existence of workable Upper Carboniferous coals beneath deformed Devonian rocks has long been known from mines and boreholes through the Faille du Midi or Midi Overthrust, the major thrust-fault complex of the Variscan Front.
Interest in the implications of this increased in the 1960s, with the result that seismic and drilling have since demonstrated the continuation of the thrust with shallow dips well to the south of its outcrop.
The subsurface form of the thrust zone has now been traced eastwards to the northern Rhenish Massif of Germany where it was described by Meissner, Bartelsen, and Murawski (1981) as a strong reflector 3.4 km deep, dipping slightly to the south-southeast (Fig. 2).
These investigations have shown that the tectonic style is thin-skinned.
Reflections from the underlying sediments, which range in age from Cambrian to Westphalian, suggest they are more or less flat-lying though faulted.
No commercial finds of hydrocarbons have been reported, but gas shows were noted by Massa and Oudin (1980) from Devonian carbonates in four wells.
One of these (Jeumont-1 near the Franco-Belgian border) also had gas shows in the Dinantian, Namurian, and Westphalian below the Faille du Midi.
In the same paper the authors summarise geochemical studies which suggest that the younger Westphalian beds are at the wet gas stage of maturity, but that the Westphalian A, the Namurian, the Dinantian, and the Devonian are all at the dry gas stage.
Southern England
The chances of finding commercial hydrocarbons in the Variscan thrust province of southern England hinge mainly on the question of maturity, with over-maturity the chief fear.
Further investigation is, however, encouraged by the pattern of coal ranks in coalfields just to the north of the Variscan Front, as shown for instance by National Coal Board maps (Anon 1960) and summarised on Fig. 4.
Attention has hitherto tended to concentrate on the significance of the higher ranks, for both the Kent and South Wales coalfields show successive zones progressing to anthracite grade.
Yet it is notable that in South Wales the highest ranks are in the northwest, away from the Variscan hinterland.
The reasons for this pattern have been the subject of long and sometimes acrimonious debate (see Trotter 1949; Trotter 1950; Jones, 1951; Wellman 1950).
More recently Gill, Khalaf, and Massoud (1979) provided support for the stance of Jones and Wellman, deducing that the observed increase in rank up to the medium-volatile stage could be adequately explained as the thermal result of former depth of burial; the higher ranks, they argued, require the additional factor of above-average palaeogeothermal gradients in the area concerned.
Leaving aside the unresolved problem that this raises, the significant fact from the point of view of the present discussion is that bituminous coals with ranks down to medium volatile grade occur in South Wales and Kent, and as low as high volatile grade in South Wales and Somerset immediately to the north of the Variscan Front, and appear to be disappearing beneath it.
The implication is that some Upper Carboniferous rocks of the foreland are still in the oil window, and that even if fairly high regional palaeogeothermal gradients are assumed, the gas preservation limit is likely to be several kilometres deep where the high-volatile coals occur.
Whether these conditions should be expected to alter dramatically south of the Front depends on the tectonic style of Variscan deformation in that area.
Structural Overview Southern England
Tectonic style and depth of Variscan thrusts in England
After decades of speculation, the existence of a major thrust fault probably marking the concealed Variscan Front under the Mesozoic rocks of southern England was finally demonstrated by the IGS (now BGS) five years ago (Kenolty et al.1981).
Two intersecting lines of seismic were recorded to 12 sec TWT, the longer north-south line running from the Devizes borehole to a point 10 miles west of Swindon.
The interpreted section shows a southeasterly-dipping fault zone 3 km deep between Chippenham and Melksham, flattening slightly as it passes below Devizes at a depth of about 7 km.
Reflection quality to the south of the thrust is poor, but disappearing southward beneath it is a series of relatively gently dipping, normally faulted reflections, interpreted by Kenolty et al.,as Cambrian to Precambrian sediments or volcanics, resting on crystalline Precambrian basement at depths of 5 to 13 km.
The thrust plane is on strike with the outcropping Mendip folds which are overthrust to the north.
These results were later integrated by Chadwick, Kenolty and Whittaker (1983) with further reflection seismic surveys extending southwards into Dorset, and were interpreted as showing a fundamental decollement descending to about 14 km in the south.
Shackleton, Ries, and Coward (1982) made estimates of the depth of the main Variscan decollement in southwestern England based on cleavage attitudes and shortening, and concluded that a thin-skinned model was appropriate and that the granites are rootless.
As a result of remapping the area between the Bodmin and Dartmoor granites Isaac, Turner, and Stewart (1982) deduced ‘extremely thin-skinned thrust and ‘nappe tectonics’.
The views of Shackleton et al.,(op. cit. )were supported by Edwards (1984) on the basis of geophysical evidence.
Brooks, Doudy, and Al-Rawi (1984) published the results of seismic refraction/wide angle reflection experiments in southwest England which point to the presence of a mid-crustal reflector dipping gently southwards at depths of 10–15 km.
This appears to  coincide with the base of the granite batholith and may represent the basal Variscan thrust.
Thus the evidence so far available, though far from complete, supports the hypothesis that Variscan tectonics under parts of southern England are of the thin-skinned variety.
The scattered seismic observations are summarised on Fig. 2 on the assumption that they do in fact record the same fundamental detachment zone.
A significant difference in dip is apparent between the recorded areas in England and the Franco-German area.
If real, this may represent differences in the depth of pre-Mesozoic erosion or a real change in tectonic style.
Uncertainty about the situation under eastern and central southern England will remain until further data are released, but at present it seems unlikely that the Variscan sole under much of this region will be deeper than 10–15 km.
Nevertheless, assuming a practical drilling depth limit of around 6 km, which is also about the greatest depth at which economic gas could reasonably be expected to survive even assuming conservative palaeogeothermal gradients (as discussed later), it is clear that exploration is likely to be confined to the hanging wall of the thrust system for all except a narrow zone adjacent to the Variscan Front.
Tracing the concealed thrust sheet boundaries
Ideas relating the folds and faults expressed in the Mesozoic cover of southern England to the underlying basement structure go back at least as far as Godwin-Austen (1856), but have gradually become more firmly based.
In 1951 Arkell drew attention to the close correspondence between surface structures and gravity and aeromagnetic anomalies, and postulated rejuvenation of Variscan thrusts to explain Tertiary structures (Falcon and Tarrant 1951).
The relationship of the large Tertiary Purbeck anticline to a major controlling fault beneath its northern flank was demonstrated by Colter and Havard (1981) with data from the Wytch Farm oilfield in Dorset.
With variations, this appears to be a model applicable to most of the prominent east-west trending Tertiary anticlines in southern England, as discussed by Stoneley (1982), who linked their origin to plate tectonic events in the North Atlantic region.
Basin development associated with north-south extension was initiated with Permo-Triassic rifting and continued at intervals through the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous.
Listric faults developed over suitably oriented lines of crustal weakness, giving rise to elongated zones of thickened sediment on their downthrown (generally southern) sides.
Reversal of the stress field at the end of the Cretaceous and culminating in the Miocene led to crustal shortening accommodated on the same listric faults, accentuating existing rollover anticlines and causing inversion.
The mechanism is summarised in cartoon form in Fig. 3.
FIG. 3.
Cartoons illustrating broad outline of mechanism for producing asymmetric surface fold of style common in southern England cover rocks, by Mesozoic extension followed by Tertiary compression, both on same Variscan thrust plane in rigid basement.
A dextral strike-slip component may well be important, being suggested, for instance, by displacements along the Solent-Rouen-Sennely line, and by the en-echelon arrangement of many of the surface structures in southern England.
It is not unreasonable to suppose that the lines of crustal weakness invoked by Stoneley (1982) were, as Arkell (1951) thought, mainly of Variscan origin, owing to the similarity of stress direction.
Thus a map of the main lines of Cretaceous Tertiary folds may, in effect, be a crude map of the pre-Permian subcrop of Variscan thrust planes.
The relationship is not, however, straightforward.
Chadwick et al .
(1983) drew three alternative models to explain the relationship between Mesozoic growth faults and basement thrusts, based on reflection seismic sections through the Mere and Vale of Pewsey faults.
They suggest that the principal growth fault in the Mesozoic may simply propagate from the subcrop of the thrust and extend towards the surface at a steeper angle, as illustrated by the Mere Fault (see also Lake 1975, in connection with the structure of the Weald).
In the case of the Vale of Pewsey Fault, however, only minor faulting occurs in the Mesozoic above the subcrop of the thrust, the main growth fault appearing several kilometres to the south, perhaps controlled either by a splay thrust in the hanging wall or by local steepening of the sole  thrust at this point.
A more elaborate discussion of such structures has appeared at the time of writing (Chadwick 1985 a and b).
The ambiguity in the relationship between surface structure and basement fault in the case of the Hog's Back monocline has been discussed by Smalley and Westbrook (1982).
In general, then, a number of geometries are possible; as a result the most prominent surface structures may occur above or some distance to either the north or south of the subcropping basement thrust plane.
Differences are presumably related to such factors as the angle of dip of the basement fault at its subcrop, the presence of splay faults, and the competence of both the basement and the Mesozoic sequence.
Ridd (1973) showed from evidence obtained by surface mapping and shallow drilling that in the Poxwell anticline in Dorset the surface structure was offset to the north by accommodation in the incompetent Upper Jurassic clays; this may apply to other examples.
To locate accurately the edges of Variscan thrust sheets where they are concealed, therefore, is likely to require high quality seismic and other unpublished subsurface data.
Density contrasts at intermediate depths would be expected to occur at footwall ramps, suggesting that detailed gravity studies might be rewarding.
For the purposes of the present paper the general position of the boundaries has been deduced from the linear arrangement of well known surface structures, some of which are recognisable on satellite images, and guided by the pattern of published gravity and aeromagnetic maps, also taking into account the age and character of the pre-Permian rocks penetrated in the relatively few deep boreholes from which data are publicly available.
Maps given in Whittaker (1985) proved useful in arbitrating certain difficult choices.
FIG 4.
Map of southern England showing possible boundaries between major thrust sheets in basement and their relationship to named surface structures.
Compiled from various sources — see text.
Composition of sheets suggested by the following open-file deep wells: For older shafts and boreholes in and around Kent coalfield and boreholes on London Platform see Wills (1973).
Nature, boundaries, and character of successive thrust sheets in southern England
Fig. 4 summarises the provisional results of this operation, linking the concealed thrust sheets with the better known units at outcrop in the West Country and South Wales.
The boundaries shown are intended to represent broad zones with an uncertainty of up to 10 km or so, and the whole map invites testing by further data.
At outcrop from Cornwall to Somerset and  South Wales it is possible to distinguish five zones characterised by successive northward decreases in their degree of metamorphism and deformation, and in their deformation ages.
They are separated by major fault zones, in most cases now demonstrated to be thrusts, which have on average an east-west trend.
For details the reader is referred to papers by Dodson and Rex (1971), Isaac, Turner and Stewart (1982), Shackleton, Ries and Coward (1982), Hancock, Dunne and Tringham (1983), Owen and Weaver (1983), Kellaway and Hancock (1983), Hobson and Sanderson (1983), Brooks, Mechie, and Llewellyn (1983), Coward and Smallwood (1984), Leveridge, Holder and Day (1984), and Chapman, Fry, and Heavey (1984).
In the extreme south, the first zone includes the Lizard ophiolites with radiometric dates close to 400 Ma (early Devonian).
It is thrust northwards over a zone including metasediments with K-Ar dates of 365–345 Ma (Late Devonian or Early Carboniferous).
North of the Start and Dodman Point thrusts and south of the Rusey fault zone which cuts the Cornish Atlantic coast just north of Tintagel, is a complexly overthrust zone of Devonian rocks showing intense strike-slip cleavage.
K-Ar mica crystallisation ages of 340 to 320 Ma (Early Carboniferous) are characteristic.
Into this zone were later injected the West of England granites, dated at about 280 Ma (Early Permian).
According to Isaac et al.(1982) the northerly dip on the Rusey and other thrusts in this zone is due to postorogenic tilting, perhaps related to the injection of the granites.
Next lies the mid-Devon synclinorium consisting of strongly folded Devonian and Carboniferous Culm Measures typified by slaty cleavage, with K-Ar deformation ages of 290–270 Ma (Late Carboniferous-Early Permian).
Further north, between the Cannington thrust and the Variscan Front, is a zone of folded but apparently quite unmetamorphosed ranks represented prominently at outcrop by the Carboniferous Limestone.
The age of deformation is dated by relationships in the Mendips as post Early Stephanian.
These five zones, indicated on Fig. 4., are interpreted as major thrust sheets and designated for convenience here by arbitrary capital letters.
Following the usual convention they may be named after the thrust forming their leading (northerly) edges.
The Start-Dodman complex (P) strikes across the Channel towards the Cherbourg peninsula and neither it nor the Lizard sheet need concern us further.
The Rusey complex (Q) disappears beneath Permo-Triassic cover at the Exe valley; aeromagnetic trends suggest its leading edge may be responsible for the South Dorset — Isle of Wight disturbances further east.
Some support for this is given by the nature of the pre-Permian encountered in the Wytch Farm well X14 (Colter and Havard 1981), which consists of phyllites with micas dated at 357–337 Ma.
The Cannington Thrust zone can be plausibly extended eastwards under Mesozoic cover and along the inverted northern margin of the Vale of Wardour anticline.
Beyond Dean Hill the principal line is interpreted as being deflected southeastwards, continuing as the underlying cause of the Portsdown structure, crossing the Sussex coast east of the Middleton well.
Wells reaching the pre-Permian in Hampshire and Dorset follow the broad pattern seen at outcrop in Devon, with clastics of Devonian age at Cranborne, and Lower Carboniferous Culm at Seaborough and Nettlecombe.
The Variscan Front as conventionally plotted forms the leading edge of the next and most northerly major thrust sheet (S).
Originally used by Suess (1886), who visualised a sharp tectonic front marked by northward thrusting over a relatively undeformed foreland, the term ‘Variscan Front’ is ambiguous, having conflicting meanings for different authors in various areas.
In the Ardennes and northern France it is conventionally identified with the Grande Faille du Midi, which has other names further east, but is conveniently referred to collectively as the Midi Overthrust (Bless el al .
1982).
Variscan folding and thrusting can, however, be seen north of the Midi Overthrust, and the general view of workers in the U.K. is that here the Variscan Front cannot be identified with a single laterally-continuous thrust plane, though locally it may be (Hancock 1983).
This situation arises in part from variations in the depth of erosion which has intersected the overthrust complex at different zones in different areas.
Nevertheless, the concept of a belt in which the signs of Variscan compression rapidly die out northwards is, if neither scientifically correct nor consistent, at least a practical one and firmly entrenched, and it is in this general sense that the term is used in this paper.
The problem has recently been expounded with great clarity by Shackleton (1984).
In Dyfed (formerly Pembrokeshire) Hancock et al.(1983) locate the Variscan Front in a zone of conjugate folds and thrusts a few miles north of the Johnston Thrust.
The complex structures of the Gower Peninsula, and in particular the  Cefn Bryn and Bishopston thrusts, are generally thought to be the continuation of the Front south of the South Wales coalfield.
There are, however, a number of significant Variscan compressional and wrench features further north (see Owen and Weaver 1983, for a useful summary).
The suggestion of Trotter (1949) that the whole of the South Wales coalfield was underlain by a regional thrust plane, probably represented at surface by the Careg Cennen disturbance, was scornfully rejected by O. T. Jones and others in one of the Geological Society's historic controversies, but perhaps it deserves critical reconsideration in the light of recent ideas about deep crustal detachment zones.
East of Swansea Bay, folding in the Vale of Glamorgan is gentler and partly concealed by Mesozoic rocks.
The trend of the Variscan front is conventionally drawn to link smoothly across the Severn with the over-thrust Mendip pericline or the Farmborough Compression Zone several miles north.
The difficulty of choosing a unique line for the Front is again illustrated in this area, where two obliquely-striking reverse faults (the Avon Thrust and Ridgeway Thrust) are exposed further north in the area of partial Mesozoic cover and complex geology (Kellaway and Hancock 1983).
East of the Mendips the seismic published by Kenolty et al .
(1981) reaffirms the old view that a major concealed Variscan thrust controls the Vale of Pewsey anticline, and so by inference the Ham and Kingsclere anticlines.
Re-mapping by Lake and Shephard-Thorn (1985) has shown that the Hog's Back monocline and associated strike faults extend from Farnham to Dorking.
The authors attribute the structure to a major basement fault.
Geophysical and borehole evidence for regarding the structure as the surface expression of movements on a Variscan thrust plane developed at the southern margin of the London Platform (East Anglian — Brabant Massif) has been summarised by Smalley and Westbrook (1982).
From Dorking eastwards the course of the Variscan Front probably follows the southern edge of the London Platform to near Hythe on the Channel coast.
A prominent line of fault zones diverges to its south from Dorking through Penshurst, Biddenden, and Tenterden in Kent (Lake 1975), possibly linking across the channel with well-known Variscan thrusts in the Boulonnais.
The Front is generally considered to lie south of the Kent Coalfield, within which there is no evidence of thrusting, and to link with the Midi Overthrust south of Cap Griz Nez across the Channel (Wallace 1968, 1983).
However, it is worth noting that the London Basin is interrupted by a well-known series of uplifts stretching from the Thames Estuary to Windsor which it is difficult to account for without postulating a further line of basement dislocations, possibly Variscan in origin.
If, as seems likely, this line swings southwestwards at its western end towards the Farmborough Compression Zone, it may account for the otherwise puzzling discrepancy between the E.N.E.-W.S.W. strike of the basement thrust as seen on seismic (Chadwick et a/. 1983) and the E.-W. trend of the Vale of Pewsey.
The commonest pre-Permian formation encountered in boreholes in sheet S is the Carboniferous Limestone.
In the south, thick Stephanian or Westphalian clastics were encountered at Middleton-l.
Near the northern edge of the slice, older rocks have been proved — Ordovician at Esso's Strat A1, Silurian at Shalford, and Devonian at Brightling.
Cambrian shales are present beneath the Mesozoic at Shrewton.
It is assumed that the shallow water Lower Carboniferous carbonates uncomformably overlie a platform of these older rocks, which locally are intersected by the pre-Permian surface because of thrusting or uplift and erosion.
Hydrocarbon Habitat
Source Rocks
Geochemical work on outcrop and borehole samples is needed to assess the source potential and maturity of rocks expected in the zone of interest, but on the whole there seem good prospects of adequate sources, particularly for gas.
Black bituminous Silurian shales of oil source rock quality are well known and widespread on the Continent.
In the Boulonnais, Silurian shales have been described by Wallace (1968) as untectonised where they are overthrust by Devonian and Carboniferous rocks.
Clearly, their thermal maturity would be of great interest, as Silurian shales are also known to subcrop south of the Thames Estuary (Wills 1973).
In western central southern England thick Cambrian marine shales are expected (Wills 1978; Chadwick, Kenolty and Whittaker 1983).
At least the upper parts of this sequence could, by analogy with the Alum Shale of the Baltic, be considered worth investigation for possible oil source rocks.
The source potential and maturity of the 7000 ft of Cambrian shales at the Cooles Farm borehole have not been reported.
Possible Lower Palaeozoic sources will only be of interest where they have escaped premature maturation brought on by burial under thick Devonian cover, a factor very difficult to assess ahead of analytical work in areas where the Devonian has itself suffered erosion.
In the Devonian, the general palaeo-geographical pattern of east-west troughs and swells under southern England and the Continent appears favourable to the formation of source rocks in the deeper and more poorly ventilated basins.
The Upper Devonian Kate Brook Slate in the South Devon Basin, to name only one formation, is thought to have been deposited under anoxic conditions, being quite barren of fossils (Selwood and Durrance 1982), and there are considerable thicknesses of other dark shales and slates at outcrop.
Comparable rocks are to be expected under Mesozoic cover further east.
In the Dinantian rocks which appear to form a major part of the leading Variscan thrust slice, the source potential of the limestones and dolomites (which represent shallow water facies) is assumed on the whole to be relatively low.
The underlying Lower Limestone Shale is also interpreted as a shallow water sequence, but some beds are believed to have been laid down in poorly aerated conditions (George 1958) and may therefore contain source material.
Further south, deeper water conditions, and hence the possibility of preservation of organic matter, persisted from the Devonian into the Early Carboniferous.
During the Late Carboniferous the proliferation of plant growth on land not only provided coal seams but contributed abundant particulate and dissolved organic matter to the pro-delta and deeper marine areas.
Some layers in the turbiditic Upper Culm (e.g. the ‘Bideford Black’) will burn with difficulty (Thomas 1982).
Such organic-rich shales are likely to constitute a much more widespread potential source for hydrocarbons — probably mainly for gas and condensate — than the coals of the deltas which are restricted to the northern part of the region, although the possibility that isolated intermontane coal basins may have developed further south in the later Carboniferous cannot be excluded.
Burial history and organic maturation
To assess the state of organic maturity in the thrust province properly we need do know three main things: the geometry of the thrust sheets including the present thickness of rocks of different ages, the amount of pre-Mesozoic erosion, and past geothermal gradients.
None of these, in fact, can be determined satisfactorily from present evidence.
Nonetheless, some idea of the range of possibilities may be gained from the hypothetical burial curves shown on Fig. 5.
These are not intended to represent any specific location, but explore possible burial histories for an undeformed layer cake thrust sheet built up from the following thicknesses: 2.5 km of Cambrian (after Caledonian erosion — originally 2.75 km); 3 km of Devonian; 2 km of Lower Carboniferous; 2 km of Upper Carboniferous.
Variscan upthrust is assumed to have been 2 km and virtually instantaneous at the end of the Carboniferous; erosion of the same amount is assumed to have been complete before the Triassic.
The thickness of the Mesozoic is taken to be 1.3 km, with 0.3 km erosion during the Cenozoic.
Justification of assumptions
The thicknesses are rounded values suggested by the profiles given by Chadwick et al .
(1983), thought to be broadly applicable to the foreland and sheet S in western central southern England.
Early Palaeozoic thicknesses and erosion are arbitrary and illustrative only.
Cambro-Ordovician accumulation may well have been substantially greater, with corresponding erosion in mid-Ordovician or Devonian times.
Silurian strata may have been deposited, and removed during the Devonian.
Complexities within the Devonian have similarly been ignored for lack of evidence.
These factors could have great significance for the maturation of possible sources in the Lower Palaeozoic.
The internal geometry of sheet S is unknown.
However, imbricate fans with faults meeting the erosion surface at about 60° are common near the frontal margins of thrust belts (Boyer and Elliot, 1982), and this arrangement seems compatible with the seismic evidence presented by Chadwick et al.(1983).
The amount of uplift produced by thrusting and the rate of subsequent erosion are important and particularly hard to estimate.
The problem is fortunately minimised by concentrating attention on the leading thrust sheet, because at the thrust front itself the amount of displacement is by definition zero.
Shackleton et al.(1982) thought the thickness of Late Palaeozoic sediments eroded in the area of the West of England granites was of the order of 5  km.
Field evidence (D. J. Laming,pers. com.)suggests it may have been as little as 2 or 3 km.
The figure of 2 km assumed here for the area of interest further north is therefore more likely to be an over than an underestimate.
Calculations of worldwide erosion rates (e.g. Menard 1961; Holmes 1965; Gilluly, 1964; Watson 1984) range widely from under 10 m to an astonishing 1000 m per million years with a modal value of around 150 m.
Removal of 2000 m during the Permian would only require a rate of 53 m per million years.
Bottom-hole temperatures from wells in southern England suggest that the region has a present geothermal gradient close to the world average for cratonic areas of 25° C/km.
Past gradients seem unlikely to have fallen much lower than this for substantial periods of time.
They were, on the contrary, likely to have been appreciably higher — say 30° to perhaps 50° or more during periods of significant crustal extension such as the Permian, and at times during the Jurassic and Early Cretaceous.
Data for calculating the thermal history more objectively do not yet seem to be available (but see Chadwick 1985a).
However, it is felt that the adoption of a theoretical uniform gradient of 50° C/km for the whole of Phanerozoic time represents an extreme situation yielding maturity values unlikely to have been exceeded in practice.
An initial surface temperature of 10° C has been assumed in all cases.
In view of the magnitude of the unknowns and the relatively modest displacement assumed in sheet S, transient disturbances to the geothermal gradient due to overthrusting, leading to slightly lower maturities developing near the base of the hanging wall and higher ones near the top of the footwall, have been ignored.
Implications
Since in reality strata within the major thrust sheets are themselves faulted and folded there will be greater variations in maturity in rocks of a given age than is suggested by Fig. 5.
Because of the short duration of the increased overburden resulting from overthrusting, the effects on footwall maturity levels are not drastic.
In all cases shown, rocks near the base of the Palaeozoic would have passed the dry gas deathline even before the Variscan orogeny.
From the maturation angle, reservoirs within the Devonian section in the hanging wall could have preserved gas generated in older rocks during the Palaeozoic, though it would stand a poor chance of avoiding dispersal during either the Late Caledonian or Variscan orogenies.
If the geothermal gradient was as low as 25° C/km preservation of condensate and even oil would have been theoretically possible in parts of the hanging wall.
There seems a good chance that a range of hydrocarbons from oil to dry gas could have been generated (given suitable source material) from some parts of the Carboniferous sequence after the Variscan orogeny, both in the hanging and footwall; the range of possible depths is great enough to compensate for anticipated differences in temperature gradient.
It is worth speculating about conditions under the Weald, where Mesozoic burial before inversion may have amounted to about 3 km.
Significant amounts of gas may have been generated, and it would be interesting to know whether geochemical work has been done on the gases found in Jurassic reservoirs to see whether any Palaeozoic contributions are present.
Beneath the Bristol Channel where some 3.3 km of Triassic and Jurassic sediments were deposited, conditions for post-Variscan gas generation seem comparable.
Structures tested so far have lacked significant shows; according to Kamerling (1979) this may be because the formation of the traps was later then the main period of hydrocarbon generation.
In short, it appears that temperature/time relationships may not have been unfavourable for hydrocarbon generation and preservations in the Variscan foreland and at least the leading thrust sheet, warranting attention to the availability of source rocks, reservoir rocks, cap rocks, and structures.
Reservoir Rocks
Deep tests south of the Brabant Massif in France and Belgium have encountered porous conditions in dolomitised Frasnian  stromatoporoid /coral reefs, and in fissured Dinantian dolomites (Massa and Oudin 1980).
Since Middle Devonian shelf-edge reefs with stromataporoids and corals outcrop in Devon (House et al.1977), it is reasonable to expect these potential reservoirs to occur in the subsurface of the intervening tract.
As already discussed, there is evidence to suggest that Carboniferous Limestone in shelf facies occupies a large part of the area of interest under southern England.
Its shallow water formations include grainstones which must have had high primary porosity and permeability, and the sequence is also expected to contain  dolomites.
Though generally tight at outcrop today, these formations in the subsurface might not have been cemented if protected by early hydrocarbon migration.
The thermal history expected in thrust belts seems favourable from this point of view.
Deep erosion and weathering known to have occurred (for example the Mendip caves) during the Permo-Triassic do not favour preservation of early-generated hydrocarbons in the northern part of the belt, but further south beneath the Cannington-Wardour-Portsdown slice this objection need not apply.
If later generation was significant, the cavernous conditions in parts of the Carboniferous Limestone could provide remarkable reservoirs.
The importance of fracturing has been a common theme in writings on the reservoir problem of the Appalachian and Variscan thrust provinces.
Competent limestones in the allochthonous Devonian and Carboniferous section can be expected to have been fractured extensively where they were distorted in being forced up tectonic ramps.
Anhydrite in minor quantities has been reported at different Devonian horizons in two wells in France and Belgium, and in more substantial thickness in the Dinantian in Belgium (Massa and Oudin 1980); intriguing speculations have been made that halite might be present deeper in the Namur and Dinant basins.
No evaporites are known in the Devonian or Carboniferous in England south of the London Platform, but their presence in the subsurface cannot be discounted.
If deposited there, salt movement and solution-collapse could provide further possible fracturing mechanisms.
The Devonian contains two dominantly sandy series at outcrop in North Devon — the Pickwell Down Sandstone and the Hangman Sandstone Group — deposited in paralic environments on the southern fringes of the Old Red Sandstone continent.
Sedimentological details have been described by Tunbridge (1983), but the reservoir potential of these and other arenaceous beds requires further assessment.
Similar facies may be expected further east in the subsurface.
Other reservoir possibilities are offered by the great variety of sandstone facies of the Late Carboniferous deltas which prograded southwards across the Dinantian carbonate platform.
The turbidite sandstones further south, represented by the Bude and Crackington Formations in Devon, appear less promising.
In general, secondary porosity may be of greater importance than primary porosity in the deeper prospects.
The problem of seals
Perhaps the weakest part of the argument for the existence of commercial hydrocarbons (particularly gas) in the Variscan overthrust belt in southern England is the question of adequate caprock.
It is to be hoped that some of the numerous shales in the Devonian and Carboniferous sections may prove to have been sufficiently ductile to restrain escape over the long timespan involved, despite the degree of deformation to which they have been subjected.
Their sealing efficiency should be improved by increased depth.
It may be, however, that the thrust planes themselves are important in this regard.
There have been several attempts to explain the reasons for the strong seismic reflections from such zones.
One possibility is that platy minerals favoured in mylonite zones have lower seismic velocities than the country rocks and that this, coupled with their strong preferred orientation, favours reflection (Fountain, Hurich, and Smithson 1984).
The same alignment of mineral flakes could contribute to an efficient seal, provided the zone was thick enough.
An interesting alternative arises from the observations of Meissner et a/. (1981), who discuss the nature of the reflection from the Midi thrust zone.
They estimate its thickness at between 100 and 400 m, and suggest that all the observations are consistent with its having a low rather than a high velocity.
Pointing out the implications of high pore pressure and its importance in providing a lubricated detachment layer, they cite evidence from a recent earthquake in the thrust area that the zone is still (or rather again) seismically active in the same sense as in Variscan times.
An overpressured zone could represent an ideal seal (diffusion apart).
Assuming it exists and results from the current stress field, it may have persisted since the present northward drift of the African plate began, early in Tertiary time.
Before that, however, periods of extension during the Permian and Mesozoic would presumably have rendered this sealing mechanism inoperative.
The possibility of the presence of evaporites in the Devonian and Carboniferous has already been mentioned.
If present in significant thickness they could materially improve the chances of hydrocarbon retention in beds beneath them.
Whether or not hydrocarbon generation continued during the Mesozoic, losses from Palaeozoic reservoirs during this period could have been trapped at the post-Carboniferous unconformity, for example by the Lias shales in the Wealden area.
In the Somersetshire basin trapping in Permo-Triassic sands under Triassic halite is a possibility.
Traps
It is assumed that in the overthrust belt the existence of structural closures can be taken as axiomatic.
Whether they can be mapped seismically within or below thrust sheets is more of a problem, but it is one that the industry seems confident of defeating in other parts of the world.
Culminations of hanging wall complexes over footwall ramps appear to be promising sites for hydrocarbon accumulation, and are likely to have seismic, gravity, and magnetic expression.
Conclusion
This review suggests that the existence of economic accumulations of hydrocarbons in the Variscan thrust province of southern England is at least as likely as in its counterparts in Europe or in North America.
Considerable exploration effort in those areas has been felt by the industry to be worthwhile, and in the United States has already met with some commercial success.
In England the belt of greatest interest is concealed by Mesozoic cover.
This may increase the difficulties of investigation, but may also favour retention of hydrocarbons in some areas.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Many of the ideas in this paper were first presented in a confidential report to Ultramar Exploration Limited in 1983, and I am grateful to the company for approval to air them here.
My thanks are also due to my partners and staff for help in its preparation.
Apologies are due to many whose published contributions to Variscan problems have, for lack of space, not been explicitly acknowledged, and to those quoted but possibly misinterpreted!
POSTSCRIPT: Since writing this paper a reinterpretation of the geological section of central southern England in Chadwick et al.(1983) has been published by Williams and Brooks, together with discussion with the original authors.
Using section balancing, Williams and Brooks show that the seismic profiles illustrated by Chadwick et. al., can be redrawn in decidedly thin-skinned style, with a tectonic shortening of approximately 20%.
This approach, if valid, would enable estimates of the burial history of the Palaeozoic in this region to be considerably improved.
In the discussion, however, Chadwick et. al. , remain firmly in favour of a thick-skinned interpretation.
The true state of affairs is unlikely to be clear until more and better quality deep seismic data become available.
References
Palaeozoic Prospects on the Northern Flanks of the London-Brabant Massif
S. R. Tubb, A. Soulsby and S. R. Lawrence
Exploration Consultants Limited, Henley-on-Thames, Oxon, RG9 4PS
SUMMARY: Seismic data across the northern flank of the London-Brabant Massif, between the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, have highlighted some interesting exploration leads in the sub-Permian section.
Carboniferous sediments have been affected by low-amplitude Hercynian folding, Mesozoic rift faulting and Cretaceous inversion-related compression and fault re-activation.
These effects have created a variety of trap situations in potential Palaeozoic reservoir units.
In addition to early Permian Rotliegende sandstones, potential reservoirs are formed by late Carboniferous Barren Measures and Millstone Grit sandstones, Carboniferous Limestone carbonates, and basal or pre-Carboniferous clastics.
Also Carboniferous Limestone ‘reef’ developments have been tentatively identified along a paleo hinge-line.
A significant stratigraphic break is identified near the base of the Barren Measures in the late Carboniferous which has been designated the ‘Symon Unconformity’.
The unconformity and depositional patterns within the Barren Measures are explained by the effect of lateral heat flow on normal basin development in the late Carboniferous.
An analysis of well log data has demonstrated that Barren Measures' sandstones constitute a good reservoir objective.
Reservoir quality and sand thickness/frequency increase towards the flanks of the London-Brabant Massif.
Westphalian A and B coals subcrop the Symon Unconformity, and together with the Millstone Grit, onlap the Carboniferous Limestone surface on the flanks of the London-Brabant Massif.
The coals constitute a proven commercial gas source which is in direct contact with the recognised potential reservoirs.
Maturation studies, based on geochemical analysis, demonstrate that gas-generative maturity is largely dependent on Jurassic burial.
The source/migration/entrapment model suggests that conditions have been favourable for gas accumulation in Palaeozoic reservoirs contained within rift-related fault-blocks and more subtle stratigraphic traps.
Introduction
The data and concepts presented here have originated from work carried out by ECL during 1983 and 1984.
In 1983 ECL undertook a major integrated exploration study of offshore Netherlands utilising government-released well and seismic data.
In 1984 a similar study was completed in U.K. Quadrant 53 based on a non-exclusive seismic survey.
The regional offshore Netherlands study was subsequently updated during 1985 with further seismic related studies.
Improvements in seismic data quality have allowed an insight to be gained into the sub-Permian structure and stratigraphy which in turn has allowed the recognition of several potential Palaeozoic plays on the flanks of the London-Brabant Massif.
Figure 1 shows the area covered by this study on the southern edge of the Southern North Sea Basin, relative to known gas fields and discoveries.
This area has been subdivided into three broad geological provinces on the basis of Zechstein facies relationships.
The ‘Zechstein Basin’ contains thick halite sequences, the ‘Fringe Zechstein' is characterised by interbedded carbonates and anhydrites and the London-Brabant Massif is formed of pre-Carboniferous sediments and meta-sediments lying directly beneath Cretaceous strata.
For the purposes of this paper the flanks of the London-Brabant Massif are defined as the area between the ‘Fringe Zechstein' and the subcrop of the base of the Carboniferous section with the base of the Cretaceous.
The distribution of gas fields in the Southern North Sea is generally related to the subcrop of the sourcing Westphalian A and B Coal Measures to the basal Permian Rotliegende reservoir sandstones.
Fig. 2 shows the established petroleum geology in the Southern North Sea.
The most important reservoir beds are formed by the predominantly aeolian Rotliegende sandstones.
Other reservoirs are known in the Triassic Bunter and Hewett Sandstones and Permian Zechstein carbonates.
Coal Measures’ coals are the accepted gas source, the highest frequency of which occur in  the Westphalian A and B sequences of the Lower and Middle Coal Measures.
Higher level reservoirs are thought to be charged from the same source by migration through faults or fault contacts.
Seals are provided by Zechstein halite for Rotliegende reservoirs, and Triassic shales for Triassic reservoirs.
These petroleum exploration ‘parameters’ have been developed as a result of the exploration activities of the late 1960s.
Little exploration effort has been directed to reservoir objectives beneath the Permian even though the recognised source is in the Carboniferous.
Fig. 3 shows the drilling history and discovery record of the area.
All the major gas discoveries were made between 1965 and 1967 using seismic data similar to that shown in Fig. 4.
Note the general poor quality of the data at Base Permian level and beneath the Permian.
Note also the absence of migration, which was not a standard processing sequence at that time.
Factors such as the increase in gas prices, the existence of gas field infrastructure and the relatively shallow water depths, in a proven hydrocarbon bearing province, have generated a renewal of exploration interest in the Southern North Sea.
Seismic data shot in 1984 (see Fig. 5) have improved energy penetration and resolution which has resulted in better definition of the sub-Permian section.
For this reason the zone of exploration interest has been extended to the deeper section with potential reservoirs occurring in Carboniferous and pre-Carboniferous sediments (see Fig. 6).
FIG. 1.
Location Map.
Regional Structural Setting
The southern edge of the Southern North Sea Basin is structurally very complex due to the superimposition of Alpine inversion tectonics and Mesozoic rifting on original Palaeozoic basin geometry or mild Hercynian folding.
Fig. 7 shows the regional structural setting and the location of the structural profiles of Figs. 8, 9 and 10.
The regional structure is presented here in a greatly simplified manner.
It summarises  post-Carboniferous structural form although the London-Brabant Massif has acted as a positive structural feature at least from early Palaeozoic times.
The major tectonic influences on the preserved structural geometry are Jurassic/Cretaceous rift and wrench faulting (Cimmerian) and Cretaceous (Alpine) compression and inversion.
Four broad post-Carboniferous structural zones are recognised:
London-Brabant Massif
The Massif is well-known from borehole data in Norfolk and Southern England where strongly-folded Silurian sediments are encountered beneath Cretaceous or younger strata.
This same relationship is demonstrated at the ends of Profiles 1, 2 and 3 (Figs. 8, 9 and 10).
Strong angularity is recognised at the base of the Cretaceous and northwards in the Hewett Sub-basin progressively thicker Palaeozoic and Triassic section is developed below this unconformity.
Only gentle low relief pre-Cretaceous block-faulting can be seen on the flanks of the London-Brabant Massif.
Hewett Sub-Basin
This is a new name applied to a small sub-basin lying between the flanks of the London-Brabant Massif and the previously-identified Dowsing Fault-Zone (Glennie and Boegner 1981).
Significant thicknesses of Permian and Triassic sediments are preserved in the sub-basin and are locally dissected by northwest/ southeast rift faulting.
The pre-Tertiary section has been subjected to inversion in the north-west as demonstrated on Profile I (Fig. 8).
The effects of the inversion decreases southeastwards and cannot be seen at all in the south of Quadrant 53.
Over the sub-basin large thicknesses of Carboniferous sediments can be identified from the seismic data and their presence has been confirmed by well control.
Swarte Bank High
This is a new name applied to a complex fault-zone where the Dowsing Fault-Zone and the Swarte Bank Hinge recognised to the north (Glennie and Boegner 1981), come together.
In the north the Dowsing Fault-Zone forms the edge of the strongly-inverted Sole Pit Trough whilst the Swarte Bank Hinge is described as a ‘synclinal flexure’.
In the south they together form the Swarte Bank High, a broad zone of strong block-faulting where thick Upper Cretaceous and Tertiary section overlies strongly eroded Permian or older strata.
The feature is thought to be a former Cimmerian high block which has suffered inversion in the Cretaceous (see Profile 1, Fig. 8).
The Dowsing Fault-Zone can still be distinguished as a separate structural zone which has seen Tertiary re-activation, as shown in Profile 1.
It is interpreted as a hinge-line during Jurassic-Cretaceous (Cimmerian) rift development forming the north-eastern edge of the Hewett Sub-Basin.
Faulting is therefore mostly of Jurassic age although during the late Cretaceous it formed the locus for strong inversion and fault-block readjustment.
The disposition of the Carboniferous section appears to be unrelated to shallow structural effects and maintains the thicknesses and relationships observed in the Hewett Sub-Basin.
Winterton Sub-Basin
This structural province lies on the northern flank of the Swarte Bank High and is analogous to the Hewett Sub-Basin (Profile 1, Fig. 8).
Remnant Permian and Triassic section gradually thickens northwards beneath the base of the Cretaceous.
The area has been subject to Cimmerian rift-faulting but has suffered additional severe inversion and wrench-related movements associated with the edge of the Broad Fourteens Basin.
The Ijmuiden Ridge is highlighted as a possible structural influence in a manner analogous to the Dowsing Fault-Zone.
The Ijmuiden Ridge forms the southern edge of the inverted Broad Fourteens Basin and has the characteristics of a line of complex re-activated fault movement.
Hercynian influences are largely obscured by the later structural effects, but as a result of the improved quality of seismic data, some important aspects of pre-Permian structure have been defined.
With the exception of the London-Brabant Massif, the structural form is considered to be largely independent of the Mesozoic structure described above.
A regional geometry of eroded and fault-dissected low-frequency folds is recognised with broadly aligned northeast/southwest structural trends.
The generation of this Hercynian ' folding' is discussed later in terms of late Carboniferous basin development.
Potential Reservoir Units
Several potential reservoir intervals are inferred in the Carboniferous sequence on the basis of this interpretation and regional knowledge (Fig. 11).
The Dinantian (Lower Carboniferous) limestones encountered in wells in the U.K. sector are generally tight and non-porous although there are reservoir possibilities in weathered and fractured limestones.
In addition, it is suggested that several seismic anomalies recognised along an apparent early Carboniferous hinge-line represent  biohermal build-ups.
The Namurian, Millstone Grit sediments have not been penetrated in any well in the area but are assumed to be present on the basis of the stratigraphic relationships deduced from seismic data.
Regional considerations suggest that deltaic and pro-deltaic sands can be anticipated in this section.
The so-called ‘Grey’ Measures of the Lower and Middle Coal Measures contain only thin sandstones of delta plain and top delta origin.
The Barren ‘Red’ Measures of the Upper Coal Measures contain thick sandstone units in a ‘red-bed’sequence thought to be of fluviatile and flood plain origin.
A Barren Measures' sandstone reservoir study was based on log analysis of three wells in the study area.
This indicates the sandstones can be over 30 m thick and are separated by well-defined shale beds.
Thick mudcake build-up observed on the caliper log highlights the sands and the presence of permeability.
The analysis has indicated that the  sands are variably shaly and some anomalous log responses are considered to be due to the presence of secondary minerals, either as cement or detrital elements.
Porosities average between 14–20% and range up to 28%.
In Fig. 12 a comparison is made between a typical Rotliegende reservoir section, in 53/5–1, and that of the Barren Measures' sandstones in 53/12–3.
The obvious differences include the presence of definitive shale interbeds, the slightly higher clay volume and lower overall porosities within the Barren Measures' sandstones.
However, they still represent a good reservoir objective and in this instance the presence of interbedded shales is a positive factor in terms of hydrocarbon trapping.
In order to gain an understanding of the potential reservoir disposition within the Upper Carboniferous a broad stratigraphic analysis was undertaken by integrating the new seismic data with released well information.
This involved the interactive use of seismic and log data with palynological work.
An angular unconformity recognised in the Upper Carboniferous on the flanks of the London-Brabant Massif was of particular interest in this respect.
On seismic profiles the unconformity is characterised by gently on-lapping reflectors from above and a subcropping series of strong-amplitude discontinuous events.
When tied to available well data it approximates to the base of the ‘red bed’ sequence of the Barren Measures.
In the Oxfordshire Coalfield area Dunham and Poole (1974) have recognised an unconformity at the base of the Upper Coal Measures which they extrapolate into the Coventry area to the base of the Halesowen Group.
This would fall at the Middle to Upper Coal Measures boundary near to the base of the Westphalian D. In the Coalbrookdale coalfield in west Central England, the so-called ‘Symon Fault’ is recognised as a strong angularity, probably within the Westphalian C sequence.
We correlate the seismically-identified intra-Westphalian unconformity with that locally observed and poorly documented onshore, and have therefore designated it the ‘Symon Unconformity’.
It is illustrated in Figs. 13 and 15 where the overlying acoustically ‘dead’ character of the Barren Measures can be distinguished from the subcropping high-frequency reflections of the ‘Grey’Coal Measures.
Reduced sonic logs have been superimposed at well locations.
The palynological analysis has not been able to identify the exact level of the unconformity but a thin sequence of coals believed to be above the unconformity generally demonstrate Westphalian C ages.
The  stratigraphy deduced from the wells and correlated with the seismic is shown in Figs. 14 and 16.
It is therefore believed that the unconformity does not correspond exactly to the base of the Westphalian D but falls within the Westphalian C. This is supported by regional stratigraphic relationships (Ramsbottom et al .
1978) which show that ‘red-bed’ lithologies and in some cases thick sandstones, extend down to the Cambriense Marine Band which separates the two Chronozones of the Westphalian C.
The recognition of the Symon Unconformity and its regional significance along the northern and western flanks of the London-Brabant Massif, has led to the proposition of a modified Carboniferous basin development model.
It has traditionally been assumed that a gradual decrease in intensity of Hercynian folding has resulted in the stratigraphic relationships observed within the late Carboniferous.
However, recent basin development experiments have suggested that observed stratigraphic effects could be a normal consequence of basin development.
Watts et al .
1982 have shown that lateral heat flow results in anomalies in the normal thermal subsidence profile following crustal stretching.
According to this modified model, at about 16 my after the onset of post-rift thermal subsidence lateral heat flow produces a thermal ‘bulge’ in the basement along the basin flank.
From this time maximum subsidence is not in the basin axis but immediately basinward of the ‘bulge’.
According to Leeder (1982) early Carboniferous development represents the rifting associated with crustal attenuation.
The Upper Carboniferous, Namurian (Millstone Grit) and Westphalian (Coal Measures), constitute the thermal sag phase of basin evolution,(Fig. 17).
An attempt to explain the Symon Unconformity by the lateral heat flow phenomenon is shown in Fig. 18.
The first effects of lateral heat flow are seen as a ‘hiccup’ in basin development denoted by the Symon  Unconformity within the Westphalian C, approximately 18 my after the onset of thermal subsidence.
The unconformity level corresponds to the initial ‘bulge’ development on the flanks of the basin.
The angularity is produced by tilting of the Grey Measures sequence into the basin and the gradual overstepping/onlapping of the Barren Measures as the ‘bulge’ progressively flattens out.
This tectono-stratigraphic model has also been used in a very tentative way to predict broad facies relationships.
The depositional patterns are governed by the lateral heat flow phenomenon and this therefore plays an indirect role in the disposition and regional development of prospective reservoir sandstones within the Barren Measures.
Fig. 19 demonstrates how the frequency and thickness of sandstones, within the overall fluviatile environment will decrease away from the direct detrital source of the London-Brabant Massif.
In vertical section the sand frequency decreases upwards as the detrital source retreats ‘landwards’ and sedimentary onlap occurs.
This is confirmed by examination of the available well data as shown in Fig. 20.
Similar trends in reservoir quality are noted with a  detectable improvement in reservoir quality towards the basin flank.
Source Potential
Carboniferous Coal Measures' coals are the established gas source in the Southern North Sea  (see Eames 1975 and van Wijhe et al .
1980).
So-called humic coals have a known gas potential inherited from their high proportion of woody organic matter.
The presence of Coal Measures and well-developed coaly intervals on the southern margins of the Southern North Sea Basin is known from an examination of available well data and recently acquired seismic data.
A number of observations can be made on the three-dimensional spatial-stratigraphic development of sourcing coals by the examination of seismic relationships and documented stratigraphy.
On the seismic data the Westphalian A and B units have the highest proportion of discontinuous ‘strong-amplitude’ events which are taken to be coal developments.
In the English coalfields flanking the London-Brabant Massif, Westphalian A and B units have the highest frequency of coal occurrence (see Ramsbottom et al.1978) and the coals appear to be evenly distributed between these two units.
Offshore, the limited well data show coal developments in the Westphalian A and B although only the lower part of the Westphalian B sequence is usually seen on the extreme edge of the basin.
The Westphalian A and B Coal Measures section has a maximum thickness of about 1500 m but this reduces towards the Massif, due to onlap to the Carboniferous Limestone surface and truncation beneath the Symon Unconformity.
Coals are also indicated in the lower, or Westphalian C, part of the Barren Measures.
This is demonstrated by regional stratigraphic correlation (see Ramsbottom et al.1978) and an examination of log data in the study area (see Fig. 14).
The Symon Unconformity has been picked at the base of a thin coal sequence which might correspond to the Phillipsii Chronozone of the upper Westphalian C. Thus a limited gas potential can be attributed to the base of the Barren Measures sequence.
The critical aspect to Coal Measures source potential along the flanks of the London-Brabant Massif is considered to be that of maturity and generation timing (see Eames 1975 and Lutz et al.1975).
The Lopatin time-temperature index (TTI) has been used to predict sediment maturity (see Warples 1980).
Burial histories have been plotted at several well locations based on a stratigraphic interpretation of well and seismic data.
Similarly burial plots at seismic locations have been constructed by the use of seismic stratigraphy and correlation with adjacent well positions.
The two main difficulties with predicting burial history are presented by deep erosion in the mid Jurassic and the late Cretaceous.
This has been estimated, in the first instance, by regional knowledge and seismic stratigraphy, but a further control was provided by the calibration of calculated maturity with present-day maturity values measured in wells.
The prediction of thermal history is somewhat more problematical and requires the modelling of basin evolution and heat flow.
The youngest and most significant heating event is taken to be due to the crustal stretching in the mid Jurassic.
Heat flow modelling was based on the matching of calculated tectonic subsidence profiles with theoretical stretching curves.
Thermal conductivity was estimated from compaction data to derive a temperature profile which was constrained by known present-day geothermal gradients (see Oxburgh and Andrews-Speed 1981).
The recognition of an earlier stretching event in the early Carboniferous formed the basis of heat-flow prediction prior to the Jurassic.
No modelling was possible, however, since the degree of stretching could not be ascertained.
Heat flow during the Carboniferous was estimated by assuming similar levels to the Jurassic with an allowance made for the effects of the Hercynian Orogeny in the late Carboniferous.
In the event the calculated TTI values, using the predicted heat flow models, matched well the maturity parameters measured in the wells.
Coal gas thresholds were determined by a dual procedure based on coalification trends used in coal evaluation.
Firstly the level of gas generation was determined against coal rank by the use of Fig.
II.
1.11 in Tissot and Welte (1978).
The quantification of methane generation was used to select thresholds as follows:
Onset of significant generation at 5 cm 3 /gm
Peak gas generation at 76 cm 3 /gm
Completion of significant gas generation at 10 cm 3 /gm
These levels correspond to volatile matter values of 36%, 28% and 10% respectively, which allows a correlation of coal rank against vitrinite reflectance.
This was done by way of Fig. 4 of Bartenstein (1979) and is shown below with corresponding TTI values:
The burial plots were used to produce a temporal and spatial guide to regional maturity and gas generation history.
The Base Permian and Base Coal Measures levels were chosen to correspond to the upper and lower parts of the source rock units in the Westphalian A and B Coal Measures.
The analysis has shown that the base of the Coal Measures was immature for gas generation in early Permian times and that burial during the late Carboniferous and heat flow, generated by aesthenospheric upwelling, was insufficient to raise the maturity to gas generation levels (see Fig. 21).
The maturity picture does not change significantly along the northern edge of the London-Brabant Massif until the late Jurassic.
Triassic and Jurassic burial combined with the effects of mid Jurassic heating brought large  areas of the basin flank within the gas generation zone.
Further into the basin significant gas generation began in the Triassic or early Jurassic whilst maximum generation was attained during the early to late Jurassic.
At the level of the Symon Unconformity, at the top of the Grey Measures, significant gas generation began in some restricted areas away from the basin flank at this time, depending on local position within the developing Jurassic sub-basins.
In other areas gas generation occurred during Cretaceous/Tertiary burial.
Hydrocarbon Potential Summary
The northern flanks of the London-Brabant Massif contain hydrocarbon potential in Palaeozoic reservoirs that have yet to be tested.
New seismic data are of sufficient quality to map sub-Permian reflectors with confidence and extend the hydrocarbon search into deeper levels based upon reasonable reservoir and maturity concepts (Fig. 22).
There is a proven gas source in the Westphalian A and B coals and along the basin flanks gas generative maturity post-dates traps formed during Cimmerian structural development.
Prospective Palaeozoic reservoirs have a wide contact exposure to onlapping and subcropping source beds and vertical migration can be prevented by overstepping intra Barren Measures' shales.
Structural traps for Barren Measures' sandstone reservoirs are provided by Mesozoic block-faulting and other more subtle plays have been identified such as‘reef’ developments in the Lower Carboniferous and onlap/'pinch-out' of sands within the Millstone Grit.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: The authors acknowledge SEI and Sefel Geophysical for the acquisition and processing of the seismic data in Quadrant 53 and Offshore Netherlands and Petra-Chem and SSI for the Geochemical and Biostratigraphic studies.
References
Gas Prospects in the ‘Midland Valley’ of Northern Ireland
L. V. Illing and A. E. Griffith
V. C. Illing & Partners, Cheam, Surrey, England.
Director, Geological Survey of Northern Ireland, Belfast
SUMMARY: A substantial sedimentary basin in southeast Co.
Antrim is indicated by gravity measurements and has been explored by the Larne-2 geothermal test well which encountered 9395 ft of Permo-Triassic sediments without reaching their base.
Porous sandstones near the top of the Sherwood Sandstone occur beneath thick impervious halite horizons in the Mercia Mudstone.
Further potential reservoir rocks occur in Lower Permian sandstones below a 370 ft thick Zechstein salt at a depth of about 6000 ft.
Potential traps in the form of tilted fault blocks have been indicated by reconnaissance Vibroseis.
Suitable source rocks, the remaining essential ingredient for a petroleum prospect, are expected but have yet to be proved.
A similar Permo-Triassic basin is indicated by gravity beneath Lough Neagh.
Although covered by thick Tertiary basalts and Lough Neagh Clay, its western margin has been successfully mapped by reconnaissance Vibroseis.
The Permo-Triassic here is thinner and is without salt.
However, the underlying Carboniferous contains Westphalian and Namurian coals, and geochemical studies confirm their potential to produce gas where suitably buried.
There is a good chance that similar Carboniferous strata with coals underlie the Permo-Trias of the Larne Basin of southeast Antrim and provide the source rock for an important gas province.
Introduction
Even a cursory inspection reveals the resemblance between the main geological features of Northern Ireland and those of southern and central Scotland.
The south-westward extension into Northern Ireland of the Midland Valley of Scotland exposes Devonian, Carboniferous, Permian and younger strata separating the Dalradian rocks of the northwest from the metamorphosed Lower Palaeozoic rocks of the Down-Longford massif to the southeast.
However, while the extension of such major structural elements as the Highland Boundary Fault and the Southern Uplands Fault into Ireland is probable, their position cannot be clearly defined, largely due to the extensive cover of Mesozoic and Cainozoic sedimentary rocks and plateau basalts.
Thus the Highland Boundary Fault may lie further north than is shown in Fig.
I, and be equated with the Tow Valley Fault in North Antrim, extending southwestwards through the Sperrins to join the Castle Archdale — Ox Mountains faults (J. R. P.
Bennett,pers. comm .
). The Southern Uplands Fault is believed to enter Northern Ireland around Carrickfergus and, although no obvious fault line is recognised, it probably affected sedimentation during at least Carboniferous and Triassic time.
It should, however, be noted that the contact between the Lower Palaeozoic rocks of Co.
Down and Armagh and the Carboniferous, Permian and Triassic strata to the north is not in general faulted.
Petroleum exploration in Ireland is relatively recent.
Licences over the whole of the Republic of Ireland were awarded jointly to Ambassador, Continental and Marathon in 1957 and, after some encouraging gas shows during drilling in the Northwest Basin, the consortium acquired licences in the adjacent part of Northern Ireland in 1965.
In 1968 Marathon obtained prospecting rights in south-east Antrim and the adjacent offshore area, and in 1971 the Newmill No.
I well (TD 6500 ft) was drilled under a farm-in agreement with Shell.
The well was dry and shortly thereafter the Marathon licences in Northern Ireland were relinquished.
Further important subsurface information comes from the several boreholes put down in the search for coal by the Department of Commerce on the advice of the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland.
The most significant, Langford Lodge (5002 ft), Magilligan (4418 ft), Port More (6223 ft), Larne-1 (4211 ft), Ballymacilroy (7454 ft), and Killary Glebe (3803 ft) are indicated in Fig. 2.
A summary of this early exploration was published by Griffith (1983).
A fuller account of some of the results of Marathon's work has been presented by Sheridan (1977).
At the present time Aran Onshore Ltd. and its partners are exploring an area in the Northwest Basin straddling the border with the Republic of Ireland, while Anvil Petroleum and Energy Sources (N.l.) hold licences in the Rathlin Basin in north Antrim and north Londonderry.
FIG. 1.
South-westward extension of Midland Valley of Scotland into Northern Ireland.
(After Fig. 3 of
A. E. Griffith 1983.)
Stratigraphy
The possible relevance of the Lower Palaeozoic rocks to the petroleum prospects of the area will be mentioned later; this brief account begins by considering the significance of the Carboniferous strata in the Northwest Basin.
Carboniferous
In Co.
Fermanagh the Carboniferous sediments thin northwards against the land mass from which they were derived.
They extend north-eastwards into Co.
Tyrone in a series of much faulted outcrops.
Above a variable basal clastic unit, the lower Viséan west of Lough Neagh is dominantly a limestone sequence culminating in the Ballyshannon Limestone (Fig. 3).
This, the Lower Limestone of 19th century surveyors, passes up into a thick sequence of sandstones and shales with thin limestones referred to as the Middle Limestone or ‘Calp’.
In Co.
Fermanagh the overlying Upper Limestones are commonly mud-bank reefs.
Further east these limestones pass upwards into the Rossmore Mudstone.
In Co.
Fermanagh the strata above the Upper Limestones include laminated dolomicrites associated with thin evaporites, interpreted as sabkha deposits, in the Meenymore Formation.
This highly variable unit is not recognised to the east.
The Namurian is composed of sandstones and shales, and thin coals are known at several localities.
Similar strata occur in what is left of the Westphalian Coal Measures: in addition to the effects of the present cycle of erosion, the Westphalian and some of the older strata in many of the fault blocks have been removed by erosion beneath the Hercynian Unconformity.
Thin coals have been worked at Coalisland and Annaghone.
One of the objects of recent seismic work in Co.
Tyrone was to search for evidence of further concealed Coal Measures.
Permo-Triassic
As in most parts of Britain the Hercynian  movements at the end of the Carboniferous were accompanied and followed by a long period of erosion.
The succeeding New Red deposits gradually buried a landscape broken by numerous faults, some of which remained active outlining subsiding basins that are now filled with thick Permo-Triassic sediments.
The major trend of the total Permo-Triassic basin conforms with that of the ‘Midland Valley’.
Within it there is evidence of a N.W.-S.E. component in subsidiary basins, well seen at Larne and in the offshore North Channel Basin.
FIG. 2.
Surface geology of Northern Ireland, with Bouguer gravity contours.
(From Geol.
Surv.
N. Ireland.)
Along the Lagan Valley south of Belfast and in the narrow belt south of Cookstown in Co.
Tyrone, up to a few hundred feet of reddish sandstones occur above a basal conglomerate, and are succeeded by a thin development of argillaceous dolomite, the Upper Permian Magnesian Limestone.
This is overlain by further sandstones and silty red-beds which pass up into the Triassic Sherwood Sandstone.
The latter is over a thousand feet thick in the Belfast area, and twice as much at Larne.
Large quarry faces at Scrabo Hill, a few miles west of Newtownards, show porous dune-bedded sandstones associated with rippled sandstones and thin layers of clay galls.
The overlying Mercia Mudstones are a typical Keuper red-bed sequence; near Carrickfergus they contain three composite halite units, each containing several salt beds separated by red silty shales.
In the Larne-2 borehole (Fig. 4), the total Triassic salt amounted to 1309 ft.
In the subsurface the Permo-Triassic sequence  thickens appreciably into the basins.
In the Larne basin much of the thickening occurs in the Lower Permian: Larne-2 proved about 1500 ft of Lower Permian sandstones above 1800 ft of lavas and tuffs.
The overlying Magnesian Limestone was itself overlain by 370 ft of Zechstein salt sandwiched between thin beds of anhydrite.
These Permian and Triassic salts, well known in the Cheshire Basin and in the Irish Sea Basin (Colter and Barr 1975), have so far only been identified in Ireland in and around the Larne Basin, though it would be surprising if that was the limit of their former extent.
Post-Triassic
Despite a major stratigraphic gap that includes most of the Jurassic and the Lower Cretaceous, there is little angular discordance between the shaly limestones and shales of the Rhaetic and Lower Lias and the overlying glauconitic sandstones and limestones of the Upper Cretaceous.
The eroded top of the Upper Cretaceous was covered by thick Tertiary (Eocene) basalts, and the Chalk was thereby metamorphosed from its usual porous form into non-porous crypto-crystalline limestone.
The Tertiary basalts dominate the scenery of Antrim, with the Ulster White Limestone forming a narrow outcrop around them (Fig. 2).
Soft Oligocene clays with thick lignite beds overlie the basalts in the vicinity of Lough Neagh (and of Ballymoney to the north).
In places these Lough Neagh clays are over a thousand feet thick.
FIG. 3.
Stratigraphic column west of Lough Neagh.
(In part after Fig. 4 of A. E. Griffith 1983.)
Subsurface Information
Regional Gravity
With the completion of the recent (1984) survey of Lough Neagh, gravity data are now available for the whole of Northern Ireland.
Figure 2 shows the major features of the Bouguer anomalies.
Reference to the N.W.-S.E. trend of the Larne Basin has already been made.
How much of this gravity low is attributable to the normal clastic sedimentary fill of the basin and how much to the Permian and Triassic salt beds within it is not known.
Similarly, without knowing their thickness, it is impossible to calculate how much the low-density Lough Neagh Clay contributes to the gravity low that underlies the Lough.
Larne-2 and Newmill-1
Larne-1, drilled by the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland in 1962–63, reached only to the Sherwood Sandstone at a total depth of 4211 ft; it found no oil or gas.
Newmill-1 followed in 1971 and reached 6500 ft in the Lower Permian Sandstone, near the top of which it encountered traces of gas; further traces were found in the Sherwood Sandstone.
The geothermal exploration well Larne-2 has already been mentioned (Fig. 4).
It was drilled to  9450 ft in 1981, looking for a source of thermal water from the Permo-Triassic.
The Sherwood sandstones were shallower and their water correspondingly cooler than expected, whereas the Lower Permian sandstones lacked sufficient permeability to give an adequate supply of hot water.
Although not located on a structural culmination, the well had a small show of methane at the top of the Lower Permian Sandstone beneath the Magnesian Limestone and Zechstein salt.
Furthermore, it gave valuable information about the Permian sequence; in particular it penetrated 370 ft of Upper Permian salt, and the 1800 ft of lavas and tuffs believed to be Lower Permian.
Neither of these units were encountered in Newmill-l, which presumably terminated above the volcanics; the absence of the Magnesian Limestone and Permian salt is attributed to faulting.
Seismic Reconnaissance
Following the drilling of deep boreholes in the 1960's and in 1978–79 which had confirmed the presence of sandstones with good reservoir characteristics in several areas below the thick basalt cover, there was an urgent need to establish whether usable seismic data could be obtained from below the basalts.
An early experiment in 1963 using explosives had not been a success, and in 1981 the geophysicists turned to Vibroseis.
Under the direction of Mr T. J. Papworth of GeoMinerals Exploration Inc., a CGG crew, using four vibrators, successfully recorded two lines AA' and BB' over Mesozoic sedimentary strata and thin basalt remnants close to the coast and to the edge of the basalt outcrop to the north of Belfast.
Two portions of Line BB' are shown in Fig. 5 beneath the interpretation of both lines in geoseismic form.
The start of a prominent band of energy at close to 1.0 second at Larne-2 ties with the top of the Lower Permian Sandstone and the thin overlying Magnesian Limestone in the well; the two horizons are too close to be separated seismically.
Below the sandstones there is a thick sequence of tuffs and lavas, already referred to and believed to be Lower Permian.
The well bottomed in coarse conglomerates composed of various volcanic rocks and mudstone/siltstone/sandstone clasts.
Intermittent sub-parallel reflections beneath the total depth of the well may indicate further Lower Permian lavas and conglomerates, or they may originate in Carboniferous strata beneath.
Two kilometres north of the Sixmilewater Fault the Lower Permian Sandstone event at about 0.75 sec seems to be truncating deeper reflectors that again may be Carboniferous or older.
Above the Magnesian Limestone event a number of reflections have been tied in with the sequence in Larne-2 and Newmill-l.
Some are probably caused by dolerite sills, several of which were intersected in the wells.
Others are correlated with the Sherwood Sandstone and with salt beds that occur in the Mercia Mudstone.
Lenticularity between the so-called Larne and Carnduff halites, conspicuous near the east end of Line AA', is probably caused by near-surface salt leaching in the present cycle of erosion.
In addition to the major Sixmilewater Fault, the seismic revealed a number of smaller faults that break the Permo-Triassic sequence into a series of tilted blocks.
Experimental lines across basalts were also shot in the area west of Lough Neagh, and indicated that useful results can be obtained despite the surface problems.
Consequently, in 1983 a more comprehensive survey was carried out in the area with two objectives,— to map structure in reconnaissance form, and to look for evidence of Westphalian strata with a view to coal development.
The time-structure of the Magnesian Limestone, based on a wide grid of Vibroseis data supplemented with outcrop information and gravity mapping, is illustrated in Fig. 7.
The results from two of the better Vibroseis lines across the basalts are presented in Fig. 6, and show a similarity in style of faulting with that in east Antrim (Fig. 5).
Petroleum Prospects
Reservoir rocks
Potential reservoir rocks have been found at the top of the Sherwood Sandstone.
At outcrop the sandstones are visibly porous and they provide a good aquifer in the Belfast region.
Measurements on core No. 2 of Larne-2 at a depth of 4100 ft, some 900 ft below the top of the Sherwood, averaged 23% porosity and 47 md permeability.
Calculations based on a drill-stem test of an interval 350 ft below the core gave similar results.
Somewhat higher values were obtained elsewhere.
Measurements on a core near the top of the Sherwood Sandstone in Newmill-l had permeabilities ranging up to 1 darcy, and averaging 306 mD and 20% porosity.
At Ballymacilroy, north of Lough Neagh, the upper thousand feet of the Sherwood showed good porosity and permeability.
Thin sandstones within the Mercia Mudstones are usually finer and less permeable.
Nevertheless potential reservoir rocks may occur at these shallower levels.
The Lower Permian Sandstone beneath the Magnesian Limestone (which may itself be a viable reservoir rock) constitutes a deeper prospect.
The upper part of this formation tends to be argillaceous, and the thickest clean sandstones are in the lower section.
However, in Larne-2 there is evidence of extensive secondary silicification reducing porosity and permeability.
A core at the top of the unit averaged only 7% and 0.2 md.
Yet measurements on a core at about the same stratigraphic level in Newmill-1 averaged 16% and 212 mD, with values as high as 1 darcy.
Permeable zones are also present in the Permian sandstones at Ballymacilroy, and it may be that the degree of cementation at Larne-2 is not typical of the area as a whole.
Sandstones in the Carboniferous have given modest gas flows in Co.
Fermanagh, where they are the target of current exploration by the Aran Group.
However, most of them are argillaceous and have limited porosity and permeability.
On present evidence they are regarded as a secondary objective in South Antrim.
Cap Rocks
One of the major attractions of southeast Antrim as a petroleum prospect lies in its combination of good reservoir rocks with excellent cap rocks provided by the several thick salt units within its Permo-Triassic sequence.
The Lower Permian Sandstone and the Magnesian Limestone are overlain by the thick Zechstein salt proved in Larne-2 (Fig. 4).
Similarly, the uppermost Sherwood sandstones are overlain by the Ballyboley Halite (above the thin intervening sandstones and siltstones of the Lagavarra Formation); and thin silty sandstones within the Mercia Mudstone are in turn capped by the Carnduff Halite (Craiganee Formation) and the Larne Halite (Glenstaghey Formation) and could provide secondary objectives.
By way of comparison, the absence of bedded salt west of Lough Neagh must downgrade Permo-Triassic prospects there.
Source Rocks
Although no source rocks are expected in the Permo-Triassic, there is a good chance that they exist in underlying Carboniferous sediments.
This question of source rocks is the main unproven factor in assessing the hydrocarbon potential of south Antrim.
A thin wedge of basal Carboniferous clastics at Cultra on the southern shore of Belfast Lough rests on folded Lower Palaeozoics.
It is expected to thicken northwards under the Permo-Triassic basin.
As already discussed, outcrops in Co.
Fermanagh, Armagh and Tyrone show that a thick and extensive Carboniferous sequence, including Westphalian Coal Measures, was laid down in the ‘Midland Valley’ to the southwest of Lough Neagh, and must be expected to extend northeastwards.
Erosion beneath the Hercynian Unconformity has removed most of the Westphalian at outcrop, but coals have been worked at Coalisland and Annaghone.
There is a good chance that further Coal Measures have been preserved in some of the fault blocks, particularly towards the deeper parts of the sedimentary basins beneath Lough Neagh and southeast Antrim.
In the continuing search for coal, the Killary Glebe borehole near Dungannon penetrated 390 ft of Carboniferous strata beneath the Permo-Trias without reaching their base; the Westphalian was missing but there were thin Namurian coals.
However, of the several boreholes through the basalts in south Antrim (Fig. 2) only Langford Lodge reached the base of the Permo-Trias.
It lies on a prominent gravity high on the east shore of Lough Neagh: perhaps not surprisingly, it found no Carboniferous and passed from Permian into Lower Palaeozoic grits.
All the other deep boreholes were located within gravity lows.
Ballymacilroy finished in a series of greywacke sandstones believed to be Permian, cut by Tertiary basic igneous dykes or sills.
Larne-1 was abandoned in the Sherwood Sandstone, and neither Newmill-1 nor Larne-2 reached the base of the Permian.
The Port More borehole in the Rathlin Basin in north Antrim had a similar fate.
Deeper drilling is needed within the Bouguer gravity basins to explore the Carboniferous believed to be present.
Whether coal-bearing Westphalian strata will be found remains to be seen, but as thin coals are also known in the Namurian and Upper Viséan in the Dungannon area, a rich potential source rock for gas seems very probable.
Organic Content
Analyses by GeoChem Laboratories (U.K.) Ltd. of a selection of 9 coal samples submitted by the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland from Ballycastle, Coalisland, and the Killary Glebe and Magilligan boreholes have confirmed their high total organic carbon content, with values ranging between 19 and 65% and averaging 49% TOC.
Analyses of outcropping  Carboniferous shales have shown that they range from lean to rich.
TOC values between 1.5 and 2.5% are common in the dark  gray and black shales, notably in the Meenymore Formation (Upper Viséan) in Co.
Fermanagh where some measurements exceed 5%.
Values of 1.5 and 1.8% were recorded on two samples of Rossmore Mudstone which forms a prominent shale member near the top of the Carboniferous succession in Co.
Tyrone.
FIG. 8.
Estimated burial history of Carboniferous sediments near centre of Larne Basin.
Maturity
As is commonly found, maturity estimates based on spore colour and vitrinite reflectance (R) by different Laboratories have given varying results (Dembicki 1984).
For the coals, the 9 samples submitted to GeoChem Laboratories gave R values between 0.38 and 0.54%, while on a single sample from Coalisland, Robertson Research International measured an R of 0.65%.
Despite the discrepancy, these results suggest that the coals were formerly buried to a considerable depth, but not sufficient to commence gas generation.
Vitrinite reflectivity measurements were made by Robertson Research on a batch of 12 samples from outcropping Carboniferous siltstones, shales, shaly limestones and the above-mentioned Coalisland coal, submitted by the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland.
All but two came from Co.
Fermanagh and adjacent parts of Co.
Tyrone and Armagh.
R values ranged between 0.35 and 1.32%.
If we confine attention to the 8 samples on which at least 15 individual determinations were made, the R range narrows to 0.35–0.95%, confirming that some of these rocks were formerly sufficiently deeply buried to put them into the oil-generating window.
R values on further samples from Carboniferous  outcrops in the Coalisland-Dungannon area range from 0.25 to 0.73%.
Again the higher values were measured by Robertson Research, and suggest that these strata were formerly buried to depths and temperatures sufficient to generate oil under a thick blanket of Permo-Triassic rocks that has since been removed.
Fig. 8 is an attempt to present the burial history of Carboniferous sediments believed to underlie the Larne Basin.
Taking the present temperature gradient of 15°F per 1000 ft (28°C per km) measured in the Larne-2 borehole as representative of the post-Triassic history of the area, it is estimated that where source rocks now occur beneath the Permo-Triassic of the Larne and Lough Neagh basins at depths in excess of about 11,000 feet, they would be expected to be within the gas zone with their coals generating abundant methane.
The possibility of oil production seems less likely.
At the depths envisaged, any potential oil source rocks such as the Calp shales and Rossmore Mudstone have probably passed through the oil window; unless oil was preserved by migration to higher levels, it is likely to have been cracked into gas and condensate.
Furthermore, such migrated oil is likely to have been displaced by subsequent migrating gas.
There is a further possible gas source in the dark pyritic shales of the Lower Palaeozoics, notably the Ordovician.
Measurements by Paleochem Ltd. on behalf of the Geological Survey of Northern Ireland have confirmed that the highly folded shales of County Down are post-mature with R values between 3 and 8%.
However outcrop samples from the Ordovician inliers at Pomeroy and Lisbellaw within the Midland Valley gave R values between I.
I and 2.0% suggesting that some of them may still be within the gas window.
However, the striking difference between these two groups of pre-Devonian strata is perhaps exaggerated by the measurements being taken on pyrobitumen and phytoclasts other than vitrinite.
The reflectance of pyrobitumen increases very rapidly with maturation, so that the assumption that the reflectance values are identical with those of vitrinite can lead to interpretational errors, especially in the narrow zone of catagenesis between immaturity and metagenesis.
Nevertheless, the evidence suggests that, where they are not too deeply buried, the black shales typical of the Ordovician and Silurian of this Midland Valley area may possibly be a further source rock for gas in addition to the more obvious sources in the Carboniferous.
Conclusions
In the Larne Basin good Triassic sandstone reservoir rocks in traps formed by tilted fault blocks are capped by impermeable Triassic salt, and are expected to contain gas generated in underlying Carboniferous coals and shales.
Deeper similar prospects, with the same source, occur in Permian sandstones and dolomites beneath Zechstein salt.
Analogies with the Triassic reservoir of the Morecambe gas field in the Irish Sea, and with the many Rotliegend gas reservoirs of the southern North Sea Basin, all believed to be sourced by underlying Westphalian coals, are self evident.
We believe there are good chances of finding commercial gas in the Permo-Triassic of the almost unexplored Larne Basin of South Antrim.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: For permission to publish this paper, the authors thank the Department of Economic Development, Northern Ireland, on whose behalf the study was made.
The help of many colleagues is gratefully acknowledged-in particular, Mr T. J. Papworth who interpreted the seismic data, having supervised its acquisition and processing.
References
An Interpretation of Vitrinite Reflectance Data From the Southern North Sea Basin
Michael J. Cope
Texaco Ltd., 1 Knightsbridge Green, London, SW1X 7QJ
SUMMARY: Vitrinite reflectance data for the Carboniferous in 68 Southern North Sea Basin wells have been used to determine a maturity-depth relationship for the basin and to provide an estimate of basement inversion.
The derived maturity-depth relationship is comparable with maturity gradients in other Paleozoic coal and gas basins known to have had similar geothermal histories.
The earliest onset of gas generation in the Southern North Sea was in the late Jurassic following the accumulation of + 11700 ft (3500 m) of sediment above the Carboniferous source beds.
Estimates of inversion of the Sole Pit area using vitrinite data are similar to those based on shale velocity methods (+ 1500 m maximum).
In some areas the amount of inversion of the Carboniferous basement apparently exceeds that of the post-Zechstein section which may be attributed to removal of significant amounts of late Carboniferous strata during late Hercynian times; these areas are also associated with the principal gas discoveries in the basin.
Introduction
The Southern North Sea Basin lies within a known gas-generative province with reserves of non-associated gas derived from the Carboniferous Coal Measures located in Carboniferous, Permian and Triassic reservoirs.
As an aid to exploration for gas in the Southern North Sea and adjacent north European areas a number of authors have endeavoured to define the extent of mature Coal Measures using coal rank and vitrinite reflectance parameters (Barnard and Cooper, 1983; Bartenstein, 1979; Eames, 1975; Teichmüller, this volume).
These studies have described the maturity of the coal source beds in terms of the observed maturity level at the top Carboniferous surface and the areal distribution of maturity variation.
This approach tended to neglect discussion of vertical maturity profiles and the timing of gas generation as a consequence of differing burial patterns.
These aspects were however briefly treated in an earlier review by Teichmüller and Teichmüller (1981) which discussed the relative depth — maturity relationships for four Carboniferous coal basins in northwest Germany and the effect of intrusive heating on vitrinite profiles over the Bramische Massif.
Vitrinite reflectance data have been used in structural studies with the principal applications being the estimate of removed overburden at unconformities and the recognition of repeated section caused by faults (Dow, 1977).
The use of reflectance data as a tool to describe burial and inversion patterns in the Southern North Sea area has been somewhat overlooked.
Although the work of Barnard and Cooper (1983) demonstrated the relationship between areas of high reflectance, inversion axes and the occurrence of gas fields, they restricted their discussion of absolute amounts of uplift to the Cleveland Basin area.
However, some quantitative estimates of inversion within the Sole Pit Basin have been published based on anomalous patterns of Bunter Shale interval velocity (Glennie & Boegner, 1981; Marie, 1975).
In this paper it is possible to expand on the subjects of vertical maturity profiles and inversion estimates based on new interpretations drawn from a suite of good quality vitrinite reflectance measurements for over 60 wells in the Southern North Sea Basin.
Vitrinite Reflectance Data Base
The data for this study were provided by Robertson Research International Ltd. /Energy Resource Consultants Ltd. in their 1982 report entitled ‘The Permo-Triassic and Carboniferous Sandstones of the U.K. Sector, Southern North Sea’.
Vitrinite reflectance measurements were undertaken on the Carboniferous section in 68 onshore and offshore wells (Fig.
I) using conventional reflected light techniques on composited cuttings or core chip samples.
Determinations were made at approximately  50–100 ft (15–30 m) intervals from top Carboniferous to TD in each sampled well; the minimum amount of section over which measurements were made was 18 ft (6 m) and the maximum was 11240 ft (3425 m).
Data were reported as primary vitrinite population mean values for each sample with the number of individual determinations per sample depth ranging from two to 54; full tabulated data are presented in the RRI/ERC Report.
For the purposes of the present interpretation, the reflectance measurements over the upper 500 ft (150 m) of Carboniferous section were used to give single well average reflectance values which provided a measure of top Carboniferous maturity level.
In many cases the amount of section measured was considerably less than 500 ft (150 m) with the average being 216 ft (63 m); numbers of mean values used varied from two to six and in 27 cases only one value could be utilised.
FIG. 1.
Map of the U.K. Sector of the Southern North Sea Basin showing the control wells for which vitrinite reflectance data are available.
Maturity-Depth Relationships
Maturity-depth gradients for Carboniferous formations in the Southern North Sea Basin
A plot of single well average reflectance for the upper part of the Carboniferous section against subsea depth to top Carboniferous (Fig. 2) produces a maturity-depth diagram with no readily discernible depth-related trend.
Further examination of the data presented in Fig. 2 reveals that wells from Quadrant 44 and some from the Swarte Bank Hinge area of Quadrant 49 (see Fig.
I) plot closest to what may be described as a minimum value maturity-depth trend.
Available geological data from these areas suggest that uplift and removal of section (in Hercynian and later episodes) has been minimal compared with the rest of the area.
Thus an envelope bounding these wells showing minimum or no uplift on the diagram defines a zone of ± 400 ft (120 m) which may be termed the standard maturity-depth gradient for the Southern North Sea; all the data points which define the zone were derived from Westphalian age strata.
Some data points do plot below the zone and this is attributed with some confidence to poor reliability of measurement in these few particular wells.
Other data points which do not plot within the standard gradient zone display reflectance values which must be considered too high for their present depth of burial.
Although some of this variation may be attributed to inherent reliability problems in the computation method or original poor data quality, other geological factors probably account for the greater part of the observed variation.
For these wells either the section has been buried more deeply in the past than at present or geothermal gradients have been significantly higher in certain parts of the basin.
In the absence of geological evidence for extensive post-Hercynian igneous activity it is likely that basin inversion causing uplift is the major controlling factor for the apparent high reflectance values.
The minimum uplift maturity gradient established for the Westphalian (Fig. 3) is based on a composite of several wells each displaying 100–300 ft (30–90 m) of section.
The most reliable maximum measured Westphalian section in a single well was 750 ft (230 m).
Although determined on probable uplifted section and at high levels of maturity (R ± 2%) the section shows a gradient at some divergence to the minimum uplift Westphalian gradient.
However, the gradient in this high reflectance section is comparable with that for the Carboniferous of northwest Germany described by Teichmüller and Teichmüller (1981).
For Namurian and Visean strata, single-well measured sections are considerably longer (10190 ft (3105 m) and 5315 ft (1620 m) maximum respectively) and the resulting gradients are better defined.
Overall both  Namurian and Visean gradients are comparable with that for the Westphalian minimum uplift composite trend.
MATURITY-DEPTH RELATIONSHIP FOR CARBONIFEROUS IN SOUTHERN NORTH SEA BASIN
FIG. 2.
Graph of vitrinite reflectance against depth for the Carboniferous in 68 Southern North Sea control wells.
The standard maturity-depth relationship for the data set is indicated together with the maturity-depth relationship for the Carboniferous of northern Germany (after Teichmüller and Teichmüller, 1981).
Comparison of Southern North Sea maturity gradients with other areas
The maturity gradient defined for the Southern North Sea (Fig. 4) is determined from an area of moderate heat flow and average present day geothermal gradients (70–75 , 30–35°C/km, Oxburgh and Andrews-Speed, 1981).
Teichmüller and Teichmüller (1981) state that the present day geothermal gradient in the Ruhr area of Germany is 30°C/km which is comparable with the Southern North Sea estimates.
Their maturity-depth curve for the Carboniferous of northern Germany, including the Ruhr, is described from a similar geothermal regime to the Southern North Sea.
The similarity between the Carboniferous maturity-depth gradients for these two areas is therefore not surprising.
However, the maximum coalification level observed in northern Germany is much higher (R ± 5%) than the maximum observed in the U.K. sector (R + 2%) because of the effects of intrusive igneous bodies.
Maturity data shown here for the Peel and Beatrix areas of the Netherlands (Kuyl and Patijn, 1961) are not directly comparable with the other Carboniferous data as these were derived from volatile matter determinations; the data have been transformed to vitrinite reflectance equivalent for display purposes using the relationships established by McCartney and Teichmüller (1972).
However, the gradient depicted is not particularly different from that defined for northern Germany accepting that the relative displacement from Teichmüller's curve can be attributed to uplift and erosion.
Kuyl and Patijn estimate the removal of some 1750 m of post-Westphalian overburden in this area.
Thus the three separate north European areas discussed show a similar maturity gradient in the absence of heat-flow anomalies.
FIG. 3.
Vitrinite reflectance maturity profiles for the Visean, Namurian and Westphalian in single wells from the Southern North Sea Basin (SNSB) compared with the composite Carboniferous minimum uplift maturity-depth relationship.
FIG. 4.
The Carboniferous vitrinite reflectance gradient for the Southern North Sea compared with other Paleozoic and Mesozoic coal and gas basins.
In making comparisons with a southern hemisphere (Gondwana) coal basin, the Cooper Basin of South Australia and Queensland has been chosen.
This is a known gas province with gas having been generated from Gondwana (Permian) sediments, including coals (Grunau & Gruner, 1978).
Data depicted here are freely adapted from Kantsler et al .
(1978) and have had the effects of igneous heating removed.
Geothermal gradients in the Cooper Basin vary from 27°C to 57°C/km.
Kantsler et al.relate the lower values to thick basement overlaid by compacted Lower Paleozoic sediments and the highest values to the presence of high heat flow areas.
In terms of overall gradient a similar trend to the European Carboniferous examples is evident.
For comparison of the Southern North Sea Carboniferous with much younger sedimentary basins the Douala Basin, Cameroon has been selected because the organic type recognised in the basin is dominantly type III (vitrinitic).
Vitrinite reflectance data for Upper Cretaceous sediments over the depth range 775–4018 m are provided by Durand and Espitalié (1976); these are shown on Fig. 4.
Clearly this maturity profile has a much steeper gradient than all the late Paleozoics examples which can be related to the much higher geothermal gradient of 35–40°C/km recognised at the present day (Albrecht et al.1976).
The break of slope at ±   2000 m is probably indicative of considerably higher heat flow in the past.
QUADRANT 44 COMPUTED MATURITY FOR THE WESTPHALIAN
FIG. 5.
Computed maturity profiles for the Westphalian formations in Quadrant 44.
The onset of gas generation from Westphalian A and B strata occurred from mid Cretaceous to mid Oligocene times (right-hand diagram) with the present day gas generation threshold computed to be at ± 11500 ft (3500 m); present day stratigraphy is illustrated on the depth plot (left-hand diagram).
IOGT, initial oil generation threshold; IGGT, initial gas generation threshold; LLOG, lower level of oil generation; LLCG, lower level of condensate generation.
QUADRANT 48 COMPUTED MATURITY FOR THE WESTPHALIAN
FIG. 6.
Computed maturity profiles for the Westphalian formations in Quadrant 48.
The onset of gas generation from Westphalian A and B Strata occurred from late Jurassic to early Cretaceous times with the present day gas generation threshold computed to be at + 10000 ft (3000 m).
Abbreviations as in Fig. 5.
In summary, the maturity-depth relationship established for the Southern North Sea Carboniferous is not significantly different from those recognised in other Paleozoic coal basins displaying comparable present day geothermal gradients.
FIG. 7.
Interval velocity-depth relationship for the Bunter Shale Formation in the Southern North Sea (after Marie, 1975).
Gas generation threshold for Westphalian source rocks
Westphalian coals and associated humic organic-rich shales are prone for the generation of considerable quantities of dry gas and some minor associated liquids.
Isotopic and other compositional data relating the Southern North Sea gas accumulations to these Westphalian humic sources have been discussed by Barnard and Cooper (1983).
In agreement with their assertion that the principal phase of gas generation from humic sources commences at a maturity level equivalent to R + 1%, it can be seen that this level would be achieved at + 11700 ft (3500 m) using the standard maturity-depth gradient (Fig. 2).
In order to provide an independent assessment of this depth threshold a Lopatin time-temperature calculation is presented for a representative stratigraphic section in the Quadrant 44 area (Fig. 5).
The reconstructed stratigraphy allowed for removal of some limited amount of Westphalian C and D section in Hercynian times and the deposition and subsequent removal of some late Jurassic — early Cretaceous sediments; an assumed geothermal gradient of 33°C/km was used.
The computed maturity for each formation is shown in the left-hand diagram; the time-temperature index of maturity has been calibrated to vitrinite reflectance equivalent values following the method of Warples (1980).
In the example the R ± 1% threshold corresponds to ± 11500 ft (3500  m) of present day burial which is comparable with the depth determined from vitrinite measurements.
The accompanying curves showing maturity evolution for each formation with time (Fig. 5 — right-hand diagram) indicate that Westphalian A and B source rocks would have become gas-generative over the period mid Cretaceous to mid Oligocene.
Although there is a relative consistency in the thicknesses of Permian and Triassic strata (excluding Zechstein salt swell) over much of the Southern North Sea Basin, there are marked differences in Jurassic and Cretaceous thicknesses in different structural provinces.
Some of the thickest sequences of Jurassic-Cretaceous section are known from the Sole P; t Basin area where up to 6000 ft (1830 m) may be recognised.
It is likely that the earliest gas generation from the Westphalian took place in areas where a considerable overburden of continuous Permian to Jurassic strata accumulated.
Accordingly a Lopatin calculation is presented for a representative area of the Sole Pit Basin in Quadrant 48 (Fig. 6).
The maturity evolution curves (Fig. 6 — right-hand diagram) illustrate that gas generation in this area probably became effective from late Jurassic to early Cretaceous times.
Notwithstanding this early generation of gas it is likely that a major redistribution (migration or trap-breaching) occurred in late Cretaceous-early Tertiary times associated with the major inversion phase of the basin.
FIG. 8.
The estimated amount of basement inversion derived from Carboniferous vitrinite reflectance data in the Southern North Sea Basin.
Estimates of Amount of Basin Inversion
Estimates based on shale velocity
A method of determining inversion in the southern North Sea Basin was proposed by Marie (1975) based on anomalous interval velocities displayed by the Bunter Shale Formation for the depth at which the formation was encountered.
Marie produced a plot of average interval velocity against depth to Brockelschiefer Member (base of Bunter Shale) and defined a standard curve of velocity increase with depth.
Data plotting above the standard    curve were considered to represent uplifted Bunter Shale section; Marie's velocity-depth curve is reproduced here (Fig. 7).
The data points indicated on Fig. 7 are, however, taken from Texaco's database and a more satisfactory curve is defined as a zone of ± 200 ft (60 m) using the same wells which determine the standard maturity-depth relationship (Fig. 2).
A quantitative estimate of inversion using this newly defined velocity-depth trend has been constructed for the Sole Pit Basin area (Fig. 10) and will be discussed below in comparison with estimates based on vitrinite reflectance.
Glennie and Boegner (1981) discussed Sole Pit inversion tectonics in some detail and using Marie's method gave an estimate of 1500 m uplift in the deeper parts of the Sole Pit.
FIG. 9.
The estimated amount of inversion in the central Southern North Sea area derived from Carboniferous vitrinite reflectance data.
FIG. 10.
The estimated amount of inversion in the central Southern North Sea derived from Bunter Shale velocity data.
FIG. 11.
Interference mosaic to illustrate the differences between vitrinite reflectance and shale velocity inversion estimates.
The shaded parts represent those areas where a discrepancy of more than 500 m has been identified.
FIG. 12.
Carboniferous subcrop patterns in relation to zones of anomalous estimated inversion.
Shaded areas as in Fig. 11.
FIG. 13.
Top Zechstein structural form map (after Glennie and Boegner, 1981) and areas of major salt piercement (black) in relation to zones of anomalous estimated inversion.
Shaded areas as in Fig. 11.
FIG. 14.
Distribution of principal gas fields (black) in relation to zones of anomalous estimated inversion.
Shaded areas as in Fig. 11.
Inversion of a basin undoubtedly involves movement of the underlying basement.
In the case of the Southern North Sea Basin the Carboniferous can be considered as part of the basement layer.
Thus estimates of Bunter Shale uplift are only valid for describing basement uplift so long as there is stratigraphic continuity of the intervening Permian strata.
However, this is not necessarily the case in the Sole Pit Basin where there are areas of Zechstein salt swell and piercement which underpin and penetrate the overlying Triassic section.
In many cases the original stratigraphic relationship between Bunter Shale and Carboniferous basement is disturbed.
It is not possible to use Carboniferous shale velocity data for inversion estimates because regionally continuous homogeneous shale sections are not recognised.
Estimates based on vitrinite reflectance
Vitrinite reflectance is a temperature (and therefore depth) dependent parameter which does not undergo retrogression with uplift.
It is therefore particularly suitable for estimating maximum temperature exposure or maximum depth of burial.
In addition, using patterns of variation from the derived standard maturity-depth relationship (Fig. 2), it is possible to determine the amount of uplift of the Carboniferous section in particular areas.
A map of total basement inversion produced using this method (Fig. 8) shows the following features:
(i)
a minimum uplift area trending through Quadrant 44 and along the Swarte Bank Hinge Zone in Quadrant 49;
(ii)
a northwest-southeast trending belt of inversion maxima and minima displaying culminations in the southwest of Quadrant 49, the central part of Quadrant 48 and over the Cleveland Hills High in the central and southern parts of Quadrant 41;
(iii)
a zone of anomalous data in the south of Quadrant 47 where predicted uplift is not in accordance with the known geological framework.
The maximum inversion of the Sole Pit Basin is estimated at — 1500 m using this method which is in broad agreement with the figures of Glennie and Boegner (1981).
A maximum inversion of — 2500 m over the offshore part of Cleveland Hills High is recognised.
Over the onshore area — 2000 m of inversion is recognised which is in accord with the independent estimate of 2000 m of missing section given by Barnard and Cooper based on a study of vitrinite reflectance data from Jurassic rocks in the area.
Over much of the study area the top Carboniferous basement is Westphalian in age.
However, in the south of Quadrant 47 (the zone of anomalous data, Fig. 8) older Namurian and Visean strata subcrop directly to Permian.
Here the amount of uplift computed from the reflectance values may include a considerable fraction which can be attributed to removal of Carboniferous overburden in Hercynian times.
Thus the relatively stable East Midlands Platform has not undergone post-Permian vertical movements of some 2500 m indicated by the vitrinite data.
The occurrence of older age Carboniferous subcrop beneath the Cleveland Hills suggests that a similar argument might be applied to the estimated amount of 2500 m uplift.
However, here this estimate is supported by studies of Jurassic formations.
It must be concluded that the Visean/Namurian formations of this area were not buried beneath particularly thick Westphalian sediments prior to the Hercynian.
The apparent undulose character of the inversion surface at top Carboniferous level may be an indication that the basement has not behaved in a particularly homogeneous fashion during the various basin inversion episodes.
Thus the inversion maxima and minima along this central axis may be a reflection of a number of separate basement blocks responding in different ways to the stresses created by the inversion drive mechanism (a combination of compression and strike-slip movement).
Further evidence for this suggestion may be derived from the pinch-and-swell pattern to the Westphalian A subcrop to Permian (Fig. 12) which indicates that this broad anticlinal ridge is possibly a set of en echelon anticlines; the development of each separate anticline being controlled by a separate underlying basement block.
Comparison of inversion estimates
Contour maps for estimated inversion based on the shale velocity and the vitrinite methods are shown here for the central Southern North Sea (Sole Pit area; Figs. 9 and 10).
The patterns displayed are broadly similar with inversion maxima of — 1500 m recognised on both interpretations.
However in matters of detail there are some discrepancies between the two maps.
These discrepancies are better highlighted by the difference mosaic shown as Fig. 11.
Accepting that the two maps are drawn from entirely different methods and to some extent a different data base of wells it is not surprising that differences in detail are recognised.
Accordingly differences of up to 500 m in the estimates have been ignored for interpretation purposes.
Differences of greater than 500 m require some comment.
(a) Areas where Bunter Shale shows greater inversion than the Carboniferous
These areas are recognised along the axis of the Sole Pit Trough, onto the flanks of the East Midlands Platform and over the Audrey-Ann area of Quadrant 49.
In relation to Permian subcrop pattern (Fig. 12) these areas are seen generally to overlie areas of Westphalian A and B subcrop.
However, these subcrop units are not restricted to such areas and are also overlain by non-anomalous Bunter uplift zones.
Thus Carboniferous subcrop apparently does not control this anomalous pattern.
Another possible explanation for the distribution pattern may be related to the influence of the subcrop to the Bunter Shale, i.e. the Zechstein Formation.
A Top Zechstein structural form map with areas of Zechstein salt piercement is shown in Fig. 13.
It is noticeable that major areas of salt swell and piercement in central parts of Quadrant 47 and 48 and the west of Quadrant 49 are associated with the areas of anomalous uplift.
The effect of the expansion of Zechstein salt section would be to elevate the overlying Bunter Shale such that its depth of burial is less than that which would be expected from its velocity character acquired at greater depth.
When computing uplift from a Marie-type graph such situations would give rise to an overestimate of uplift for the Carboniferous.
The notable exception to this pattern is the west-east elongate salt wall feature which traverses the northern parts of Quadrants 47 and 48.
However, this is a major penetrative feature triggered by a fault (the Outer Silver Pit Fault) and has not had the displacive effect of the salt swells located further south and east.
A further point is that salt piercements have the capacity to dissipate heat more quickly than other rock formations.
It is possible that such perturbations to regional heat flow may have affected the evolution of vitrinite reflectance in the underlying Carboniferous rocks.
The effect would be to lower the reflectance and thus enhance the discrepancy between shale velocity and vitrinite reflectance estimates.
(b) Areas where Carboniferous shows greater inversion than the Bunter Shale
This situation occurs in the southern parts of Quadrants 42 and 43 and the northern parts of Quadrants 47 and 48, the Hewett area in southeast Quadrant 48 and the Viking-Leman area in the southwest of Quadrant 49.
These areas have apparently acquired an enhanced vitrinite  reflectance which has led to an apparent overestimate of uplift.
Considering Permian subcrop formations these areas show no particular pattern, being associated with Westphalian A, B, C and D strata (Fig. 12).
There are no obvious relationships with Zechstein structural features (Fig. 13).
It could be argued that this apparent overestimate is a true reflection of the total amount of uplift.
This could be accounted for by an initial Hercynian episode of stripping of Carboniferous overburden.
Thus some uplift had occurred prior to the main basin inversion phase in the late Cretaceous-early Tertiary.
That this effect is not apparent in other parts of the southern North Sea, especially the central Sole Pit area may have two possible explanations.
Firstly, it may have been masked by the salt movement effects described above or, secondly, it may be an indication that some of the central areas have undergone less Hercynian uplift than the flanking areas to the north and east.
The corollary of the latter explanation is that the northwest-southeast anticlinal ridge with a core of Westphalian A strata was not significantly buried in later Westphalian times and acted as a controlling feature on Westphalian sedimentation.
Some recent geological studies of the area suggest that northeast and southwest sub-basins may have existed in late Westphalian times (T. E. Dibb, personal communication).
A further spatial relationship worthy of note is the fact that the major gas fields of the area are associated with areas of anomalous Carboniferous uplift (Fig. 14).
This is especially true of the Hewett, Leman and Viking areas.
The Rough, West Sole, Filey and Audrey group of fields lie along the periphery of the northern belt of anomalous uplift.
Generally, gas fields are absent (with the exceptions of Amethyst and Ann) from the zones of anomalous Bunter Shale  uplift.
These distributions may be controlled by a combination of subcrop factors (i.e. presence of Westphalian A and B coal-bearing formations) and the position of inversion axes (affecting migration).
On the other hand the relationship to zones of anomalous Carboniferous uplift cannot be ignored and the pattern requires further investigation with a more extensive data base than that available for this study.
Some effects of inversion on the gas generating capacity of Carboniferous sediments
As a consequence of burial humic organic matter will begin to generate significant quantities of dry gas at maturity levels of R ± 1% (equivalent).
This threshold is largely determined by the expulsion of volatiles associated with the change (in the case of coals) from high volatile to medium volatile bituminous rank.
The generation of gas is largely exhausted by the anthracite stage of rank evolution (R ± 2–2.5%).
The increase in rank of coaly (vitrinitic) material is essentially a temperature controlled reaction with little evidence for the significant influence of time on the process (Price, 1983).
Thus the rank (as measured by vitrinite reflectance) and gas generating capacity of humic material should increase systematically with burial as a result of increasing temperature.
Changes in geothermal gradient caused by higher heat flow related to such events as igneous intrusion may enhance the thermal evolution of such material (Teichmüller and Teichmüller, 1981).
Some further factors which must be considered in the light of the studies of inversion of Carboniferous section presented here are the consequences of:
(i)
the interruption of the maturation process by uplift to cooler temperature regimes;
(ii)
the effects of reburial after inversion on the gas-generative capacity of the formations.
The uplift of a sedimentary pile undergoing maturation is likely to have the effect of leading to a cessation of hydrocarbon generation.
Uplifted sediments would be brought from their depth-related temperature regime and subjected to lower temperatures at higher structural levels.
This simple model assumes no increase in heat flow to accompany the inversion event.
Within a relatively short time period no further hydrocarbon-producing reactions would take place and gas generation would cease.
For a short period previously produced, but non-expelled, hydrocarbons would continue to migrate from the sediments.
Indeed an inversion episode could also produce a redistribution of previously reservoired products as a result of structural readjustment.
It is therefore expected that an inversion event would coincide with a major phase of migration, as previously suggested by Oele et al.(1981).
In some areas of the Southern North Sea Basin it is evident that post-inversion subsidence (essentially Tertiary to Recent) has been of sufficient magnitude to subject previously matured Carboniferous sediments to the depth/temperature regime to which they were originally exposed.
This would allow for a second phase of gas generation and migration.
This situation is not recognised over the major inversion centres of the Sole Pit and the Cleveland High because of the insufficient amount of Tertiary subsidence.
However, Lutz et al.(1975) recognise that southwest of the Groningen High reburial would have led to renewed gas generation from the late Cretaceous onwards; Lutz et a/. record the initial generation phase as having occurred from late Triassic to mid Jurassic.
Although the phenomenon of subsidence following inversion can be established from geological considerations, the behaviour of humic source rocks on reburial is poorly understood.
It is thought that previously matured vitrinite would begin to undergo maturation again once it reached the maximum temperature to which it had been originally exposed.
However, it is possible that some thermal hysteresis effects may have to be overcome.
If the thermal hysteresis was a significant factor it is likely that its effects would be rank related; i.e. the hysteresis would be larger at higher levels of maturation.
In the case of gas generation from coals, the experimental data provided by Barker (1974) on a suite of vitrinites of varying rank may shed some light on this problem.
Barker noted that the programmed temperature pyrolysis of several bituminous coal vitrinites showed little variation in the temperature of maximum pyrolysis yield (T max + 500°C).
Vitrinites from anthracites, however, showed very high values of T max (greater than 600°C).
In addition Barker showed that total hydrocarbon yield was not related to rank in the bituminous materials.
From these data it could be concluded that in the absence of any rank related thermal behaviour, hysteresis effects are not operative.
It is likely that similar thermal behaviour would occur under natural conditions (although at  lower temperatures).
Therefore the model which recognises the regeneration of hydrocarbons to occur on the attainment of the previous maximum exposure temperature is a likely description of actual processes.
In the case of extensive uplift it is possible that Carboniferous source sediments could be raised to sufficiently high structural levels for oxidation of the section to occur.
Uplift of this magnitude could have occurred during Hercynian times with the stripping of considerable amounts of Carboniferous overburden.
This would have the effect of rendering the reactive vitrinite component inert and therefore thermally more stable, with the result that subsequent reburial would not exceed the temperature threshold for hydrocarbon-producing reactions to occur.
A consequence of oxidation effects would be to raise observed vitrinite reflectance values.
It is possible that some of the high recorded reflectance values from the East Midlands Platform and Cleveland High areas may have been enhanced by such effects.
A phase of late Hercynian oxidation of Carboniferous humic material may account for the lack of gas prospectiveness in these areas.
Summary and Conclusions
The present study has served to illustrate the use of vitrinite reflectance measurements as an aid to the understanding of the structural history of a basin.
In the case of the Southern North Sea Basin the techniques discussed here are particularly useful because of the fact that basement formations are relatively rich in humic material (including coals).
Thus it has been possible to study the behaviour of the basin basement using a measure derived from the basement formations.
As a result of this approach some different patterns to those previously described from shale velocity methods have been recognised.
The interpretation of these patterns has led to the following significant observations:
(i)
the Carboniferous basement has behaved in a less than homogeneous manner during the basin inversion;
(ii)
there is some evidence for sub-basin development during the later Westphalian;
(iii)
zones of anomalous Bunter Shale uplift are associated with a lack of significant gas fields whereas zones of anomalous Carboniferous uplift are associated with the principal gas discoveries in the area.
Clearly more study with an enlarged data base is required to refine these observations.
However, this initial, albeit restricted, study has demonstrated the usefulness of vitrinite reflectance data in other than strictly maturation-related applications.
There is no reason why the methods outlined here cannot be applied successfully to other basins.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: Grateful thanks are extended to Robertson Research International Limited for permission to use their Southern North Sea reflectance data in this study.
The interpretations given in this paper have benefited from discussions with colleagues in the Texaco Exploration Department, especially T. E. Dibb and P. F. Riches.
This paper is published with the permission of Texaco Limited, London.
References
METHODS AND APPLICATIONS
Coalification and natural gas deposits in northwestern Germany
Marlies Teichmüller
Geologisches Landesamt Nordrhein-Jestfalan, de Greiff Str. 195, 4150 Krefeld, F.R. Germany
SUMMARY: In northwestern Germany most natural gas deposits have been sourced by coalification gases derived from the coal-bearing Upper Carboniferous.
This is the reason why a new coalification map for the top surface of the Carboniferous (1:500 000) is presented as a supplement and revision of a former map published in 1979 by the same authors.
130 new measurements of vitrinite reflectance (% Rm) from 72 deep boreholes and 60 outcrops have been introduced into the new map.
Recent data on the stratigraphy of the top surface of the Carboniferous and its depth below the Permian, Mesozoic and Cainozoic cover, as well as new gas fields (found since 1978) have likewise been incorporated.
The coalification pattern of the uppermost surface of the Carboniferous is demonstrated in a cross section running north-south from the Rhenish massif (south of the Ruhr Basin) to the North Sea.
The coalification pattern of the Pre-Permian surface in northwestern Germany is controlled
—
by the predominantly pre-orogenic (pre-Asturian) coalification of the folded Upper Carboniferous in the Rhine-Ruhr area and in the Münsterland
—
by a more or less intense ‘re-coalification’ in those parts of northwestern Germany which subsided by varying amounts during the Mesozoic and Cainozoic
—
by the telemagmatic effects of Hercynian striking intrusive bodies of Upper Cretaceous age (the massifs of Bramsche and Vlotho) with their pronounced high rank maxima.
Rank maxima in the Gifhorn trough at the upper reaches of the River Weser (south of Hameln) are caused by deep subsidence, especially in Jurassic times, and probably also by geothermal maxima.
At the mouth of the River Ems the degree of coalification is surprisingly low, although the Upper Carboniferous, comprising early Westphalian (A and B) is covered by 3500–4000 m of younger sediments.
It is assumed that because of a basin that is still strongly subsiding, the degree of coalification will not yet have reached the equilibrium which would relate to the present depth and temperature, and that gas generation and accumulation are still taking place here.
The relationship between rank of coal and the occurrence of natural gas deposits generally remain the same as demonstrated in 1979; most gas fields occur where the vitrinite reflectance at the upper surface of the Carboniferous is between 1–2% Rm,— provided, of course, that adequate reservoir rocks of the Upper Carboniferous (Westphalian C, D and Stephanian), Permian (mainly Rotliegendes) and Lower Triassic (Bunter) are present and sealed by evaporites of Permian and Triassic age.
A striking exception from the internationally acknowledged ‘death line’ for the occurrence of natural gas fields (commonly assumed at 3.0–3.5% Rm) is represented by the gas field Uchte where the vitrinite reflectance is 4.5% Rm at the surface of the Carboniferous.
This anomaly can be explained by a strong but short telemagmatic heating event, with coalification having preceded porosity loss of the reservoir rocks, and/or by fracture porosity gained through tectonic disturbance of the rocks.
This study indicates that the natural gas deposits of the Federal Republic of Germany accumulated in relatively recent geological times, i.e. during the late Mesozoic and/or the Cainozoic, either as a result of an additional subsidence and consequently additional heating of the Upper Carboniferous, or of telemagmatic heating effects.
Introduction
In northwestern Germany most gas fields have been sourced by coalification gases of the Upper Carboniferous (Silesium), the main source rocks lying in the Westphalian, especially in the Westphalian A and B but — in contrast to Britain — also in the Westphalian C and D (Hedemann et al  .
1984).
Claystones and siltstones containing finely dispersed coaly matter are considered to be good sources — besides many coal seams.
Reservoir rocks for the coalification gases deriving from the Westphalian are mainly sandstones of the Rotliegend (Lower Permian).
But  also sandstones of the Upper Carboniferous (Westphalian C and D and, in some cases, Stephanian) as well as evaporites of the Zechstein (Upper Permian) and sandstones of the Bunter (Lower Triassic) serve as reservoirs, most of which are sealed by rock salt of Permian or Triassic age.
The gas accumulated in these reservoirs has been generated mainly during the late Mesozoic and the Cainozoic, due to an increasing subsidence and associated additional heating of the coal bearing Upper Carboniferous.
The process is called ‘recoalification’, i.e. a new coalification after the first one which took place in Carboniferous times.
Whereas in the Ruhr Coal Basin i.e. at the southern margin of the N.W. German Basin, this first coalification was the only one (in places at least the predominant one) because, there, the coal reached its deepest level of subsidence and its highest rock temperature before the Asturian folding (which occurred at the boundary between Westphalian D and Stephanian), this late Variscan folding combined with an uplift of the Carboniferous, was much less intense further to the north.
There, the coal bearing Carboniferous has been covered later on by Mesozoic and Cainozoic sediments, the thickness of which generally increases to the north.
This development is interrupted only by the high of the Bramsche Massif where Upper Carboniferous even outcrops at some places.
The greatest depth of the top surface of the Carboniferous is reached north of Hamburg (more than 8000 m below sea level).
The coal bearing Upper Carboniferous in N.W. Germany extends from the Subvariscan foredeep (Ruhr Basin) to the Ringköbing-Fünen-High (see: the map ‘Carboniferous source rock’ of Glennie 1986).
In the northern part of N.W. Germany the Stephanian transgresses over coal bearing Westphalian; the Stephanian contains no coal.
The relationships between coalification and oil and gas formation are well known and have been described by M. Teichmüller (1971), Bartenstein and R. Teichmüller (1974), Tissot and Welte (1978), Hunt (1979), Héroux et al.(1979) and M. Teichmüller (1982).
Prior coalification maps of N.W. Germany with corresponding oil and gas deposits have been published for the Mesozoic (M. and R. Teichmüller 1958, 1966; Bartenstein, M. and R. Teichmüller 1971) and for the boundary Westphalian C/D (Bartenstein, M. and R. Teichmüller 1971).
A first coalification map for the top surface Carboniferous appeared in 1979 (M. and R. Teichmüller and Bartenstein 1979).
It was based on vitrinite reflectance measured on cores and cuttings mainly from oil industry boreholes.
Since then, in N.W. Germany, gas prospecting has been intensified, especially in the Rotliegend reservoirs.
Moreover, the Ruhr coal industry put down numerous deep boreholes north of the mining area, so that a new coalification map for the top Carboniferous seemed justified.
This map (scale 1: 500 000) was published in colour by the Geologisches Landesamt Nordrhein Westfalen (Krefeld) in a symposium ‘Nordwestdeutsches Oberkarbon’ as volume 32 of the ‘Fortschritte in der Geologie von Nordrhein-Westfalen’(M. and R. Teichmüller and H. Bartenstein 1984).
Fundamentals methods and results of this map will be reported in this paper.
FIG. 1 Relationship between rank of coal (volatile matter, German coal classification) and the generation of methane during the coalification process (after Jüntgen and Karweil 1966).
Fundamentals and methods
Since coalification and oil and gas generation depend on the same diagenetic factors, namely temperature and heating time, coalification data can be matched with stages of oil and gas maturation.
A sensitive measure of coal rank is vitrinite reflectance which — at present— is also  the most applied measure for maturity in oil and gas exploration.
According to Dow (1977) wet gases appear in a coalification range between 0.8 and 2.0% Rm (Rm = mean random vitrinite reflectance) dry gas deposits appear in the range 1.0–3.0 (up to 3.5) % Rm.
Oil deposits occur between 0.5 and 1.35% Rm (compare Fig. 2 of this paper).
It should be pointed out, however, that — in contrast to the oil ‘death line’(at 1.35% Rm)— the ‘death line’ for dry gas does not indicate the end of gas generation, or the beginning of gas destruction.
The latter would take place at much higher temperatures than those corresponding to 3% Rm.
According to Hunt (1975) methane is destroyed at temperatures higher than 550°C.
At a rank stage corresponding to 3% Rm, the coal is still relatively rich in hydrogen: it contains 3.3% H, i.e. ⅔ of the hydrogen content of a coking coal.
Methane formation continues in anthracite rank stages as shown in Fig. 1.
The ‘death line’ for dry gas would lie at about 5% volatile matter, corresponding to 3% Rm.
The diagram demonstrates that large amounts of methane are formed in the anthracite stage.
Therefore one must conclude that the ‘death line’ for dry gas is not related to the exhaustion of the source rock coal but rather to the disappearance of good reservoirs due to lack of porosity.
In the Lower Saxony tectogene, the mean effective porosity of reservoir rocks diminishes to less than 5% when the rank of coaly matter reaches values of more than 2.5% Rm vitrinite reflectance (Bartenstein, M. and R. Teichmüller 1971, plate 1).
A coalification map shows how coal rank changes within a certain horizontal horizon.
The top surface Carboniferous was chosen because — in contrast to stratigraphic reference levels, like, e.g., the Westphalian C/D boundary — it has been penetrated and can be identified easily in most boreholes.
As most reflectance data were obtained from coal seams or coaly matter of the Westphalian, extrapolations of the measured values to the top Carboniferous were necessary, sometimes over vertical distances of several hundred meters.
For this procedure a diagram was used which shows the relation between vitrinite reflectance and relative depth (Fig. 2) and which is based on measurements of vitrinite reflectance in 45 deep boreholes of western Germany.
For this diagram the values of single boreholes were linked together depending on the reflectance ranges.
As indicated in Fig. 2, it is possible with the help of this plot to extrapolate the reflectance level for any desired depth.
Description of the new coalification
The scale of the map is 1:500 000.
The map is based on reflectance values of more than 900 samples from 246 boreholes of the oil and coal industry and from some outcrops.
It shows:
(1)
the stratigraphic units subcropping at the top Carboniferous under a cover of younger sediments,
(2)
the depth of the top Carboniferous,
(3)
the boreholes and outcrops from which samples for rank studies were collected with reflectance values for the top surface Carboniferous.
Values for the Kupferschiefer are also presented,
(4)
iso-reflectance lines (% Rm) for the top surface Carboniferous,
(5)
the southern boundary of Zechstein salt as an important seal horizon,
(6)
the gas fields sourced by coalification gases from the Carboniferous with reservoirs in the Upper Carboniferous, Permian and lower Triassic (Bunter).
The map shows that the N.W. German Carboniferous Basin is bordered in the west by the Netherland Ridge, in the south by the Variscan Rhenish Massif and the Lippstadt High with folded Devonian and Lower Carboniferous (Dinantian), both outcropping in the Rhenish Mts. as well as in the Harz Mts.
To the north a broad zone of thick Namurian (2000–3000 m) is developed.
Westphalian A, B and C surround a large flat lying Westphalian-D-Basin which already shows the contours of the later Lower Saxony basin of Late Jurassic and early Cretaceous times.
The Stephanian transgresses from the north over Westphalian C and D with a long tongue reaching south as far as Bentheim: the so called Ems Low.
Another, smaller, south-reaching tongue of Stephanian is probably developed farther to the east where the recent borehole Texas-1 encountered Stephanian.
Fig. 3 shows a portion of the western part of the new coalification map.
The Coalification Pattern
The regional coalification pattern at the top surface Carboniferous of N.W. Germany is determined:
(1)
in the southwestern part, especially in the Ruhr District and the northward following Münsterland Basin, by the age of the subcropping Westphalian.
There, the iso-reflectance lines follow more or less the stratigraphic contours (cf.
Fig. 3).
(2)
by the depth of the top surface Carboniferous which increases towards the N.N.E. An example is given by the Arsten Z1 borehole near Bremen where the boundary Westphalian C/D lying at a depth of 6180 m reaches the boundary between the anthracite and meta-anthracite stages with a vitrinite reflectance of 3.5% Rm (for the top surface Carboniferous a value of 2.8% Rm was extrapolated).
FIG. 3.
Sector from the western part of the new coalification map (M. Teichmüller, R. Teichmüller and H. Bartenstein 1984).
drilled circles: boreholes with % Rm for top surface Carboniferous, open circles: boreholes with % Rm for the Kupferschiefer, continuous thick lines: iso-reflectances (% Rm), continuous thin lines: stratigraphic boundaries, hatched lines: depth of Top Carboniferous below sea level, twisted line: southern boundary of Stephanian (in the Ems Low), dotted line: southern boundary of Zechstein rock salt, hatched areas: gas fields.
Mulde = Syncline.
3
by the massifs of Bramsche and Vlotho (Figs. 4 and 5), where palaeogeothermal events of Upper Cretaceous age have determined the coalification pattern.
There, the Hercynian striking (trending) iso-reflectance lines follow each other in dense  succession with values up to 5% Rm around the centres of the massifs, the centres lying near Bramsche (Fig. 3) and Vlotho respectively.
(4)
by the N.N.E. striking Gifhorn Trough which lies in the northward continuation of the Hessen trough as part of the  Mediterranean -Mjösen Zone.
The Gifhorn Trough (lying in the eastern part of the map) is characterised by anthracitisation (3% Rm iso-line) at the top surface Carboniferous (cf.
Fig. 7), mainly due to deep subsidence in Jurassic times.
(5)
by the uplift of the top surface Carboniferous towards the west, near the Netherland Ridge.
This western margin of the N.W. German Carboniferous Basin is characterised by relatively low reflectance values (Fig. 3) due to relatively low rock temperatures.
At the mouth of the river Ems strikingly low reflectance values were recorded (1.0–1.3% Rm) although the top surface Carboniferous is represented by early Westphalian (A and B), and is lying as deep as 3500–4000 m below sea level.
This relatively weak coalification is obviously due to an early ‘Pre-Permian updoming’ of the Westphalian and to a late subsidence in very recent times which caused a very young re-coalification that is not yet in equilibrium with the present depth and temperature.
In the northern part of the Hannover province, i.e. in the northeastern part of the coalification map, reflectance measurements could only be performed on samples of Kupferschiefer because no boreholes reached the Westphalian.
In this region the Kupferschiefer is underlain by a thick series (several hundred to one thousand meters) of Rotliegendes (Lower Permian), often represented by volcanic rocks.
Extrapolations of reflectance values measured on Kupferschiefer to the top surface Carboniferous result in values of 2.0–2.5% Rm.
It is interesting to note that farther to the west, in southern Oldenburg and at the Ems estuary, where Kupferschiefer is underlain by thin Rotliegendes and flat lying Upper Carboniferous, vitrinite reflectance is about the same in the Kupferschiefer and at the top Carboniferous, thus reflecting the predominance of recoalification.
In the Ruhr Basin there is a great difference in reflectance values between the Kupferschiefer (which is still in the lignite stage) and the top of the pre-orogenic coalified, folded Carboniferous.
Fig. 4 shows a cross section through the Bramsche Massif, demonstrating the doming of iso-reflectance lines in the roof of the intrusive body.
The Carboniferous coals and also the coals of the Wealden Formation and the Jurassic oil shales are affected.
Formation of graphite in the contact-zone is indicated by anomalously low electric resistance (1 Ω m and less), measured by means of magneto-telluric methods (Wagenitz 1982).
In this area of highly elevated reflectance values no oil and gas occurrences are known.
The occurrence of high temperature minerals, e.g. pyrophyllite and of hydrothermal ore minerals on fractures is indicated in Fig. 4.
The Bramsche Massif is not only characterised by a striking coalification maximum but also by pronounced geophysical anomalies, namely maxima of gravity and magnetic intensity (Stadler and R. Teichmüller 1971).
The same is valid for the Vlotho Massif as demonstrated in Fig. 5 showing a cross section with magnetic, gravimetric and coalification maxima in the roof of an assumed lakkolith at a  depth of about 5000 m.
In this case, the reflectance values refer to the Rhaetian/Liassic boundary.
In Fig. 6 the regional coalification pattern is shown in relation to the stratigraphy and the depth of the top surface Carboniferous in a cross section running (with some breaks) through the new map from the Rhenish Mts. in the south to the North Sea in the north.
Note the gradual slope of the Top Carboniferous from its outcrop in the south down below an increasing cover with Cretaceous sediments towards the north within the Münsterland.
This development is followed towards the north by a sharp uplift in the horst of Ibbenbüren where Westphalian C and D lie at the ground surface,— followed by a renewed deep subsidence within the Lower Saxony Basin and, farther to the northwest, into the North Sea.
Fig. 6 indicates the main features of rank development.
At the Ruhr and also in the Münsterland Basin the Rm-values reflect mainly the age of the Westphalian units: in the Westphalian C values < 1% Rm were recorded, whereas in the Westphalian B and A values > 1% Rm were found.
In these regions the present depth of the top surface Carboniferous does not control the rank of coal: in the Bevergern 1 borehole, where it drops to 2550 m, the vitrinite reflectance is about the same (1.15% Rm) as in the boreholes Münsterland 1 and Südkirchen 1 where the top Carboniferous lies at much shallower depths (Südkirchen 1 at 806 m with Westphalian A).
This coalification pattern is a  consequence of the pre-orogenic coalification, a coalification which obviously did not proceed later on during the subsidence of the Ruhr Basin and the Münsterland in Cretaceous times,— at least not at the surface of the Carboniferous.
Farther to the northeast a very striking coalification maximum is developed in the horst of Ibbenbüren, where, in the coal mining area, Rm-values of 2–3% Rm were measured in the youngest Westphalian (C and D) at or near the ground surface.
Still farther to the northeast the reflectances increase to values up to 4.8% Rm.
These high values are related to the strong telemagmatic heating caused by the Bramsche intrusive body.
North of the Bramsche Massif reflectance values  decrease to 2% Rm in the Lower Saxony Basin.
In this area — in contrast to the Münsterland Basin — a strong post-Carboniferous coalification took place due to a thick cover of Mesozoic and Cainozoic sediments, and probably also due to a relatively weak coalification in Carboniferous times.
At present, the top Carboniferous lies as deep as 4000 to 5000 m.
This re-coalification, along with the good seal by evaporites of the Zechstein and Bunter Formations, seems to be the reason for the development of numerous gas fields on the South Oldenburg Ridge which, moreover, is characterised by a flat doming of the Upper Carboniferous and therewith by good conditions for gas accumulation.
Farther to the northwest (Fig. 6) at the Ems estuary and in the southernmost part of the German North Sea, the Rm-values decrease drastically, although the Top Carboniferous occurs only at somewhat shallower depths, in part even at significantly greater depths (Norderney Z1) than on the Oldenburg Ridge.
This can be explained by the recent deep subsidence in Cainozoic times.
As mentioned above, at the mouth of the river Ems, coalification obviously is not yet in equilibrium with the present depths and rock temperatures, it is still going on.
The strikingly low Rm-value in the Holthusen Z1 borehole might be explained by the ‘chimney effect’ of the overlying salt stock which has caused a rapid heat discharge (Hedemann 1967).
Occurrence of gas fields in relation to coalification
The gas fields of N.W. Germany are generally small but numerous (Fig. 7).
Most fields occur within the South Oldenburg Ridge and its continuation to the east within a west-east striking band of about 60 km width.
There, the reflectance values at the Top Carboniferous lie between I and 2% Rm.
No gas fields occur in the Bramsche and Vlotho Massifs, although in the past many boreholes have been drilled there.
At the northern margin of these massifs some gas fields (like Apeldorn, Bahrenborstel, Staffhorst and Uchte) are characterised by relatively high reflectance values at the Top Carboniferous (2.5–2.8% Rm; Uchte even 4.5% Rm).
Here, indications for hydrothermal activity along Hercynian striking fractures were found, so that a strong but short heat supply may be assumed, leading to local coalification maxima but not to a significant loss of reservoir porosity.
Fracture porosity may also have been the reason for relatively good reservoirs in these regions of anthracite and meta-anthracite rank: these gas fields are situated in a W.N.W.-E.N.E. striking, weak structural zone at the northern margin of the Bramsche Massif which, according to Stadler and R. Teichmüller (1971), is characterised by relatively late and deep reaching faults along with the ascendence of hydrothermal solutions and deposition of ore minerals were possible.
Galena and chalcopyrite were observed under the microscope in the samples used for reflectance measurements in these areas.
The gas fields in the northern part of the N.W. German Basin lie in a region where the coal bearing Carboniferous has reached its deepest level of subsidence at the present time (Barnard and Cooper 1983).
Here, as in the Netherlands (van Wijhe et al.1980), the ‘gas window’ may be expected at a depth of 4000–6000 m (at a geothermal gradient of 32°C/km).
The gas fields of the eastern part of the Hannover province with reservoirs in Rotliegend sandstones have reflectance values of about 2% Rm.
The gas fields of the Ems estuary are associated with values of 1.0–1.5% Rm.
Here, coalification and gas generation are still going on.
Not far from the Dutsch Ridge, many fields west of the river Ems are associated with surprisingly low reflectance values (0.6–1.6% Rm) as shown in Figs. 3 and 7.
There wet gases occur besides dry gas.
So far, no gas deposits have been found in the Münsterland.
Although many boreholes have been drilled only traces of oil and gas have been observed.
Reflectance values are favourable, but the Zechstein rock salt is lacking here as a good seal horizon (cf.
Fig. 7).
Moreover, subsidence in the Upper Cretaceous and/or Cainozoic has been relatively shallow, and no additional geothermal heating occurred in recent times.
Conclusions
The natural gas deposits, derived from coalification gases of the Upper Carboniferous, accumulated in relatively recent geological times during the late Mesozoic and/or the Cainozoic,— either as a result of additional subsidence and, consequent additional heating of the Upper Carboniferous source rocks, or of telemagmatic heating effects.
Most gas fields occur where the vitrinite reflectance at the Top Carboniferous is between 1 and 2% Rm, a few fields are located between 2 and 3% Rm and only one small field (Uchte) is located where the vitrinite reflectance is 4.5% Rm.
This exception can be explained by a strong, but short heating event, by which the coalification process preceded the loss of porosity in the reservoir rocks.
Moreover there are indications that in this gas field a secondary fracture porosity may exist.
The relationships between coal rank and occurrence of gas deposits in N.W. Germany support the general rule that most gas deposits are limited to areas with vitrinite reflectance values lower than 3% Rm (see Figs. 2, 7).
References
Laboratory Studies into the Generation of Natural Gas from Coals
M. D. Higgs
Koninklijke/Shell Exploratie en Produktie Laboratorium, Rijswijk, The Netherlands (Shell Research B.V.)
SUMMARY: The thermal histories of a Palaeozoic and a Tertiary coal have been investigated by laboratory simulation experiments in which a suite of samples, with natural maturities ranging from 0.4–3.0% vitrinite reflectance (VR), were heated under identical conditions of time and temperature.
The cumulative hydrocarbon yield (measured as methane equivalents) was found to be 170 ml/g organic carbon (Org.
C) for the  Palaeozoic coal and 225 ml/g org.
C for the Tertiary coal.
Peak hydrocarbon generation was estimated to occur at approximately 1% reflectance for both coals.
Carbon dioxide generation for both coals is rapid and can be considered to have ended by 1% reflectance.
Nitrogen generation is negligible for both coals over the maturity range investigated.
Introduction
Although our knowledge of the processes involved in the formation of oil from kerogen has expanded rapidly in recent years, our understanding of gas generation has lagged behind.
However, research into this area of hydrocarbon generation was given fresh impetus by the first ‘energy crisis’ in 1973 which saw gas assume a more important role as a primary energy source.
To explore effectively for gas, it is necessary to define: the nature of gas-prone versus oil-prone source rocks, the maturity window for gas generation and the quantity and composition of the gases generated from different source rocks.
One approach to this problem is to simulate the thermal history of a source rock in the laboratory by heating immature kerogen for various times at temperatures between 200°C and 450°C.
Studies of this type, which have been comprehensively reviewed by Barker 1978 and by Larter and Douglas 1982, indicate gas generation to be a late catagenic process, with peak generation occurring at 2–3% vitrinite reflectance.
This paper describes an alternative approach whereby the thermal histories of coals from the Palaeozoic and from the Tertiary are deduced from simulation experiments in which samples with different natural maturities are heated under identical conditions of time and temperature.
Experimental Procedure
The coals were selected on the basis of microscopic analysis of the homogenised ground coals to minimise variations in organic facies.
The samples (+ 1 g ground to 100–125 micron) were heated in duplicate in steel autoclaves in an inert atmosphere at an initial pressure of 1 bar.
The samples were heated either at 400°C or 550°C for three days in the absence of water, after which the gaseous products were analysed by gas-liquid chromatography (GLC).
The samples were subjected to microscopic, chemical and extract analysis before and after heating.
Gas compositions are normalised to exclude hydrogen sulphide because of poor analytical reproducibility for this gas.
Carbon monoxide and hydrogen are also excluded since, while always present, their concentrations are negligible.
Results and Discussion
Two basic approaches can be followed when using long-term laboratory heating experiments to investigate the generating potential of coals.
In the first, the thermal history of a source rock is simulated by heating an immature sample for increasing time and/or temperature.
The products evolved are then related to the ‘change in maturity’ which occurs as a result of heating.
A major drawback of this approach lies in the danger inherent in estimating and equating final ‘maturities’ attained by samples after heating in the laboratory with maturities produced under geological conditions (Snowdon 1979).
In this study an alternative approach was followed whereby the remaining gas-generating potential is assessed for a series of coal samples of increasing natural maturity.
The samples are  heated under experimental conditions such that the ‘live’ organic matter remaining in the coal is completely converted into gaseous products.
The gas-generating potential decreases as the maturity increases and thus this decrease is a measure of the amount of gas generated and expelled from the coal during its thermal history.
A cumulative gas yield for the coal can be constructed from the experimental data, over the maturity range investigated, by summing the differences in gas yield for successive pairs of coals of increasing maturity and plotting this against maturity.
This approach does not necessitate measuring the ‘maturity’ of the heated sample, and therefore this source of error is eliminated from the constructed cumulative yield.
Initial studies indicated that two heating temperatures were necessary for the qualitative and quantitative characterisation of gas generation.
Changes in gas composition with increases in coal maturity were made using the C 1 /ΣC, C 1 /C 2 and C 2 /C 3 ratios, calculated from the compositional data of the gases formed by heating the coals at 400°C for three days.
Chemical analysis of coals after heating at 400°C for three days showed them to have a residual gas-generating capacity.
Thus the more vigorous conditions of 550°C for three days were used to quantify the gas yield.
Thermodynamic calculations indicate that under these conditions contributions to the gaseous products from inorganic equilibria reactions are minor while chemical analysis of the coals after heating indicated negligible residual generating capacity.
The two suites of coal samples chosen for this study were selected on the basis of their maceral analysis and maturity.
The Palaeozoic coals (Carboniferous-Pennsylvanian) ranged in maturity from 0.4 to 2.9% reflectance (Table 1).
The dominant maceral at low maturity was non-fluorescent desmocollinite with minor amounts of telocollinite, liptinite and inertinite.
At higher maturities the desmocollinite graded into telocollinite.
The German Tertiary coals (L. Miocene-Aquitanian) ranged in maturity between 0.4 to 3.0% reflectance (Table 2) and had maceral analyses similar to those of the Palaeozoic coals, except that the desmocollinite exhibited a weak fluorescence.
Palaeozoic coals
The unheated coals fall within the Type III band of the van Krevelen diagram (Fig. 1), plotting from immature through to the ‘dry gas’ zone (Tissot and Welte 1978).
The unheated samples had Cr/Ct (Gransch and Eisma 1970) ratios of approximately 0.75 between VR 0.4 and 0.8, after which the ratios rapidly increased reaching 0.9 by VR 2.9 (Fig. 2).
Heating at 400°C for three days altered the coals such that they became chemically equivalent to unheated coals with maturities between VR 1.8–2.5 (Figs.
I and 2, samples 9 and 10).
The chemical alteration resulting from heating at 550°C for three days was such that the coals plotted in the metagenic zone of the van Krevelen diagram (Fig. 1).
The Cr/Ct ratio of 1 for these coals indicates no residual generating capacity remains.
The gas yields, determined at 550°C, plotted against the vitrinite reflectance of the unheated coal (Fig. 3) were used to reconstruct the cumulative gas yield for the Palaeozoic coal between 0.4 and 2.9% reflectance (Fig. 4).
The cumulative hydrocarbon yield (measured as methane) is 170 ml/g organic carbon.
The hydrocarbon yield increases steadily with  increasing maturity up to a reflectance of approximately 1–1.5%, after which generation gradually decreases.
The carbon dioxide yield of 180 ml/g organic C is generated rapidly with little gas produced at maturities greater than VR 1.0.
Nitrogen generation is negligible throughout the maturity range investigated; this is not unexpected in view of the low nitrogen concentration of these coals (+1°10 between VR 0.4 and 2.9).
The  and  ratios, plotted against the maturity of the unheated coals (Fig. 5), show that the composition of the Palaeozoic coal gas remains constant until a reflectance of 1.2–1.3% and only becomes drier at higher maturities.
Tertiary coals
The maceral analysis of the Tertiary coals (Table 2), which are described as liptinite-rich, showed no major differences from the Palaeozoic coals.
However, the Tertiary coals contained weakly fluorescent desmocollinite,(non-fluorescent in the Palaeozoic coals), suggesting a slightly greater hydrogen richness.
This difference was not reflected in the van Krevelen diagram (Fig. 6) where again the unheated coals plotted within the Type III band.
The Cr/C, ratio of 0.35 at a reflectance level of 0.4% (Fig. 7), decreasing smoothly with increasing maturity to 0.9 by VR 3.0, however, does indicate a greater generating capacity for the Tertiary coals.
The increase in hydrocarbon-generating capacity is clearly seen in the reconstructed cumulative hydrocarbon yield (Fig. 8).
Between VR 0.4 and 1.2 the hydrocarbon yield is 50% greater than that for the Palaeozoic coals.
Above 1.5% reflectance the hydrocarbon-generating capacities of the two coals are comparable (Table 3).
Carbon dioxide generation for the Tertiary coals follows the same trend as that for the Palaeozoic coals, though the yield is only about half.
This decrease in the CO2 yield corresponds to the increase in hydrocarbon yield (the total cumulative yield: is the same for both coals) and since chemical analyses of the Palaeozoic and Tertiary coals at the same maturity were very similar, it can be inferred that there are internal differences in the chemical structures of the two coal types.
Nitrogen generation was again negligible throughout the maturity range investigated.
The  hydrocarbon ratios for the Tertiary coals behave similarly to those determined for the Palaeozoic coals (Fig. 9).
The gas composition remains relatively constant up to 1–1.5% reflectance, and then increases as  the gas becomes drier.
Comparison of the  ratio for the two coal types shows the Tertiary coal gases at 0.4–1.0% reflectance to be wetter.
Since the relative concentration of  hydrocarbons remains relatively constant over this maturity range, the increased wetness of the Tertiary gases can be attributed to higher C&sub4+; concentrations.
Rate of gas generation
Experimental gas yields such as those presented in Fig.
I can be used to graphically estimate the rate of gas generation.
Using data for the Palaeozoic and Tertiary coals, it is found that the maximum rate of hydrocarbon generation for both coals occurs at a vitrinite reflectance of about 1% (Figs. 10 and 11).
This result is in general agreement with the peak generation estimate of 1.2% reflectance determined from the rapid pyrolysis data published for a German coal by Jüntgen and Klein (1975)(Figs. 12 and 13).
These values are lower than the 2–3% reflectance predicted from heating experiments in which the maturity of the sample is estimated after heating (Snowdon, 1979).
The  maximum rate of carbon dioxide generation, in contrast, appears to occur at maturities of less than 0.4%.
At peak generation the Palaeozoic coal has generated approximately 40% of its cumulative hydrocarbon yield, while the Tertiary coal has generated 64%.
Conclusions
The variations in gas yield and composition with maturity have been determined for Palaeozoic and Tertiary coals using data obtained from laboratory heating experiments.
By looking at differences in gas yield for the same coal type at different levels of thermal maturation, it has been possible to demonstrate that gas generation from coals occurs at lower maturities than previously reported.
Peak generation occurs at about 1% reflectance rather than at the 2–3% reflectance reported in a number of published studies.
By peak generation, 40–60% of the cumulative gas yield has been generated and by 2% reflectance 80% has been generated.
A comparison of the gas yields and maceral analyses for the coals investigated indicates the gas yield to be influenced by subtle changes in structure which are not apparent from the maceral analyses.
However, these differences are reflected in the Cr/Ct ratios.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: The author is indebted to Shell Internationale Petroleum Maatschappij and The Koninklijke Shell Exploratie en Produktie Laboratorium for permission to publish this paper.
In addition, Mrs P. Wüstefeld is thanked for her assistance with the experimental and analytical work.
References
The Distribution of Porosity in Zechstein Carbonates
D. N. Clark
G.B. Petroleum Consultants Ltd., 18 Grosvenor Street, London, W1X 9FD
SUMMARY: Zechstein carbonates form important gas reservoirs in Germany and the Netherlands and in at least one commercial field in the U.K. southern North Sea but elsewhere they are largely unexploited.
The carbonates occur in four separate units and all are known to contain potential reservoir rocks.
Distribution of porosity is controlled either by a combination of depositional facies and diagenesis or by the occurrence of collapse breccias.
Intragranular porosity resulting from early leaching predominates in shallow-marine grainstones and inter-crystalline porosity caused by late leaching occurs in deeper-marine carbonate mudstones.
Using a knowledge of facies distribution, it is possible to predict where these potential reservoirs might occur and as facies distribution can be related to the overall thickness of each carbonate unit, it is also possible to make tentative predictions of porosity distribution from isopach maps.
Collapse breccias, however, are not related to any particular facies and potential reservoirs resulting from this process are most likely to be found around structural highs that became exposed at various times since, the Zechstein.
Introduction
Zechstein carbonates form important gas reservoirs in Germany and the Netherlands and several significant discoveries have been made in the U.K., notably at Locton, Eskdale and Malton in Yorkshire.
Gas has also been tested from numerous wells in the southern North Sea but the only commercial discovery so far to have been made is the Scram field.
Oil has been encountered in Zechstein carbonates at Locton, Gieterveen Oost-1 in the eastern Netherlands, and at a number of localities in the North Sea, and production has been obtained from the Auk, Argyll and Claymore fields, and from various fields in East Germany and Poland.
Four separate carbonate units can be recognised in the Zechstein; the Z1 Carbonate, the middle carbonate member of the Z1 Anhydrite, the Z2 Carbonate and the Z3 Carbonate (Fig. 1).
The distribution of porosity is controlled partly by depositional facies and partly by diagenesis, and potential reservoir rocks are known to be developed in each of the carbonate units.
Thus, in order to predict where potential reservoirs might occur, it is necessary to understand both the distribution of facies within each unit and the diagenetic history of the sediments.
Distribution of Lithofacies
Each carbonate unit is characterised by the development of a shallow-marine platform around the edge of the basin (Fig. 2).
In the Z1 Carbonate, the platform was bounded on the seaward side by a combination of bryozoanalgal reefs and oolitic sand shoals, but in the Z2 and Z3 Carbonates the reefs disappeared and barrier complexes composed exclusively of oolitic sand predominated.
Shorewards of the barriers, lagoonal, intertidal and supratidal conditions prevailed and alternating sequences of oolitic and pelletoidal sands were deposited.
These are locally interbedded with carbonate muds and bioclastic and pisolitic sands.
Basinwards of the platforms, thick wedges or aprons of thinly-bedded carbonate mud were deposited in a submarine slope environment (Fig. 2).
These sediments were derived from the platforms and transported into the basin by storm and gravity processes (Clark in press).
Isolated colonies of algae and bryozoans became established on the upper parts of the submarine slope in the Z1 Carbonate, and these grew above the level of the surrounding carbonate muds to form patch reefs.
Further basinwards, the aprons pass into thin, laminated, organic-rich muds that were deposited in a basin plain environment (Fig. 2).
In general, the marginal platforms developed on a gentle slope and formed wide belts of shallow marine carbonates running parallel to the basin margin.
This is not the case, however, in the Z2 Carbonate on the southern flank of the Ringkøping-Fyn High.
Here, the platform edge appears to have been controlled by a normal fault and the belt of shallow marine sediments is much narrower than elsewhere in the basin (Clark and Tallbacka 1980).
The distribution of shallow marine carbonates around the Ringkøping-Fyn and Mid-North Sea Highs is also complicated by the presence of small grabens which appear to have divided the highs into a series of islands (Clark and Tallbacka 1980).
These islands were probably each surrounded by shallow marine carbonates which may also be preserved in the grabens (Fig. 3).
The marginal platforms appear to have prograded  over the top of the mud aprons and when combined with the latter, form lenticular bodies of sediments (Figs.
I and 2).
As the Zechstein progressed, the thickest part of each successive lens developed further into the basin and the facies belts were displaced in the same direction (Figs. 3 and 4).
The only exception to this appears to be in southern Denmark, where the  Z3 Carbonate appears to have onlapped the Ringkøping-Fyn High, relative to the Z1 and Z2 Carbonates, and the facies belts and isopachs were displaced towards the basin margin (Clark and Tallbacka 1980).
Diagenesis
The diagenesis of Zechstein carbonates can be divided into four phases; surface, shallow burial, deeper burial and uplift phases (Fig. 5; Clark 1980a).
The surface phase was characterised by processes that affected the rocks during or soon after deposition.
These processes were controlled by the conditions existing in the environments where the sediments were deposited.
They included cementation in subtidal, intertidal and supratidal environments, growth of vadose pisoliths and evaporites in sabkhas, and vadose compaction of unconsolidated carbonate sands in supratidal environments.
The shallow burial phase was dominated by pore waters that were derived from surface environments and percolated down through the buried sediments (Fig. 6).
The composition of these pore waters was controlled by the conditions existing at the surface, and these in turn were dependent on the stage reached in the ‘evaporation cycle’(Clark 1980a; Clark and Tallbacka 1980).
During phases of carbonate deposition, diagenesis was dominated by freshwater leaching.
This took place mainly in sediments of the marginal platforms which became subaerially exposed during low stands in sea-level.
It did not affect the sediments of the carbonate mud wedge because these remained in a submarine environment.
As a result, extensive leaching of ooids and bioclasts occurred in the vadose zone (early leaching), and cementation occurred at deeper levels in the phreatic zone.
During subsequent episodes of sulphate and chloride deposition, dense, residual brines were formed in saline lagoon, sabkha and playa environments.
These brines percolated downwards, causing dolomitisation and leaving the pre-existing texture and porosity of the sediments largely unchanged.
As burial progressed, the influence of surface-derived pore waters decreased and the effect of rising temperature and overburden pressure became more important in controlling  diagenesis, marking the onset of the deeper burial phase.
This phase was characterised by a series of events, the more important of which included: cementation and replacement by anhydrite, which accompanied the dehydration of adjacent gypsum formations to anhydrite; leaching and calcitisation of dolomite in response to decarboxylation of organic matter (late leaching); and cementation and replacement by halite, triggered by mobilisation of  underlying salt deposits (Fig. 5).
Only the sediments of the carbonate mud wedges appear to have been affected by late leaching because of their proximity to organic-rich basin plain deposits.
Over most of the Zechstein basin, burial has continued until the present day but at some localities the carbonates have been uplifted, exposed and even eroded.
Once again the carbonates came into contact with meteoric water and this was responsible for yet another episode of leaching.
As a result, patches of replacement anhydrite were removed to form vugs, and extensive  brecciation took place either by collapse of the carbonates as interbedded evaporites were dissolved, or by karstification during exposure and the collapse of resultant solution channels and caves during subsequent reburial (Pennington 1975; Brennand and van Veen 1975).
Z1 Carbonate
The Z1 Carbonate is also widely referred to as the Zechsteinkalk and in N.E. England it is known locally as the Lower and Middle Magnesian Limestone (Brueren 1959; Füchtbauer 1964 and 1972; Richter-Bernburg 1955; Rhys 1975; Smith 1980; Taylor 1981; Taylor and Colter 1975; van Adrichem-Boogaert and Burgers 1983; Wagner et al .
1978).
The thickness of this unit is normally about 50 m around the margin of the basin, decreasing to 5 m or less in more central parts (Fig. 4a), but locally in Poland and the U.K. it reaches 100–120 m.
The marginal platform of the Z1 Carbonate is made up of a lower unit of light-coloured, bioturbated and fossiliferous carbonate mudstones, and an upper unit of reefs which pass laterally into oolitic and pelletoidal grainstones (Fig. 7).
The platform is bordered by a mud apron that consists either of light coloured and bioturbated or dark and thinly-bedded carbonate mudstones.
Reefs have been described from the U.K. (Smith 1958 and 1981), Germany (Füchtbauer 1972 and 1980), the Netherlands (Dorsman 1954), Denmark (Clark and Tallbacka 1980) and Poland (Peryt 1977).
In most cases, they are constructed mainly of bryozoans and capped by a unit of  stromatolites (Füchtbauer 1972; Smith 1958 and 1981; Peryt 1978), but locally they are formed entirely of stromatolites (Paul 1980).
In the U.K., the reefs form a continuous barrier up to 100 m in thickness, at the edge of the platform (Smith 1958 and 1981).
Elsewhere they form isolated patch reefs up to about 1.5 km in diameter and about 30–100 m in thickness (Füchtbauer 1972 and 1980; Peryt 1976).
These appear to have grown at the edge of the platform and were surrounded by oolitic sand shoals (Peryt et al .
1978).
The reefs in Denmark are surrounded by carbonate mudstones and in this case they probably grew on the upper part of the submarine slope rather than at the edge of the platform.
Similar reefs may also exist further westwards along the southern flank of the Mid-North Sea High.
As yet, no reefs have been recognised in the North Sea but large fragments of  byrozoan stems have been reported in the Z1 Carbonate in well 53/1–2, which suggests that a reef may be present nearby (Taylor and Colter 1975).
Potential reservoirs can be recognised in the oolitic grainstones and reefs of the platforms, and in the carbonate mudstones below and in between the reefs (Fig. 7).
No porosity or permeability data has been published for the oolitic grainstones but these are known to be porous in the southern North Sea and Poland where they display both primary inter-granular and leached intragranular pores (Taylor and Colter 1975; Peryt and Piatkowski 1977; Peryt 1978).
No information is available about the potential net pay (i.e. the thickness of rock capable of producing hydrocarbons) that could be expected in these sediments.
Data is available, however, for the reef and carbonate mudstone reservoirs and examples of these can be found in southern Denmark (Clark and Tallbacka 1980).
Here, a series of patch reefs are developed surrounded by inter-reef sediments (Fig. 8).
The reefs are characterised by an upper unit of dolomitised and vuggy bioclastic and pellotoidal packstones and a lower unit of dolomitised carbonate mudstones.
The inter-reef areas are represented merely by carbonate mudstones.
The porosity and permeability of the vuggy packstones ranges from 15–27% and 10–20 mD, respectively, in Aabenraa-1 (Fig. 9).
This porosity is made up of intra-skeletal pores together with vugs, enlarged fractures and intercrystalline pores (Fig. 10).
The carbonate mudstones, in contrast, are characterised almost exclusively by intercrystalline pores (Fig. 10) and in Aabenraa-l, the porosity and permeability of these sediments range from 12–30% and 10–100 mD, respectively (Fig. 9).
With regard to the origin of the pores, the intra-skeletal types were probably preserved during deposition and escaped infill by sediment.
The vugs, fractures and intercrystalline pores, on the other hand, are thought to have formed in response to late leaching (Clark 1980a).
This process enlarged the intraskeletal pores and fractures and selectively removed crystals of dolomite to form intercrystalline pores.
A small amount of intra-crystalline porosity was also formed at the same time by  corrosion and removal of the centres of some dolomite crystals (Fig. 10).
The total potential net pay exhibited by the Aabenraa patch reef is about 24 m whereas in the inter-reef area at Hønning, it is probably only about 10 m.
Although no porosity logs are available for the Z1 Carbonate of the Aabenraa-l, the porosity profile can be compared with the neutron log of Ørslev-1 (where no core was taken).
These correlate almost exactly, suggesting that the porosity and permeability characteristics of the Z1 Carbonate are identical in both wells (Fig. 11).
From this it is possible to infer not only that the Ørslev carbonates were deposited as a patch reef like Aabenraa, but also that they were subjected to the same diagenesis and that this resulted in the development of comparable pore types.
Furthermore, the wire-line log response in the inter-reef areas, as exemplified by Hønning-1 clearly indicates the absence of the vuggy packstone unit and only carbonate muds with intercrystalline porosity are developed (Fig. 12).
FIG. 10.
Pore types in the Z1 Carbonate of Aabenraa-l, southern Denmark:(A) Core slab of a vuggy packstone, showing vugs and enlarged fractures (scale bar 2 cm);(B) Photomicrograph of a vug lined with corroded dolomite crystals (scale bar 0.5 mm);(C) SEM photomicrograph of a corroded dolomite crystal from the periphery of a vug.
Note that the centre of the crystal has been removed by leaching (scale divisions 10 microns);(D) SEM photo-micrograph of a dolomitised carbonate mudstone showing a well-developed intercrystalline porosity (scale divisions 10 microns).
The prediction of porosity in the Z1
Carbonate is not generally possible at present because, apart from one map from Poland (Peryt et a/. 1978), very little information has been published on the distribution of facies in the formation.
Nevertheless, in areas where a carbonate platform is developed, as in N.E.  England and the southern North Sea, a similar model to that applied to Z2 and Z3 Carbonates presumably can be used, and it should be possible to make tentative predictions of porosity distribution from isopach maps (Fig. 4a).
In cases where patch reefs are expected, isopach maps would be less useful and the reefs would have to be identified where possible on seismic.
However, the potential reserves offered by these reefs would be minimal because of their relatively small size, and they are likely to be only of limited interest as exploration targets.
Middle Carbonate Member of the Z1 Anhydrite
This unit is only present in southern Denmark and the southern North Sea (Clark and Tallbacka 1980; Rhys 1975).
In Denmark, it forms a wedge of sediment about 40 m in thickness at the edge of the basin.
Here, it is made up of light-coloured and dolomitised carbonate mudstones, interbedded with thin layers of laminated stromatolites (Clark and Tallbacka 1980).
These were probably deposited in lagoonal and intertidal environments on a marginal platform.
The wedge rapidly decreases to a thickness of 3 m towards the basin centre where it consists of darker, millimetre-bedded carbonate mudstones, that were probably deposited in a basin plain environment.
By analogy with other Zechstein carbonate units, it is possible that an oolitic-barrier or reef complex also may have been deposited at the edge of the platform but no evidence of this has been reported so far.
Potential reservoirs can be recognised in both the platform and basin plain carbonates.
In Aabenraa-l, the porosity of the platform carbonates ranges from 5–20% and permeabilities reach up to 11 mD (Fig. 13).
The pores consist entirely of intercrystalline voids that are identical in appearance to those described from the Z1 Carbonate and likewise probably resulted also from late leaching (Fig. 10d).
The potential net pay of middle carbonate member in Aabenraa-1 is about 20 m.
Porosities of up to 25% and permeabilities in excess of 200 mD also have been observed in the basinal carbonates of Tønder-2.
In this case, the porosity is made up entirely of vugs (Fig. 14) that have resulted from the leaching of crystals of replacement anhydrite (Clark 1980a).
Similar pores have been observed also in the Z1 Carbonate of the Auk (Brennand and van Veen 1975) and Claymore fields and in outcrops of Zechstein carbonates in the U.K., where leaching is thought to have been caused by meteoric water during uplift and exposure (Clark 1980a).
In the Tønder example, however, the vugs occur in the subsurface on top of a salt dome, with thick units of halite above and below, and it is more probable that they were formed by the same late-leaching process that was responsible for the intercrystalline porosity (Clark 1980a).
The potential net pay of the basinal carbonate unit is too thin to be of interest as a reservoir because the total thickness of the unit in Tønder-2 is only 3 m.
If, however, similar pores were to be found in a thicker  development of the middle carbonate member then a correspondingly thicker net pay could be expected.
FIG. 14.
Vuggy porosity resulting from the leaching of replacement anhydrite, in the middle carbonate member of the Z1 Anhydrite of Tønder-2, southern Denmark;(A) core slab (scale bar 2 cm);(B) photomicrograph (scale bar 1 mm).
Z2 Carbonate
The Z2 Carbonate is also widely known as the Hauptdolomit (Brueren 1959; Füchtbauer 1964 and 1972; Rhys 1975; Taylor 1981; Taylor and Colter 1975; Wagner et a/. 1978) but strictly speaking this name only refers to a particular part of the formation.
In Durham and Yorkshire it is known locally as the Upper Magnesian Limestone (comprising the Hartlepool and Roker Dolomites and the Concretionary Limestone) and the Kirkham Abbey Formation, respectively (Smith 1980; Taylor and Colter 1975).
In general, it ranges in thickness from 40–60 m around the margin of the basin, decreasing to 5–10 m towards the basin centre (Fig. 4b).
Locally in the U.K., Netherlands and Germany the marginal platform reaches 150–200 m in thickness.
Three distinct lithological units can be recognised within the Z2 Carbonate, these being the Hauptdolomit which comprises the sediments of the marginal platform, the Stinkdolomit which consists of a wedge of carbonate mudstones bordering the platform, and the Stinkschiefer which consists of thinly developed carbonates found in the more central parts of the basin (Fig. 15; Richter-Bernburg 1955; Füchtbauer 1964 and 1972; Clark 1980b).
The Hauptdolomit is composed mainly of oolitic, pelletoidal, bioclastic and pisolitic grainstones (Clark 1980b).
These were deposited in shallow marine barrier/lagoon complexes that became established at the edge of the basin on top of the marginal platform of the Z1 Anhydrite.
Pelletoidal grainstones are more commonly found on the interior parts of the platform where lagoons became established periodically, and locally carbonate muds were also deposited in this environment.
Oolitic grainstones predominate at the edge of the platform where the coastal sand barriers that enclosed the lagoons, became established.
Pisolitic grainstones are best developed in the upper part of the Hauptdolomit where sabkha environments predominated.
Although the Hauptdolomit was primarily located on top of the Z1 Anhydrite platform, it prograded basinwards to some extent and overlays the carbonate mudstones of the Stinkdolomit in some wells (see Figs. 18, 19 and 25).
The Stinkdolomit is composed mainly of dark, thinly bedded and dolomitised carbonate mudstones.
These accumulated basinwards of the marginal platform in deeper marine, slope and base of slope environments.
Submarine fans were also formed locally and these are composed of oolitic and bioclastic grainstones and packstones (Sannemann et al.1978; Clark 1980b and in press ).
The Stinkschiefer is made up of a thin unit of dark, laminated, organic-rich carbonate mudstones.
These were deposited in a basin  plain environment and are laterally equivalent to the Stinkdolomit (Füchtbauer 1964 and 1972; Clark in press ).
Three types of potential reservoir rock can be recognised in the Z2 Carbonate; platform carbonates, mud wedge carbonates, and submarine fans (Fig. 15).
The platform carbonates are probably the most important reservoir in the Zechstein and most gas production comes from these sediments.
Porosity is found mainly in oolitic grainstones and is made up of both primary intergranular and leached intragranular voids (Fig. 16a).
The combination of these pore types results in porosities of 15–30% and permeabilities of up to 100 mD, as demonstrated by core data from Aabenraa-1 (Fig. 17).
In general, the thickness of the platform carbonates varies from 20–60 m but up to 100 m has been recorded locally, and in good cases a potential net pay of 10–20 m could be expected.
The intragranular pores probably formed in response to the flushing of the rocks by freshwater during phases of exposure (Fig. 6; Clark 1980a).
As the water percolated through the rocks, the leaching process became less effective and the porosity that was created decreased progressively away from the exposed surfaces.
As a result, leaching profiles commonly can be recognised on porosity logs through the Hauptdolomit and a particularly good example can be seen in Emmen-9.
Here, the intergranular pores have been filled by an anhydrite cement leaving only leached porosity, and the sonic log displays a very clear downward-decreasing porosity profile in the uppermost unit of oolitic grainstone (Fig. 18).
As pellets are not normally susceptible to early leaching, only intergranular pores are present in the pelletoidal grainstones and this makes them less porous than the associated oolitic grainstones (Fig. 18).
In terms of total porosity, therefore, the interbedded successions of pelletoidal and oolitic grainstones found in the interior of the platforms do not form such attractive reservoirs as the predominantly oolitic successions found at the platform margin.
Thus the thickest potential net pay can be expected to be developed only in the latter situation (see Figs. 25 and 26).
The porosity of the uppermost unit of the Hauptdolomit in eastern Drenthe has been severely reduced by a combination of vadose compaction and early cementation (Figs. 1 6c and d).
The reason for this was probably that the sediments were deposited largely under sabkha conditions and therefore were particularly prone to exposure and freshwater flushing.
As a result, vadose compaction of unconsolidated grains took place, which consisted of   the preferential leaching of grains at their points of contact until all intergranular porosity had been destroyed and a tight polygonal texture had been created (Fig. 16c; Clark 1980a).
An example of this can be seen in the upper part of the Hauptdolomit in Schoonebeek-447, where the porosity has been completely destroyed by vadose compaction and the sonic log as a typically serrated character (Fig. 18).
Any remaining intergranular porosity that escaped vadose compaction appears to have been occluded by early cementation (Fig. 16d).
This took place either as a result of beachrock development in an intertidal environment, or as a consequence of vadose and phreatic diagenesis during phases of subaerial exposure.
Both vadose compaction and early cementation only appear to have operated locally, however, as porosity has survived in the uppermost Hauptdolomit in Exloo-2 nearby (Fig. 18).
FIG. 16.
Pore types in oolitic grainstones of the Z2 Carbonate:(A) Well-developed intergranular and intragranular porosity in an oolitic grainstone from Aabenraa-1, southern Denmark (scale bar 2 mm);(B) Occlusion of porosity by anhydrite cement in an oolitic grainstone from Arnum-1, southern Denmark (scale bar I mm);(C) Destruction of intergranular porosity by vadose compaction in a pisolitic grainstone from Schoonebeek-447, eastern Drenthe, the Netherlands (scale bar 0.5 mm);(D) Occlusion of intergranular porosity by isopachous and blocky cements in an oolitic grainstone from Exloo-2, eastern Drenthe, the Netherlands (scale bar 1 mm).
During deeper burial, the intergranular and intragranular pores have been partially or completely occluded by anhydrite cement at some localities (Fig. 16b).
This has had a much more drastic effect on the reservoir quality of the rocks than vadose compaction or early cementation, as it affected the whole of the Hauptdolomit rather than just the upper portion (Fig. 18).
It is a particular problem in the Z2 Carbonate because the sediments are sandwiched between two thick formations of anhydrite (Fig. 1).
What controls the distribution of these anhydrite cements is not properly understood and therefore their  presence is difficult to predict.
One possibility is that anhydrite was brought into juxtaposition with carbonates by faulting and that this allowed CaSO 4 -saturated solutions to infiltrate the rocks along fractures.
If this is true, it would suggest that exploration wells should not be drilled too close to obvious faults in order to minimise the chance of finding a tight reservoir.
A good example of the problem caused by anhydrite cementation can be seen in well 48/22–1 (Fig. 19) in the southern North Sea, which was drilled on a dip-closed structure at ‘base Zechstein' level.
This well encountered oil in the Z2 Carbonate and production rates of up to 2000b/d were obtained during testing but the appraisal well 48/22–2 encountered a tight reservoir with only oil shows.
Although there is possibly a small fault in the first well, the overall similarity between the sonic and gamma ray logs suggests that succession in each well is similar, and using a combination of log and core data it is possible to recognise a lower unit of carbonate mudstones and an upper unit of oolitic and pelletoidal grainstones (Fig. 19).
In the first well the upper unit appears to be porous and by analogy with the Z2 Carbonate elsewhere the porosity is thought to be composed mainly of intergranular and intragranular pores.
In the second well, however, the sonic log indicates that the upper unit is much tighter and the core descriptions suggest that the pores have been filled by an anhydrite cement.
Furthermore, the lower unit appears to have been extensively replaced by anhydrite to the point that on the original completion log, at least half of it was incorrectly attributed to the Z1 Anhydrite (up to the arrow in Fig. 19).
Thus, what initially appeared to be a reasonably-sized oil discovery was downgraded to the point of being uneconomic, largely because of the influence of anhydrite cementation.
As there is no obvious reason why the reservoir should have been adversely affected in the second well, more study is clearly needed in order to understand the distribution of these cements.
The carbonate mudstones which comprise the  Stinkdolomit also have important potential as reservoir rocks (Fig. 20).
These sediments were dolimitised during early diagenesis and are generally characterised by low porosity and permeability.
In Emmen-7, for example, the porosity and permeability of the dolomites does not exceed 7% and 1 mD, respectively (Fig. 21).
During later diagenesis, however, these properties were locally enhanced by late leaching which is thought to have taken place in response to the decarboxylation of organic matter in the Stinkschiefer (Clark 1980a).
This generated CO2 which migrated up-dip into the Stinkdolomit and caused leaching of dolomites at the foot of the mud wedge (Fig. 20).
The porosity of these rocks is made up predominantly of intercrystalline voids (Fig. 22c) formed by the selective corrosion and removal of dolomite crystals and the observed porosities and permeabilities typically range from 10–30% and 1–100 mD, respectively (Fig. 23).
The thickness of the Stinkdolomit in areas where it has been affected by late leaching is about 40–60 m and of this, about 10–20 m might be expected to constitute potential net pay.
In most cases, late leaching was accompanied by the calcitisation of dolomite and secondary limestones are normally found together with the porous dolomites (Figs. 21, 22, 23 and 24; Clark 1980a).
These limestones are completely tight and form lenses or nodules which vary considerably in horizontal and vertical distribution from one well to another (Fig. 21).
When secondary limestones are extensively developed, it is easy to mistake the porous dolomites for layers of porous limestones using the sonic log (Fig. 21).
This can be avoided, however, by using a combination of the FDC and CNL logs which, when used together with a gamma ray log, allow the porous streaks to be unambiguously identified as dolomites (Fig. 24).
Care should be taken in calculating pore volumes in these reservoirs because of the variable distribution of secondary limestones, and large errors can be made if the porous layers are extrapolated laterally from a single well.
Not all of the intercrystalline porosity that has been generated by late leaching is necessarily preserved because the host dolomites appear to have been compacted as leaching progressed, reducing the final porosity of the rocks (Fig. 22b; Clark 1980a).
Compaction also caused the secondary limestones to become fractured and in some cases this results in the caving of the limestone sections in boreholes which can be detected using the caliper log (Fig. 24).
These fractures also provide the Stinkdolomit with an enhanced permeability thereby improving the potential productivity of the rocks.
Submarine fans are much less important as potential reservoirs in the Z2 Carbonate than the platform or mud wedge carbonates, because  they are only rarely developed.
So far, they have only been described from localities in the Netherlands and Germany but another example may be present in N.E. England (Clark in press).
The fans are normally situated within the carbonate mud wedge (Fig. 15) and consist of a succession of graded oolitic and pelletoidal grainstones, interbedded with carbonate mudstones.
These grainstones exhibit porosities of up to 15% which consist mainly of intergranular voids preserved after deposition, together with some intragranular pores resulting from early leaching.
The latter process does not seem to have been very effective in the submarine fans and therefore the porosities are generally lower than those observed in the grainstones of the  Hauptdolomit .
This is probably because the fans were encased in impermeable carbonate muds and also buried at considerable depth below the exposure surfaces from where the leaching solutions originated.
In Emmen-Nieuw Amsterdam-1 in eastern Drenthe, the gross thickness of the submarine fan is 35 m, of which about 10–15 m can be considered as potential net pay (Fig. 25).
With regard to the prediction of porosity in the Z2 Carbonate, several studies have now demonstrated that the distribution of facies can be related to the overall thickness of the formation (Sannemann et al.1978; Peryt et al.1978; Clark 1980b).
In eastern Drenthe for example, it can be shown that the edge of the marginal plat-form usually corresponds to a line following the maximum thickness of the formation (Fig. 26).
Between this line and the basin margin the formation comprises mainly platform carbonates, whereas basinwards it consists entirely of slope and basin plain deposits and submarine fans are developed only where the Z2 Carbonate reaches exceptional thickness.
Hence, as porosity distribution and facies appear to be related, it follows that prediction of potential reservoirs can be made from facies maps, and even if facies interpretations are not available, reservoir prediction can still be done by identifying the zone of maximum thickness on an isopach map and extrapolating from it the distribution of facies and porosity.
Z3 Carbonate
The Z3 Carbonate is also widely known as the Plattendolomit (Brueren 1959; Füchtbauer 1964 and 1972; Rhys 1975; Taylor 1981; Taylor and Colter 1975; van Adrichem-Boogaert and Burgers 1983; Wagner et al .
1978).
In Durham it is known locally as the Seaham Formation and in Yorkshire as the Upper Magnesian Limestone (Smith, 1980; Taylor and Colter 1975).
In general, it reaches a maximum thickness of 40–50 m near the basin margin but locally in the southern North Sea it attains a thickness of   up to 90 m, and basinwards it decreases in thickness to less than 5 m (Fig. 4c).
Three distinct lithological units can be recognised in the Z3 Carbonate, these being platform, slope and basin plain deposits (Fig. 27).
FIG. 22.
Pore types in carbonate mudstones of the Z2 Carbonate:(A) Polished slab showing nodules of secondary limestone set in a matrix of porous dolomite (scale bar 3 cm);(B) Photomicrograph of a porous dolomite which has been compacted around nodules of secondary limestone (scale bar 4 mm);(C) Photomicrograph of a porous dolomite showing a well-developed intercrystalline porosity (scale bar 0.5 mm).
The succession at the margin of the platform appears to be composed mainly of oolitic grainstones, although these have only been described so far from Poland (Peryt et al.1978).
These sediments were deposited in a coastal sand-barrier complex that became established at the edge of the platform.
As in the Z2 Carbonate, the platform sediments prograded to some extent over the top of already deposited slope carbonates and, consequently, a lower unit of slope and upper unit of platform sediments is commonly encountered in the Z3 Carbonate (Fig. 28).
On the interior parts of the platform, the succession is composed predominantly of cyclic alternations of dolomitised carbonate mudstones and algal boundstones, interbedded with thin layers of nodular anhydrite (Fig. 28).
These were deposited in lagoonal, intertidal and sabkha environments, respectively, that became established behind the barrier complex.
The individual cycles are easily recognised with the aid of the FDC log, because each is characterised by the presence of a leaching profile, punctuated by thin, dense layers of nodular anhydrite (Fig. 28).
In some areas in the southern North Sea, Germany and the Netherlands, the lagoonal sediments consist of bioclastic grainstones instead of carbonate mudstones (Füchtbauer 1972; Taylor and Colter 1975; van Adrichem-Boogaert and Burgers 1983).
These grainstones are composed entirely of the stems of dasycladacean algae which have been identified either as Calcinema or Tubulites .
A wedge of dark, thinly bedded carbonate mudstones is present basinwards of the marginal platform, that was deposited in slope and basin plain environments (Fig. 27).
These sediments were originally defined in Germany as the Plattendolomit (Füchtbauer 1964 and 1972).
Further basinwards, the carbonate mudstones pass into a thin shale that is indistinguishable from the Grauer Salzton (Grey Salt Clay), which represent the basin plain environment proper.
Some authors, however, erroneously equate the Plattendolomit with the basinal facies of the Z3 Anhydrite (Richter-Bernburg 1955; Füchtbauer 1972; van Adrichem-Boogaert and Burgers 1983).
Submarine fans have not been found in the Plattendolomit but by analogy with the Z2 Carbonate, it is possible that these may be found in areas where the Z3 Carbonate reaches exceptional thickness.
Porosity has been observed in both platform and slope deposits of the Z3 Carbonate (Fig. 27).
The porosity of the lagoonal mudstones is mainly of the intercrystalline type and rarely exceeds 2–3%.
Slightly higher porosities of up to 5% are developed in the algal boundstones at the top of each depositional cycle, where the pores consist mainly of vugs and enlarged fractures, together with some intragranular voids.
In both cases, the porosity probably resulted from early leaching and was preserved when the sediments were dolomitised.
Although leaching profiles are developed throughout the platform carbonates, a much stronger one is normally present at the top of the Z3 Carbonate (Fig. 28).
This is thought to have resulted from a prolonged period of subaerial exposure in response to a drop in sea-level prior to the deposition of the Z3 Anhydrite.
As a consequence, the uppermost part of the formation was subjected to a more intense phase of leaching than the  underlying cycles and this has resulted in the development of higher porosities and permeabilities of up to 10% and 400 mD respectively.
More generally, however, the cycles have not acquired such good reservoir properties and the overall porosities are much lower than those formed by early leaching in the Z2 Carbonate.
For example, in P/6–1, offshore from the Netherlands, average porosities and permeabilities of 5% and 1 mD (max. values 6.8%, 15 mD), respectively, have been reported (van Adrichem-Boogaert and Burgers 1983) and in Rustenburg-1, average values of 4% and 10 mD have been observed (Fig. 27).
This may be because of the difference in lithology between the platform sediments of the Z2 and Z3 Carbonates, but is also possible that the episodes of exposure and leaching in the Z3 Carbonate were of shorter duration and therefore less effective in generating porosity.
Good porosity and permeability has been reported, however, from the bioclastic grainstones of lagoonal origin.
For example, in Schermer-1 in the western Netherlands, an average porosity and permeability of 20% and 10 mD, respectively, has been reported from this lithofacies, with maximum values reaching 26% and 149 mD (van Adrichem-Boogaert and Burgers 1983).
This porosity probably formed in response to the same early leaching process that affected the lagoonal mudstones and boundstones, and is made up almost entirely of intragranular voids.
As in the Z2 Carbonate, a belt of good porosity might be expected at the edge of the platform where a continuous sequence of oolites is though to be present.
These oolites are likely to be similar to those present in Rustenburg-l, where a thin unit of cross-bedded oolitic grainstones about 2 m in thickness, is present at the base of the platform sequence (Fig. 28).
These oolites were probably deposited as part of the coastal sand-barrier complex as it prograded basinwards, before becoming stabilised at the edge of the platform.
They are characterised by the presence of primary intergranular pores and leached intragranular pores (Fig. 29a) but the total porosity does not exceed 10%.
Generally, the lower unit of the Z3 Carbonate consists of tight, dolomitised carbonate mudstones with porosities and permeabilities rarely exceeding 3% and 3 mD, respectively (Fig. 28).
The lowermost sediments of the unit commonly display an apparent porosity on wireline logs, which rapidly decreases upwards from the base of the formation (Fig. 28).
This, however, is caused by the presence of clay minerals in the carbonates, which decrease in abundance upwards away from the Grauer Salzton and result in an anomalous log response.
It does, nevertheless, have one benefit in that it makes the identification of the Z3 Carbonate relatively easy because when combined with the leaching profile at the top of the formation, it gives the sonic log a characteristic D-shape which is unique to the Z3 Carbonate (Fig. 28).
At some localities, late leaching has enhanced the reservoir properties of the slope mudstones, although not as commonly as in the Z1 and Z2 Carbonates.
An example of this can be found in Tønder-2, in southern Denmark, where very intense leaching has taken place (Clark 1980a).
This has corroded and removed dolomite crystals to form an excellent porosity composed of both intercrystalline and intracrystalline voids (Fig. 29d).
Some porosity was lost, however, as leaching progressed and the dolomite host became compacted around patches of replacement anhydrite (Fig. 29c; Clark 1 980a) but despite this, porosities of 20% and permeabilities of 20 mD have survived.
In this particular case, the porosity is present in basin plain sediments (Clark and Tallbacka 1980) and therefore the potential pay is only a few metres in thickness.
By analogy with the Z2 Carbonate, however, similar porosities could also be expected to be developed in base of slope sediments where the pay zone would be thicker and the rocks would make more attractive reservoirs.
One problem that is more commonly encountered in the Z3 than in the Z1 or Z2 Carbonates, is that the sediments are widely affected by  cementation and replacement by halite.
The reason for this is that the formation is sandwiched between thick units of halite (Fig.
I) and consequently the pores are prone to infill by the latter.
In Rustenburg-l, the porosity and permeability that was initially observed from wireline logs and cores, was very low and did not exceed 1% and 0.2 mD, respectively (Fig. 28).
This is because the intragranular pores have been occluded by a late-stage halite cement (Fig. 29a; Clark 1980a) and, only after washing the core plugs in freshwater, were porosities obtained that were more typical of the platform carbonates.
At the same time, a vuggy porosity was also created in the lower unit of carbonate mudstones but this was found to have resulted from the dissolution of patches and veins of replacement halite (Fig. 29b and c) and as such cannot be expected to be present away from the areas where replacement has occurred.
Prediction of porosity in the Z3 Carbonate can be done in the same way as for the Z2 Carbonate, using either facies or isopach maps (Figs. 4c).
However, as detailed facies maps are only available from Poland (Peryt et al .
1978), reliance has to be placed on isopach maps in most areas.
These can be interpreted in a similar way to the maps of the Z2 Carbonate, with a belt of porous oolitic grainstones coinciding with the thickest part of the formation.
Between this belt and the basin margin, lagoonal sediments can be expected and beds of porous bioclastic grainstone may occur locally in this situation.
Basinwards of the zone of maximum thickness, a wedge of slope and basin plain sediments is present and porous dolomites may occur rarely at the foot of the mud-wedge.
FIG. 29.
Pore types in the Z3 Carbonate:(A) Intergranular and intragranular pores in an oolitic grainstone from Rustenburg-l.
These pores have been occluded by halite cement (scale bar 1 mm)(B) and (C) Irregular patch (B) and vein (C) of halite that have replaced a carbonate mudstone from Rustenburg-l.
These may be dissolved during core preparation and analysis to produce an anomalous vuggy porosity (scale bar 0.2 mm in B, and 1 mm in C)(D) Porous dolomite that has been compacted around patches of replacement anhydrite from Tønder-2 (scale bar 1 mm);(E) SEM photomicrograph of corroded crystals from the porous dolomite illustrated in Fig. 29d, showing both intercrystalline and intracrystalline porosity (scale divisions 10 microns).
Collapse Breccias
A less commonly developed reservoir that is found in Zechstein carbonates, is the so-called collapse breccia.
These have formed in response to influxes of meteoric water during phases of uplift and exposure, and may be developed in either platform or slope sediments.
An excellent porosity is normally preserved between the fragments of the breccias and widespread fracturing has resulted in high permeabilities.
Vugs that have resulted from the leaching of crystals of replacement anhydrite also make an important contribution to the total porosity of the breccias (cf.
Fig. 14).
Collapse breccias have only been described so far from the Auk and Argyll fields in the central North Sea (Pennington 1975; Brennand and van Veen 1975).
In both cases, the breccias are thought to be exclusively developed in the Z1 Carbonate, although it is possible that the upper part of the reservoir in Auk may represent a collapsed portion of the Z2 Carbonate.
The average porosity of the reservoir in the Argyll field is about 18%.
This appears to be made up largely of vugs and fractures, although it is not clear whether the ‘vugs’ have originated from leaching of evaporites or by brecciation of the carbonates (Pennington 1975).
In the Auk field, the reservoir has been divided into an upper and a lower unit (Brennand and van Veen, 1975).
The lower unit is characterised by an average porosity of about 13% which is largely derived from vugs produced by leaching of replacement anhydrite.
The upper unit has an average porosity of 12%, formed largely of voids between fragments of the breccias, together with some contribution from fractures.
As might be expected, the permeability of these breccias is very good and high flow rates of up to 10,000 b/d have been reported from wells in the Argyll field (Pennington 1975).
The enhancement of reservoir properties in these fields appears to have taken place only on a local scale and nearby wells exhibit much lower porosities.
In well 29/25–1, for example, which is close to the Auk field, the average porosity of the carbonates is only 2.2%, whereas in 30/16–1 which is within the field, the average porosity is about 12.5% (Brennand and van Veen 1975).
The reason for this is probably that the fields are situated on top of upthrown fault blocks.
These became exposed in the Triassic and again in the Cretaceous and consequently the interbedded evaporites were removed and the carbonates  themselves were karstified.
In the downthrown areas, in contrast, the carbonates have escaped exposure and karstification, and the interbedded evaporites are largely preserved.
A similar relationship also exists in the Claymore field where the Z1 Carbonate is situated on an upthrown fault block.
This block became exposed periodically in the Mesozoic and porosity was generated by the leaching of replacement anhydrite.
Brecciated carbonate mudstones are also present at this locality but are thought to have formed as debris flows during deposition rather than by solution-collapse.
As a result, the breccia fragments are surrounded by a mud matrix and rocks are only of marginal reservoir quality with porosities and permeabilities that are much lower than in the collapse breccias of Auk and Argyll.
Collapse breccias are also possibly developed in the Scram field in the southern North Sea where, according to the released well data, gas has been produced from fractured and brecciated Zechstein carbonates.
This field is situated at the edge of the Zechstein salt basin and thin beds of halite extend over part of the structure.
During the early Jurassic, the area appears to have been subjected to uplift and erosion and as a result, the evaporites appear to have been partially removed by leaching.
At the same time, the interbedded carbonates became fractured and brecciated but in this case the process seems to have affected the Z2 and Z3 Carbonates rather than the Z1 Carbonate.
As the distribution of collapse breccias is not related to any particular facies, the only way that their presence can be predicted is by identifying areas where uplift and exposure has occurred.
The most obvious places where this is likely to have happened are along the flanks of the Mid-North Sea and Ringkøping-Fyn Highs, around late Cretaceous inversion features such as the Texel-IJsselmeer High (van Adrichem-Boogaert and Burgers 1983), and in areas where the Zechstein is presently at outcrop such as N.E. England.
Conclusions
Reservoir rocks suitable for gas production are widely developed in the Zechstein.
Porosity is known to occur in all of the carbonate units but the best potential probably exists in the Z1 and Z2 Carbonates, where porosities are generally higher than in the Z3 Carbonate.
Most of the gas discovered so far has been from the Z2 Carbonate but a few finds have also been made from the Z3 Carbonate in the western Netherlands and the adjacent offshore area, and gas is present in both the Z1 and Z2 Carbonates in Scram.
With the aid of wireline logs, it is possible not only to interpret the environments of deposition and diagenesis of Zechstein carbonates, but also to infer the types of pores that may be present in the various lithofacies.
It is also possible to construct facies and isopach maps from logs and using these maps, predictions can be made about the distribution of potential reservoir rocks.
Each carbonate unit must be considered separately, however, as the facies belts are displaced progressively into the basin with each successive unit, and therefore isopachs of ‘total carbonate’ cannot be used to predict porosity.
It is not possible at present to assess the adverse affect that evaporite cements may have on reservoir quality and this must be considered as one of the main risks in exploring for Zechstein gas.
Significant reserves of gas almost certainly remain to be discovered in the Zechstein, particularly in onshore areas of the U.K. and Denmark.
Admittedly, the net pay that could be expected in the carbonates is relatively small,(perhaps only 10–20 m) and therefore the potential reserves that could be expected might only be in the order of 10–50 Bcf.
The Scram field, however, is understood to contain gas reserves of somewhere between 100–200 Bcf, so clearly it is possible to find larger accumulations of gas in Zechstein reservoirs.
Nevertheless there has been little interest in exploring for Zechstein gas in the North Sea and the test results so far encountered have been very discouraging.
These results, however, are somewhat misleading because in most cases the wells do not appear to have been drilled for Zechstein objectives and were either off-structure or lacking in significant closure at Zechstein level.
Furthermore, even where valid structures have been drilled, rocks of poor reservoir quality have been found but this my be due to the fact that no attempt has been made to select the structures with the best reservoir potential.
At present, most of the possible Zechstein accumulations would not be economically attractive in offshore situations, where the minimum size of field that can be commercially developed is about 100 Bcf.
Smaller fields, however, could be commercially developed onshore and fields as small as 50 Bcf might be an attractive proposition offshore, if they were to be developed as satellites to larger fields.
Clearly, therefore, there is further scope for finding Zechstein gas and with the aid of the sedimentological models presented herein, it is  hoped that future exploration will be more successful.
Evaluation Procedures in the Carboniferous of Northern Europe
J. K. Draxler and D. P. Edwards
Schlumberger Technical Services, London
SUMMARY: Formation evaluation in the Carboniferous has always been an extremely difficult task due to complex formation properties coupled with adverse logging conditions.
A study was undertaken in co-operation with oil companies to propose optimum data acquisition techniques and formation evaluation procedures.
The study covers a 300 kilometre-wide area of North Continental Europe.
It includes data from 12 wells with different logging conditions and depths ranging from 2200 to 6700 meters.
Cores were analysed for porosity, permeability and formation factor under reservoir pressure conditions.
Thin sections, SEM photographs and X-ray diffraction results, have been utilised for clay typing and to establish the lithological model best suited to Carboniferous evaluation.
This model includes: quartz, ferroan dolomite, haematite and mica.
Illite and kaolinite are the two main clays.
Formation water salinity was found to decrease from 230 Kppm in the uppermost formations, close to the Zechstein cap rock, to 26 Kppm in the oldest Westphalian horizons.
Determination of the true formation resistivity takes account of the influence of the so-called Groningen effect.
Core and log observations pointed to the presence of a dual porosity system with variations of cementation exponent with overburden pressure.
Rock mechanical property computations, estimation of in-situ stress directions and fracture detection completed the study.
Geological Overview
In the early Carboniferous, the Variscan geo-syncline of North Europe, the Cornwall-Rhenish basin, formed an east-west basin stretching about 2000 km from Russia to the west of Ireland.
Several Graben-like extensions in the north-west direction gave it a width of about 500 km (Ziegler 1979).
Limestone and dolomite shallow-marine and near-shore deposits indicate that the basin was connected to the sea during the Lower Carboniferous Dinantian time.
In late Visean, a displacement of the basin towards the north took place.
During Namurian time the main influx of material came from the ‘Old-Red Continent’, the Fenno-Scandian Shield in the north-east.
To a lesser extent material was supplied from the south.
Confirmation is found in the increase of coarser sands and number of conglomeratic intervals towards the south within the alluvial fans.
The Westphalian age is characterised by alternating conglomerates, sands, silts and claystones in very distinct cycles of transgressive and regressive phases.
There was deposition in large alluvial fans stretching out from the mountains in the south and the north-east into the flat plain.
Fluviatile, braided river, sheet flood and point bar sediments prevail in Germany.
Towards the west they become more deltaic with meandering stream, distributary channel and barrier type sedimentation in Holland and the southern North Sea.
A general fining of the material and better sorting from east to west is the result.
A very humid climate fostering tropical vegetation in a swampy and lagoonal surrounding is characteristic of this period.
The rich organic matter deposited is the origin of the numerous coal measures.
Frequent marine ingressions flooded the low-relief plain and left ‘marine’ shales behind.
These shales have great lateral continuity.
In late Westphalian the climate became more arid and the coal development disappeared.
The number and the thickness of the sands increased.
During the Stephanian the main area of sedimentation has shifted out into the North Sea.
A general map of the Upper Carboniferous basin (after Bartenstein 1979) is shown in Fig. 1.
Compaction of the sediments under very high overburden pressure has caused appreciable porosity reduction.
Compaction of shales and clays has resulted in dewatering and solution  recrystallisation of minerals.
Cementing material is described as ferroan dolomite, siderite, ankerite, quartz and calcite (Kelch 1963).
The origin of the cement is either in mineral pressure solution or circulation of mineral rich waters.
The mineralogical modification of the clays has been montmorillonite to illite, kaolinite to illite below about 3000 m, and illite to sericite and chlorite at greater depths.
Data Description
The 12 wells chosen for this study cover a wide area from the Elbe river in Germany to the North Sea coast in Holland.
maximum depth varies between 2200 m and 6700 m.
Seven different mud systems have been used, with one common characteristic; the mud system used to drill through the Zechstein evaporites has been kept to drill the Carboniferous reservoirs.
Most muds are ‘high salinity muds’.
In only two wells has special attention been given to the mud system.
This has resulted in improved borehole conditions enabling the recording of greatly superior quality of log information; a dolomite mud has been particularly successful in keeping the borehole in perfect shape.
Core data are available in 10 of the 12 wells studied.
Special care has been taken to evaluate the effect of confining pressure on the classical porosity/permeability laboratory measurements.
Mineralogical composition of the rocks, reservoir and shales, have been obtained through thin section, SEM photographs and X-ray analysis studies.
Furthermore, porosity-resistivity relationships have been plotted under different confining pressures to establish a model for water saturation computations.
Break-down tests performed in two wells are available.
Drill-stem tests, production results, RFT tests and production logs are also available in some wells.
A complete suite of modern logs was an essential requirement for the solution of the problems addressed.
Particular care was taken when recording the Spontaneous Potential.
Groningen effect on the Deep Laterolog measurement had been suspected, therefore priority was given to wells with more resistivity devices than just the Dual Laterolog/Micro-Spherically Focused Log.
Litho/Porosity Model
Core Analysis
Measurements of porosity, permeability, density, formation factor, cementation exponent and resistivity index under ‘room conditions’ constitute the largest part of the data.
On certain selected core plugs the porosity, permeability and formation factor measurements under ‘confining pressure’— simulating original overburden pressures — have been made by operators, or by Robertson Research on behalf of Schlumberger.
Petrographic descriptions have been provided for core plugs from five wells.
For 10 wells detailed geological core descriptions give information on the nature, type, grain size, lithology, mineralogical composition and apparent cementation material.
From core measurements made under ‘room conditions’ porosity visibly decreases with increasing depth.
For a coarse to medium grained mature sandstone, with only a small fraction of clay, porosity ranges from 15 pu or more at around 2200 m to I pu or less below 6500 m.
Permeabilities do not exhibit such depth dependence.
The amount, type and distribution of clay, mainly within the pore space, is the main influence on permeability reduction.
When the ‘hairy’ mesh of illite plugs the pore-space, practically no permeability remains, even with porosities of 8–12%.
The matrix density variations have their likely source in the changing carbonate fraction (ferroan dolomitic/sideritic cementation) and the contribution coming from heavy minerals.
Densities of 2.64 to 2.73 g/cc have been measured for relatively clean sandstones.
Thin Section Analysis
The main emphasis was placed on point-counting to determine the volumetric fraction of the mineralogical composition of the rock.
The rocks are classified as lithic arenite, quartz arenite and lithic sandstone with the following mineralogy: quartz (52–84°10), clays (2–26%), biotite (2.5–5.0%), muscovite (2.8–14.3%), dolomite including ferroan dolomite (3–16%), other non-identified minerals (1–13%).
If feldspar is present, it is in minor volumes or traces.
Calcite was recognised on only a few sections.
Haematite grains have been widely found.
The diagenetic transformation of the rock is governed by the formation of illite.
It is the result of alterations of detrital muscovite and unstable lithic grains (feldspars) and to recrystallisation of detrital clays.
With increasing depth of burial, formation of illite and sericite is intensified.
Authigenic kaolinite has precipitated in small volumes as vermicular pore filling.
Percentages of biotite and chlorite increase with depth.
Mineral cements are mainly ferroan dolomite, siderite, quartz and calcite.
Cementation of grains by pressure solution is very common.
Intergranular primary porosity is generally present in well sorted coarse to medium sands with round or subrounded grains.
Conglomerates have normally less intergranular porosity.
Secondary porosity occurs mostly at sites of leached-away detrital grains —‘moldic porosity’, leading to an increase of effective porosity if connected to primary porosity.
If not, the pore spaces remain isolated ‘vugs’.
Illite overgrowths on grains, may not visibly decrease porosity — but permeability is severely restricted, especially if the illite is in the ‘hairy’ form.
X-Ray Diffraction
The bulk volume analysis for the fraction larger than 2 µm, gave quartz (65–80%); feldspar (1–2%); mica (0.5%); kaolinite, well crystallised (0.5–10%); haematite (1–3%); siderite (0.5%).
The fraction less than 2 µm, which varied between 3.0–4.9% by weight of the bulk sample, gave illite as the dominant clay with 70–85% in well crystallised form, kaolinite 10–25% either very poorly or well crystallised, and mixed layer 5% with illite and chlorite poorly represented.
X-ray diffraction confirms illite as the main clay mineral, kaolinite as the secondary clay, and, as a special mineral, haematite/siderite.
Log Evaluation
The major matrix components identified from core observations or measurements are quartz, dolomite, illite and kaolinite.
Ankerite, haematite, mica and feldspar have also been identified in smaller quantities.
The log interpretation lithological model reflects the core information as much as possible with the restriction that the number of unknowns (minerals) is limited by the number of logs recorded in order to maintain the stability of the computation model.
The following model has been retained: Quartz, Ferroan Dolomite (or ankerite), Illite, Kaolinite, Haematite, Special Mineral (Mica to combine Biotite, Chlorite, Muscovite).
The Thorium versus Potassium cross-plot confirms illite as being the main clay and kaolinite as the secondary clay mineral.
A cluster of points with low thorium concentration trends towards mica (Fig. 2).
The Pga versus Umaa cross-plot shows quartz as the main mineral.
Points with low gamma-ray readings display a trend towards dolomite and points with higher gamma-rays, below the kaolinite-illite line, indicate mica and heavy minerals (Fig. 3).
Table 1 summarises the parameters selected for the different minerals.
The basic model has been found to be applicable in a wide area extending from Germany in the east, to onshore U.K. in the west.
The lithology model for Carboniferous formations is complex.
Solutions can only be found if the proper information has been recorded.
Clay typing is facilitated by the Natural Gamma-Ray Spectroscopy log (NGT); only then can illite be differentiated from kaolinite.
Similarly if haematite or siderite is to be detected the Litho Density Tool (LDT) must be run.
Uma is the only sure indicator for the presence of heavy minerals.
The GLOBAL method has been applied to solve for porosity, water saturation and the complex lithology.
With the model established and other corrections implemented excellent results have been obtained.
Fig. 4 represents typical results.
GLOBAL and CORE porosities are compared in Fig. 5.
Water Saturation
Formation Resistivity
Resistivity and Conductivity log readings are influenced by the logging conditions.
It is necessary to correct these readings for environmental conditions such as hole size and mud resistivity and to compute the effect of mud filtrate invasion.
Rt-GLOBAL performs the necessary computations on data corrected for environmental effects including shoulder bed correction.
In the Carboniferous the shale beds generally exhibit higher resistivities than the sands.
Therefore correction for ‘squeeze’ effect is necessary.
Resistivity adjustments of up to 20% have been recognised.
Two other major difficulties need special consideration:
the micro resistivity tools (MSFL) are adversely affected by rugosity of the boreholes; this in turn affects the quality of R xo  computations.
The deep laterolog (LLd) resistivity is often influenced by the so-called Groningen effect.
This effect appears as an abnormal increase of the deep  laterolog resistivity in formations capped by thick highly resistive beds, like the Zechstein evaporites.
Its magnitude depends on the borehole geometry, resistivity contrast between mud, formation and cap rock, formation thicknesses and location of the casing shoe.
If high resistivity shales or gas bearing sandstones lie immediately below the anhydrite the length of the interval exhibiting the effect increases by the thickness of these resistive beds.
A special modification of the laterolog tool has been designed to eliminate Groningen effect, though unfortunately at the expense of reducing the depth of investigation and increasing the sensitivity to shoulder resistivity.
Patterns of in-phase and out-of-phase voltage and current signals can be utilised to recognise and in some circumstances correct for Groningen effects.
The method is still experimental and its applicability depends on the casing position with respect to the high resistivity cap formation.
Even if the out-of-phase signals have not been recorded, experienced log analysts can still recognise Groningen effect with high probability.
The amount of the effect can be estimated in shale sections and a corrective function over the total affected interval can be applied (Fig. 6).
Formation Water resistivity
Analysis of water samples, usually provides the most reliable way to determine formation water resistivity — Ru.
Since water samples were available on only two wells, Rw had to be derived exclusively from wireline logs.
Until 1982 the SP was seldom recorded in the Carboniferous.
It is now recognised that as long as certain precautions are taken, the SP is indispensable (Fig. 7).
Rw was derived by the SP method for all the wells in the study except three.
Table 2 summarises the water salinity values derived from these observations.
Dual Porosity System
Conventional analysis ofF-–data measured on Carboniferous cores using the standard Archie relationship, has historically given widely  varying values of the cementation exponent m and coefficient a.
The authors believe that both cores and near-wellbore measurements can be affected by induced cracks due to stress relief, and by possible pre-existing fractures.
It has therefore been thought prudent to invoke the concept of dual porosity to explain the anomalous behaviour.
Basic dual porosity theory postulates that the total conductance of a sample of formation is equivalent to the sum of the separate conductances for each porosity system.
The conductance of the intergranular system having a volume V 1 with a porosity  (with respect to V,) and with a cementation exponent m p  , coefficient a equal to I, saturated with water of conductivity , will have a conductance  for a sample of length L.
The conductance of the fracture system with the original fracture volume V,, now partially filled by crystallisation so that the fraction of V2 representing connected voids is , and with a fracture cementation exponent , saturated with the same Cw, will have a conductance  
Cementation Exponent
Careful preparation of the core plugs was made to ensure reliable measurement of formation factor and porosity.
After completely flushing out all hydrocarbon, the plugs were saturated with a brine of 100 000 ppm NaCl.
The  plots were made for different overburden pressures.
It was apparent that the presence of micro-cracks and the effect of increasing overburden had to be taken into account (Figs. 8, 9).
‘Type-curves’ corresponding to the dual porosity model were used to derive the cementation exponent values to be used in the Carboniferous evaluation (Table 3) and were supported by similar  plots of data logged through water saturated intervals.
Saturation Exponent
Six samples were subjected to tests in order to derive the saturation exponent n from Resistivity Index versus Sw plots.
Starting with fully water saturated plugs, the resistance was measured in steps of decreasing Sw.
Two methods of desaturation were used — absorption by porous plate and centrifuge.
The porous plate technique proved inadequate since, due to the tightness of the rock, the minimum saturation attainable was 79%.
Centrifuge treatment was slightly more successful in reaching lower saturations, but shattered the plugs in the process.
Due to the difficulties in obtaining reliable saturation exponent values from core date, we have retained the traditional n = 2 for log evaluation.
Hydraulic Fracturing
Hydraulic fracturing is a method frequently used in Carboniferous wells to improve productivity.
The geometry of the fracture is usually calculated on the basis of volume of fluid injected during the hydraulic fracture operation.
Fracture length is derived from stimulation modelling provided the fracture height and width are correctly assumed.
Fracture height can be estimated from log-derived data.
A hydraulic fracture is generally expected to propagate in a vertical plane in a direction perpendicular to the minimum horizontal stress azimuth.
Borehole break-outs have been found to give an indication of stress anisotropy thereby enabling the fracture orientation to be predicted.
In-Situ Stresses
The in-situ stress field at a given depth is defined as  and .
The vertical stress (Jz is equal to the overburden pressure while the minimum horizontal stress, according to the elastic model modified for transverse isotropic formations, is defined as  
Tx represents the additional tectonic stress not predicted by the horizontally-constrained elastic model.
In areas around faults or domes or near the surface (thrust areas) Tx can be significant.
It can be determined by comparing closure stress measured down-hole with the log-derived computed value 
The closure stress, i.e., the stress which must be overcome to keep the fracture open can be obtained by analysing the pressure decline curve, following shut-in after a ‘mini-frac’ test.
In the illustrated Carboniferous example (Fig. 10) the computed minimum horizontal stress was within 150 psi of the tested closure stress.
In this case Tx was assumed to be  negligible .
The maximum horizontal stress  includes a tectonic stress component which is greater than Tx.
In the example horizontal stress unbalance has been simulated by setting , halfway between  and .
Fracture Pressure
Except for the case of a pre-existing open fracture, the rock tensile strength To has to be overcome for a hydraulic fracture to be initiated.
Formation break-down pressure can be expressed as 
Given that To is known, the comparison of the computed fracture pressure with the observed value in a mini-frac test, can provide a check on the amount of tectonic unbalance.
Mechanical Properties
As rock characteristics can vary considerably over very short intervals, it is useful to be able to evaluate them on a continuous basis from log data.
Poisson's Ratio is computed from the ratio of compressional velocity to shear velocity obtained from the analysis of waveforms recorded with the Long Spaced Sonic Tool or Digital Sonic Tool.
Estimates of tensile strength, are based on relationships between tensile, compressive and shear strength parameters and the log-derived Young's Modulus and Bulk Modulus, contained in the MECHPRO computer program.
Results for one well are presented in Fig. 10.
This well has been drilled through a tectonically stressed area, as demonstrated by the hole break-out displayed in Fig. 11.
The minimum horizontal stress gradient was computed to be 0.80 psi/ft in the middle of the sand unit at 4402 to 4416 m.
Pressure analysis indicated a closure stress of 11 420 psi, or minimum horizontal stress gradient of 0.79 psi/ft.
Fig. 10 also illustrates a deeper zone that was hydraulically fractured.
The computed value of fracture initiation pressure gradient was found to be 1.02 psi/ft.
The formation break-down gradient of 0.96 obtained from the test in the interval 4460 to 4468 m compared well with the computed fracture re-opening pressure gradient 0.95 psi/ft.
From the above observations one can deduce that either the tensile strength is zero due to pre-fracturing, or that the tectonic component of  was underestimated.
Fracture Containment
An indication of the ability of the layers above and below the injection point to contain the vertical fracture can be obtained by studying the closure stress gradients in a vertical sequence.
Another indicator of fracture containment capability is currently under examination.
Termed the ‘fracture toughness modulus’ it is derived from Poisson's Ratio v and Shear Modulus G and expressed as   
The example in Fig. 12 demonstrates the approach.
In view of the minimal hole break-out, there appears to be very little horizontal stress unbalance.
The computation of stress gradient is therefore made with the stress model  equal to  The fracture initiation pressure over the interval 2665 to 2689 m is computed to exceed overburden pressure, with the exception of isolated points at 2680. 5 and 2678 m where Pb = I. 0 psi/ft.
Progation of a vertical fracture to the potential fracture height of 25 m (using the FTM criterion) would require a fracture pressure of 0.23 psi/ft higher than overburden i.e., 2000 psi above Pb or a total fracture initiation pressure of 11 080 psi (750 bars).
Failure to apply this pressure differential will probably result in a fracture of very limited height, of the order of
Hole Break-out
A compilation of break-out data from worldwide sources, correlating long-axis orientation and rock stress data, has been made by Cox 1983.
The same phenomenon is observed in the Carboniferous of Northern Europe.
Induced fractures or cracks occur at the borehole wall as the result of off-loading the stresses during the drilling operation.
The cracks are caused by shear failure and according to Bell and Gough 1981 would result in a break-out elongating in the minimum horizontal stress direction.’
In a number of wells studied the Micro SFL and Formation Density Log were influenced by hole break-out.
A development currently under trial in Germany is ‘short-axis’ logging, in which the pad-mounted sensors are oriented to travel on the short-axis, thus responding to relatively undamaged formation characteristics.
The Break-out Orientation Log utilises the data provided by the two calipers and the drift measurement systems of the Dipmeter (HDT or SHDT) or the Borehole Geometry Tool (BGT).
The orientation of the long axis of an elliptical borehole is displayed when the break-out criteria are satisfied.
The qualifying criteria are based on caliper differential threshold and sharpness of hole enlargement.
Azimuth frequency histograms (or rosettes) represent the number of qualifying samples falling into each arc of 10°.
Small intervals close together are pooled.
A consistent orientation of the long axis towards 40–60 degrees east was found.
Results can be seen in Fig. 1.
This indicates that direction of the minimum stress within the Carboniferous in North Germany and East Holland is N 50° E ± 10° approximately parallel to the Variscan mountain chain.
Surface measurements of induced electrical potentials around a well which has been hydraulically fractured, carried out by Prakla-Seismos in Northwest Germany, established the direction of the hydraulic fracture propagation as being N.N.W.-S.S.E.
(Hardt 1982).
This direction coincides with the maximum horizontal stress direction predicted from the break-out orientation.
One well deviated from this regional trend due to the dominating local stress field.
Formations in this well are dipping 70–80 degrees S.E.
Conclusion
A lithological model for Upper Carboniferous formations has been established with suggested parameter for the major constituent minerals.
The influence of environmental effects, including micro-cracks induced by stress relief at the borehole, on log data and in particular on the determination of the true resistivity, has been taken into account.
Corrections have been made for the influence on Deep Laterolog measurements of the so-called Groningen effect.
Formation water salinity has been determined, mainly from the Spontaneous Potential measurement, to decrease with depth.
The effect of confining pressure on micro-cracks in cores and consequent influence on the cementation exponent was explained by means of a dual porosity model.
Finally the groundwork has been  laid for obtaining useful rock mechanics data which can aid hydraulic fracture modelling in the Carboniferous.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: The authors would like to express their sincere appreciation to the oil companies who kindly provided log examples, core data, core samples and their very valuable advice and to the Schlumberger staff in The Hague and in London for their contribution.