

Restructuring the state: the case of local government
Allan Cochrane
Introduction
After a period of apparent — and perhaps misleading — political stability in the first twenty-five years following the Second World War, the 1970s seem to have marked some sort of turning-point for the British political system.
But the direction taken at that turning-point is less easy to identify.
In the previous chapter Simon Mohun considered one aspect of the problem, exploring different interpretations of the changing relations between state and economy in the post-war period.
Here we shall be looking rather more closely at changes within the state system itself, considering ways in which it has been restructured or, perhaps more accurately, was restructuring itself, in response to crisis.
A key concern will be to explore the extent to which there has been structural change in this area.
In other words the issue is whether there has been a gradual process of change based on clear continuities with the past or an accumulation of changes in a relatively short space of time which has fundamentally altered the structures of the UK state.
In another context Allen and Massey (1988, p. 2) develop the notion of periods of structural change to describe this process, and one of the central questions around which this chapter is organized is whether the UK state has recently passed through (or is still passing through) such a period.
These issues will be developed by looking in some depth at one particular aspect of the UK state — namely, local government and its position within the wider state system.
Local government has been chosen as a case for further exploration not only because of its inherent interest as an object of study, but also because of its remarkable centrality to debates about the changing UK state in the 1970s and 1980s, reflected in policy discussion, academic debate and a continuing series of legislative ‘reforms’ and official reports.
For much of that time, local government acted as an arena through which wider political debates about the state were conducted.
Local government was a crucial element of the social-democratic or Keynesian welfare state so laboriously constructed after the war.
As Rhodes (1985) notes, sub-national government in the UK has developed extensively because until the 1970s it was the prime vehicle for building the welfare state.
Although most existing powers and responsibilities over the delivery of health services and the production of utilities, such as electricity and gas, were effectively removed by post-war nationalization, within the welfare state the role of councils was substantially increased, building on responsibilities some of them had already claimed in the inter-war period.
There was a massive expansion of public housing (which was even called council housing); responsibility for personal social services (such as children's welfare and provision for the old) grew dramatically; the growth of education budgets and responsibility for (almost) universal primary and secondary education gave local education authorities very high profiles in the lives of ordinary people; and the introduction of a nationally organized town and   country planning system suggested a major new influence over development.
The discrediting of the post-war system in the late 1960s and 1970s, discussed in Chapter 2 and charted by Leys (1983, Ch. 5 and 6), was also reflected in the position of local government within it.
In the years up to the mid-1970s, local authority expenditure rose steadily, and apparently inexorably, as a proportion of national income (up to 1975) and as a proportion of public spending (until 1973)(see Table 4.1).
After declining sharply up to 1979 its share of both stabilized in the first years of the Thatcher government, only to fall once more into the late 1980s.
The changing financial fortunes of local government have been accompanied by substantial organizational change.
Since the late 1960s there has been a series of overlapping periods of local government reform, each of which helps to illustrate some key theoretical debates about the state.
These periods can crudely be labelled as those of modernization (1966–76), centralization (1975–85) and fragmentation (1983 onwards).
Although it would be a mistake to see them as watertight compartments, or to pretend that issues raised in the first were not also relevant to the third, this division is helpful in indicating broad trends and key differences, which will be explored in the sections which follow.
Modernization (1966–76)
The search for efficiency
The dominant critique of local government as it existed in the 1960s was relatively straightforward.
The old system, with its urban district councils, rural district councils, municipal boroughs, county boroughs, the London County Council and other County Councils (the ‘shire’ counties), was perceived as ramshackle and illogical: incapable of efficiently delivering the services required by a welfare state in the modern age.
Despite ritualistic genuflections from time to time towards the value of local democracy, it was assumed that the purpose of local government was more or less consensually agreed to be the local delivery of a set of services enshrined in centrally determined statutes.
And, certainly, it was difficult to find any substantial difference in approach between authorities on the basis of party political control.
Sharpe and Newton (1984), for example, set out to identify differences between the spending patterns of urban councils (county boroughs) in the 1960s on the basis of party political control, and by the use of extensive statistical manipulation they succeeded in doing so.
But perhaps what is most noticeable from this and other research is that the differences seem marginal.
Labour councils tended to spend relatively more and be more committed to spending on social services than Conservative councils which spent a higher proportion of their budgets on education, but the bulk of spending was similar and handled through nationally organized professionals rather than locally based politicians.
By the second half of the 1960s the machinery of local democracy was being presented in official reports as one of the sources of problems for the effective operation of local government.
John Dearlove has neatly summarized the dominant views of the period: ‘Most commentators have described the system as democratic, inefficient, subject to massive and increasing central control, and dominated by councillors (and officers) of declining calibre’(1979, p. 22).
This was reflected in a series of official government reports and White Papers, which offered the prospect of a still greater expansion of local authority spending and responsibility but only on the basis of substantial reorganization to provide greater efficiency and improve the calibre of councillors and officers.
The assumption was that the creation of larger authorities (with larger budgets) would attract less parochial (more managerial) councillors and also make it possible to attract a different sort of officer, less tied to the narrowness of existing departmental boundaries with a management style closer to that of the major corporations in the private sector.
An indication of the direction and degree of interest can be given by listing the series of reports produced at the time (and generally known by the name of the person who chaired the relevant committee):
Report of the Committee on the Management of Local Government (1967)(Maud Report);
Report of the Committee on the Staffing of Local Government (1967)(Mallaby Report);
Report of the Royal Commission on Local Government (1969)(Redcliffe-Maude Report)(among the research studies undertaken for the Royal Commission were one on Economies of Scale in Local Government, another on the Performance and Size of Local Education Authorities, and a third on Aspects of Administration in a Large Local Authority);
Report of the Royal Commission on Local Government in Scotland (1969)(Wheatley Report);
Report of the Review Body on Local Government in Northern Ireland (1970)(Macrory Report);
The New Local Authorities: Management and Structure (1972) Report of the Study Group on Local Authority Management Structures (Bains Report);
The New Scottish Local Authorities: Organization and Management Structures (1973) Working Group on Scottish Local Government Management Structures (Paterson Report).
The overall message drawn from these many reports was that technical efficiency needed to be improved, management given an increased importance and decision-making streamlined.
The 1970 White Paper on the reform of local government in England expressed these concerns simply and clearly:
Unless local government is organized to meet the needs of the future, and in particular is organized in units large enough to match the technical and administrative requirements of the services which it administers, its powers must diminish, and with it the power of local democracy…
Radical change is overdue.
And only if such change occurs, and local government is organized in strong units with power to take major decisions, will present trends towards centralization be reversed, and local democracy secure its place as a major part of our democratic system.
(HMSO, 1970, paras 10, 97; quoted in Dearlove, 1979, p. 23)
These concerns provided the basis on which major local government reorganization took place in the early 1970s in England, Scotland and Wales.
In England the Local Government Act (1972) redrew the boundaries of local government and created a mixed system, in which major metropolitan areas retained powerful district councils whose responsibility included education, housing and social services, while in non-metropolitan areas education and social services were the responsibility of county councils, which also had the tasks of strategic (structure) planning.
In the metropolitan areas, the newly created counties were left with strategic responsibilities, and responsibility for the police and fire services.
The main tasks of the non-metropolitan districts were concerned with housing and basic services such as street cleaning and refuse collection.
In London, the Greater London Council had similar responsibilities to the metropolitan counties, but the Metropolitan Police came directly under the Home Secretary, while through the Inner  London Education Authority — which also included representatives from the Inner London Boroughs — it was directly involved in education within inner London.
In outer London, the individual London Boroughs alone were responsible.
Although the results of reorganization and the distribution of responsibilities which arose from it may sound confusing, the system was clearer than before.
And the principles underlying it, despite short-term political bargaining over boundaries, were relatively simple, too: to have major services, councils had to have populations large enough to sustain an efficient delivery system; to have strategic planning functions, still larger bodies were needed, to reflect the need to attract technically adequate staff and to interest political leaders of a sufficiently high calibre.
Outside England, apparently, there were no areas suitable to be given metropolitan district status.
In the Local Government Act (1972) Wales was organized on the basis of non-metropolitan counties, so that none of its major cities had education or social services functions, while the Local Government (Scotland) Act (1973) brought similar results to Scotland.
But there the county equivalents covered very large areas and were called regions rather than counties.
In addition there were three island authorities (covering the Western Isles, the Shetlands and the Orkneys) not included in any region.
Cities such as Glasgow and Edinburgh were placed in the same sort of category as non-metropolitan districts in England although they had populations larger than the more rural regions and all the island councils.
(Table 4.3 (in section 4.3.1) shows the structure of local government in Great Britain and the distribution of functions between different councils in 1987.
The only change since 1974 is that the metropolitan counties and the GLC were abolished in 1986, so that their functions have largely been distributed between their component districts and boroughs or transferred to newly created joint boards.)
Although the changes were presented as local government reform, the main criteria which underlay the new legislation seemed to be national in origin.
Local governments were to become more efficient and effective parts of a national system.
The reorganization in England recognized some important variations between areas, for example in (not always successfully) attempting to distinguish between metropolitan districts (such as Sheffield, Birmingham and Manchester) and non-metropolitan districts (such as South Northamptonshire and South Bedfordshire).
Places such as Nottingham, Southampton, Bristol and Middlesbrough, however, continued to stick out, having been labelled non-metropolitan, yet with population sizes and political traditions which suggested a different status.
And in Scotland and Wales because there were no equivalents to the metropolitan districts, major urban centres were left as part of much bigger administrative areas with which they sometimes had little in common.
A clearer, if implicit, recognition of the importance of uneven development can be seen in the nature of the reforms which took place in Northern Ireland.
As the Macrory Report pointed out in 1970, Northern Ireland ‘is  smaller than Yorkshire and has a population of 1.5 million…the rateable value of the entire province is only £14m.
In contrast the rateable value of the City of Leeds alone…is nearly £22m: and many of the proposed unitary authorities in England will have rateable valuations of £20m, £30m and even £40m’(quoted in Tomlinson, 1980, p. 109).
And for reformers from above — based in Whitehall rather than Northern Ireland — the past operation of local democracy was seen as part of the problem.
The Macrory Report favoured a move (away from elected county councils) towards area boards, made up of appointed experts and other ‘public-spirited individuals’ with only a minority representation of elected councillors.
This report presented this as ‘a suitable combination of professionalism and popular representation’.
But the dominant theme of the Macrory recommendations with respect to the distribution and control of services between Stormont (the Northern Ireland Parliament which has since 1971 been replaced by direct rule from Westminster) and local government was to emphasize the role of service professionals and experts, since ‘sensible’ and ‘spontaneous’social democratic politics were absent’(Tomlinson, 1980, p. 114).
The result today is that few important functions (measured in terms of expenditure) are handled by local government in Northern Ireland: most, like housing, are instead the responsibility of non-elected quangos or, like education, of area boards.
The particular position of Northern Ireland in a sense encouraged the development of the 1970s programme of reforms to one of their logical conclusions with a stress on the techniques of management rather than electoral politics.
(Local government reform in Northern Ireland is discussed more fully in Chapter 2, section 2.3.
See also O'Dowd , 1989.)
In England, Wales and Scotland the new local government systems which finally came into operation in 1974 appeared to confirm a new status for local government, which was also reflected in significantly increased salaries for the chief officers of the new councils.
Local government, as the Bains Report commented, was ‘not limited to the provision of services.
It is concerned with the overall economic, cultural and physical well-being of the community’(Study Group on Local Authority Management Structures, 1972, p. 122).
The task of councils had apparently become the management of urban change, and this implied a move away from old fragmented forms of decision-making with a plethora of committees and sub-committees and unpredictable interference from councillors, towards a more integrated system.
New management approaches and political structures swept through local government.
Almost all the new councils soon had chief executives instead of town clerks — even if the person employed remained the same.
Corporate management appeared everywhere, with the development of joint management teams of chief officers, central policy units and sometimes a series of interlocking interdepartmental working groups to cover joint areas of work and policy.
On the councillor side and paralleling the creation of management teams, most councils set up policy and resources committees, to allow leading councillors an overview of the  council and, in principle at least, force them to move away from narrow service committee interests and department loyalties.
The new councils were to be managed, like business corporations, as single entities with overall strategies, rather than an accumulation of individual decisions made by separate departments or committees.
The connection between these reforms and the modernization strategies discussed in Chapter 2 should be clear.
They stressed notions of strategy, planning, professional skills and modernity, while moving away from traditional forms of fragmented, professionally specialist, administration and political organization.
This was reinforced by a number of other changes which took place at roughly the same time.
Large generic social services departments, which arose from the proposals from the Seebohm Committee on Local Authority and Allied Personal Social Services (1968) were set up at this time.
The Town and Country Planning Act (1968) and Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act (1969) introduced a system of structure and local plans, apparently endorsing a vision in which planning departments of different authorities might integrate their development strategies into a coherent network, supervised by the Department of the Environment, the Welsh Office and the Scottish Development Department within the Scottish Office.
Responsibility for these plans was divided between the tiers of local government after reorganization so that counties, metropolitan counties and the Scottish regions were responsible for the structure plans, which were understood, at first at least, to be of strategic importance, providing the framework within which local plans might be prepared by district councils.
The case for structural change
The extent of local government reorganization and managerial reform in the UK at the beginning of the 1970s makes it very tempting to argue that a structural change was taking place.
This is a view which has been popular among some analysts of the period.
According to Benington (1976), this was the time when local government became ‘big business’.
In her book on the local state Cynthia Cockburn develops this idea by suggesting that the main criticism to be applied to corporate planning in local government was that it was a method borrowed from the private sector and was thus inherently anti-democratic, implying control from the top and attempts to manage the community (the reproduction of labour power), as well as the workforce (in the process of production)(Cockburn, 1977, pp. 6–18).
In addition, ‘not only could new planning processes forge a closer link between the interests of business and government, the very style of corporate management, the language that both partners were now speaking, brought them closer together’(p. 19).
Dearlove (1979) seeks to develop a rather more sophisticated analysis in his discussion of reorganization, but his conclusion is similar.
He focuses on  the ‘coded’ language of the official reports with their complaints about the ‘calibre’of officers and councillors.
As Dearlove explains:
The concern about declining councillor calibre embodies a bitter lament that a variety of changes have conspired to result in a situation in which there is now a less close and direct relationship between economic power, social status, and the political control of local government than was once the case in the Victorian age when local government enjoyed the leadership of businessmen and local notables.
Business groups consider that in some places ‘decline’ has reached such a pitch that local political power has become almost totally divorced from economic power and may even be working against its interest…
In effect, the concern to increase calibre embodies a concern to recapture the social relations, style of politics, and class of leadership, that existed before the franchise was extended and before the working class rose to some sort of local political power through the Labour Party.
(1979, pp. 104–5)
In retrospect, it is now rather easier to see that the cases made for the identification of structural change at the beginning of the 1970s were exaggerated or, at least, rather premature.
The analyses of both Cockburn and Dearlove imply a relationship between business and local government which did not exist at the time and could not easily be generated, whatever the ambitions of civil servants in the departments of central government, or of individual chief executives.
In most areas of local government activity, the main concern of business organizations was that councils should operate as cheaply as possible and interfere as little as possible with their operations through planning controls.
Longer-term relationships had generally only developed where particular business interests were more or less directly involved.
The construction and development industry is best known for this and there were notable scandals in the 1970s which linked architects (such as John Poulson), who were highly dependent on local authority orders, to key local politicians (such as T. Dan Smith), who had some influence over their allocation.
Without  introducing questions of legal impropriety, Dunleavy (1981) charts some of the links between the London Borough of Newham and major construction companies.
But these linkages were highly instrumental.
They existed because councils were — until the early 1980s at least— a major source of orders and remain, as planning authorities, agencies whose decisions could significantly influence the profitability of development schemes.
Links of this sort are intuitively likely to be stronger when local government has a major construction programme, with orders to distribute, or when large-scale development is on the cards and council co-operation is needed to ensure its success.
But they hardly suggest that a major structural change has taken place.
Other links between business and local government were more informal.
Saunders (1979, Chapter 8) charts a whole series of social and committee contexts through which leading councillors, local businessmen and managers from national companies tended to meet.
He argues that this helped to create an overall ‘community of interest’ shared by business and  council which made direct and formal interconnection largely irrelevant.
In the case of Croydon, which he studied, the main business interests directly represented on the council were those connected with property and development.
(Newton (1976) noted a similar phenomenon in Birmingham, although there the building trade was highly represented.)
Although Saunders stresses that the individuals concerned did not gain directly from this, the period of his study was one of major  commercial development in the borough.
There was little in the way of negotiation or managed change of the sort which might be expected from the Cockburn model.
Instead the council's role seemed to be facilitative.
And a need for a more structured set of relationships was not recognized.
Evidence of closer and longer-term institutional arrangements between business interests and local government at this time is far more limited.
Flynn's (1983) assessment of developing relationships in planning is cautious.
He considers attempts by county councils to set up ‘industrial liaison groups’ through which firms were able to express their concerns over planning processes and procedures, and planners tried to influence the behaviour of firms.
And there were also attempts to generate significant consultation in the structure planning process.
But the links were not consistent or sustained, in part perhaps because it was unclear what the general discussions could be expected to deliver for particular firms and structure plans, in particular, soon gained a reputation for being of little relevance for actual processes of development.
Similarly, although King (1985) is able to identify some links between the Leeds Chamber of Commerce and the council's developing economic strategy in the 1970s, they do not develop fully until the 1980s, and the links identified seem to be more of form, in terms of meetings and forums for discussion, rather than of detailed negotiation.
Sheffield, too, had such links (even before reorganization) formalized in an Industrial Development Advisory Committee, involving representatives of industry, trade unions, central government departments as well as the city council, and in the late 1970s Nottinghamshire set up an economic forum involving similar groups (Johnson and Cochrane, 1981, p. 171).
But such links remained tentative and seem to have been of little relevance to policy development even if the symbolism was important.
It would be a mistake to suggest that there were no direct links between business and local government at this time and, indeed, it may be justified to acknowledge that they were becoming more important and more regular through various forms of consultation.
But they were not sufficiently close to sustain Cockburn's analysis, particularly in the field of urban policy and the management of local communities.
Cockburn's own research in Lambeth actually highlighted the difficulties of managing community groups because their ambitions rarely fitted with those of the council.
Similarly, in retrospect Dearlove's prognosis of the reorganization of local government does not survive close inspection, although like Cockburn much of what he says hits important targets.
One of Dearlove's central theses is that local government reform was intended to take power away from representatives of the working class in local government and return it to representatives of the economically powerful.
At one level, of course, it is difficult to assess this claim since none of the supporters of reform ever made it.
As we have seen he argues persuasively that the issue of councillor ‘calibre’ was a coded way of raising it.
But circumstantial evidence suggests that his case is weaker than he would allow: in particular, there is little evidence before the late 1970s of substantial party political conflict within local government.
Gyford argues that the dominant form of Labour politics before then was ‘municipal labourism’ in which officers and politicians were allied to make ‘local government's contribution to the post-1945 welfare state’(1985b, p. 5).
And if undermining the left was the intention of the reforms, then it must be said that they failed dismally.
By the end of the 1970s there was substantially more conflict between central and local government than there had been before and, by the early 1980s, not only was Labour in control of almost every urban council — even when very weak at national level — but in some places the controlling Labour groups had swung dramatically to the left.
In a few cases they were even using corporate planning techniques to reshape the political face of their councils in ways never envisaged by the Bains or Paterson Reports.
Gyford (1985b, p. 27) goes so far as to suggest that local government reorganization was one of the reasons for moves to the left outside London, where older councillors were replaced not by the hoped for technocrats waiting in the wings, but instead often by representatives of Labour's new left.
The ambitions of the modernizers, themselves, seem to have been exaggerated and to have encouraged commentators to believe more substantial change was taking place than was actually implemented.
British local governments have not yet shown any marked ability to effectively manage change outside their own organizations.
Whatever the aspirations of the corporate planners, most of the attempts to develop corporate objectives and goals (whether in structure plans or corporate documents) have ended up as bland statements of intent, which are either unachievable or virtually meaningless.
The actual work of most councils continued to look more like the product of incremental growth and fragmented decision-making than of corporate policy-making.
Assessing the theories
These retrospective criticisms of Cockburn and Dearlove are largely based on evidence which has accumulated since their books were written.
They are not fundamental criticisms of analysis or method, although they begin to raise wider questions about theoretical approaches.
Put simply, it might be fair to ask whether their underlying theories of the state (or local government) can be appropriate if they lead to conclusions which are contradicted by empirical evidence.
Cockburn's analysis starts from a view of the local state (which includes local government, but also other locally based state agencies including offices of central government departments) as having a functional role within capitalism, principally concerned with capitalist reproduction .
This is not only expressed through direct welfare, housing and educational provision to families which helps to ensure an adequate supply of suitable labour, but also in the reproduction of wider ideologies of popular consent which make it difficult for the rule to see the possibility of any other form of economic and political organization.
The state's primary role, she says, is ‘continually to reproduce the conditions within which capitalist accumulation can take place’(Cockburn, 1977, p. 51) and the local state is part of this greater whole.
The ‘state preserves a basic unity.
All its parts work fundamentally as one’(1977, p. 47), even if from time to time its various parts seem to be moving in different directions.
This neo-Marxist theoretical underpinning encourages Cockburn to look for changes in the requirements of capitalist production to explain what is happening in the sphere of local government.
Having found the key to changes in terms of the need to manage the politics of reproduction more effectively, she tends (in theory, at least, since her own empirical analysis is rather more flexible) to follow the perceived logic through, so that the conclusion is that local government is being reorganized more or less in line with changes in the organization of major capitalist enterprises.
Unfortunately, as we have seen, such an approach suggests a more complete, less messy and more fundamental change at the time of her study than seems to be justified by the continuing history of the 1970s.
It is almost as if the direction of change is determined in advance (by theory) and then events have to be fitted into that pre-ordained model.
Dearlove's approach shares some features with that of Cockburn, but is less directly Marxist influenced.
Like her, he tries to set local government within ‘the context of the encompassing political economy’, but he also argues that Cockburn's approach, by presenting local government as an instrument of capital makes it ‘unproblematic and so renders any detailed study of it almost superfluous’(Dearlove, 1979, p. 217).
He suggests, instead, that local government reorganization took place precisely because local government is not ‘a simple instrument of either the central state or dominant interests’ and so has some room for political manoeuvre (1979, p. 221).
‘The persistent concern to increase councillor calibre through reorganization’, he says, ‘makes it equally clear that the essential object of reorganization has been to make local government more functional for dominant interests, by restructuring it so as to facilitate their direct control of its expenditure and interventions’(1979, p. 245).
Dearlove starts from an understanding of changes in local government as part of a struggle between different groups ‘to control public power’(1979, p. 105).
In principle, of course, the conclusion of such a struggle need not be as straightforward as Dearlove implies in his own study.
Even if the intention (however identified) of reorganization was to shift power away from local  working-class representatives, the results could be, and (in the 1970s at least) probably were, different.
But at the level of theory Dearlove's approach seems more helpful than Cockburn's in a number of important respects.
Above all it succeeds in escaping from criticisms of political economy approaches for being determinist and allowing little scope for political intervention, yet it continues to stress the importance of changes in the priorities and organization of capitalism.
It attempts to give some meaning to notions of relative autonomy at local level and encourages the consideration of actual political processes in determining what is possible.
One problem which remains, even in Dearlove's formulation, however, is that it tends to present options in rather too clear-cut a fashion.
Reorganization is fitted into a model which already exists without sufficient attention always being given to those parts which do not fit very well.
For example, in order to argue that reform was intended to remove power from working-class representatives it becomes necessary to exaggerate their power, and the differences between authorities controlled by different parties, as well as the influence of community groups of various sorts (pp. 235–6).
Similarly, it becomes necessary to read back some of the concerns of the later 1970s about levels of spending into the reports which fed into the 1972 legislation (for example, p. 243).
At the time those concerns were far less significant than they were to become in the late 1970s, and reorganization was actually accompanied by a substantial increase in local authority spending.
One of the main strengths of both Cockburn and Dearlove is their concern to place changes in local government within a wider ‘political economy’ context.
But this also seems to make it more difficult for them to look at changes generated from within the state system itself, whose importance is stressed by Rhodes (1985).
He argues that after the Second World War central government depended heavily on local government for the implementation of its policies on welfare.
This, he says, resulted in the development of service-based (vertical) linkages between civil servants at the centre and officials at local level on the basis of what he calls policy networks .
The importance of these networks was, in turn, reinforced by the increased professionalization of these service areas.
He stresses the ways in which the period from the early 1960s to the mid-1970s saw the effective by-passing of local elites, including councillors, because of the development of other central-local linkages.
According to him, ‘policy-making in British government became characterized by professional bureaucratic complexes based on specific functions: a series of vertical coalitions or policy networks in which central dependence on sub-national government (SNG) for the implementation of policy was complemented by SNG's dependence on the centre for financial resources.
Fragmentation between functions within the centre went hand in hand with centralization within policy networks’(Rhodes , 1985).
The strength of Rhodes' arguments is that they allow a focus on interests and negotiations within the state.
They imply that the state — and groups within it — have their own interests which may be pursued separately from  any changes in the structures of British capitalism.
There is no a priori assumption that the state (whether local or national) acts either as an agent of capital or in response to pressures from other classes.
Insofar as a ‘logic, unfolds, it is one which follows from the organization and structure of the state itself, rather than the requirements of capital.
Of course, the state is not insulated from economic pressures or political demands from the working class and other groups, but this analysis suggests that it will respond to them in ways which are to its own advantage, which may not coincide with the narrowly defined interests of capital or other political forces.
There is a balance which needs to be drawn here, however.
Even if one acknowledges the significance of the state itself as an agency, there is a danger that it may be given a role which is too sharply independent.
As far as local government is concerned the extent and direction of change to which it has been subject since the 1960s are difficult to explain mainly in terms of the state itself.
Here Cockburn and Dearlove seem more convincing again — at least in terms of their focus on broader tendencies of change, which also seem relevant to the continuing shifts that have taken place up to the late 1980s.
In particular, both argue that reorganization was part of an attempt to adjust systems of representation to fit with the social and economic structures of the late twentieth century.
In doing this, they make it easier to understand why some form of local government continues to survive as more than simply a creature of the centre.
Cockburn stresses the need to use community approaches to local authority management to involve and incorporate groups in urban areas which might otherwise increasingly question and even threaten the operations of the state.
Such incorporation is, for her, a necessary corollary of a continued erosion of popular control over local government.
Dearlove focuses on the pressures to encourage the direct involvement of business interests at local level.
The changed nature of business — the shift to corporate organization and the break between the location and ownership of industry — means that old, more or less direct methods of incorporation on the Victorian model cannot be sustained or renewed.
There are few modern equivalents of the great nineteenth-century urban capitalists like Cadbury, Rowntree, Boots, Lever, Chamberlain, Salt and others, who lived near the factories and were directly involved in local politics and urban development in one way or another.
Instead, some institutionalized system of representation may be required, with some similarities to the ‘corporate bias’ identified by Middlemas (1979) at national level, and discussed in Chapter 2.
One of the problems for local government is that it is easier to see how this might work at national level where the interests are clearer and more easily identifiable.
The national economic and political environment is likely to be far more important for most companies, particularly since they will tend to be nationally or even transnationally organized.
This may help to explain why Dearlove's conclusions were premature, but the issues he identifies come back as key concerns in the 1980s and 1990s.
Activity 4.1
Rhodes' approach seems to play down the importance of ‘local’ politics because of its stress on the state system and relations within it.
What significance do you think Cockburn and Dearlove would attach to local politics in explaining the changes of the early 1970s?
Cockburn
Dearlove
Summary of section 4.2
In the late 1960s official reports wanted to make local government more efficient by:
rationalizing the confusing structures, boundaries and distribution of responsibilities between authorities
increasing the size of local authorities so that they could undertake strategic tasks and attract a higher ‘calibre’ of officer and councillor
introducing new methods of management, particularly corporate management.
Some commentators — particularly Cockburn and Dearlove — have argued that this was a period of structural change in which local government became more clearly tied to the interests of capitalism and closer to business interests.
The argument for this is not convincing, because relations with business remained informal and instrumental and local governments were, for a time, more rather than less troublesome for the centre.
Corporate management did not make councils more managerial.
The theories themselves seem partly to blame for this inaccurate assessment.
In both cases the theory becomes more important than the  development being investigated, so that the evidence is made to fit, instead of being used to test, the theory.
Cockburn's approach is more determinist than that of Dearlove, who stresses the importance of political conflict around local government as one of the reasons for the reforms.
By setting local government reform in a wider ‘political economy’ context, Cockburn and Dearlove help to explain change, but may exaggerate its significance.
Rhodes, by focusing on shifts within the organizational structures of the state, is able to identify some reasons for longer-term stability, but is less able to explain the extent of change since the late 1960s.
Centralization (1975–85)
Financial controls and legal controls
In 1975, just after reorganization had finally been implemented, and in the context of a great deal of criticism about its unexpected costs, Tony Crosland (Secretary of State for the Environment) announced that cuts were needed in local government spending: ‘We have to come to terms with the harsh reality of the situation which we inherited.
The party's over’(quoted in Crosland, 1983, p. 295).
The years of steady expansion were over, although achieving the hoped-for cuts was not to be as easy as the centre expected.
The second half of the 1970s and the early 1980s were dominated for local government by a series of changes in funding arrangements and rules on spending.
The importance of this should not be missed: one aspect of growing local government spending in the first thirty years after 1945 was that the balance between sources of funding shifted dramatically.
The increased role of councils in the local administration of a nationally organized welfare state had meant that an increased proportion of local spending was funded by central government grant, as well as centrally approved loans for capital spending.
Both the rates (then the only locally determined tax, levied on property and based on the capitalization of rental values) and fees and charges declined as a proportion of income, while grant became more important.
After the mid-1970s, however, the proportion of local spending funded by central grants fell sharply, and continued to fall into the 1980s.
This is shown in Table 4.2.
These changes were, of course, initiated from the centre.
They were not products of local decision-making.
Within central government in the mid-1970s, Rhodes stresses the ‘pre-eminence of the Treasury and the treatment of local expenditure as a matter for national decision’(1986, p. 239).
The Department of the Environment (DoE, the central government department with overall responsibility for local government in England) was, he says, trapped into the position of being both the advocate of local services within the centre and the guardian of the purse-strings as far as local government   was concerned (in that respect the Secretary of State acted as a sort of ‘mini chancellor’)(Rhodes, 1986, p. 238).
In the context of the mid-1970s and later, this meant that the DoE's role increasingly became that of policing the spending of local governments.
The Scottish and Welsh Offices were in similar positions.
Indeed, Goldsmith argues that on finance, ‘the Scottish Office has been the pioneer for the Imperial core, seeking and using greater controls over local government’ than was the case in England (1986, p. 168).
(See also, for example, Midwinter, Keating and Taylor, 1983.)
The context for this shift in direction was to be found in wider pressures to reduce state spending and, above all, levels of state borrowing to finance such expenditure.
There have been many different attempts to explain these pressures, in terms of capitalist crisis (or the fiscal crisis of the state (O'Connor, 1973)); or the state acting as a leech on productive sectors of the economy (most strongly argued in Bacon and Eltis, 1976); or simply in terms of monetarism (outlined in Gamble, 1984, pp. 145–9;Leys , 1983).
But whatever the explanation, there can be little doubt that local spending became a target for central control.
As the proportion of central support began to fall dramatically, local authority dependence on it became clearer.
Until the late 1970s, however, the centralization was largely limited to tighter control over overall levels of grant and the imposition of ‘cash limits’ which meant that no (or little) account was taken of inflation.
Those councils which wanted to could make up for lost grant by increasing rate levels, and many did so, so that overall levels of spending did not fall significantly.
Some indications of future policy moves, however, were to be seen in the increasingly tight controls on capital  spending including the introduction of Housing Investment Plans (HIPs) which meant that individual councils had to agree the pattern of their housing capital spending with the Department of the Environment.
The Inner Urban Areas Act of 1978 also encouraged a more detailed consideration of urban programme spending through partnership and other arrangements, which involved central departments more directly in decision-making on local spending.
If the direction of change was already clear by the end of the 1970s, the pace of change accelerated dramatically in the early 1980s.
A series of reforms, heralded by the Local Government Planning and Land Act (1980), developed further controls on capital and current expenditure.
This Act introduced a new block grant in England and Wales and included a formula which penalized councils which spent more than a previously determined limit.
Grant was removed from those authorities, so that any increase in spending brought a fall in income and, therefore, implied a further increase in rates to make up for that loss.
Now councils were to be targeted individually, rather than as a group.
This was taken further with legislation which limited rate levels as well as spending.
The first steps in this direction were taken in Scotland where, for the first time in 1982/3, individual authorities were targeted for ‘excessive and unreasonable expenditure’ in what was popularly called a ‘hit-list’(see Midwinter et al .,
1983), and legislation on ‘rate-capping’ was enacted in England in 1984, enabling central government to set a maximum rate level for particular councils — just as later (in 1988/9) the community charge (popularly known as the poll tax) and the uniform business rate were introduced there before the experiment was extended to England and Wales.
In 1985 a further Act was passed which went beyond controlling the operation of existing local governments, when the Greater London Council (created in 1965) and metropolitan county councils (created in 1974) were abolished and their responsibilities transferred either to borough/district councils or to joint authorities of various types.
The defence of local democracy
Most academics involved in the study and teaching of local government lined themselves up behind the councils which they perceived to be under threat, in a centrally inspired attack on local democracy and local autonomy.
The main criticisms directed against the legislation of the first half of the 1980s were ‘that decentralized democratic decision making in the form of representative local government is an essential element of the country's political and government system…we believe the government's proposals to limit local authority rates and expenditure levels are a major threat to this’(SAUS, 1983, Conclusion).
As the title of another book written by two leading academics in the field made clear, they saw themselves as presenting ‘a ‘case for'’ local government' (Jones and Stewart, 1983).
The implication of their arguments was that a major restructuring was   taking place.
Indeed, in their most extreme form, it was suggested that the legislation of the 1980s heralded the end of local government as an independent sphere.
Although the immediate context for the ‘attack’ on local government was pressure for overall reductions in public spending and local government spending in particular, few of those writing about it have accepted this as a major explanation, partly because the evidence that levels of local government spending are of major significance to the economy are limited, and the arguments that state spending in itself discourages private investment are also weak.
Newton and Karran argue that ‘the case for the present degree of control is built on shabby theory and lacks empirical support.
As one economist puts it, the cost of this form of monetarism’ is ‘the erosion of local democracy which has accompanied the move towards greater centralized control of public spending decisions.
On macro-economic grounds there is little justification in exacting such a heavy toll in the form of lost local autonomy (Jackson, 1982)’(Newton and Karran, 1985, p. 124).
A great deal of the argument against central controls has stressed that local government has shown a greater ability to reduce spending than the departments of central government and even the Audit Commission — in the early 1980s — has acknowledged that the operation of central rules may actually have encouraged increased levels of spending and a reduction in the accuracy of information feeding into the centre (Audit Commission, 1984).
But, if the end-result of the changes has not been significantly to reduce spending, it remains to be determined what it actually has achieved and what has been at stake.
Duncan and Goodwin argue that:
…the centralization of local government is not merely an issue of macroeconomic and financial policy.
The desire to control public spending does not necessitate the detailed and blanket control of local authorities sought by the Conservative government — still less if it is public borrowing that is crucial (as monetarist doctrine would have it).
Indeed, some of the Government's actions are counter-productive or at least peripheral to this aim.
Rather, we claim, it is the political objective of removing local government's autonomy that is at issue.
This has both a short-term and a long-term objective.
In the short term, the centre can make cuts in public service provision and enforce its own policy aims in every local area.
In the long term, alternative political and policy positions can be weakened — there will be no government framework to give them any institutional voice or credence.
Although Duncan and Goodwin develop a particular analysis of local government which explains its existence largely in terms of uneven development and the representation of differentiated local social relations (discussed extensively in Mark Goodwin's chapter which follows), their conclusions here would have been shared far more widely both by academics in the field of local government studies and by many local government politicians (such as Blunkett and Jackson, 1987).
For them, the main explanation of national policy — at least in its centralization phrase — was that it was designed to undermine resistance to the wider political strategies of the Conservative government.
More broadly, it was placed in the wider context of the continuing ambitions of central government to control local independence.
Underlying this interpretation are echoes of Dearlove's.
Local politics is understood as being difficult to manage from the centre, because it reflects locally generated demands, through local democratic institutions (including political parties, community groups and other local interest groups).
In its various forms, this is probably the dominant interpretation of the reforms of the 1980s, and implies a fundamental change — a structural shift — in which local government becomes far weaker and central government becomes virtually the sole political power.
Alternative explanations
There are a number of major problems with this interpretation of events, however, which makes it difficult to accept it as an entirely adequate explanation.
First, like Dearlove, it still seems to exaggerate the localness of local politics and the extent to which they ever presented a substantial obstacle to the programmes of the centre.
In a sense the abolition of the GLC and the metropolitan counties and the successful implementation of the ‘rate-capping’ legislation, while presented as examples of centralization , can also be seen to confirm the relative weakness of local governments.
Despite widespread opposition to abolition expressed in opinion polls it is difficult to discern any significant backlash in the 1987 general election — indeed the increase in the Conservative vote in London seems to have been higher than elsewhere.
O'Leary (1987) argues that attempting to identify general trends revealed in the attack on local government may be a mistake, since it ignores the importance of political style within government.
His own analysis of the abolition of the Greater London Council stresses that it was ‘a policy folly rather than a rational decision…the government embarked upon a major initiative as an unintended ill-considered by-product of its other policies’(1987, p. 212).
He concludes that it was the consequence of a political style — a belief that ‘Firmness, the resolute approach, is considered essential even in defence of the indefensible; consensual, rational approaches to decision-making, tedious incrementalisms are regarded as excuses for doing nothing.
A dramatic political style is required to rectify Britain.
The price of such a style is repeated unintended and counter-productive outcomes for its supporters’(1987, p. 214).
In principle, perhaps, such an analysis could be integrated within those outlined above.
But it would undermine the essential certainty of an approach which sees the abolition of the GLC as an integral part of an attack on local autonomy.
O'Leary would be more sceptical.
Rhodes' analysis, too, suggests a rather less dramatic set of changes and makes fewer claims to the essential democracy of local government.
It sets developments in a longer context of negotiations and bargaining between  levels of government.
He argues that: ‘the financial relationships between central and local government can also be characterised as a complex set of interactions involving a range of government institutions and placing a premium on networking skills…
The relations between central and local government are too often seen in an oversimplified light.
The intricate pattern of linkages is both a constraint and a source of opportunities’(Rhodes, 1981, pp. 28 and 34).
This certainly seems to fit the experience of local government up until the early 1980s.
Reductions in levels of central government grant did not mean that councils had lost control of their spending.
The impact of cuts was dulled by a return to the use of rates as a source of funds and, in some cases, a shift to increasing income from charges.
Probably the most important means of evading the intentions of the centre was the increased use of what came to be called ‘creative accounting’.
At first, this largely involved the search for loop-holes in central government legislation: if, for example , the rules suggested that future grant depended on spending in a particular year, then it was possible with little difficulty to prepare the accounts to show that spending had been higher or lower that year (whichever was the required answer), More important, perhaps, as time went on, it become common for councils and their treasurers to seek new sources of funding which were not covered by the rules or were covered by different rules.
The accounting convention which divided spending into revenue (current) and capital expenditure was particularly susceptible to manipulation.
So, for example, moves were made to turn revenue spending (i.e. which had to be paid for out of current income — grants, fees, charges and rates) into capital spending (i.e. which could be paid for from loans raised from banks and other financial institutions).
Spending on housing maintenance was frequently capitalized in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Another increasingly common way round the rules at the time was to engage in lease/lease-back arrangements, which became more and more complicated as the rules surrounding them tried to plug loop-holes, until they were finally outlawed in 1987.
Under these schemes, which had first been developed in the 1970s as a means of raising capital from the private sector for new development, for example, on office and shopping complexes (i.e. as a means of avoiding constraints on capital spending), council property was sold on a long lease to another agency and then leased back for shorter periods until the long lease expired.
They were often, in effect, used as ways of borrowing money from commercial banks at slightly higher rates than the commercial market and those guaranteed by the government-sponsored Public Works Loan Board.
For the purposes of our argument here, it is not necessary to understand all the ins and outs of these various schemes, nor to grasp the increasingly complex rules of the centre invented to limit them.
By the mid-1980s there were very few people who would have pretended to understand all the ramifications of Grant Related Expenditure Assessments, rate-capping or  capital controls.
Local government finance was a labyrinth,(possibly) understood by the experts, but a complete mystery to most of those involved in local government (officers and councillors) and certainly to the electorate.
But the extent of the schemes should make us cautious about identifying radical structural change too readily even in the wake of the legislation so severely criticized in the 1980s.
And too sharp a division between central and local government may also be misleading.
Rhodes' analysis stresses the continuity of central-local relations in the post-war period.
He charts an unfolding if uncertain logic which goes back to the way in which the welfare state was put together after the war, as pieces were tacked on in a rather haphazard way to existing state institutions.
Rhodes argues that the organization of both central and local government was characterized by functional divisions (along service lines, such as education, social services or planning) so that links between levels were also on functional (rather than territorial) lines through policy networks, including professionals as well as politicians.
He stresses the complexity of interrelations and points to an increase in the importance of territorial politics (i.e. based on a local government area) at just the time when — in the face of severe economic problems — local (welfare) expenditure has become an increasingly important element in central (economic) planning.
The tensions were bound to create difficulties, which came to the fore as national problems of economic management became clearer, even if they were not simply the consequence of those problems (Rhodes , 1985).
The conclusions drawn from the arguments of Duncan and Goodwin would point to an increased process of centralization and the erosion of an existing local autonomy.
But Rhodes' view is rather different.
He would deny that any clear direction can be identified.
Instead he suggests that the centre has always used local government (and other sub-national governments) to serve its own political interests ‘whether the example is the construction of the welfare state, the modernization of sub-national government or the containment of public expenditure.
If central actors have not been literally squalid, the results of their actions have been a mess through their failure to comprehend the differentiated nature of the system’(1985, p. 55).
The implications of this would seem to be that 1975–85 did not see a process of structural change, but simply the latest in a series of chaotic attempts by central actors to use local government as a means of achieving their ends, without any appreciation of the range of different interests reflected in its various policy networks, and which are also linked by various routes to the still disaggregated parts of the centre.
There is, however, a potentially very important theoretical weakness in the approach adopted by Rhodes, because it is difficult to see how any other conclusion could be generated by it.
The focus on a complex process of negotiations appears to exclude the possibility of structural change.
Conclusions will tend to be in terms of shifts within the system itself — adjusting the balance between groups, levels and interests of different times.
Any  structural change — that is one which changes the rules of the game on the basis of which bargaining takes place — would have to come from outside the system.
Arguably just such a change took place in the early 1980s, and the pressures encouraging it could only be understood in the context of shifts in the wider political economy.
Both Rhodes and Duncan and Goodwin, in their different ways, make it possible to identify some dynamic for change.
Put simply, the failure of economic management at the centre and the onset of economic crisis set a context in which the continued survival of a relatively independent or autonomous sphere of politics, reflected in the institutional form of local government, became less likely.
At precisely the same moment at which central government concerns to reduce spending on the welfare state became dominant, it became more difficult to ensure that local authorities would do what was required.
They were under increased (local) pressure to respond to the demands of their residents for welfare support.
Indeed, the increased concentration of central government on local government spending helped to increase its political profile, locally as well as nationally, at just the time when reorganization had created authorities with major staffing and financial resources, authorities more powerful than the patchwork quilt of councils which they replaced.
The conclusion to be drawn from one theory is that attempts to restructure the welfare state helped to generate forms of ‘territorial’ resistance (Rhodes), while from the other, this is merely the latest in a continuing series of attempts by UK central governments to overcome and control the differentiated demands of a series of local governments with their own local bases of political support (Duncan and Goodwin).
In Rhodes' formulation, the nature of the ‘territorial’ resistance may be defined in terms of the interests of local government professionals, as well as the local populations.
They, too, have an interest in sustaining levels of welfare spending (and even existing forms of delivery), possibly to a greater extent than local consumers of services.
This tends to be underemphasized in more ‘localist’ approaches like those of Duncan and Goodwin.
But they are able rather more easily to explain the strength of local resistance and the loyalty of local electors to politicians apparently under attack from the centre.
As Mark Goodwin shows in the next chapter, they are able to uncover and explore a rich world of local politics.
Activity 4.2
Local government spending has fallen significantly since the middle 1970s both as a proportion of state spending and of national income.
But it has remained at levels comparable to those of the 1960s.
How do you think Rhodes and Duncan and Goodwin would explain this and how would they differ?
Factors to take into account include: the role of policy networks and  professionals, the independent basis of local politics, the intentions of government.
Rhodes
Duncan and Goodwin
Summary of section 4.3
From the mid-1970s local government spending was under severe pressure from the centre as more and more complex rules were developed to keep it under control.
Many academics (including Newton and Karran, Duncan and Goodwin) have suggested that the official explanations for this pressure were unconvincing, since the control of local finance is argued either to be irrelevant to the needs of the economy or, even, counterproductive.
Instead, they have explained it in terms of political conflict over the programmes of central government (particularly after the election of a Conservative government in 1979) or longer-term central-local tensions, in which the centre is concerned to minimize the pressure generated by the existence of local political autonomy.
According to this approach, because local governments have their own political bases, they are always potential rivals to the centre.
Others have been unconvinced by the search for an overall — and underlying — logic, linking the various local government reforms.
O'Leary, for example, has argued that the abolition of the GLC is best understood as an act of ‘policy folly’.
Rhodes sets the period of ‘centralization’ in a longer-term context of negotiation and bargaining between levels of government since the war.
This seems to fit quite well with the detailed process of manoeuvring which characterized the early period of financial centralization.
But it fits less well with a situation in which the ‘rules’ under which the negotiation takes place  are regularly changed to the extent that the nature of the ‘game’may itself have been changed.
Rhodes' analysis leads to a conclusion in which no clear direction of change can be identified: policy-making has been ‘chaotic’.
Duncan and Goodwin identify a more coherent direction of change, pointing to an erosion of local autonomy.
Fragmentation (1983 onwards)
Breaking up is hard to do
The era of ‘centralization’ brought rather uncertain conclusions for the local government system.
The centre proved incapable of controlling levels of local spending to the extent which supporters of restraint had hoped, but local governments also came to accept new parameters beyond which they could not stray.
Those few councils which sought substantially to exceed government guidelines were brought sharply into line.
The trench warfare of the early 1980s was replaced by more subtle forms of guerrilla conflict, in which the guiding principles are no longer so straightforward, yet the consequences of change may be rather more significant, to the extent that the '80s as a whole might justifiably be seen as a period of structural change.
Three main features of change can be identified: changes in the tax base; the growth of privatization; and the growth of non-elected local governments.
The changing tax base
The domestic rating system, which provides around 11 per cent of local government income in England, is due to be replaced by the community charge (or poll tax) in England, Scotland and Wales by the end of the 1980s.
Instead of local taxation being based on property values, it is to be based on a flat rate per capita charge levied on all adults, with limited rebates for some groups.
Accompanying this shift is the introduction of a uniform business rate whose level is to be centrally determined, with the income also collected centrally and then redistributed in the form of government grant according to a centrally determined formula.
This replaces non-domestic rates (i.e. property taxes levied on commercial, industrial and other business premises), whose levels have previously been locally determined and raised about 17 per cent of local government income in England (1984/85 figures, Douglas and Lord, 1986, p. 15).
The end-result of this will be to increase dramatically the proportion of local income which is funded by government grant, since the only sources of local income will be the community charge (poll tax) and specific fees and charges for planning applications and the use  of leisure facilities, for example.
In the 1990s over 75 per cent of local spending will, in effect, be funded through central government grant.
Privatization
An underlying theme of change since the early 1980s which has sometimes been buried in the overall conflict over spending levels has been a move towards the privatization of services: that is, the replacement of previously direct local government provision by the provision of services by commercial enterprises under contract to local authorities.
This has taken a number of forms and has not spread as widely as some of its supporters might have hoped.
The various support and maintenance activities which could relatively easily be ‘contracted out’ were early targets.
Direct labour housing construction and maintenance departments of local authorities (DLOs) now have to compete with commercial tenders for much of their work.
Since 1980 DLOs have had to make a return of 5 per cent on capital.
Although DLOs have survived, Stoker (1988, p. 186) notes that there was a 22.5 per cent fall in numbers employed between 1980 and 1985 and a 17.7 per cent fall in value of output over the same period.
Some councils have been more eager than others to develop ‘contracting out’ schemes.
Despite a boom in interest in the early '80s, with one hundred and fifty authorities considering contracting out in the years 1982/83, only thirty-seven actually did so.
The value of contracts in 1986/87 only amounted to £120 million (Stoker, 1988, p. 186).
In many cases, according to Stoker, the threat of privatization was used by councils to ‘re-establish firm control over their in-house staff and trade unions.
The tendering process has in a number of cases been used by local authority managers to reassert their right to manage’(1988, p. 187).
But legislation in 1987–88 has also brought an increase in moves towards more explicit privatization by making competitive tendering compulsory for a wider range of activities, including refuse collection, street cleaning and vehicle maintenance.
This probably underestimates the extent to which there has been a wider shift away from direct council provision, however.
The limitations on council spending have encouraged a search for other ways of providing services.
There has, for example, been a marked reduction in direct council provision of homes for the elderly and a concomitant increase in privately run homes.
There has been a move away from the use of children's homes towards more developed foster care and some private sector provision.
In the field of housing where central financial controls have made housebuilding by councils almost impossible, there has been a marked increase in partnerships with housing associations and many councils have also sought to encourage low cost housing through equity share schemes with the private sector.
From a slightly different perspective, there has been a shift in emphasis among some councils towards seeking to influence the wider environments  within which they find themselves rather than concentrating on direct service provision.
This has been particularly noticeable in the areas of local economic policy and equal opportunities.
In the former, agencies such as local enterprise boards, or economic development units, have attempted to encourage firms to develop or invest with the help of limited assistance from councils — attempts have been made to ‘lever’ additional funds from the private sector (Clarke and Cochrane, 1987).
In the field of equal opportunities, the notion of contract compliance has been borrowed from the USA by some councils: the idea behind this is that a condition of local authority purchase from its suppliers may be expressed in terms of key employment practices, including the recruitment of ethnic minorities and women, and reasonable access for them to promotion within the enterprise.
Government legislation has sharply reduced the scope for this, but a number of councils are still interested in developing it as far as they can.
Other forms of privatization have been closer to the dominant forms identified at national level by Mohun.
The sale of council houses to sitting tenants has (as Hamnett, 1989, notes) helped to shift tenure patterns significantly, particularly when coupled with the lack of housebuilding in the public sector.
And the deregulation of bus services following the 1986 Transport Act has dramatically changed the nature of public transport which is now either privately owned and managed (outside London) or run in direct competition with the private sector, with severe limitations on possible subsidy.
The growth of non-elected local governments
The standard model of local government since the war has been of multi-functional authorities with an elected council supervising the direct provision of services.
As the previous point suggests, the 1980s saw a decline in the direct proportion of services directly provided, whether by the extension of activity into new areas (such as economic development) or by the privatization of existing services.
Alongside this there has been a move towards non-elected and usually specialist forms of local government.
In the 1970s there were already some moves in this direction, reflected in the formation of regional agencies, such as water authorities and health authorities (Duncan and Goodwin, 1988, Ch. 7).
Although their significance as regional political institutions has been undermined — in the case of water authorities by proposals for privatization and in the case of health authorities by a series of financial and managerial initiatives which have encouraged a shift towards private sector (market-type) decision-making (Pollitt, Harrison, Hunter and Marnoch, 1988)— there has been a growth in regional state institutions in other policy areas.
The joint boards created in the wake of the abolition of the metropolitan county councils in England to cover such  activities as strategic planning, fire and police services, for example, point in this direction, while the major development agencies in Wales and Scotland (and Northern Ireland) also suggest that regional bases  for political negotiations remain important.
Regional bodies of this sort encourage the representation of interests as interests, rather than their fragmentation through electoral politics.
In the case of the development agencies, for example, although they are explicitly market-oriented and sometimes presented as examples of the neo-liberal, non-interventionist virtues (Moore, 1986), they also negotiate with representatives of business and communities (represented by local councils) to develop agreed programmes.
But these changes are not just taking place at regional level.
Some of them are specifically oriented towards more identifiably local areas.
The urban development corporations first introduced by the Conservative government in 1981 are one example of this.
These corporations are non-elected and, although an attempt is made to ensure some representation of different interests at board levels, their tasks are clearly defined in advance in terms of development and infrastructure.
The early and best-funded corporations (such as the London Docklands Development Corporation) were clearly intended to bypass the local authorities in their areas, using their own planning powers and financial resources to achieve changes which would allow private sector property development to take place.
Although councils have often been appointed to sit on the boards, more recently they have been more open to direct local authority involvement: in the case of Sheffield in 1988, for example, there was a substantial degree of negotiation over representation from the start.
But the key point remains the same — to achieve development the constraints of electoral politics need to be avoided, so that effective decisions can be made and negotiated with key industrial and commercial interests.
The initiative for bodies of this sort has not only come from the centre.
Stoker (1988, Chapter 3) identifies a much wider trend in this direction.
In the field of local economic policy, this is particularly clear, because of the development at local level of a series of public/private partnerships.
The move towards these has come from more than one direction.
There has certainly been central government encouragement: bodies recognized as enterprise agencies are entitled to various tax concessions and become part of a wider national network.
And there has been some encouragement from within industry, reflected, for example in Business in the Community (BiC), founded in 1982 and sponsored by firms such as IBM and Marks and Spencer as well as supported by the DoE and the Manpower Services Commission (later the Training Commission, itself absorbed by the Department of Employment in 1988).
BiC has the objective of encouraging the growth of enterprise agencies and ‘bringing together groups of local companies to work in partnership, together and with their local authorities’(quoted in King, 1985, p. 206).
Local governments have eagerly become involved, both because such agencies appear to offer new opportunities for development and because they may have legal powers (for example on financial assistance) which exceed their own.
They may also give increased access to other sources of finance.
Some councils have also set up local enterprise boards  (many of which are now organized on a regional basis) which operate at an arms-length from the councils and are separate legal entities with a commitment to working with financial and commercial agencies to encourage local investment.
Although initially set up in direct opposition to the policies of the Thatcher government, the implications for local government structures are similar, with a move away from direct electoral representation towards a greater concern for the representation of functional interests.
Other areas in which non-elected local government has increased in importance go right to the heart of the post-war system, in particular in reforms proposed for housing and education.
In the field of housing there has been and is likely to continue to be a major growth in housing associations, particularly after provisions are implemented which will allow council tenants to opt out of council control and into housing associations or tenancy with private landlords.
In some cases local authorities have even set up their own associations to deal with this, although since many housing associations are organized on a regional and increasingly even a national basis,local input is likely to diminish over time.
In education, although legislation promises increased power to parents and the opportunity for schools to opt out of local education authorities, it also promises a greater power for head teachers and, in the case of City Technology Colleges, a greater direct input from industry.
The reorganization of the Training Commission has already shifted decision-making on post-sixteen training towards non-elected decision-making forums, often with the enthusiastic involvement of colleges which see them as sources of additional funds.
 If it is accepted that these moves are taking place, and there seems little doubt that they are, the question remains as to what significance they have, and what they imply.
There are two main ways of interpreting them and these will be discussed below.
Towards increased freedom of choice?
These changes can be viewed as one aspect of a potentially liberating move towards an increased role for the market and in this sense the reform of local government may be understood as a part of a wider restructuring of the state to achieve the same ends.
According to Barry,
The market at the moment appears to be on the threshold of a new era of intellectual popularity.
This is not merely the result of changes in fashion that inevitably occur in the social sciences, but has perhaps more to do with the observed failures of alternative social and economic arrangements.
A properly understood market process is not just a generator of economic welfare, it is also protection for liberty and an efficient method for the realization of many desirable social goals.
(1987, p. 171)
Just as the post-war local government system can be understood as a key element of the social-democratic consensus developed in that period, so it has been argued that ‘what is needed is a new municipal culture’ to fit the  changed social and economic realities of the late twentieth century (Walker, 1983, p. 10).
Arguably it is this aim which provides the ‘ideological coherence which holds together the various initiatives and pieces of legislation’(Stoker, 1988, p. 251) introduced by the Conservative governments of the 1980s.
The strongest critiques of local government as it was in the 1970s concentrate not on its localness, but its position within a national system and, above all, use it as an example of what its critics see as the failings of bureaucratic decision-making.
According to this analysis the existing municipal culture is one which stresses uniform provision, with little choice for the consumer and which has been driven largely by the demands of the producers.
In that sense, local government is only a special case of bureaucratic choice organized through the state.
Walker's critique of the ‘municipal empire’ stresses that it ‘is not local.
In fact the municipal system as at present constituted is an astonishing block of power, controlled by professionals who run the schools and the social services, and by the administrators and councillors who operate the machine in a bureaucratic darkness rarely pierced by public inspection’(Walker, 1983, p. 4).
He challenges the notion that local government is anything more than local administration , whose claim to be government is merely another reflection of the high self-regard in which officials hold themselves rather than any expression of locally based decision-making.
Green (1985, p. 12) argues that ‘the voices most strident in their demands of the ‘protection of public services'’ are those of the middle-class government salariat' who gain directly from it in terms of income, employment and status.
This approach is influenced by a more developed analysis of bureaucracy associated with public choice theory .
Public choice theory is an approach to the study of political decision-making using the tools of orthodox economic theory (of the type discussed in Chapter 3, section 3.2).
McLean quotes Mueller's definition, according to which it is ‘the economic study of non-market decision-making’(1987, p. 1).
In particular, it attempts to assess how rational decision-makers will act in certain situations: ‘It takes the tools of economics and applies them to the material of politics.
By applying logical, deductive reasoning, economists try to work out what a rational actor…would do to maximize his [sic]chance of getting what he wants’(McLean, 1987, p. 1), that is, to maximize his or her ‘utility’.
It is a very powerful weapon in the hands of critics of bureaucracy.
Niskanen (1973) is probably the best-known proponent of public choice theory in the analysis of state bureaucracy, and a summary of his arguments, which are largely United States based, was presented to UK policy-makers through the Institute of Economic Affairs, a leading ‘think-tank’ devoted to spreading the message of economic liberalism and reform of the state.
The key point of these arguments is the suggestion that state bureaucracies have certain special features which encourage them to have budgets which are significantly greater than would be ‘optimal’ for the provision of the services with which they deal.
This is argued on the basis of assumptions about the  behaviour of ‘bureaucrats ’ who are unable to operate by making profits from the services they provide as entrepreneurs do in the private sector.
So they seek to maximize their ‘utility’ in other ways — Niskanen argues that they do this by maximizing budgets, because this gives them extra power, prestige and status.
And he also suggests that simply policing budgets will not solve the problem either, since the basic motivation is not undermined and, in the absence of market mechanisms, financial monitors have no way of knowing when the waste has actually been eliminated.
Niskanen's approach has been modified by a number of other writers to include reference to other criteria apart from budget maximization.
His analysis suggests that the spending levels of bureaux will not be ‘optimal’, but within the agreed budgets he concedes that management will generally be efficient, if not quite as efficient as the private sector.
Others, however, have gone further, arguing that ‘bureaucrats’ will also be staff maximizers, for similar reasons to those outlined by Niskanen for budget maximization.
In addition, increasing staffing levels is said to make it more likely that successful coalitions can be developed at local level to push for higher levels of spending, so that the process of expenditure growth becomes self-perpetuating (for example , Tullock, 1977, p. 285).
It is therefore in the interests of bureaucrats to go for increased staffing levels as a means of constructing such coalitions, and the implications of this clearly point to increased waste and inefficiency, since, having bid for a maximum budget, within that budget, instead of adopting the most efficient form of production and delivery of services, ‘bureaucrats’ can be expected to choose the most labour-intensive.
A survey of British local governments by Blore (1987) concludes that our local bureaucrats, too, are staff maximizers.
Underlying much of this argument is a feeling that the institutions of local democracy are very ineffective channels for the transmission of individual preferences — and, in some cases, even group preferences.
The reforms which might be expected from this theoretical starting-point are moves towards market mechanisms or some surrogate for them which can be used both to influence the behaviour of bureaucrats by giving them a different set of incentives, and to increase the range of choice available to the consumers of public — in this case particularly local government — services.
The extension of ‘privatization’ could be seen as evidence for structural change — a ‘rolling back’of the state.
But a number of qualifications need to be made before fully accepting such an analysis.
Two main forms of privatization can be identified at local level: first, the issuing of contracts to private agencies to undertake work for councils and, secondly, a redefinition of certain existing public services as services which should be supplied by the market.
In both cases it is important not to exaggerate the extent to which it has been implemented.
As Stoker argues above, contracting out has largely been used as a threat to achieve other forms of change, often by senior bureaucrats to gain concessions from and changes in work practices by staff at lower levels of the hierarchy.
Even after the introduction of legislation to increase the use of  competitive tendering, it is likely that the core areas of public sector provision will be unaffected.
Privatization of this sort has less to do with increased public choice by individual consumers and more to do with the cheaper provision of a standard service.
The very process of issuing a contract implies that standardization, since it also implies a checklist of activities whose performance can be specified and assessed.
A great deal of local government spending is already directed towards the private sector.
This will merely increase it a little.
It has, in any case, been argued forcibly by Dunleavy (1985, 1986a) that contracting out will not substantially undermine the position of senior bureaucrats.
On the contrary he suggests that because public choice theory narrowly defines bureaucratic behaviour in terms of budget or staff maximization, it fails to grasp more important aspects of bureaucratic rationality — such as the desire to avoid conflict from troublesome staff at lower levels and interference from councillors.
Contracting out makes it possible to transfer those problems to others, who can in principle be fairly tightly controlled through contracts.
The sale of local authority assets and the shifting of activities to the private sector have been equally limited in the 1980s.
Council houses were sold and buses ‘deregulated’(although the housing association sector seems set to expand dramatically in the 1990s), but the bulk of existing public housing remained in council hands, and public transport has always been run on a semi-market basis, with the charging of fares coupled with separately identified public subsidy.
In the case of public transport Mackintosh (1987) shows very clearly for London Transport in the early 1980s that politicians from the GLC had to challenge the market-based arguments of the bureaucrats in order to increase subsidy to keep fares down and maintain services.
politicians rather than bureaucrats sought to escape market pressures.
The changes in public transport look more like an attack on local political autonomy than on bureaucratic power (see also Duncan and Goodwin, 1988, pp. 256–70).
The extent to which the process of privatization has involved major shifts to market provision at local level, then, should not be exaggerated, and public choice theory would suggest there is much more scope for the market provision of services currently handled through the state.
But perhaps other changes can be understood with the help of that approach.
If activities have to be organized through the state, then advocates of public choice theory would tend to favour decentralized delivery systems rather than those organized through the departments of central government.
Such decentralization should encourage competition between agencies.
This competition cannot come through direct market mechanisms.
The ‘Tiebout thesis’(Tiebout, 1956), which suggests that taxpayers will tend to move to those areas with the mix of tax levels and service provision which they prefer, has been substantially discredited (McLean, 1987. p. 91).
Even the widespread belief that decisions on industrial location are (or were before the introduction of the uniform business rate) heavily influenced by  the level of local taxation has been undermined by a series of research reports (including Crawford, Fothergill and Monk (1985) which was commissioned by the Department of the Environment).
So competition has to be generated through the political system, by some form of democratic decision-making.
This is essentially the conclusion drawn by Salmon (1987) in his survey of decentralization in France in the early 1980s.
He suggests that there is a strong argument for decentralization to local government (and potentially a limited hierarchy with some overlapping powers) so long as information is available which makes it possible for voters to judge between them and thus to influence the direction of their own local government through elections.
For this argument to work, however, a number of key conditions have to be met.
First, of course, there really does need to be a range of choices available at local level.
If local government is solely about the local administration of national services, then the possibility of comparison will be severely limited and privatization might be a more advisable option.
Secondly, there needs to be a reasonably close relationship between taxation and accountability: if some voters can gain markedly greater benefits than others without making any substantial financial contribution, then the electoral system is likely to encourage higher levels of spending than would be justified on grounds of efficiency.
(This is of course, a local variant of concerns expressed by Johnson (1977) regarding the welfare state as a whole, and discussed in Chapter 2, section 2.2.)
Thirdly, there needs to be a reasonably clear understanding of which agencies are responsible for what activities, or else the information on which comparison is based will be highly confusing.
None of these conditions seems to be met as a consequence of the reforms of the 1980s.
First, the range of choice at local level seems, if anything, to have been reduced as a consequence of a series of tighter and tighter rules, first on levels of expenditure and then on activities on which it could be spent.
Every attempt by local government to evade central spending restrictions has been met by a new rule to make evasion more difficult.
The possibility of expanding levels of public housing has effectively been removed.
Even the possibility of using income generated by the sale of council houses has been sharply restricted.
Through schemes, such as the Urban Programme and various training programmes, access to funds for local authorities has been shifted to areas in which they engage in some sort of partnership with the departments of central government.
Within a declining overall level of grant, there has been a marked increase in the share targeted for particular purposes (specific and supplementary grants rose from 17.6 per cent of the total grant in 1981/82 to 23.6 per cent in 1986/87 (Douglas and Lord, 1986, p. 29)).
If anything, the networks of control have become tighter and the area of independent choice has been reduced, yet public choice theory would suggest that such control was unlikely to achieve substantial cuts in spending.
Secondly, local accountability was at the centre of the arguments put  forward for the community charge (or poll tax) and other reforms in local taxation.
The argument was that the existing rating system made rational voting difficult.
All voters tended to get more out of the system because of the levels of government grant.
Hence it was important to reduce levels of grant to make it clearer to voters what services actually cost.
More important,some voters seemed to get substantially more out of the system than others, whilst paying substantially less.
In particular, voters on social security receiving rate rebates could vote for increased services without having to pay for them.
Large families in small flats or houses might pay less than individuals in larger ones while receiving more services.
It was also argued, conversely, that, in general, middle-class families benefited more than the poor because they understood how to manipulate the non-means-tested elements of the system, such as education.
The commercial rate was felt to be a still greater source of distortion because of its rather unpredictable incidence.
Councils such as Camden, Lambeth, Islington and Edinburgh, among others, were felt to be able to fund ‘excessive’ spending simply because of the high rateable values of commercial and office property within them.
In other words local voters were able to escape the financial consequences of their (voting) decisions on spending.
The flat-rate community charge coupled with a universal business rate was intended to make this far more difficult and ensure that there was some relationship between costs and local taxation levels.
The irony, however, is that in fact the new system is more likely to increase central control over, and funding of, local spending, instead of allowing for local variation, accountability and choice.
The income from the business rate will appear as a grant from central government so that total grants will amount to 75 per cent of local expenditure.
As a consequence, any increase in overall spending determined at local level will require a substantial increase in local taxation (assuming central grant remains the same), i.e. a 1 per cent increase will require a 4 per cent increase in locally raised funds including the community charge and specific fees and charges, thus reducing the likelihood of substantial local variation.
The only choice to be made, therefore, will be between packages of services at roughly the same cost, without any direct financial accountability at local level.
Thirdly, a recurrent theme of much criticism of local government has been that the division and allocation of responsibilities have always been unclear.
Social security, for example, is the responsibility of central government but housing benefit is handled through local authorities.
Personal social services are the responsibility of county councils (outside metropolitan areas) and of metropolitan districts or London boroughs in England and Wales; in Scotland personal social services are the responsibility of regional and island authorities and in Northern Ireland of Health and Social Service Boards.
The probation service, many of whose clients are also involved with social services departments, is the responsibility of the Home Office and its equivalents in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Many district councils also offer welfare advice and fund community development programmes, and some voluntary agencies, including the Citizen's Advice Bureau and the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, are involved in activities and may even have statutory powers which are similar to those of councils in this area.
It is hardly surprising that there is a high degree of confusion and it is not always clear who is to blame (or can claim credit) for particular activities.
Certainly some of the reforms had as one of their stated intentions a reduction in confusion.
In particular it was one of the arguments put forward for the abolition of the metropolitan counties and the GLC in 1986 (HMSO, 1983, paragraph 1.19).
But the confusing plethora of separate joint boards on the fire service, strategic planning, waste disposal and other matters which succeeded them suggests that abolition did not achieve those ends These boards are now under no direct electoral control, but are instead made up of nominees from often compulsorily participant councils.
The bodies supervised by such boards are likely to be dominated by the bureaucrats who run them, rather than nominees who supervise them, particularly since they will be able to hide behind all the defences of professional expertise with organizations which are larger than almost all the departments within individual local governments with which councillors will be familiar.
In the apparent desire to reduce levels of political controversy and so limit the powers of political opponents, it appears that the reforms have, in this area at least, helped to strengthen the position of bureaucrats, and insulate them to a great degree from scrutiny.
The contrast between what one might have expected if changes in line with public choice theory were being implemented and what has actually happened can be illustrated still more clearly by looking rather more closely at particular service areas.
In the case of public housing, financial control from the centre has — as we have seen — become stronger and the opportunity for local variation has been reduced.
The sale of council housing to sitting tenants is a national initiative and local authorities have been under pressure to carry it through.
Council house rent levels have increasingly been influenced — if not determined — by central government order to reduce subsidies.
New building has virtually been stopped.
The growth of housing associations has been encouraged and subsidized from the centre, but financial rules have also made it advantageous for councils to co-operate (form partnerships) with housing associations.
The financial structures of housing finance have always been confusing — with heavy subsidies hidden in mortgage tax relief — and have become more so, with, for example, tax concessions promised for investment in rented housing through business expansion schemes.
Once in housing associations, few tenants have much choice of alternative landlords — and in many cases are not even eligible under the ‘right to buy’ legislation which has had such dramatic effects on council housing.
In England and Wales, most of the major housing associations' tenants have few rights of democratic control over their landlords.
New legislation at the end of the 1980s is intended to take this process further, by reducing the housing stock managed by local authorities.
The  attempts to shift higher numbers of tenants out of council housing do involve elements of choice.
Tenants on estates are to be allowed to vote (once) on whether they wish to transfer to housing associations or private landlords, but they will have no right to transfer back at any future stage.
In those areas which the Department of the Environment designates as Housing Action Trusts — which will operate as independent agencies for renewal — tenants are to be given no choice, and nor are the councils from whose stock the Trusts are to be extracted.
In Scotland, the formation of Scottish Homes in 1989 has created a powerful agency which is intended to change the face of public housing in the country and to encourage the growth of the private rented sector.
In fact development of Housing Action Trusts to deal with particularly run-down estates and Scottish Homes to break up the public sector suggests an alternative vision, based on state-sponsored restructuring and renewal from above, rather than individual choice.
Activity 4.3
The previous discussion has used the example of housing to consider whether the three conditions outlined on p. 128 were met.
You should now attempt a similar process in looking at reforms proposed for primary and secondary education in England and Wales at the end of the '80s.
The key elements involved here seem to me to be:
(a)
the introduction of a national curriculum;
(b)
increased powers for school governors over internal budgeting and the appointment of staff and a shift in balance towards parent governors;
(c)
increased power for head-teachers (including greater responsibility for the running of the school);
(d)
the possibility for schools to ‘opt out’ of the local education authority (and its rules, while still receiving state funds);
(e)
the encouragement of ‘city technology colleges’, with substantial financial support from the private sector, separately funded from other schools and with specialist attention to teaching on science and technology;
(f)
continued limitation of finance, in most cases to be distributed through the local education authority but devolved budgetary powers to the schools and the possibility of raising additional funds from other sources.
How would you assess these changes in terms of the assumptions?
If substantial structural change is taking place, then, it does not seem to be following the lines which would be suggested by public choice theory.
In part that might be explained in terms of the powers of resistance possessed by the bureaucracies under attack, so that whatever change is proposed it is soon absorbed and reinterpreted by the very groups it is intended to undermine.
Arguably the process of centralization which has taken place could be presented as a necessary precursor to the decentralization of power which is desired.
Only by centralizing power in the first place, on this argument, can the all-pervasive powers of bureaucracy be challenged.
Despite its initial plausibility, however, this approach has the main disadvantage that the ultimate end — if it is there at all— tends rather too easily to get lost in the detail of policy.
It becomes difficult to identify signs of any significant decentralization, although an increased degree of fragmentation between different agencies is clear enough.
Towards local corporatism?
A second interpretation of the developments of the 1980s would set them in a longer context, dating back to the late 1960s.
Within such a context it is easier to see how a series of advances, retreats and confusing divisions can be explained as part of a general shift which is of wider significance than the accumulation of a mass of detailed incidents, each of which can only be fully explained in terms of its own unique genesis.
It is particularly helpful, despite the weaknesses associated with them, to think back to some of the arguments presented by Cockburn and Dearlove which were discussed in section 4.2.
Cockburn looks to changes within the managerial structures of local government and relates them to changes in the methods of management adopted in the private sector.
Dearlove associates local government reorganization with the need to link business and government more closely, both to undermine the basis of working-class and community power as reflected through the local government system, and to integrate more closely the infrastructural requirements of the private sector and the responses of the state.
Some analysts of the eighties have in effect, developed and modified these approaches in response to some of the criticisms made earlier, and to the changing features of political life.
Paul Hoggett (1987), for example, has sought to explain changes in the organization of local government largely in terms drawn from debates within economics and the sociology of work (see, for example , Massey, 1988a; Meegan, 1988), which suggests that since the early 1970s there has been a move away from Fordist towards post-Fordist methods of production.
Fordism is said to be characterized by high levels of mass production and work organized on standardized (Taylorist) lines, so that each element can be broken down, systematized and repeated.
Alongside mass production, according to this approach, went mass consumption, so that the system could be sustained by general state-inspired (Keynesian) economic management, which encouraged a continued growth of demand for the products of the generally centralized industries with their large production units.
Post-Fordism , on the other hand, is characterized by the growth of flexible specialization, which implies a more widely variegated and less standardized  set of products, as well as the ability to change the nature of those products in response to changes in the market.
Such a model also implies a change in the driving force of economic decision-making.
Under Fordism mass consumption was a consequence of mass production; whilst with post-Fordism, it is changes in consumption and the identification of specialist markets which are said to determine changes in production.
Post-Fordism implies that management, too, has to be decentralized and forms of work discipline changed, because they can no longer be organized through hierarchies in which standardized messages are passed from above and implemented in any very straightforward fashion.
Workers are expected to be able to deal with a range of tasks and managers to be able to respond to immediate changes in demand.
All of this is said to be made easier by (and possibly to have been a partial consequence of) the introduction of information technology.
Hoggett (1987) argues that the end of Fordism as a paradigm linking state and production has also undermined the basis of the old management and organizational structures of British local government.
He draws an analogy between the decline of mass production (and consumption) and the pressures for an end to the standardized service delivery (and what he calls ‘people processing’) of the local welfare state.
And he argues that changing social relations imply the need for more specialist and responsive service delivery, while changing managerial technologies (particularly information technology) make it possible to flatten managerial hierarchies by removing many of the  middle layers and encouraging the growth of decentralized offices with less professional specialization and a greater ability to deal with individual issues across professional lines.
Information can be made available more easily through computer links without the need for a significant layer of intervening administrative bureaucrats or middle managers.
This would confirm the move away from the traditions of post-war local government with its large centralized service departments, towards rather more fragmented forms.
Hoggett's analysis concerns itself principally with the opportunities opened up for the left by these changes, with more direct contact between service providers and consumers through neighbourhood offices.
But a similar argument could equally well explain the break-up of local governments as major employers of labour and direct providers of services.
The underlying shifts which Hoggett identifies make it easier to view the local authority as a ‘manager’ of service delivery rather than its actual administrator.
On this model the local authority would be left with a limited number of central staff concerned to monitor and regulate service delivery organized by private concerns — for example, in street cleaning and refuse disposal — or undertaken by autonomous voluntary agencies — such as housing associations or schools directly managed by elected governors.
The main tasks of such an authority would be to issue contracts for the performance of particular tasks coupled with supervisory and inspection to ensure that they were adequately performed.
Bureaucrats — or potential bureaucrats — would  in some cases be controlled by the need to compete for contracts, in others by the need to compete for ‘clients’(or pupils).
At a theoretical level there remain some problems with this analysis.
It tends to proceed by a process of analogy .
It accepts the arguments of others that moves towards post-Fordism are taking place in economy and society, and then attempts to translate these moves into the languages of local government.
So, for example, mass production becomes ‘people processing’; standardized output becomes the delivery of standardized services.
There are two principal problems associated with this.
First, the analogy itself is rather stretched since many local government services, particularly in education and welfare, unlike those delivered by central government (for example, through social security), have always been based on discretion and variation between individuals and not on standardization in accordance with clearly identified rules.
As Lipsky (1979) notes, many local government services are delivered by ‘street-level bureaucrats’(such as social workers and teachers) whose decisions are the product of negotiations between client and professional.
It is because they make the decisions that they are often under sharp pressure both from those above them in the hierarchy who allocate resources and from those with whom they deal who want to receive them.
It also makes them difficult to control.
Secondly, the analogy does not provide very much by the way of explanation.
It is not clear what processes are generating these changes.
At best it shows only that something similar is happening without showing why, or identifying key causal processes.
Without such explanation, of course, it makes it difficult to accept that the same things really are taking place in the different spheres.
And, as was argued  earlier regarding Cockburn, even if similar methods have been borrowed it remains to be determined whether the implications are similar too.
Some consideration of the changing roles of corporate interests along the lines suggested by Dearlove may be more helpful here.
In Chapter 2 it was argued that some of the most striking features of the post-war development of the British state, at least until the late 1970s, could be explained quite effectively in terms of‘corporate bias’, that is moves away from the formal structures of democratic (electoral) representation towards the representation of major corporate interest groups (such as the trade unions and employers' organizations), as mediated through the agency of the state itself.
Cawson defines corporatism as a process ‘in which organizations representing monopolistic functional interests engage in political exchange with state agencies over public policy outputs which involves those organizations in a role that combines interest representation and policy implementation through delegated self-enforcement’(1985a, p. 8).
In the 1980s it has been acknowledged that the importance of formal (tripartite) arrangements at ‘peak’ levels has been reduced — indeed it is now often suggested that Britain was always less ‘corporatist’in these terms than countries such as the Federal Republic of Germany, Austria and Sweden.
But this does not mean that there are no longer forms of interest mediation through the state.
One aspect of the changing nature of local government  since the early 1970s seems to be that various local government agencies have taken on this role in one way or another, to the extent that there seems to have been a marked change in relations between those agencies and business interests at local level.
Reference has already been made to some of these changes.
There has been a significant growth in non-elected local government, of local quangos.
Some of this (such as the growth of joint boards and the relegation of local government in Northern Ireland in the early 1970s) has been the direct result of various local government reforms.
But the process has also been a more subtle one, as new initiatives have apparently been tacked on to existing local government.
In Scotland the most obvious example of this — the Scottish Development Agency (SDA)— is not strictly a local government but a regional organization, yet in many ways it has provided a model for initiatives which have since been developed elsewhere at local level.
The SDA was initially set up in 1975 ‘to provide a regional dimension to complement the UK-wide sectoral interventionism of the National Enterprise Board (NEB)’(Moor, 1986, p. 8).
Like the NEB, it was set up to operate separately from the direct institutions of central government and the Scottish Office, although dependent on them for funds (up to £75 million in the mid-1980s) and its board included representatives of business and labour as well as government.
More important perhaps, its role was to work ‘with the market rather than seeking a directive role.
The key to this was seen as establishing close links with the private sector’(Moore, 1986, p. 9).
Although the SDA was strictly a national agency, it was also given the responsibility of managing the Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal Project (GEAR), which was then the largest inner-city project in Britain.
Here it was effectively a form of non-elected local government, which had access to greater resources than Glasgow District Council.
Through GEAR (and on a smaller scale similar agencies in some other Scottish cities) the SDA pursued a policy of bargaining and negotiation designed to mobilize private sector finance, voluntary sector initiative (particularly in housing) and local authority co-operation (for example on the provision of land)(see, for example, Donnison and Middleton (1987) for a more developed discussion of GEAR).
It allowed and encouraged the possibility of longer-term co-operation with business and property development, which has in the past proved more difficult to achieve with locally elected councils, through which other interests may achieve higher levels of representation.
In England and Wales these lessons were taken further through the creation of a series of urban development corporations — first set up for London's Docklands and Merseyside, and later extended to a number of other areas, including the Black Country, Trafford Park, Teesside, Salford, Tyne and Wear, Cardiff Bay and Sheffield.
These, too, are dependent on central government funding and have — even more explicitly than GEAR — the role of encouraging investment through the provision of infrastructure  which makes property development possible and profitable.
Again, such agencies operate to allow and encourage negotiation between key groups (including developers and, in some cases, local industry) and the state in such a way that the obstacles created by a locally elected body can be bypassed.
The SDA itself is now to be dismantled and replaced by a series of local agencies.
But the growth of non-elected local government is not restricted to these centrally inspired creations.
Many councils have themselves encouraged their growth — sometimes to avoid the implications of centrally imposed financial constraints and sometimes explicitly to make co-operation and partnerships with the voluntary and private sectors easier and less dependent on committee cycles and bureaucratic indecision.
This helps to explain the extent to which local authorities have begun to work closely with housing associations and several left-wing councils have set up enterprise boards while others are heavily involved in local enterprise agencies.
Their relative independence of the councils which set them up means that deals can be negotiated and long-term arrangements achieved which do not depend on detailed discussion through council committee.
It allows a relationship between professionals to develop which is unlikely to be disrupted by what are seen as more ephemeral shifts within local electoral politics.
The nature of these changes, then, can be seen as some confirmation that the trends identified by Dearlove were genuine enough, but that working them through has taken much longer to achieve and involved much more upheaval than his initial analysis would have suggested.
The search for appropriate bodies through which business interests could be represented was not an easy one and has only been achieved either by completely bypassing existing councils or by involving councillors as well as officers in developing new arrangements in a context of financial pressure and legal constraints.
The extent to which it is appropriate to describe the new arrangements as local corporatism is rather more problematic.
Cawson (1985b), for example, prefers the description ‘corporatism at local level’, since he argues that ‘in most cases the local dimension is the target of intervention rather than the basis for the organization of the participating bodies’(p. 144).
This certainly appears to be the case for many of the centrally inspired agencies referred to earlier, particularly the urban development corporations and development agencies.
But even in these cases such an interpretation seems unnecessarily narrow.
It implies the implementation of a nationally determined (and negotiated) strategy at local level, involving locally based groups (or local branches of national organizations) only with a view to ensuring a smooth process of implementation.
Yet the available evidence suggests rather a different model.
The various urban development corporations, for example, are recognizably different in their modes of operation and have not always followed the line favoured by central government.
In some places they have negotiated with and worked together with local authorities and in some cases, at least, a local authority representative has been included on the  board.
In others regional representatives of the trade unions have been similarly involved.
More important, perhaps, as they have begun to operate in practice, a higher degree of localized bargaining has developed, often with agencies (including unions, community groups and local authorities) which are not formally represented within the official structures.
Even the London Docklands Development Corporation (arguably the least local of the boards) has been involved in negotiations with the London Borough of Newham over low-cost housing and has resisted proposals from developers to utilize land allocated for such housing for other purposes.
This is still clearer with the development agencies, not only at the regional (or ‘national,) level where Cawson would find the corporatist label acceptable, but also at local level, particularly through agencies such as GEAR.
A stronger argument which Cawson also develops is that major interests are not directly represented at local level, because whether sectoral (for instance, professional or industrial organizations) or production (such as employers and trade unions) their main levels of organization for the purposes of representation are national or regional.
It is there that key decisions are made.
According to this model, local politics (see also Chapter 5, section 5.3.3, where the ‘dual state’ thesis is discussed) is more open to pluralist pressures, since locally based interest groups tend to be those of service consumers, rather than the various types of producer which dominate at other levels (and often play a big part in determining what is possible at local level).
Cawson's arguments are persuasive, at least insofar as he confirms that it is difficult to conceive of any independent local corporatism, based on local classes and local producer groups.
Economic and political organization in the late twentieth century is more centralized than that.
Certainly an analytical distinction between ‘corporatism at local level’ and ‘local politics’is useful.
But the conclusion to be drawn from this may be less acceptable to those for whom the democratic and pluralist nature of local government is one of its key defining characteristics, since local government (both elected and unelected) seems increasingly to be drawn into ‘corporatism at local level’.
This is the case across a range of local government services, including housing, where the voluntary sector is becoming accepted as a ‘partner’.
The language of partnership is becoming more and more important.
Cawson himself acknowledges the significance of this in his discussion of ‘microcorporatism’, that is the detailed bargaining of the state with individual enterprises over investment and other matters, sometimes with the involvement of trade unions (see Cawson (1986, pp. 118–21) where he focuses particularly on the experiences of the GLC and the Greater London Enterprise Board).
In practice micro-corporatism of this sort has only been undertaken with any consistency by local government and their agencies (such as the enterprise boards) or by the development agencies (see, for example, Greater London Council (1985) and Murray (1987)).
This implies a different role for local government — almost an echo of the Bains Report quoted earlier — with a move away from the direct delivery of  services as a dominant activity, even if the bulk of the spending is still in that area, towards the management of change, in this case, economic change.
Such a vision implies a wider set of partnership arrangements.
In principle, of course, it also implies an independent bargaining role of government and the state, in which it is not solely responsive to the demands of particular dominant interests.
The extent to which such an understanding is justified has been a matter of some debate, not only at the local level, but in terms of national politics, and even politics within the EC.
Lindblom (1977), for example, argues that business interests are in a politically privileged position, to the extent that in any bargain struck between business and government, its terms will largely be dictated by business.
‘In the eyes of government officials, therefore,’ he says, ‘businessmen do not appear simply as the representatives of a special interest, as representatives of interest groups do.
They appear as functionaries performing functions that government officials regard as indispensable’(Lindblom, 1977. p. 175).
Dearlove's arguments on the reform 1970s similarly stressed a shift towards business interests.
So, whilst it is possible to identify some broad directions of change it remains difficult to decide the precise implications.
For corporatist arrangements to survive at local level, at least according to Cawson, state agencies must be ‘capable of making and delivering bargained policies, so that a potential local corporatism depends upon strong local state institutions’(1985b, p. 146).
The extent to which these conditions exist at the end of the 1980s, given the extent of legal and financial changes, remains a matter of contention.
Summary of section 4.4
There were three main elements to local government restructuring in the 1980s:
changes in local taxation
moves to privatization
growth of non-elected local governments.
These changes can be seen as elements of a programme intended to open up more aspects of public sector provision to the market and to undermine the powers of state bureaucracy, particularly as highlighted by exponents of ‘public choice theory’.
This approach concentrates its attention on the behaviour of bureaucrats as maximizers of budgets or staff and seeks to identify ways in which that behaviour can be modified by changing the context of their decision-making.
But, privatization had not dramatically affected core areas of local government activity by the end of the 1980s, and in those areas where it was implemented it seemed unlikely significantly to undermine bureaucratic power.
And, attempts to encourage greater accountability and competition  between authorities have tended to flounder because it has been accompanied by a higher degree of centralization and control and a wider gap between the possibilities of locally generated finance and overall levels of spending.
The distribution of responsibilities between local, national, public and voluntary sectors has also become less rather than more clear, which reduces the possibilities of accountability.
Another interpretation of the changes would see them as part of a longer-term shift towards new relationships between government and the wider political economy.
Like Cockburn, Hoggett stresses the links between changes in the organization of local government and those of capitalist management.
But the model he develops tends to distort the past in order to exaggerate the extent of change.
It remains unclear why the changes he identifies have taken place and what the implications are.
There is some evidence that relationships between local government and business interests have become closer and more institutionalized, and this seems to support an interpretation which identifies a significant shift (or structural change) between the late 1960s and the late 1980s.
The implications of this change, however, remain contentious.
One area of contention is whether it is appropriate to describe the new arrangements as evidence of a growth of local corporatism, or even ‘corporatism at local level’(Cawson, 1985b).
Further reading
There are a number of interesting academic books in this area which would repay further reading.
Dearlove's analysis of local government reorganization in the early 1970s,The Reorganization of Local Government (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press; 1979) is particularly important because it encourages a political analysis of change and develops an impressive critique of more traditional or orthodox approaches.
The way in which he mobilizes his evidence to undermine dominant arguments and to construct his own is exciting, and helps to draw local government into the mainstream of political studies.
More recent academic publications include The Local State and Uneven Development by Duncan and Goodwin (Cambridge, Polity Press; 1988) and Politics of Local Government by Stoker (London, Macmillan; 1988).
The former argues the case of viewing relations between central and local government in terms of tensions generated by uneven development.
The latter provides a useful survey of current debates on local government.
Finally, local government is an active topic of political debate.
It has generated its own publications many of which are difficult to follow if you are  not actively involved in one way or another.
Democracy in Crisis.: The Town Halls Respond by Blunkett and Jackson (London, Hogarth; 1987) is a clear exception to this.
It is a readable account of the conflicts and policies of the early 1980s, and puts forward a strong case for local government to be given more power.
The politics of locality
Mark Goodwin
Introduction
The opening chapters of this book have drawn your attention to post-war changes in the structure and position of the British state, both nationally and internationally, and Chapter 4 discussed how these changes in state structures have affected local as well as national government.
This chapter will follow up this theme, and remain focused at the local level.
But it will shift attention away from state structures towards a consideration of the actual politics occurring in and around these local state institutions.
Hence the focus is on local politics , on the ways in which these have changed and developed over the post-war period and on the concepts and theories used to account for such changes.
Localized variations in voting patterns may reflect changing forms of political alignment and voting behaviour (see Johnston, Pattie and Allsopp (1988) for a review), and electoral politics will be looked at in the next chapter, but here I shall consider the notion of political culture more widely.
For, as we shall see, political practice and behaviour at the local level can vary widely, even with the same party in control of the council chamber.
Variations in local political practice have increased markedly since the end of the 1960s (see Curtice and Steed, 1982).
This increase has been best documented with regard to voting behaviour in general elections, where a number of psephological surveys and statistical analyses support Johnston and Pattie's conclusion that ‘voters in Great Britain have been increasingly influenced by their local environment when evaluating the competing claims of the political parties…people are increasingly concerned about their local circumstances, and vote accordingly’(1988, p. 10).
According to the academic orthodoxy, this local influence is a relatively recent political phenomenon.
Indeed, the accepted view of post-war politics in Britain showed how diverse, localized political cultures were subsumed under, and gradually integrated into, a single homogeneous national politics.
Johnson (1972) labelled this gradual ironing out of local characteristics the ‘nationalization ’ of local politics, and this process was reflected in the confident claim of the political pundits that ‘to know the swing in Cornwall was to know, within a percentage or two, the swing in the Highlands’(Crewe, 1985, p. 103).
No analyst would make such a claim today, and the ‘nationalization’ thesis has had to be revised in the light of increased local variations in voting behaviour.
Following the general election of 1987, media recognition of the ‘two nations’ of north and south fuelled such revision.
But although voting behaviour in national elections has received most attention, many other forms of political activity have also become more locally differentiated.
This chapter will concentrate on just one — the politics operating around and within local government — and will use this as an example to indicate how local political cultures, as well as voting behaviour, can vary geographically.
This concentration is especially relevant in any consideration of a restructured Britain.
For, as part of that restructuring, local government has  recently emerged as a major issue, and arena, of political debate and conflict.
This is not just of interest to professional politicians or academic specialists; local government has become front-page news, its leading politicians such as Ken Livingstone, David Blunkett and Derek Hatton have been catapulted to national fame and the local-central government conflict detailed in Chapter 4 has been a major issue in three successive general elections.
Borrowing the terminology used to describe national electoral politics, Gyford (1985a) has characterized this revitalization of local politics as a shift from ‘nationalization’ to ‘reappraisal’.
But if we can view ‘nationalization’ as the ironing out of local political characteristics during the 1950s and 1960s, ‘reappraisal’has meant more than their simple re-appearance during the late 1970s and early 1980s.
For the term indicates nothing less than a complete questioning of the traditional role of local government.
This role, of locally providing and administering a wide range of public services, from planning and transport to housing and education, was deeply embedded in the postwar political consensus, and local government seemed to have found a safe and secure niche with the coming of a fully fledged welfare state.
However, as Chapter 4 pointed out, this niche, and the relatively stable two-party system which surrounded it, increasingly came under pressure as Britain's ever deepening economic crisis began to bite.
From the mid-1970s successive governments attempted to alleviate the crisis by curbing public expenditure.
Although this included controlling overall levels of local government spending, the role of local government was not in question.
But when the Conservatives came to power in 1979, local government found itself at the centre of a much wider conflict regarding the role of the state as a whole, and the position of local government began to be ‘reappraised’.
For the new government, economic regeneration rested on more than mere control of public expenditure.
It also depended on the promotion of the belief that free markets are both economically efficient and socially just — and in crucial respects local government stood in the way of such promotion.
It was not only a substantial spender of public money, but also a major provider of public services, often allocated collectively, sometimes even on the criteria of social need.
Moreover, in some places these services were explicitly provided, usually by Labour-controlled authorities, to offer protection against the ‘purifying winds’ of the market, and to mitigate the cut and thrust of commercial rationality.
Local governments are thus not just caught up in recent political conflicts as some innocent or neutral part of the political machine, but are themselves crucial in interpreting and promoting social change.
The conflict between central and local government referred to in Chapter 4 has been clouded by both inter- and intra-party disputes.
The institutions of local government offer a site where several alternative values and practices can be tried, tested and demonstrated to the public.
The local politics of central versus local government, and Conservative versus Labour, is underlain by ‘wets’ versus ‘ drys ’, by ‘left’versus ‘right’, by ‘rural traditionalism’versus ‘suburban  Thatcherism’and by ‘working-class militants’versus ‘the new urban left’.
What we have witnessed over the past decade is the emergence of a whole host of competing and conflicting forms of local politics — different places have begun, in political terms, to behave very differently and British politics is now characterized by diversity rather than homogeneity.
This chapter will look at this emergence in three parts.
The first will consider the nature of this new political diversity, and will also examine the historical evidence to see if, in fact, such differentiation is entirely ‘new’.
The second will provide an overview of the varying academic approaches towards understanding the politics of local government, and in particular will look at the concepts and wider theories that such studies draw upon in order to inform their analysis.
The third will look at the actual experience of one recent, and especially contentious, form of local government activity — the development of local economic strategies.
As you will see, these sections between them raise several important analytical questions.
Should we conceptualize local politics as merely denoting local voting behaviour, or should we include geographical variations in a range of political activity and experience?
Does this increase in variation mean that we can speak of a specifically ‘local’ politics, and if so is this based around local issues and is it generated through local processes?
Or does it just indicate the different ways in which national political shifts are experienced locally?
And if we can identify locally generated politics, are we justified in speaking of the ‘local state’?
Or is local government simply to be viewed as one part of the state as a whole — with no specificity of its own?
Activity 5.1
Before we go on to consider these studies of local politics, think about other major economic and social changes that have taken place within Britain since the mid-1970s — such as deindustrialization, or the large increase in home ownership.
Would you expect these to be accompanied by an increasing diversity of local political activity?
If so, why should this be the case?
What form would you expect such local politics to take?
Should they necessarily be restricted to electoral variations, or even to activity around state institutions such as local government?
The re-emergence of local politics
We have already noted how recent studies of the changing electoral geography of Britain have identified increased local variations in voting patterns.
Johnston and Pattie (1988) claim that people no longer vote so much  according to their class, or social, position, but rather are increasingly  referrent to their spatial location.
Thus, people with similar socio-economic and demographic characteristics, but living in different places, may well vote for different parties.
Although the mechanisms behind this geographical variance are unclear, what is not in dispute is that spatial polarization in voting behaviour has increased steadily, especially during the three general elections of 1979, 1983 and 1987, making it difficult to disagree with the conclusion that the ‘nationalization’ of British politics has now been replaced by an emerging local differentiation.
Local political behaviour shows a similar path — in an appendix to the Widdicombe Report on the Conduct of Local Authority Business (1986, Cmnd 9797), Miller argues that variation in local voting can increasingly be attributed to specifically local factors, and Jones and Stewart also show how since the mid-1970s local factors have increasingly influenced the results of local elections.
They note how in the local elections of 1982 local authorities in the same region showed very different results: ‘In Wolverhampton, Labour made gains while in nearby Walsall Labour lost seats.
Whereas in Bradford and Leeds Labour lost ground, in Barnsley they made large gains and in Sheffield they maintained their position.
In Rochdale, Labour lost seats, while in Oldham Labour gained seats.
In Strathclyde Labour made gains but not in Lothian’(Jones and Stewart, 1983, pp. 16–18).
They point out how similar differences would be found in an analysis of Conservative and Alliance results in the 1982 local elections.
Indeed, in London the Alliance made large gains in Tower Hamlets, but in neighbouring Islington it held only one seat in a council it had previously controlled.
After noting how local parties differ on major issues of expenditure, financial control, privatization, transport subsidies, rents and council house sales, they conclude that ‘It is not surprising that the local electorate vote in response to local circumstances’(Jones and Stewart, 1983, p. 17).
But this increased local differentiation cuts across party lines, and especially within the Conservative and Labour parties there has been an increasing ideological polarization, which, though denied expression in the tightly controlled atmosphere of Westminster, often surfaces at the local level.
Thus if we widen our notion of local politics from electoral behaviour, we find increased differentiation in local political activity within as well as between the major political parties.
Indeed, local government has often been used by the right of the Conservative Party to promote the introduction of ‘market forces’ into, and the privatization of, certain state services, and by the left of the Labour Party to develop ‘local socialism’and the extension of public sector services into areas of the community previously untouched by local government.
Although radical politics of this kind remain in the minority, for both left and right, their development means that councils can experience large changes in their policies whilst remaining under the control of the same party -so increasing political variation at the local level.
For instance, the London Borough of Southwark remained under Labour control after the May 1982  local elections, but two-thirds of the Labour councillors were new, following ‘de-selections’ and defections to the newly formed Social Democratic Party.
Most of their policies were also new, and the differences between the two successive Labour Councils were probably greater than those which existed between the previous Labour Council and their Conservative opposition prior to 1982.
Indeed, the emergence of the SDP nationally, and of its alliance with the Liberal Party as the ‘third force’ in British politics at the beginning of the 1980s, led to increased political instability and variation across the country, as several local elections produced ‘hung councils’in which no single party could claim overall control.
Many other aspects of local government have also become increasingly politicized over recent years.
In some councils certain key administrative officers are appointed on the basis of their political sympathies.
As Derek Hatton, Deputy Leader of Liverpool City Council put it, ‘We'd want to make sure that…those who are employed to manage and carry out the policies which we decide are those who are in general sympathy with those policies’(Gyford, 1985b, p. 58).
The traditional role of the local government officer as the neutral bureaucrat has also come under stress from the growing militancy of local authority trade unions.
Sometimes this is the result of the strength of left-wing groups in particular council branches, but at other times strikes have been called on a nation-wide level to protest about changes in industrial relations, cuts in local government spending and enforced job losses.
Along with the rise of local voluntary and community groups, often funded by the local council, this has ensured that local authority politics have increased markedly in both their visibility and their differentiation.
Duncan and Goodwin (1988, pp. 6–9) give examples of variation in local authority service delivery.
With regard to the overall provision of services they show that only 18 out of the 47 English and Welsh County Councils spent within ±5 per cent of the national average per capita expenditure in 1984/85.
The variations in local government spending on single issues of some political contention are even more marked.
Duncan and Goodwin examine the subsidizing of council housing, via contributions made from the rates, in London in 1984/85.
In addition to finding that many Boroughs actually made a profit from council house rents, and thus subsidized ratepayers, they found that the highest transfer from rates to council housing was no less than 443 per cent above average.
In all only 7 of the 32 London Boroughs are even within ±50 per cent of the average transfer.
But it is one thing to document the diversity in local authority expenditure and political activity; it is another to  account for its origins and maintenance.
When faced with this problem many authors have turned to the idea of ‘local political cultures ’, and have sought to explain political variation by reference to the existence of such ‘cultures’(Butler and Stokes, 1974; Johnston, 1986a).
But although this is at first appealing, on closer examination the concept is somewhat flawed.
For if local political activity is the mere reflection, or embodiment, of local culture, it is difficult to see how anything changes.
Instead, as both Mark-Lawson and Warde (1987) and Savage (1989) stress, local politics are extremely dynamic, both spatially and temporally, and local cultures themselves are subject to continual change.
If this is the case we need to take one conceptual step backwards.
The relevant questions should not concern how local ‘culture’ forms local politics, but how this ‘culture’itself is formed, how it is sustained or transformed, and how it affects local political activity in conjunction with a host of other structures and practices, some of which may be locally based and some of which may not.
Detailed research on local politics helps to indicate the complexity of practices and processes operating around the politics of local government, and hence points to some of the reasons underlying the recent diversity in local political activity.
For instance,Savage (1989) examines the development of local politics in Glasgow, whilst Mark-Lawson and Warde (1987) look at the transformation of the local political environment in Lancaster.
Both concentrate on the politics of local government, but both also stress how any explanation of local politics must look outside the formal political processes which operate around local political parties and the Council Chamber.
They note the range of institutions and processes that contribute to the formation of local political practices.
These include institutions based in the local economy, such as trade unions or Chambers of Commerce, and those based in the local community, such as tenants' groups, neighbourhood associations and women's organizations.
Also important in both Glasgow and Lancaster is the existing level and type of service provision: in both cases local politics were especially affected by the nature of local housing provision.
This indicates that the politics of local government do not just respond or react to the local environment, but crucially that they also help to mould this environment, and thus to a certain extent help to shape the local political agenda.
Given the range of institutions and the varying sets of social relations involved, it does not seem surprising that there should have been an increase in the diversity of local politics.
However, perhaps this increase should not be seen as the emergence of local politics, but should more properly be viewed as their re-emergence.
For although the 1950s and '60s may have seen the homogenization and ‘nationalization’ of local politics, before this period the merging of local and national political activity was the exception rather than the rule.
Indeed, from the very beginning of elected local government in the first half of the nineteenth century, Britain has generally experienced a wide range of local political activity.
Gyford points out that in their earliest days, the politics of local government assumed ‘a somewhat kaleidoscopic form.
A variety of actors in different towns — Whigs, Tories, Liberals, Conservatives, Radicals, Chartists, Improvers, Economisers, Independents, and a bevy of personal cliques and factions — argued over whether to expand, or to economise on, the provision of public services,(1985a, p. 79).
This was also the case around the turn of the century, when the emerging labour movement often used local political activity in  particular strongholds such as East London and Sheffield to promote its aims and objectives long before it reached the national political stage.
In the inter-war period local government had responsibility for Poor Law duties, including some hospitals, and the public utilities of gas, water, electricity and transport, in addition to its current functions of education, highways and housing.
Given the diversity of these functions, their local provision was often politically contentious.
Thirty councillors from the London Borough of Poplar were sent to prison in 1921 for refusing to levy rate precepts for London County Council, the Metropolitan Police and the Metropolitan Asylums Board, in a protest against the unequal nature of the rates burden as between rich and poor areas of London.
In 1932 the government sent commissioners into Rotherham and Durham councils to take over their public assistance committees when they refused to operate the means test as rigorously as the centre wished.
These were only the most visible of a whole series of local political challenges to the centre, built around distinct and diverse local political cultures.
In Gyford's words, ‘in this inter-war period, municipal and national politics were not wholly assimilated into one another…
It is thus possible to see local politics in these years as having, in some degree, a life of its own’(1985a, pp. 82–3).
Thus political diversity at the local level, crystallizing around the politics of local government, has been widespread for one hundred and fifty years.
When seen in this historical light, it seems that the ‘normal’ 1950s and '60s were actually quite abnormal.
The nationalization of local politics arose from a specific combination of economic, social and political processes which no longer applies.
This combination was expressed at the national level by ‘Butskellism’— that bi-partisan approach to government relying on an expanded mixed economy, and underlain by the social-democratic compromise between capital and labour.
At the local level it was expressed by a shared set of values and policies, operating within a welfare state consensus.
Local government had its place within this consensus, and its role was accepted by both major political parties.
The somewhat unitary, homogenized world of local politics in the '50s and '60s was thus a reflection of wider social relations, of wider values, and of a wider economic stability — all of which have now disappeared.
Thus the nature of local politics has changed over the post-war period, and we will now look at the way this has been analysed, to see if the debates within the social sciences have kept pace with material change.
Summary of section 5.2
Spatial differentiation in political activity has become increasingly marked, at both a national and a local scale.
This is more than just a case of increased differentiation in local voting behaviour.
Local government has seen the growth of intra-as well as inter-party  politics, and has been used by both major parties to promote ‘radical’ policies.
There is a complex range of institutions and practices involved in local political activity, including economically and socially based organizations.
The homogeneity of local politics in the 1950s and early 1960s was the exception rather than the rule.
Activity 5.2
(a)
What are your local councils?
(b)
What parties are in control?
(c)
How has this changed since the last local elections, if at all?
(d)
Are you aware of any significant changes in council policies over the past five years?
If so, would you explain them more in terms of:
central government pressures or initiatives?
changes in political control locally?
changes within local political parties? or
initiatives developed by local government officers?
Analysing local politics
Before we begin this short survey of attempts to analyse local political activity, it is worth noting a dual contradiction which underpins post-war changes in British local politics.
We have just noted how local politics in Britain has recently become more diversified, but, as Chapter 4 pointed out, this has happened at the same time as political power has become increasingly centralized.
The politics of local government have come to the fore just as the powers of local government have declined.
Of course, this is no accident, and Duncan and Goodwin (1988) in their book on the local government crisis detail how the two processes are interlinked and how each has helped to shape the other.
Increasingly threatening forms of local political activity brought a response from central government, whose policies were designed to reduce the scope for local government autonomy.
But these new measures from the centre, such as rate-capping and the introduction of poll tax (see Duncan and Goodwin, 1989), have resulted in new and varied forms of local politics.
This situation can be contrasted with the 1950s and 1960s when, under the boom conditions of Keynesian economic management and social-democratic political consensus, local government was largely free of detailed financial  or administrative control.
The result, however, and the second contradiction, was that given this freedom local authorities behaved in a very similar fashion to each other.
Local political diversity was almost absent at a time when central control was at its slackest.
Or this at least was the academic orthodoxy, and by examining this and subsequent debates we should have a clearer idea of the analytical tools which can be of help in understanding the changing nature of local politics in Britain.
The lost world of Local politics
We thus have to begin our examination of local politics in a restructured Britain, at a time when there were supposedly no local politics.
Indeed, according to Rhodes (1975, p. 39), ‘The politics of local government was a lost world’ until the late 1960s.
Political scientists in the 1950s and '60s managed to maintain this position through two major lines of argument and methodology.
Firstly, they mainly restricted their political analysis to the relations between local authorities and central government departments.
There was a concentration, in other words, on the formal political world of intergovernmental relations.
And within this relationship local authorities were seen as decentralized administrative agents, acting at the behest of the centre.
Secondly, whenever local politics were looked at, they were investigated using quantitative statistical techniques, used to try to find some sort of ‘link’ or ‘association’between local inputs (such as population density, income per capita, degree of urbanization) and policy outputs (usually levels of expenditure on particular services).
Both approaches prevented any understanding of the actual processes of local politics, and thus both helped to further the orthodoxy that local politics were largely absent in the immediate post-war period.
Those studies which concentrated on local-central relations ignored local politics because they saw local authorities as mere receptacles for central policy.
The opportunity for autonomous action and local diversity was limited, according to this view, because of two factors.
First, it was argued that local government was financially dependent on the centre, and that ‘he who pays the piper calls the tune’.
Financial dependence was taken as evidence for agency status.
Secondly, the imposition of centrally determined standards of provision coupled with a public demand for equality in local services was supposed to have led to an increasing uniformity in service provision.
Hence, the argument runs, even without central financial control most local councils would have been providing similar levels of services.
Dearlove (1973, p. 15) shows both arguments to be largely false, and concludes that such studies consisted of ‘unsupported hunches based on partial research’, leading to a definite exaggeration of both central control and uniformity of service provision.
However, even when research came to recognize this exaggeration and to examine the diversity of local service provision, local politics remained  shrouded in mystery.
Initially this local political research, following its North American counterpart, concentrated on manipulating quantifiable variables — the so-called ‘output studies’.
These essentially consisted of using multiple regression techniques to test the ‘relationship’ between local political outputs and a number of external input variables: a likely looking set of independent variables would be tested against expenditure levels to see if any of the relationships were statistically significant.
There is no conceptualization here beyond statistical association.
This may be able to identify some sort of ‘fit’ between the social and economic characteristics of a city and its public policy, but this in no sense explains that policy.
Through this type of analysis we may discover that there is a relationship between certain socioeconomic inputs and political outputs, but we would not know how or why this relationship exists.
Moreover, the results depend totally on what data are put in, and the methodology of necessity limits data to those which are amenable to statistical manipulation.
There are obviously important facets of the local political system — such as power, patronage and personality — which cannot be quantified and so must be left out of the ‘explanation’.
Thus, despite its empirical sophistication, the outputs approach leaves local politics as a ‘lost world’.
In Search of the political process
Studies of intergovernmental relations, and of inputs and outputs, both failed to consider the actual political processes operating in and around local government.
In reaction, the late 1960s saw the beginnings of a new type of local political analysis which consisted of intensive case studies of particular authorities.
Research turned  towards the policy process itself, to the people who took the decisions and to the local political institutions in which they operated.
Soon a torrent of research appeared, on individual councils and on individual policies.
(Jones (1975), Rhodes (1975) and Gyford (1976) provide reviews.)
By their volume alone, these new studies of local politics promised to illuminate the lost world.
This new field of local political research was stimulated by an increase in local authority activity, especially in housing and urban renewal, in the 1960s and early 1970s, as well as by the responses of community groups.
Indeed, the rise of ‘community politics’ in the late 1960s helped to focus academic interest on the North American ‘community power’studies, but the new research received its most important theoretical support through the emergence of urban managerialism.
This directed attention towards the activities and values of key officials — the ‘urban managers’— who, through their positions in influential institutions such as local authorities, building societies, estate agents and the like, could allocate scarce urban resources and thus influence service provision locally.
In Pahl's well-known expression, local political research came to be concerned with ‘Who gets the scarce resources  and facilities?
Who decides how to distribute or allocate these resources?
Who decides who decides?’(1975, p. 185).
This new flowering of empirical work on local politics usually addressed three key issues, albeit with different degrees of emphasis (see Bassett and Short, 1980, p. 132).
First, the studies looked at local councillors themselves -at their attitudes and perceptions, at their organization and relationship with their political party, and at their political activity.
Notions of ‘political ideology’, and of an ‘assumptive world’, were developed to account for their behaviour (see respectively Dearlove, 1973; Young and Kramer, 1978).
Secondly, research looked at the relationship between these councillors and the local government officers employed to implement their decisions.
Not surprisingly research on different places produced conflicting results.
Davies (1972), on Newcastle, and Dennis (1972), on Sunderland, both show how council officials acted almost independently over issues of urban redevelopment, their actions being governed by a vague notion of the type of planning needed to produce ‘a good society’— hence the title of Davies's book The Evangelistic Bureaucrat .
In contrast Saunders (1979) and Newton (1976), in their studies of, respectively, Croydon and Birmingham, both trace fairly close relationships between high-level council officers and leading councillors, with each relying on the other during the policy-making process.
It seems safest to conclude that this symbiotic relationship is the norm, but that it takes place to varying degrees according to policy, place and circumstance.
Thus if Davies and Dennis had been studying other cities with different political and administrative structures, they would have found different results — as would Saunders and Newton!
As is the norm in social science, yet one rarely acknowledged, what you find depends on where and when and — crucially — how you look.
This is borne out by the third type of managerialist study — that of the role of external ‘pressure groups’ in local politics.
Again different results were found in different places, although there did seem to be some agreement on a broad division between those ‘helpful’ pressure groups that gained access to the policy-making process and those ‘unhelpful’, or ‘unreasonable’, groups whose actions were treated by the local authority with suspicion and dismissal.
(See Dearlove (1973) on Kensington and Newton (1976) on Birmingham.)
Through these three strands of study,urban managerialism seemed to offer a convenient conceptual framework for the new case studies of local political behaviour.
By its identification of, and concentration on, the ‘gatekeepers’ of the urban system, it gave a way of shifting research from an emphasis on empirical variables to one which stressed political processes, actual decision-making and the real exercise of political power.
But the shift was actually only from one limited set of variables to another.
This body of work viewed the local political sphere, and those who operated within it, as autonomous — both from local social and political pressure and from wider constraints imposed from outside agencies and institutions.
Just as the concentration on individual managers isolates them from their  proper context and makes them almost personally responsible for local policy variations, so the concentration on the processes of local politics isolated these from other sets of socio-economic processes.
The emphasis on councillors, officers and pressure groups proved to be a great limitation.
The very studies which found the lost world of local politics, did so within a conceptual and methodological framework that ensured it would never be fully understood.
For they concentrated on a very formal identification of local politics.
The important objects of study were assumed, in an a priori manner, to be operating around the formal institutions of local government and its electoral process.
Research stressed political and administrative factors in isolation and never succeeded in analysing the way local politics are linked to wider social and economic processes.
Local politics becomes urban politics: collective consumption and the dual state
Since the mid-1970s, with the recognition that urban managerialism was too narrow in its scope, the concerns of local political research have widened considerably.
The almost exclusive concentration on the formal political process has been replaced by accounts that take in crucial determinants outside this sphere, and which are placed in an explanatory framework that allows links to be made with wider sets of social relations.
These broadened the somewhat parochial world of local political studies in two senses, both empirically and conceptually.
Local political activity came to be seen as part and parcel of changes taking place within capitalist society as a whole, especially within the capitalist state as it attempts to manage and transform a social and economic system in profound crisis.
Again material changes stimulated the new thinking just as much as the perceived inadequacies of existing theory.
The reorganization of local government described in Chapter 4 confirmed that local government was indeed part of a much wider state system, and the 1973 oil crisis followed by the onset of economic depression deepened the pressures on that system.
as if to confirm that they had rejected the old emphasis on local political organizations, the new studies gave themselves a new title.
The analysis of local politics became instead an analysis of ‘urban’ politics, a change given academic respectability towards the end of the 1970s, when the Political Studies Association changed the name of its Local Politics Group to the Urban Politics Group.
This change of name was itself based on changes in the theories which informed the Group's work.
The biggest influence on this change came from across the Channel via the writings of the so-called ‘French school’ of urban sociology, whose most influential figure was undoubtedly Manuel Castells.
In his early work (1977, 1978) he undertook a detailed critique of previous sociological approaches to an understanding of the urban system.
His reformulation was woven around three key points.
First was the argument that the urban is characterized  not by any spatial or cultural boundary as had been contended by earlier theorists, but as the site of consumption processes involved in the reproduction of labour power.
Castells argued that since production units were increasingly leaving the western city for rural and Third World locations, the urban unit was becoming characterized as a location for consumption.
Indeed he stated that ‘urban units seem to be to the process of reproduction what the companies are to the production process’(1977, p. 237).
Secondly, he argued that these consumption processes are increasingly provided by the state in a collectivized form, since they become too expensive, especially at times of economic crisis, for private firms to supply.
And, thirdly, he presented the notion that this increasing state intervention and action at the local urban level inevitably ‘politicizes’ the provision of collective consumption and leads to the development of political activity expressed as ‘urban social movements’.
Somewhat paradoxically, however, despite this widening of enquiry, the new urban sociology managed to impose limits on its own research.
These arose mainly from its reliance on a rigid theoretical framework which views the urban system as an autonomous political entity — one characterized by its position as the site of collective consumption practices.
And despite detailed empirical application in France no major investigation of local politics has been carried out in Britain using these ideas.
Instead their lasting legacy and major influence was the legitimacy that they gave for local politics to be reduced to urban politics, which in turn consisted solely of issues concerning collective consumption.
This double reduction was formalized by Patrick Dunleavy, who gave his book Urban Political Analysis (1980b) the subtitle ‘The politics of collective consumption’.
Dunleavy used the ideas of Castells to argue that local political analysis should not be concerned with particular communities, or specific institutions of local government, but instead should focus on the ‘urban politics’ of collective consumption — that is, with consumption organized on a non-commercial basis by state agencies.
Dunleavy also notes the similarity of much local authority service provision in the 1950s and 1960s, and argues persuasively for an explanation of such uniform local political activity to be couched in non-local terms.
He puts forward three key areas of non-local policy determination: policy formulation within the welfare state as a whole; the involvement of large private firms in urban development and service provision; and professionalism at both the local and the national level.
Although these wider influences are important to consider, Dunleavy perhaps overreacts to the limited local approach of previous analysts.
For he denies the importance of local factors in accounting for local (or urban) politics, by arguing that local authorities are insulated from any electoral or public opinion influences; that local councillors are in any case only involved in decision-making in the most fragmented way; and that local policymaking is constituted by stereotyped responses with little distinctly local reference (1980b, p. 135).
Dunleavy's non-local forces may well be  important, but they are usually mediated by local processes, and translated into policy by local authorities sometimes in dramatically different ways.
As we have already noted, the explanation for the post-war uniformity of local politics perhaps lies elsewhere than in a simple appeal to non-local forces.
An attempt to develop the idea of analysing local politics as the urban politics of collective consumption has also been made by Peter Saunders (1981, 1984, 1986), and working in conjunction with Alan Cawson (Cawson and Saunders, 1983).
But, crucially, unlike Castells and Dunleavy they reject a unitary view of the state in favour of a ‘dualistic’ theory of politics — the dual state thesis .
As discussed in the previous chapter, this view argues that distinct political processes operate at the national and the local level.
State intervention at the central level is supposed to focus mainly on issues of production and income, and it proceeds through a policy process of corporate bargaining.
On the other hand they argue that local politics have their own specific frame of reference and form of practice.
Locally, they maintain, state intervention is directed towards consumption processes, and policies are developed through a plurality of political struggles.
Thus those interests mobilized at the centre around the processes of production — the organized class interests of industrial and finance capital, the professions and organized labour — will differ from those organized locally, where mobilization usually cuts across class lines to be based on specific local consumption issues -council tenants, parents of under-fives and so on.
This work has been important in highlighting the specificity of the local level, and in presenting a conceptualization of local politics based primarily on their ‘uniqueness’ and separation from the centre.
But it still presents problems for those seeking to analyse the changing nature of British local politics.
A major difficulty with the thesis is that it rests on an a priori allocation of functions between national and local states, and that these functions are then assumed to produce specific and separate political processes.
Local politics are assumed in advance to be of a pluralist nature, and concerned with issues of consumption.
In addition to this general point about theory placing empirical practice into pre-determined boxes, there seems little historical rationale or evidence for this particular division between the types of functions and types of politics which characterize the local and the national state.
Although, for instance, British local governments are now predominantly concerned with welfare provision, before 1930 they were far more heavily involved in production issues — especially in relation to the ‘utilities’ of gas, electricity and water.
Indeed, the historical emergence of the local state in Britain as a set of distinct institutions, was characterized by its support for production and capital accumulation, and before 1914 only a third of local authority expenditure could be classified as social consumption (Dunleavy, 1984, p. 76).
Similarly, there seems little evidence to segregate types of politics by geographical scale.
Corporatist politics are sometimes marked at the local level, and Cawson himself (1985b) recognizes this by distinguishing a whole category of ‘local corporatism’.
Likewise, pluralist and class-based  politics are not at all unknown in national states.
It seems that the mode of politics in any situation is governed as much by the actors and interests involved, as by the geographical scale at which it takes place.
The problems of analysing real events using such a rigid divide between the national/local scale, production/consumption issues and corporatist/pluralist type of politics are only increased by Saunders' recent attempt (1985) to provide urban sociology with a distinctive disciplinary focus of study.
Again he advocates research concentrating on collective consumption, and calls for urban sociology to become ‘a sociology of consumption’.
This only serves to confuse even further the conceptual status of the terms ‘local’ and ‘urban’.
Are local politics concerned with consumption because they are local, as the dual state thesis suggests, or because they are urban?
The two distinct categories are muddled in a manner that is difficult to separate analytically.
Saunders partly deflects criticism of this sort by putting forward the dual state thesis as an ‘ideal-type’, claiming that it is a research strategy rather than an account of reality, and that its aim is to develop a framework which suggests research questions and which can be evaluated analytically but not empirically.
Even if we accept this, it is questionable how useful an analytical framework is which has an untenable base.
It may well be that the ‘ideal-type’, far from being ideally typical, actually represents very abnormal and atypical political conditions.
As we saw in section 5.2, recent changes in the nature of local politics may well have made the ideal-type of the dual state no longer applicable.
The local state and social relations
One of the merits of the dual state thesis is its explicit attempt to place the understanding of local politics into a wider analytical framework.
The very use of the term ‘state’ immediately suggests a broader focus than the often narrow concentration on the institutions and personnel of local government which had hitherto informed local political research.
In 1969 Miliband's book The State in Capitalist Society , and the author's subsequent debate with Poulantzas, set the tone for a renewed academic debate about the nature of the state.
The questions of political autonomy, of the links between the state and the ruling class, and of the ability of subordinate groups to ‘take over’ the state were especially prevalent in this debate.
These concerns were addressed to local politics following the publication of Cockburn's book The Local State (1977).
As the title implies, she related theoretical debates about the nature of the state to the institutions of local government.
The term ‘local state’ gained critical acceptance and helped place on a new conceptual stage the mass of research and political activity that had gathered around local, or community, politics since the late 1960s. for those on the radical left, the state, and of course the local state, came to be seen as a site of competing political interests rather than as a neutral set of administrative institutions.
The importance of Cockburn's work was that it integrated studies of local  political activity into this wider view of the capitalist state.
But unfortunately the analytical use of the new concept of the local state was hampered by Cockburn's concept of the state as a whole.
Essentially Cockburn updates Marx's idea that the state acts as an ‘executive of the bourgeoisie’, to include social reproduction as an important concern of the state and ideology as an important dimension of domination by the state.
The local state plays its part in these new processes through the detailed management of people and institutions locally.
But it is seen as part of a whole, differentiated from the central state only by an increased concern with social reproduction.
Again, function, not process, is the major method of specifying the local state.
Under this unitary model Cockburn claims that local governments ‘are, and under capitalism have always been, subject to central government’(1977, p. 46).
Such a view is misleading on two counts.
First, it simply projects forward Marx's descriptive generalization of the mid-nineteenth-century liberal state — without universal suffrage, parliamentary working-class parties or labour movement involvement — into a universal model.
The capitalist state is viewed functionally as a given thing, a pre-existing instrument possessed by the capitalist class, rather than as a historically emerging, changing and contradictory relation.
Following from this, local government as ‘part of the whole’ is also seen as a static instrument of capital.
But if this were the case why has the local-central state system been subject to continuous conflict and occasional crisis?
And why bother with all the political tension and uncertainty in the latest attempt to reduce local autonomy, which was detailed in Chapter 4?
Cockburn reduces two contradictory processes of the local state — that it is simultaneously agent and obstacle for the national state -to those of a one-way agent.
Not only does this ignore a whole aspect of local state activity — that which opposes the centre — but it also reduces social relations between active human agents to purely functional operations.
Elsewhere, Duncan and I have made an attempt to overcome these problems by putting forward a conceptual view of local politics which stresses the social relations involved, which highlights the importance of the locality, and which is based on the notion that local state institutions can be at once an agent of, and an obstacle to, central demands (Duncan and Goodwin, 1988).
Uneven development is taken here as a key concept, both in explaining why there are local state institutions to begin with, and in understanding how local politics come to be differentiated from place to place.
As this series stresses, the uneven social and economic development of places has been a central feature of post-war British society.
But uneven development does not simply mean that types and quantities of physical and social phenomena vary from place to place.
Rather, it means that socioeconomic processes are themselves uneven, increasing the disparities in preexisting social and natural systems.
As the other books in the series have shown, social and physical environments are continually developed, abandoned and changed.
Duncan and Goodwin claim that state institutions are invaluable in the  management and organization of the differentiated and spatially variable societies typical of capitalism, and that to be successful such state intervention should take place on a local as well as a national level.
But this development of local state institutions can be a hostage to fortune.
For uneven development also means that social groups are spatially constituted and differentiated, with variable local strengths and importance.
In some places locally dominant groups will differ from those dominant nationally, and ‘such locally constituted groups can then use these local state institutions to further their own interests, perhaps even in opposition to centrally dominant interests’(1988, p. 41).
Moreover, this lever is strengthened by electoral democracy, which legitimates the promotion of locally preferred policies, and in this way local states, and especially electoral local government, are not only used by those dominant at the centre to enable them to manage uneven development, but can also represent specifically local interests.
This somewhat contradictory role is what enables us to specify the concept of a local state, as well as a national one.
For the outcome of this role depends on the multiplicity of local social processes which influence the activities of the local state, but which are inaccessible to the centre.
The centre will, however, often ‘attempt to neutralise the influences of local interests in local states’(Duncan and Goodwin, 1988, p. 41), and we claim such an attempt has taken place from 1979 to 1988 and that it is this which lies behind the current restructuring of local-central government relations.
Duncan and Goodwin provide a conceptual framework for understanding the differential forms that these local political processes take, by claiming that particular local policies arise through the uneven development of a whole range of economic, social, cultural and political relations.
We illustrate ways in which these combine with each other and with wider sets of social relations by using the examples of the development of radical forms of local politics in both the small borough of Clay Cross and in the very large Greater London Council.
Despite the growth of a local political consciousness nurtured in its coal-mines, the transfer of militancy from work to council chamber could only take place in Clay Cross once the mines had been nationalized and the culturally paternalistic influence of the local coal-owners had been removed.
And in London, where manufacturing industry and trade union strength have all but disappeared, the radicalism of the ‘new urban left’ was based on a coalition between white-collar unions and civil organizations built up outside work.
(For these and other examples see Duncan and Goodwin (1988, pp. 76–89).)
Duncan and Goodwin thus claim that it is the localized heterogeneity of economic, social and cultural relations, and the plurality of influences which result, that is crucial to the distinctiveness of the local state, and to an understanding of the myriad forms of local politics which are produced.
As was noted in Chapter 4, this view can be criticized for over-stressing the importance of local social relations, and for a rather restricted view of how these relations are translated into policy.
More research, however, still  needs to be done on the actual mechanisms involved in local political activity, to identify those causal processes which transfer the characteristics of different local socio-economic environments into diverse local political practices.
Whilst researchers will only be able to specify the ways in which large-scale social and economic restructuring has led to particular types of local political practice through empirical study, we can claim that there has been an increase in local political activity, in contrast to the relatively homogeneous picture presented in the 1950s and early '60s.
Moreover, we are now in a position to examine how effectively research has analysed this change.
Reviewing the arguments presented earlier, it would seem that the lack of local politics in the post-war period should not be equated with the turning of local government into mere agents of the centre; nor should it be seen as the result of non-local structural forces promoting change on a national basis.
Rather, it represented one part of a very particular period in British history, and as such was ‘one aspect of the mid-twentieth century rapprochement between the feudal paternalism of Tory Democracy and the Fabian centralism of Social Democracy’(Gyford, 1985a, p. 88).
As this text, and those related to it, point out, this rapprochement no longer holds.
The Keynesian consensus, built on an expanding economy in which private profit could be balanced with social need, has now been destroyed by recession and economic decline.
Shared assumptions and values, including those about local government, have now been replaced by competing visions of Britain's future.
On the one hand, the Labour Party has turned to ideas of democratic socialism, with regard to the control and regulation of capital.
On the other, the Conservatives have become committed to a free-market society, in which the market-place is seen as economically efficient and socially just.
Somewhat ironically, the erstwhile consensus has been best represented by the formation of new centre parties — the Social Democratic Party and the Social and Liberal Democrats.
The starting-point for all these alternatives is the deterioration of Britain's position within the worldwide division of labour and, even more starkly, of particular places within Britain.
What is the best way of stemming this decline or, even better, of regenerating the economy?
And how do we rescue particular places, or should we leave them to decay?
In answering these questions, local politics inevitably come to the fore again, not only because different responses have different costs and benefits for different groups of people in different places, but also because alternative policies can actually be tried out at the local level.
Nowhere is this clearer than in the case of local economic policies.
It is to the development of this particular type of local politics that we now turn.
Summary of section 5.3
Several theoretical positions have been developed to analyse local politics, broadly grouped into those which highlight local autonomy, and  those which stress the role of national government and non-local determinants of change.
Through a process of critical appraisal successive theories build on those that go before.
This process of appraisal is often developed through reference to empirical changes in the processes being analysed.
Activity 5.3
There are three main approaches to the analysis of local politics outlined in this section.
The first, labelled urban managerialism, focuses on the activities of councillors, officers and pressures groups; the second, labelled urban politics, focuses on the politics of consumption and, in one version at least, identifies a dual state in which the local state is principally concerned with consumption issues; the third, which we can label the social relations approach, stresses the importance of locality and uneven development as the basis for local politics.
Looking back at these different sets of theories (outlined in sections 5.3.2, 5.3.3 and 5.3.4), consider how each of them might explain the restructuring of local government (discussed in Chapter 4 and referred to at the start of section 5.3) which took place in the 1980s?
Which do you think would have been most helpful as a basis for an explanation?
Which provide the best explanation for central-local conflicts?
The development of local economic strategies
Before looking at local economic strategies in more detail we should point out that the decline of consensus politics at the national level does not inevitably lead to an increase in local political activity.
It does, however, make it more likely to happen, and facilitates this by opening up the political space in which local differentiation can occur.
In other words it provides the context, but the actual shape and form of local politics is the outcome of a whole number of processes operating at both the local and the national level.
As we shall see, local economic policies are a good case in point.
‘Traditional’ policies
Until 1980 local economic strategies took their place among the many uncontested, bipartisan policies of local government, although with the recession and the ‘de-industrialization’ of Britain this was an expanding  activity for an increasing number of local authorities.
But by the end of the 1970s, added impetus — and critical changes of direction — had been given to this expansion.
First, several left-wing Labour councils had come to power committed to establishing more effective, and thus inevitably more contentious, local economic policies.
Furthermore, their ascendancy accompanied the severest phase of the recession, which gave them the added incentive to try something different as some of their own areas were among the hardest hit.
Secondly, the new Conservative national government began to introduce a whole set of nationally promoted, and equally contentious, ‘local’ economic strategies.
Both of these developments reflected the evident failure of traditional local policies in the face of a pervasive and thorough restructuring of many local economies.
Cochrane (1983, pp. 289–92) identifies four main components of this ‘traditional’ approach to local economic strategies.
First, publicity and advertising extols the virtues of one area over another, in an attempt to attract firms which are beginning, expanding or relocating.
Secondly, assistance and information is offered to these firms, guiding them through the planning and development process, and offering advice on a range of issues from education and housing to estate agents and government grants.
Thirdly, land and premises are often provided, especially for small ‘nursery’ or ‘seed-bed’units.
And fourthly, subsidies and loans help provide finance to encourage development.
From these four components sprang four characteristics of ‘traditional’ policy.
It was property-led, market- and business-related, aimed at small firms and had little emphasis on employment.
There were, however, a number of serious problems with this approach and the assumptions behind it.
First of all, local authorities possess only a very limited economic power and can only exercise what powers they have in very small geographical areas.
They cannot significantly alter labour or commodity markets at a scale relevant to a national, let alone an international, production system.
Secondly, what they can do is further restrained by an interlocking web of assumptions, rules and regulations.
Thirdly, there is no necessary or even likely reason why subsidizing capital with below-cost land, premises or advice should create more jobs or lead to local regeneration.
Servicing private capital in this way is usually a matter of job redistribution rather than job creation.
Moreover many firms will use relocation as an opportunity to shed jobs or introduce cheaper and less worthwhile ones.
In addition, an increase in production, or even in investment, does not automatically lead to an increase in jobs — the norm is usually the exact opposite, and shedding labour is a prerequisite for a firm's expansion.
Success for capital is not necessarily the same as success for labour or for a local economy.
(See Massey (1988a, b) for a discussion of ‘jobless growth’.)
And, fourthly, because of these other limitations local authorities, especially those in the inner cities, usually end up trying to attract or influence the behaviour of a pool of small firms, which they often justify by stating that small firms are the key to local regeneration.
But in reality small firms are often backwards  in terms of resources, capital and innovation, as well as limited in terms of job numbers.
They depend on larger companies for a market niche, and often provide low-paid and insecure jobs.
Of course, some small firms do offer growth potential, but these have to be identified and given appropriate support rather than a general subsidy linked to premises or land.
The failure of these traditional local economic strategies to stimulate and sustain local economic growth in all but a minority of places has led to the development of new forms of policy.
They can be grouped under two headings, those seeking to ‘restructure for labour’ and those seeking to ‘restructure for capital’.
Both assume that local intervention should be deeper and more fundamental than merely ‘servicing capital’, and both also accept that it is necessary to change the structure of declining local economies if regeneration is to come about.
They also share a rejection of the postwar consensus in both labour relations and state policy.
There has been a perceived failure of old political, as well as old economic, relations.
But here the similarities end and the new policies for local economic regeneration can be placed at opposite ends of the political spectrum.
Indeed it is doubtful if one group can even be called local, since it is sponsored, promoted and financed by central government.
We will quickly consider these, before exploring in more depth the development of those policies that are in fact locally generated.
‘Restructuring for capital’: a national approach?
Central government has always been involved in promoting local economic change, and since the 1930s has developed explicitly sub-national and spatially differentiated economic policy.
By the 1980s this had come to be called ‘local’ economic policy, despite its national origins.
Initially, however, such policy was regionally based, designed to affect the growth of regions rather than localities.
Regional development aid, new and expanded towns, and restrictions on metropolitan growth, especially in the south-east, were the major policy instruments.
By the late 1970s, however, the emphasis had changed to inner-city regeneration: the policies were becoming more local in scale, if not in origin.
The incoming Conservative government in 1979 kept this new emphasis and minimized overt regional policy.
But it gave its inner-city policy a new direction by stressing the role of private enterprise in economic regeneration.
Moreover local authorities, viewed by the previous Labour government as the ‘natural agencies’ to tackle such regeneration, were now seen as a major cause of the problem.
The government set about ‘freeing private enterprise’ through a number of legislative and administrative changes, the major ones seeing the introduction of Enterprise Zones (EZs), Urban Development Corporations (UDCs) and Freeports.
Each are area-based and are concerned with  encouraging economic growth in specific parts of particular cities.
In this way they are ‘local’— but then so is much other central government policy.
By 1987 the UK had 28 EZs, 6 UDCs and 6 Freeports, with several other ‘mini-UDCs’ in the pipeline.
All are weaker versions of earlier plans to display small Hong Kongs in run-down local areas, where laissez-faire would be ‘let rip’, free of government interference.
Accordingly EZs give firms exemption for ten years from various taxes and duties and offer a simplified planning regime.
Freeports, all near airports or docks, offer tariff and customs privileges, while UDCs go further and replace local government's powers over development control with an appointed board responsible only to the Minister.
Although marketed around the notion of freeing private enterprise, these measures in fact depend upon considerable public subsidy: the UDCs actually operate as a state development agency, buying, preparing and marketing land.
They are backed by a whole host of other innovations designed to promote the private sector in certain local areas — such as Task Forces (later City Action Teams), Inner City Enterprises and Business in the Community (see Duncan and Goodwin, 1988, pp. 127–49 for details).
In economic terms they seem to have had little effect: in Merseyside, for instance, which has had every new scheme, economic decline has not even been halted, let alone reversed.
In general, these initiatives seem to have shifted jobs around rather than created new ones, as some firms have relocated to take advantage of the subsidies (see Roger Tym and Partners, 1981, 1982; Shutt, 1984; Erikson and Syms, 1986).
Similarly, the attempt to remove barriers to investment has merely led to their redistribution, for instead of paying rates inside Enterprise Zones firms pay higher rents and property prices (Erikson and Syms, 1986).
Developers and land-owners have benefited most from the subsidies, which in turn have encouraged large land-intensive concerns, such as retailing and warehousing, at the expense of labour-intensive industrial firms.
And although London's Docklands has seen major development, questions are being asked about its nature.
It seems that existing residents have hardly benefited at all, as most jobs created have gone to those living outside the area, and most economic gains to international finance companies, property developers and construction companies (see Goodwin, 1989, for details).
Thus neither the causes nor consequences of this type of economic strategy can be said to be specifically local.
They were designed nationally, were implemented on a national basis, and have benefited interest groups of a national and an international nature.
Their only claim to be local is that they are implemented in a restricted geographical area — but then so are certain aspects of defence and foreign policy!
This raises the question which also runs through The Changing Social Structure (Hamnett, McDowell and Sarre, 1989)— what exactly do we mean by local?
Should the term mean more than just a circumscribed spatial area?
In the case of local politics, should this mean more than just the local implementation of national policy?
To help tackle some of these questions we will now turn to examine the  development of another recent set of local economic strategies, those designed to ‘restructure for labour’.
‘Restructuring for labour’: a local approach?
In the local elections of 1981 a number of Labour Party manifestos highlighted economic issues, and suggested ways of moving beyond the traditional approach to local economic strategies.
The new approaches were designed to counter the onset of mass unemployment in the severest phase of the recession, but also reflected the shock of Labour's huge general election defeat of 1979, and the realization that Labour's national industrial policy of the 1970s had failed.
Significantly the policies stressed the importance of local initiatives, and were offered as a decentralized alternative to the centralized bureaucratic planning of national government.
These Labour local authorities were developing conscious efforts to alter local economies so as to bring about long-term economic development, through job creation and job enrichment, for the benefit of local workers and the local community.
The emphasis was thus on using firms for the development of a local area and for its people — rather than with using people for the development of private firms in an area.
Hence the strategy was given the name ‘restructuring for labour’.
There are four major components to this strategy.:
(a)
identifying strategic plants, firms and sectors where intervention should be directed.
Support for firms is not just a matter of marginal servicing, nor should it be property-led or based on the notion of any jobs at any price.
Rather intervention will mean changing how workplaces operate and is defined as much socially as economically in terms of developing local skills, satisfying local needs and enriching the working life of local people;
(b)
strengthening the position of workers through planning agreements, stressing, in return for help to the firm, improvements in conditions, pay, unionization, equal opportunities etc.;
(c)
encouraging alternative forms of management and production, and encouraging the development of ‘socially useful’ products;
(d)
improving the influence of local communities on their own economic management and development, through democratic planning initiatives known as ‘popular planning’.
Although elements from each of these components are usually found in the new initiatives, they vary in their emphases from place to place.
Some authorities support strategic manufacturing businesses in difficulty, others help small businesses and co-operatives.
Some concentrate on local authority employment, others stress the council's planning role.
Some conduct strategic research, others help develop new products and new markets.
To implement these strategies new institutions have been set up, but these are also diverse.
Some councils set up new industry or employment committees, staffed by their own departments.
Others concentrated on setting up  enterprise boards, outside the council itself.
Yet more have restructured their planning or personnel departments, or established economic development units in a central co-ordinating role.
As Blunkett and Jackson (1987, p. 113) put it, such differences ‘reflect the responsibilities of different types of authority, their local economic structure and their political traditions’.
This is a clear indication that these initiatives have developed locally, have taken account of local conditions, have started from different political positions and bases, and have had their roots in very different local experiences.
In opposition to centrally imposed ‘local economic strategies’, these initiatives of the left explicitly recognize that what is appropriate in one place, may not be of much use in another.
The London Industrial Strategy (Greater London Council , 1985) details the strategy developed for London, and outlines the social, economic and political reasons which led to this particular form of local policy being adopted for London.
It would seem sensible that strategies to help Sheffield, with the recent and very sudden collapse of its steel industry, may not be able to assist Liverpool or Newcastle, where steel has never been an important industry and where decline has been long-term.
A short look at one of these initiatives, that developed by Sheffield City Council, will help to tease out the local roots and separate the influence of local politics and local processes from those operating on a wider scale.
It will also help us to assess the extent to which these local policies are, in fact, local and whether they can be viewed as autonomous from national and international forces.
Local politics in practice: economic policy in Sheffield
In May 1981 Sheffield City Council set up the country's first Employment Committee, serviced directly by a new council department.
This section will analyse the development of this initiative over its first few years, in order to give a particular example of local political activity at a particular time in a particular place.
It should be emphasized that this policy initiative was part of much broader policy changes in the city, set in motion by a new Labour leadership elected in May 1980.
Many of the leading figures were young left-wing councillors with professional jobs, part of a new breed of local politician promoted to take the place of older, more right-wing politicians who had close links with the city's steel and engineering trade unions.
Although this kind of shift was common to many local Labour Parties, and has been characterized as the rise of the ‘new urban left’(Gyford, 1985b), in Sheffield it was given a particular twist by the nature of the local economy and society.
The Labour Party in the city had developed a political structure which closely linked representatives of the labour movement to its borough politics.
Delegates from the workplace-based Trades and Labour Council were sent to meetings of Sheffield's Labour councillors, which in return sent delegates to the executive of the Trades and Labour Council.
In addition several other Labour councillors would be present as delegates from other  constituent organizations.
This tightly knit framework of liaison between the three sections of Sheffield's labour movement — Labour Council, Labour party and trades unions — helped unite its political and industrial wings.
When local government reorganization in 1974 led to Sheffield being ordered by the national Labour Party to disband these structures, the city's labour movement set up other channels of influence, and the trade union delegates were elected directly to the new District Labour Party, which in turn monitored the activities of the new District Council.
These lines of influence were felt particularly in industrial and economic policy.
The early 1980s witnessed dramatic changes in Sheffield's economy.
Severe unemployment followed redundancy and closure in the city's manual workforce.
Councillors, who had grown up and learnt their politics in a labour movement founded on the dominance of Sheffield's skilled workers in the steel and engineering industries, now had to formulate a response as this dominance quite literally crumbled to the ground.
Committees and forums were set up inside the local authority, the local Trades Council and the local Labour Party, and together they formulated the idea of a new Employment Department to co-ordinate all the council's efforts to tackle the economic crisis in the city.
Blunkett and Jackson (1987) explore some of its policies in more depth, and indicate how the new strategy departed from traditional policies of supporting private sector employment in a number of ways.
Crucially, the close lines of influence and power drawn between the political and industrial wings of the city's labour movement meant that in Sheffield the task of the new committee was one of political as well as economic regeneration.
In the words of the council leader, the new department was set up to‘act in a political manner’ with a function of ‘political mobilization’and, according to its first co-ordinator, ‘part of the challenge for us in the local authority is to try to reintroduce some political perspective’(quoted in Duncan and Goodwin, 1988, p. 85).
However, reconciling these dual political and economic functions proved difficult.
In its initial year the new department spent a great deal of time and energy intervening in the private sector to try to save jobs, especially in the cutlery and engineering sectors.
This was partly as a result of inherited policies, but was also because of the council's desire ‘to be seen to be doing something’ to support its traditional political base of the skilled manual working class.
The most obvious place for this was in the private sector, where these jobs, and skills, were being lost.
The ‘imagined community’ of a vibrant, important and expanding city, controlled by the organized, skilled, male working class and built on the strength of its steel and cutlery industries long outlived its real dissolution.
The council was responding as much to this as to real economic circumstance.
For this strategy, founded as much on local politics as on economics, was ultimately based on investing considerable time and money in rescuing firms on the brink of collapse.
A crucial breaking-point came in 1983, when the Labour councillors first took a decision to support a small steel firm and save around sixty jobs, but later withdrew their support leaving the firm to collapse.
The local labour  movement was split between those who wanted to intervene politically to support members of the skilled manual working class and those who wanted to act on financial grounds and not intervene in a declining enterprise.
As one council officer said of the firm, ‘It was crazy to support in economic terms, but the councillors felt a political need to deliver’(quoted in Duncan and Goodwin, 1988, p. 88).
It is indicative of the particular local society in Sheffield that this gesture had to be made.
It is perhaps more significant that the political gesture was overturned in favour of more pragmatic financial reasoning — but this itself is indicative of broader changes in Sheffield's local politics.
The former political coalition which directed support towards the skilled working class in the private sector had begun to dissolve.
In its place the councillors now found an amalgam of interest groups, some class-based, some not, some based on workplace issues, others concerned with matters of production.
The older organic links between the council, the Labour Party and the trade unions have been replaced by a much wider constituency and coalition.
As a result local government policies have changed, and employment strategy has entered a phase of negotiation.
At first, from around 1984–85, policy concentrated on saving and creating jobs within the council's own workforce.
To a certain extent this made economic and political sense: in economic terms it is where the council had most leverage and control, and in political terms it represented a move to a new base, one built on the strength of the white-collar and public sector unions in the changing economy and society of Sheffield.
This new coalition may not, however, be strong enough to last in the face of increasing economic decline and continued cut-backs in local authority expenditure.
The emphasis could well be changed once again, and may be switched back to the private sector, but in a new and different form — especially given the fact that an Urban Development Corporation was designated in Sheffield in March 1988.
This UDC, imposed by central government, straddles the Lower Don valley, once the site of massive steel and engineering firms.
New economic strategy may well have to be based around this UDC, and could thus become one of partnership and cooperation between the city council and private firms.
Should this scenario happen, crucial to its success would be changing the image of the area, and a key part in this is being played by the city's successful bid for the World Student Games in 1990.
Where steel-workers once laboured in their thousands, the facilities built for student athletes from around the world are hoped to provide the backbone for a different kind of economic prosperity — one which acknowledges the changing economy and society of both Sheffield and the nation.
Evaluating local economic strategies
As the example of Sheffield makes clear, local economic policies of the left are heavily influenced in their development by changes in local economic, social and political structures and practices.
It also shows how a combination of these can easily result in a local economic strategy which has clear political as well as economic goals.
Many other Labour councils recognize this explicit political role.
Geoff Edge, the chair of West Midlands County Council Economic Development Committee, sees their purpose as ‘advocates and missionaries of new Socialist ideas’, while Michael Ward, his counterpart in the Greater London Council, has written that ‘local initiatives can demonstrate that the alternative works; that greater democratic control and the planned use of resources can be used to create jobs.
Local initiatives can lay out the line of policy that a future Labour government can follow’(quoted in Duncan and Goodwin, 1988, p. 128).
This political role has perhaps become more important as the economic and employment claims originally made for these new strategies fail to be met.
For recognizing the restraints and limitations of the old policies is not at all the same as removing them.
The new initiatives suffer from all the financial, administrative and geographical problems which affect the traditional approaches.
The limited resources available to individual local authorities prevent them solving employment problems caused by national deflationary policies and world recession.
The Greater London Enterprise Board (renamed Greater London Enterprises in 1986) can claim some considerable success in saving or creating up to 4000 jobs between 1982 and 1985, but London had lost over 250000 jobs between 1978 and 1982 alone (Duncan and Goodwin, 1985, p. 81).
This shows the difficulty that local intervention faces.
Local strategies are, not surprisingly, unable to cope with major sets of problems generated outside the area.
The new initiatives of the left made a start by identifying strategic sectors of the economy in which to intervene, rather than adopting a blanket approach to all firms in their area — but the problem was that the local authorities were still geographically limited.
The London Industrial Strategy (Greater London Council, 1985) highlights some of these problems, and although it argues for a positive role for local authorities, in the end it concludes that national help and assistance will be necessary in order to have any major impact.
Discussions of these problems are similar to those raised in The Economy in Question (Allen and Massey, 1988) concerning the nature of ‘an economy’.
Labour-controlled local authorities have faced very real questions about the nature of a ‘local economy’.
They have been forced to confront two important facts.
First, no economy is spatially bounded, and the economic relations and processes occurring in their districts are connected through a myriad of links to the wider world.
It is therefore not adequate to speak of a local economy.
We should rather refer to economic processes which are constituted in a particular place, which of course does not make them local.
Some firms, or companies, may recruit workers locally, and sell their products locally — but this does not constitute a ‘local economy’.
It only means that certain sets of economic processes are more  referrent to a local area than others.
And, secondly, local economic strategies have shown that the economy cannot be abstracted from other sets of relationships within  society.
Economic policies are actually about social relations and social values, which is why they are as much political as they are economic.
The term economic hides the fundamental point that economic change is at the same time social change.
Activity 5.4
What is it about local economic policies that make them ‘local’?
Summary of section 5.4
Traditional local economic policies developed during the 1970s have been replaced by two new forms of economic strategy, labelled by observers ‘restructuring for capital’ and ‘restructuring for labour’.
That which restructures for capital cannot, however, be called local, as neither its causes nor consequences are locally based.
That which restructures for labour is local, in that it arises from a desire to tackle local problems with locally based solutions to benefit local people.
These local strategies are subject to change, as local political activity changes in response to different social and economic circumstances.
Conclusions
Having read this chapter so far, you should now be in a position to answer some of the questions posed at its beginning.
The works cited by Savage, Mark-Lawson and Warde, Blunkett and Jackson and the Greater London Council (see the associated Reader, Anderson and Cochrane, 1989) illustrate some of the more general points made in the chapter.
First, it seems as though we can identify a locally based form of politics, arising from local social relations and social processes.
The rise in local politics over recent years is not just the passive outcome of national forces working themselves out at the local level.
Instead, factors such as local political parties, local trade unions, local community groups, local economic structures and local culture will all combine to influence and shape these wider forces in different ways in different places.
Thus the activities of successive Conservative governments since 1979 may have made the re-emergence of local political activity more likely, but the form that this activity takes, how it varies from place to place and how it develops will be shaped by the interaction of local and national processes.
The examples given have also indicated that local government is much more than just an agent of the centre.
Its actions and policies are formed by  local as well as national events, and it must be seen as both an agent of, and an obstacle to, central government.
The economic policies developed by Sheffield City Council and the Greater London Council, amongst many others, are testimony to this fact.
They are locally based, and have been formulated in direct opposition to those policies preferred by the centre.
But just as these new politics have been developing at the local level, so too we need new theories and new concepts to take account of them.
So far political science has been unsuccessful in doing this.
Some of its theories stress the role of local processes, whilst others analyse national structures.
Some concentrate on formal political institutions, others look at economic and social factors.
Some specify the collection of quantifiable data, others use more subjective qualitative forms of analysis.
As this indicates, most are somewhat one-sided and limited in scope, and we need to move towards a synthesis which can enable us to grasp the most significant relationships and processes involved in the local politics of an increasingly diversified, and ‘restructured’, Britain.