

Sugar and Spite and True Confessions
Sugar and Spite was the first attempt at doing anything specifically for out-loud performance.
In spring 1978, Marcella Evaristi had persuaded the Traverse that she and I ought to put a ‘poetry reading’ together, and run it for several nights.
‘What, the same poems, every night the same order,planning it?’
‘Yes, and wouldn't it be good to get a structure and…maybe costume, a few props anyway and learn the poems off by heart, not read them, nose buried in a book, dropping them out your looseleaf onto the floor, scrabbling around picking them up again in the wrong order.’
‘You mean a sort of show …’
‘Why not.’
But not many poems felt at all right to do out loud.
Only ‘Spinster’ and ‘Bawd’, two poems that I suddenly realised were dramatic monologues anyway.
So Marcella and I started writing loads more.
…And it seemed there ought to be music, so Esther Allan, the music teacher at the school where I was the most reluctant member of the Art Department, got roped in.
As neither Marcella or I could sing we spoke along to the music in what we felt, somehow, was Good Old Cabaret Style…
Esther sang the songs that were proper songs.
It was great fun to do and people seemed to like it, so I was hooked.
More of this.
True Confessions in 1981 was an attempt at getting my stage nerve back after a disastrous premature version of Blood and Ice , my first try at a real play, went on in the studio of the Belgrade Theatre, Coventry (‘I'd rather be at the dentist — Birmingham Evening News’).
So would I, and the cast too.
I kept trying to remember what a good time Sugar and Spite had been — and Goodstyle , a history of art revue I'd written and pinched and compiled for Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art, Dundee, when I'd been writer in residence.
Maybe I ought to stick to revue?
One ‘character’, Sharon, the schoolgirl who loves (among other things) the Brontes, had been written for Sugar and Spite and she didn't depend on rhyme for her humour and seemed less steam-radio-Stanley-Holloway-meets-Flanders-and-Swann-meets-Joyce-Grenfell-old-fashioned  .
(I liked the radio when I was wee.)
I thought I'd like to write more characters who, by being deadly serious, would give themselves away…
Siobhan Redmond I'd seen once in a revue by Marcella for St Andrews University and I tracked her down in Glasgow and asked her would she like to do a show for buttons for the newly opened Tron Theatre, who were interested.
She said yes.
Esther Allan dusted off the music and taught her the best songs from Sugar and Spite .
We both thought Siobhan was brilliant.
This inspired me to write the dreadful Verena for her.
(Siobhan provided the ‘basically’ Verena threaded things together with.)
‘Suzanne Valadon’ was rescued from the Goodstyle script and its patchy Franglais with Frenchy music by Esther was something Siobhan made all her own.
Some things were revived and rewritten from Sugar and Spite but Esther and I both wrote like maniacs, together, separately, new stuff.
We got full houses (it was only the bar seating 65) and got asked back.
Revived it at the Edinburgh Festival the following year with Angie Rew replacing Esther Allan who had fallen in love with a Frenchman and gone.
We do bits together whenever we get the chance and (someday) will do a brand new one.
We spilt a few beans and touched the odd (female) nerve and laughed off a few fiascos.
It seemed odd that taking the (gentle) mickey out of women (i.e. ourselves) made some men (not our Real Pals) feel a bit got at…
The subject was Women In Love.
Hence True Confessions .
True Confessions (Rap)
Wanna know anything 'bout being a woman?
Well, better just ask us.
I know her dramas, her traumas, and her fiascos
I know her sober
(but I know her better pissed)
I know her acid trips,
her abortions, and her analyst.
I know the Story of her Life —
each ironic twist.
She lent me her copy of Anais Nin
and we discovered we were Sisters Under the Skin.
Oh, I know her inside out—
thanks to the sessions
of all-and-sundry, dirty-laundry
True Confessions.
Our conversations range from the Arts to Child Psychology.
From World Affairs and Who Cares
To Avant-Garde Gynaecology.
I know her trouble with her nerves
and the trouble with her mate,
what she did with her brother when they were eight,
and Should-she-love-him?
Should-she-leave-him?
What-were-their-Chances?
The night she was almost tempted by lesbian advances.
I know about the strange stains she found
on young Sebastian's pyjamas,
her Wild Night with that waiter
on her trip to the Bahamas;
I get the dope on each High Hope,
on her fainting spasms,
the ins-and-outs of her orgasms,
how the Pill gives her Headaches,
her cramps with the coil,
how My-Man-once-made-this-pass-at-her-at-a-party-but
She Was Too Loyal.
Oh.
we spill the beans and we swill our gin
and discover that we're Sisters Under The Skin.
Oh, I know her inside out—
thanks to the sessions
of truly hellish, unembellished
True Confessions.
Open with the Closing
(Song)
You should never try to make a Lover
Of someone who ought to be a Friend
So let's open with the closing —
Begin with the end.
Don't have to be a Guggenheim scholar
To realise when I'm beat —
Don't get all hot under the collar
When I tell you I've got cold feet.
What right had I to think it might be easy?
Why was I so sure it should be fun?
You know we'd hate to complicate it —
So let's end it before it's begun.
First the phonecall, starter's orders
For an over-eager heart —
I was off before the pistol.
False start.
No, no, never try and make a lover
Of someone who ought to be a friend.
So let's open with the closing,
Begin with the end.
Mrs Abernethy: Burns the Hero
(Monologue)
Don't you think it would of been absolutely Super to have been Immortalised by Robert Burns?
What a man, eh?
I just have to agree with my Better Half on this one — he loves Poetry you know — why, his whole study in the Manse is absolutely chockabloc-jampacked with Poetry Books.
Of course it's Yours Truly that's got to dust the whole kit and caboodle!
Well, he likes, instead of sticking to Paul and the Ephesians all the time, to, you know, slip in a wee snippet of Shakespeare or Tennyson or mibbe even Wordsworth now and again, as a Text.
Wordsworth was a man of feeling, for an Englishman, but well compared to Oor Rabbie quite frankly he was nothing to write home about.
Such Passion.
And such eyes!
I mean, have you seen the portrait, you know the Kilmarnock Edition one, the one you see on all the ashtrays, the one on all the dishtowels…the absolute Spitting Image of John Cairney!
He…
Felt Things, don't you feel that?
I love a Burns Supper, don't you?
Now that the Ne'erdy's by we're into the Supper Season again.
It's nice a wee taste of haggis now and again, not that you'd want to eat it too often, it does tend to come back on you a wee bit, doesn't it?
Not that I'm keen on neeps!
A weedrop's plenty.
So I thought it was nice that we in the Women's Guild declared Women's Lib this year and held our own.
Well, it's better than just sitting in watching Moira Anderson yowling Caw The Yowes on the television.
Sandra Peden, her that works in the Co-operative she's a Gold Medallist in Elocution you know, well wait till I tell you she came on in a long Laura Ashley nightdress carrying a Wee Willie Winkie candlestick with wee pink bedsocks and a matching pompom hat and did Holy Willie's Prayer.
She brought the house down!
She looked just adorable…and Historically Accurate too I must say.
Then she came back later on in a wee Royal Stewart tartan skirt and did Wee Modest Crimson Tippet Floo'er and Tae A Moose and some of the other Guid Auld Scots Favourites.
Of course some of Our Guild Members are dare I say it just that wee bit narrow minded.
It wasn't like that at my hubby's last Kirk, telling you the Young Mothers' Meeting we had there was Really Radical.
But well, you have to go Where You're Called!
As He says to me you can choose yir freends  but you canny choose yir flock!
With this lot there were those who stayed at the end to tutt-tutt at some of the language and that.
I just says to Mrs Sneddon that she needed a new battery for her hearing aid and that a daimen-icker in a thrave didny mean whit she thought it did!
And anyway Burns had always been Very Frankly Spoken about that kind of thing.
Before his time really.
Of course somebody, Who Shall Be Nameless, would bring up the subject of Burns-And-You-Know-What, and how many of his children were born on The Wrong Side Of The Blanket, What Right Had We to look down on Brown Owl for her shotgun wedding when we were all supposed to look up to Rabbie Burns as Our Big Hero?
I tried to tell her, don't be daft, everybody knows Artists Are Different.
Anyway, every time I hear ‘Ae Fond Kiss’ I Melt Inside, I really do…
Scotch Mist (The Scotsport Song)
Lazy Sunday Afternoon in Central Scotland.
You scoosh ‘Yes please’
Behind your knees
And ask him what he's got planned?
All over Central Scotland, men are pulling down the blinds.
The men of Central Scotland got something
Sort of Sunday Afternoonish on their minds.
Match of the day, action replay it's on Scotsport.
Chuck us a can, a man's not a man without Scotsport.
You can cook good, you can look good
You can play hard to get.
To turn him on's impossible —
He's turning on the set.
He'll never tell you he loves you
Unless he's pissed.
Love in a Cold Climate,
Scotch Mist!
Pissed off with life
Your average wife
Is quite entitled to feel
He's a waste of a bottle of Bad-E-Das
And a damned good Meal.
He'll say, after Scotsport
You're next on the list.
Love in a Cold Climate,
Scotch mist!
Verena: Security
(Monologue)
See since Derek went up to work up there on the Rigs things have been Different.
I can't honestly say I really miss…
Well, basically to tell you the truth it's been…better in a way.
Definitely.
Financially anyway.
I mean we'd never have been able to afford all this.
See before with Derek's Other Job, before, on-shore, honest-to-god the Mortgage was a Millstone.
Telling you, I thought we'd of been clomping around on the bare floor-boards and sitting on orange-boxes watching a wee black-and-white portable for ever.
But see since he went Up There — well, it's Security, isn't it.
Not only did we double-glaze and fitted-Tintawn the whole place from top to bottom but I got my Dream Kitchen!
The Exact Units I wanted, eye level grill, Tricity Rotisserie, fully stocked freezer, oh Derek insisted on it.
Money no object.
Not that I bother much with the cooking while he's away.
You don't, for yourself, do you?
And I'm out a lot, I tend to just slurp down a cup of Slimma-soup, stick a wee dollop of quiche in the microwave or something while I'm waiting for my Carmens to heat up.
Och, just round to my Mother's, basically, just to get out the house — I've never been one just to sit in listening to the Central Heating switching itself off and on.
But see Derek he's that jealous!
Honestly, always was, ver-near Divorce Proceedings every time I went out with emdy for a Campari after the Country Dancing…
But basically my mother and I have always been very close.
Although I think it's with us having the None Of A Family ourselves that I've adjusted so well.
Derek was telling us only the last time he was home all about his Mate up there on the Rigs.
Diver or something, honest-to-god I don't have a clue what they actually do up there, don't ask me — anyway, seems This Chap had Two Boys, one teenage, the other growing out of anoraks faster than look-at-you so She put pressure on him.
How if the boys were to stay-on and get their Highers they needed the Security etc.
So he took the job.
Seems the Separation put a Strain on the Fragile Fabric of their Marriage and they started to Not Get On.
Sexually etc.
Not that I can say either Derek or I have ever had any problems in the Bedroom Compartment.
Touch wood.
Excuse my French…
No I can honestly say that Two Weeks On, Two Weeks Off suits me fine just as long as he minds to cut his toe-nails…
I mean you've got to keep the Home Fires Burning, Grin and Bear it, make him Feel Welcome — although see when he's up at midnight frying eggs and he spatters grease all over my good ceramic hob I could brain him so I could — but I just tell myself he's Not Home Forever and I bite my tongue.
Anyway, this mate of his and his wife — things went from bad to worse, seems he met this woman from Dundee who travelled down regular on the same train and one day he just Got Off with her and the upshot of the whole thing was a Dear-Jeannette-Letter from Sullom Voe.
Course, as Derek says, his mate is basically a very decent bloke.
Good family man.
He'll make sure neither the wife nor the two boys ever want for anything.
Fat Girl's Confession
(Rap)
Roll up and see the Fat Lady!
Such a jolly sight to see.
Seems my figure is a Figure of Fun…
To everyone but me.
Smile!
Say Cottage Cheese!
You all know me —
I'm the Office Fat Girl, the one you see
Wearing Vast Dark Dresses and a Cheery Veneer…
And lingerie constructed by a civil engineer.
Occasionally, you meet some bloke who'll give you this tripe
About how, yeuch, he's repelled by the skinny model type.
He can't see the attraction, he'll swear by all he owns
It'd be like lying in bed with a rickle of bones.
But, oh how he lurrves 
Yir Voluptuous Curves
And your Supper Board that Groans.
I met him at my wee cousin's wedding — he was the Best Man — he says to me would you like to go out for a bite to eat?
I mean, do you fancy a curry?
A Chinese?
An Italian?
I said, who me?
Oh, I love…
Lasagne and canne-linguini and pasta and stuff.
(well, who with pasta, ever says basta, enough!)
And then for my main course I tend to choose
something smothered in a sauce made of butter, cream and booze
with asparagus hollandaise and cauliflower mornay
potatoes dauphines, onion rings and mushrooms saute.
And after the cheeseboard, my sweet tooth's nagging, so
I need another great big stodgy wedge of Blackforest Gateau.
Well, when it comes to pudding,
the way I see it —
with cheesecake you've got a choice:
Either EAT it or BE it.
I didnae cry when he left me.
I gave not one cheep, not a chirrup —
just devoured a whole packet of Mr Kipling's Kunzle Cakes
and a half-hundredweight sack of Mexicali Taco chips dunked in Maplesyrup,
went for a double blackpudding supper, then half an hour later,
I ravished the refrigerator
(in my classic response to Rejection and Pain)
and immediately began eating
My Heart Out again.
But, Oh
Dear Joe.
much as I miss you
I just been reading how Fat Is A Feminist Issue.
Fat Girls like me have all fallen from grace —
If I could feed my own ego I wouldnae need to feed my face!
Everyone needs Oral Satisfaction, but the Truly Fulfilled don't need a filled-full gut.
I says, Enough of this Junk Food, You Are What You Eat.
When did you last see your lover?
When did you last see your feet?
So…
I'm persevering, but it's kind of hard
to live on lettuce, and self-regard.
But, you know, I've been really, really, really good today!
Breakfast was black coffee, plus a saccharine tab from the tube.
For my lunch, a half-a-cup of chicken bullion made with a
Knorr chicken stock-cube.
Dinner: two slice of starch-reduced Ryvita with a scrape of slimmer's imitation margarine,
then I pedalled myself blue in the face on the Exercise Machine.
See, I've joined this Health Club, and hell, I saw some sights you wouldnae believe!
Enough heaving flesh to make you heave.
All that pummelling, and pedalling, and pounding, and sweating
and keeking in the mirror to see how much thinner you're getting!
Well, there's not one lady Waging the Inch War or wielding the tape
who doesnae wish for a Dishy Man to lick her inty shape.
So I'm stuck here in this Stephanie Bowman Sweat-lt-Off Slimmersuit
I feel a right clown!
I'm to huff, I'm to puff,
I'll wear my hips down.
I'll mortify my surplus flesh,
remove it like a tumour…
and all to make of myself the kind of confection
who'll appeal to the Consumer?
Look At Us
(Song)
Can't you see us in the movies?
Can't you see us play our part?
You as Charlie Chaplin
And me as the World's Sweetheart.
Hearts and flowers and baggy pants
In flickering black and white
My dumbshow love and cupid's bow —
But the captions don't read right.
Can't understand what's happening
Imagine how it feels
To be stuck in a Saturday serial —
And someone's switched the reels.
And I'm bound and gagged on the Railway Line —
Is this the final shot?
The piano's playing overtime
To catch up with the plot —
And the train is getting nearer
My wide eyes open and shut
Surely this can't be quite right —
Should someone not shout Cut!?
Oh look at us.
Don't we look ridiculous?
In the musicals of the Thirties
We make the Perfect Pair.
We click together in any kind of weather
like Rogers and Astaire.
Fine Romance or Ziegfeld Folly?
Tapshoes, top hat and tails —
Oh you look real cute in your morningsuit,
and I'm polished to the nails.
As Just One of the Chorus
good timing's all you need
Oh I'd be fine if you hadn't pulled me out of line
To dance your female lead.
Oh look at us,
Don't we look ridiculous?


I saw this Forties' movie
That could of been 'bout us —
Like he kissed her then she slapped him —
then he gave her hair a muss.
‘I've paid you your retainer —
Now find him that's your brief!’
‘Is that a dress you're nearly wearin'
Or a Lurex handkerchief?’
So let us drink to the long cool blonde
and the lonely private dick
Who conversed in whiplash wisecracks
That cut them to the quick.
There was a loner and a
lady schoolmarm, and she turned gangster's moll.
But in the end they solved it —
So it wasn't like us at all.
So, pour me another bourbon,
I'll drink to all we did,
though outside it's still raining,
here's looking at us, kid!
Oh look at us
Don't we look ridiculous.
Phyllis Marlowe: Only Diamonds Are Forever
(Monologue)
The letters lying there on the mat didn't exactly look as though if I didn't open them the world would stop.
I picked them up.
I turned them over, squinting through the bloodshot marblings of my hangover and the tangled remains of last night's Twiggy eyelashes.
It was back in sixty-six.
Those days the world was a more innocent place.
I fanned out the fistful of manilla in my mitt.
As I had thought.
Zilch.
A final demand from the Gas Board and a threat from Glasgow Public Libraries if I didn't return The Maltese Falcon and pay my seventeen-and-six fine they'd permanently withdraw my ticket and cut my left hand off.
And what was this?
I swallowed.
I swallowed again.
An appointment card, report today, today at two-thirty, the Brook Clinic, a discreet logo and address, a classy address in the city's ritzy West End.
I showered, shaved — shaved my legs — like I said this was back in sixty-six, the world was a more innocent place, those days no one accused you of anti-feminism if you were caught with a tube of Immac.
I sniffed.
I showered again.
I emerged from the bathroom a half an hour later in a cloud of Amplex Aerosol avalanched in Boots' 365 Talcum.
The place looked like the ski-slopes at Chamonix.
I shimmied shivering to the bedsit, slotted another shilling in the gas fire and reached for the knob on the third drawer of the tallboy.
I knew exactly what I was looking for, they had to be here somewhere, the one and only pair of knickers left uncontaminated in that disastrous load at the launderette, the stuff that had got washed along with that bargain-price bright-pink non-fast Indian-cotton mini-skirt from C&A.
Some bargain, huh?
These days I peeked out at the world through unevenly rose-tinted underwear.
I found them at last.
Virgin white as the day they crossed the counter at Galls.
I slid them on.
Two-thirty, huh?
I showered again.
Two-twenty-five found me on the steps of a slightly crumbling mansion in what the Estate Agents would call a highly desirable residential area.
A simple brass plaque spelt  out Brook Advisory Clinic.
The whole place screamed Anonymity.
I pressed the bell.
The door creaked open a couple of inches.
‘Yes?’ said a voice more frosted than its glass panels.
I showed her my card.
‘Two-thirty,’ I barked.
She barked back, the door slid open wide enough for me to enter and I found myself in a roomful of dames all with rigor mortis of the third-finger-of-the-left-hand.
Engagement rings.
Woolworth's engagement rings, each a lump of glass as big as the Ritz.
There was more imitation ice than in The Ancient Mariner , more gilt than in a psychiatrist's office, more rolled gold than in Acapulco.
Tonight these dames were going to have greener fingers than Percy Thrower.
Each broad had a Tame Boyfriend with her, like a poodle on a lead.
All you could see of any of them was a pair of very pink ears sticking out behind old copies of the Woman's Own .
Nobody in the place looked exactly relaxed.
I sat down.
Dame opposite was wearing laddered black Beatle nylons — Jesus, nobody had worn Beatle nylons since sixty-four Chrissakes.
She was reading The Uses of Literacy .
Maybe she did have an honours degree in sociology.
but she certainly was sixpence short in the shilling when it came to dress-sense.
Still, somebody loved her.
Otherwise she wouldn't be here.
I slid my eyes over the gent she had accessorising her.
Below magazine-level at any rate he was not painful to look at.
Over in the corner behind a gigantic desk sat this old bird who looked as though she had been there since Marie Stopes was pre-pubescent.
‘Next!’ she plainsonged and fixed me with an old-fashioned look from behind her lorgnette.
I sidled over.
‘Name,’ she stated.
‘Marlowe,’ I quipped.
‘Marlowe with an ‘e’.
Phyllis Marlowe.
‘Ph’ for Phellatio, ‘Y’for Yesplease.
‘L’ for Love.
‘L’ for Leather.
‘I’ for Intercourse, ‘S’for —’
She looked at me as though I had said a dirty word.
‘In here,’ she said, ‘remove tights and pants.
Lie up on that table.
Doctor will be here to examine you directly.’
She pronounced it like Doktor with a ‘k’.
I gulped.
I must pull  myself together.
I loosened my waistband and pulled myself together.
I found myself in a rough cubicle with a torn curtain hanging to approximately knee-height.
Through this.
various bits of anonymous female gooseflesh and, in the ringing tones of a Roedean Gymmistress, Doktor's voice interrogating the bimbo-next-door about the ins-and-outs of her sexlife.
The whole place was about as private as Grand Central Station on Glasgow Fair Saturday.
Five minutes later found me flinching and clenching.
biting into the black vinyl of the couch as cold steel penetrated.
I spat out a curse.
Ten minutes after that — I sat in triumph, six precious months supply of the pill in my grasp.
Doktor wagged a metronome finger at me.
You must take for twenty-one days religiously, stop for seven, always begin on the same day of the week, got it?
Now, what do you do?’
‘I'm a student at Jordanhill college doing Fribble.’
I riposted.
She gave me a look.
I returned it, she slammed it back, I caught it neatly, spun round and delivered a deft backward glance over my left shoulder.
Back in the waiting room it had gotten twice as crowded.
Obviously there was a future in this business, they'd hit a nerve somewhere.
Then I saw him.
Shoulder-length blond hair, embroidered cheese-cloth shirt, single strand of beads — I mean, beads but tasteful — a sensual hint of hash and patchouli, and midnight blue denims stretched taut then flaring over the longest, leanest bass-guitarist's thighs in Glasgow.
Like, this guy's loons had style .
I'd loved him for as long as I could remember.
I'd have known him anywhere…
‘Haw, thingmy,’ he jack-knifed to his feet.
‘Whit urr you daeing here?’
‘I might ask you the same question.’
His Adam's apple slid up and down his throat like the lift in the Red Road Flats oughta, but don't.
‘Hey, listen doll, great to see you, oh aye.
Hiv tae git you roon tae wir new flat in Wilton Street, listen to a few albums, smoke a few joints, Fat Freddy's got some Moroccan in, really good stuff…toodle-oo!’ he gabbled.
I looked over his shoulder.
Coming towards him, big smile freezing fast, was this Julie Christie lookalike in Fringed Suede.
I smiled a lopsided smile.
‘So long Blue-Eyes, see you around.’
Outside it was still raining.
On my way through Kelvingrove Park I flipped my once-precious packet into a wastebasket and walked on.
Last I saw, a couple of hand-in-hand schoolkids had fished them out and were avidly reading the instruction leaflet.
Probably disappointed to find it wasn't twenty-one tabs of acid.
Sex is wasted on the young.
Back in my bedsit, I spooned bitter instant into my Union-Jack-I'm-Backing-Britain mug — this was sixty-six, the world was a more innocent place — and sighed.
I guessed I'd just have to swallow it strong and hot and black and bitter, I'd run clean out of Marvel.
I ripped the cellophane off another packet of chocolate digestives.
The Suzanne Valadon Story
(Rap)
I could of been a laundress,
a soft-soaped hopeless scrubber —
I could of been a waitress —
And lived to Serve Anothair?
I could of been a housemaid
and stayed upon my knees —
Instead of these
Because Moi — sans chemise —
was cer-tain to please
Until I used my noddle
I was the Bohemienne
comedienne
Who is an artist's model!
I'd be flat on my ass still
If I hadn't seized zee pastel
I was just a girl who couldaint say Non!
Now I am the artiste, Suzanne Valadon!
Mon affaire with Renoir
Deed not go very far
And Lautrec, although nice
Seemply could not reach my heights
Edouard Manet — he canny!
(Quel type , What a creep!)
But Degas,
Oh-la-la
he drew me in ink and he etched me on zinc
Until some bloody Fauve went and painted me mauve
and Seurat stippled me pink.
Oh they did me in oils
Till I came out in boils
but when I asked them for a crayon,
Oh they turned me Van Gogh's ear…
I'd be posing noon till ten still
If I hadn't snatched zee pencil
I was the girl who couldaint say Non!
Now I'm an artiste, Suzanne Valadon.
Then I'd climb in zee sack
for the price of a cognac
Oh life in Bohemia
Could not 'ave been more seamier.
But I'd have slept with them for sables —
Zee brushes not zee furs!
I was well on my way
To the Salon des Refusés
I was just a girl who couldaint say Non!
Now I'm la grande artiste,
Suzanne Valadon.
Oh, I was seeck, seeck, seeck
being scribbled, screwed or blitzed
At the Moulin de la Galette
So I told them what to do with
Zee impressionist palette
I got off the dais,
I covered my ass,
snapped his charcoal stick in two
And I drew
without a fuss
Aha!
said Renoir
I see you're One of Us.
And Lautrec (I'll always lov heem)
Said wis-out a doubt Suzanne
You can be dronk in charge of a charcoal line
As good as any man.
Degas said I was a genius
and on further inspection
Put heez monnaie where his mouth was.
And bought mes pictures
to grace heez great collection.
I'd have ended in zee guttair as a clapped out lush
Eef I hadn't seized mon courage and a number seven brush
I was the girl who couldaint say Non!
Now I am la Grande Artiste
Moi!
Suzanne Valadon.
Vymura: The Shade Card Poem
Now artistic I aint, but I went to choose paint
'cos the state of the place made me sick.
I got a shade card, consumers-aid card, but it stayed hard to pick
So I asked her advice as to what would look nice,
would blend in and not get on my wick.
She said ‘our Vymura is super in Durer,
or see what you think of this new shade, Vlaminck.
But I see that you're choosy…
Picasso is newsy…that's greyish-greeny-bluesy…
Derain's all the rage…
that's hot-pink and Fauve-ish…
There's Monet…that's mauve-ish…
And Schwitters, that's sort-of-a beige .’
She said ‘Fellow next door just sanded his floor
and rollered on Rouault and Rothko
His hall, och it's Pollock an' he
did his lounge in soft Hockney
with his cornice picked out in Kokoshka.’
‘Now avoid the Van Gogh, you'll not get it off,
the Bonnard is bonny,
you'd be safe with matt Manet,
the Goya is gorgeous 
or Chagall in eggshell,
but full-gloss Lautrec's sort of tacky.
So stick if you can to satin-finish Cezanne
or Constable…that's kind of Khaki.
Or the Gainsborough green…
and I'd call it hooey to say Cimabue
would never tone in with Soutine.’
‘If it looks a bit narrow when you splash on Pissarro
one-coat Magritte covers over.’
She said ‘this Hitchens is a nice shade for kitchens
with some Ernst to connect 'em at other end of the spectrum
Botticelli's lovely in the louvre.’
She said ‘If it was mine I'd do it Jim Dine…
don't think me elitist or snobby…
but  Filipo Lippi'd
look awfy insipid,
especially in a large-ish lobby!’
Well, I did one wall Watteau, with the skirting Giotto
and the door and the pelmet in Poussin.
The ceiling's de Kooning,
other walls all in Hals
and the whole place looks quite…cavalier,
with the woodwork in Corot —
but I think tomorrow
I'll flat-white it back to Vermeer.
Franglais
(Rap)
I should have had the savoir faire 
To find out who you were
Before our affaire
Avait commencé.
Before I got turned on
by the Dom Perignon
I should have stopped to penser.
Ha Ha!
Qui Moi?
Tu m'aimes?
Pourquoi?
Should have had more sang froid e -bluesy pass-at-her-at-a-party-but.
The night we enjoyed
What Freud called the Auld Alliance.
Known your sexy joie de vivre 
was toujours half seas ivre
a mere alcoholic compliance.
Ha Ha!
Qui Moi?
Tu m'aimes?
Pourquoi?
Nouveau Beaujolais is thrilling
and Calvados is chilling.
The spirit makes you willing —
but it hampers…
The only  objet trouvé
I could find under your duvet
was encore une bouteille de champers.
Ha Ha!
Qui Moi?
Tu m'aimes?
Pourquoi?
If we hadn't mixed the grape and grain
we'd per'aps have come again
(amour is main-
ly for the frisky)
Oh, we'd've been tête a tête yet
If I hadn't let
you pour the nineteenth le scotch whisky.
Ha Ha!
Qui Moi?
Tu m'aimes?
Pourquoi?
So I must say Au Revoir—
Tout fed up with Pas-Ce-Soir I've-'ad-Far-Too-Much-to-Boire,
Josephine.
If we'd only stuck to Perrier…
You'd have loved me more and merrier
If that Vat Soixante-Neuf had not been
so beau…beauc…beaucoup your scene!
Cowboys and Priests
(Song)
The lady said men could be divided
Into cowboys and priests
But she was not so hot at spotting
The difference between men and beasts.
She was prone to such confusion
It twisted her in knots —
She said mark well, you just can't tell
A leopard by its spots.
Yet they said men could be divided
Into cowboys and priests.
Oh, after their devotions
He'd prayed to be released
When he looked beyond her
To the wide blue yonder
Was he cowboy then, or priest?
Oh, she was tired and had taken to declining
All invitations to feasts
Due to the confusion
Between cowboys and priests.
She said along would come some cowboy
When your whole soul cried for a priest
She was tired of being surprised by a wind from the west
When her weathercock pointed east.
Oh, he'd want to hear her confession
And to leave her feeling blessed
So she'd see a sheep in wolf's clothing
As all her love went west.
Yes every man can be divided
Part cowboy, part priest.
Six Men Monologues
No. 1: Annemarie.
Men see men I've had it
Up to here absolutely
It's all off completely.
I said suppose that'll suit you fine I said
You can go out with your mates
Every night of the week and not just Thursdays
I said,
Look at the state of you
The beer's all going to your belly already
And coming from the West of Scotland you
Are statistically unlikely even to reach the age of 25 without false teeth
And to tell the truth
Since we got engaged
You never bother with the Brut or the good suit I said
I'm sick to the backteeth of
Every time we go for a Chinese
You order chicken and chips, fried egg and peas.
I said No way
Believe me the only way I'd ever consider
The World Cup in Mala-bloody-ga
For my honeymoon
Is if I was guaranteed
An instant trade you in for a
Six foot shit-hot sharp shooter that never failed to hit the spot.
I told him where to stick his bloody
One carrot diamond-is-forever.
I blame his mother.
No. 2: Pamela.
Men , my boyfriend says, Honest-to-God he says men huvn't got it any easier than women these days!
He says men aren't any more sure and secure within their own sexual identity.
Oh naw, not by a long, long chalk.
And yiv got tae watch not tae laugh at them, huvn't yi.
Everybody knows if yi laugh at a man in That Way he will wilt for ever, won't he?
I was reading this article in a Playboy Magazine round at my boyfriend's place, or was it Penthouse, anyway, I seem to be spending quite a lot o' time round at my boyfriend's reading magazines and here it says how these several top U.S. psychiatrists had done this survey on how your emotions can sabotage your sexlife even if you are a man and here it blamed the sexually aggressive female of the seventies for the sexual recession of the eighties.
No, apparently it's world wide.
Even in Italy these days women are failing to feel the pinch.
The article says there was a definite swing away from swinging and back to the values of the fifties.
Apparently people are even going back to the fifties contraceptives!
Supposed to be that this whole you know, Ronald Reagan, Swing-to-the-Right, Fun-Fashion, Fifties thing disny stop at the glitter-sox the roll-ons and the lurex!
It says people were turning again to the old tried and true spices of Guilt and Feeling Dirty and Furtiveness And Stuff in a frantic attempt to resurrect the whole sad affair.
My boyfriend says that ladies like me huv been just too liberated for our own good.
Just you mark my words, he says, the Worm Will Turn.
No. 3: Judith.
Men said the small ad in the wants column
am I expecting too much
lady fifty one tall shapely separated
genuine gregarious aware
varied interests vegetarian (own muesli-mix)
New Statesman reader romantic sincere
Wishes to share 
simple sunshine and undemanding companionship
(view marriage) with
comfortable mature strong nonsmoker sincere
adventurous male graduate music-lover (radius Hampstead ten miles)
Whole life spent searching for him.
Lady seeks soulmate (or sim.)
No. 4: Kimberley.
Men said the Cosmogirl (eyes
lighting up like dollarsigns in Vegas)
Men And How To Hook Them by Tamara Gogetter M.D.
Sip your dulep,
slick another coat of Golddigger Red on your fingernails,
Now Read On…
‘A good substitute for a silverspoon is a castiron nerve and wherever the Beautiful People are
Be There — even if you have to hock your last Hermes scarf to raise the fare.
(P.S. spas are passé and so is San Trop).
Consider Best Bars as a first resort, regard the single cocktail you'll shell out for as sheer investment, get yourself gift wrapped, send for our jetset silklook shirt, rid yourself of even that inch-of-pinch and the body beautiful will be guaranteed bait for ace race driver or millionaire financier in advanced stages of senility.
(Offer subject to availability.)
No. 5: Mo.
Men says My Boss
are definitely more dependable
and though even in these days of equal pay
men tend to come a wee bitty more expensive
due to the added responsibility a man tends to have  in his  jobspecification 
Well for instance you can depend on a man not to get pregnant.
My Boss says men are more objective.
Catch a man bitching about healthhazards and conditions and going out on strike over no papertowels in the toilet or nagging over the lack of day nursery facilities
My Boss says as far as he's concerned a crêche is a motor accident in Kelvinside and any self respecting woman should have a good man to take care of her so its only pinmoney anyway and that's bound to come out in the attitude.
Well a man isn't subject to moods or premenstrual tension a guy isn't going to phone in sick with some crap about cramps.
My Boss says a man rings in with an upset stomach and you know either he means a hangover or else his brother managed to get him a ticket for Wembley.
You know where you are with a man.
No. 6: Bette.
Men said the housewife
(Waiting for the coffee to perk) Honestly, Muriel, men!
(Wringing her apron in mock indignation) That's the third time this week I've picked his Good polyester-dacron trousers up off the floor and Hung them up in their crease.
What's the use?
Doesn't lift a finger, does David Never a handsturn from him, believe me.
The kitchenette is a closed book.
Don't you be downtrodden Muriel.
Make that clear from the start.
Men, honestly, wee boys at heart.
Men!
Mean Mr Love
(Song)
I'm Sal, I sell haberdashery (while floorwalkers walk the floor) at Armour
and Love, Limited's big department store.
When customers
come crowding or when the times is hard through Christmas
rush and Summer slack I sell it by the yard.
Still, I'd be silly to think I'm safe because I earn an
honest buck.
The streets these days are full of girls
who're right down on their luck.
So I'm sure to always look
busy and never have time to kill — No — it's not just a
matter of not getting caught With your fingers in the till.
Because, Mean Mr Love, he'll give you the sack, he'll
kiss your arse to your face and kick you in the teeth
behind your back.
Mr Love, he asked me out dancin'.
Man, but that guy was
Bad News From the top of his curled Fedora to his
Co-Respondent shoes.
I said, ‘If old Mr Armour he finds out
he won't be too pleased, he doesn't like you getting
friendly with the employees.’
32


No, I won't dilly-dally down the Primrose Path, won't throw my
cap at the moon Don't wanna be left
holding the baby all too soon.
Because
I love him don't mean he'll love me back
the way that I deserve.
The girl who
hooks a rich man got to keep some bait
in reserve.
Because, Mean Mr Love, the moment you
hit the sack, he'll kiss your arse to
your face and kick you in the teeth
behind your back.
Maintenance Man
(Song)
Couldn't get to sleep last night for the drippin' of the tap Hurt my head
just to lie in bed Wishing it would stop
Phoned the man and I asked would he fix
it But the bastard never came So I'm
left with my fury wondering who to blame.
Chorus Oh, do-it-yourself has limits
But I'll do all I can To try and get by
to try and get by Without my maintenance
man.
Couldn't get to sleep last night For
thinking how you'd gone I turn and toss
over the loss Of the one my sun shone on
Phoned you up and I begged you to come
over But you bastard you never came So
I'm stuck with all this leftover love
Now you don't feel the same.
Chorus Oh do-it-yourself has limits But
I'll do all I can To be freed of the
need For my maintenance man.
Mae: Come Up and See Me Sometime
(Monologue)
Come up and see me sometime.
I feel recently you've had a glum time.
So
come and see me, drink up my Duty Free.
Come up and see me sometime — I asked him casually, it makes
no odds to me — if he should see me — assuming I'm free
sometime.
What, the place is a palace?
That's not so unusual, is it?
Especially when I've got a friend who might come up and visit.
No, honestly, I often sit in alone wearing a bottle and a half
of Christmas cologne.
Wasn't easy to get the desired effect in this god-awful room —
Squeezy-mopped the lino, gave the white fur rug a groom, stuck
my hair in heated rollers, kind-of-casual-but-vamp, threw an
Indian headsquare over the landlady's lamp, lit a couple of
joss-sticks to drown out the cat, everything to spell a
welcome short of writing on the ma t — You should of seen me
half an hour ago, like a geisha in my facepack
35


Casually trailing something black and sort of flimsy over the chairback.
Ask a man to dinner in your bedsit
and after you're fed there's nowhere
to sit, except on the bed.
Well, ask
a gentleman friend to whatsit in your
bedsit and after an hour and a half
of batting your eyelids at him you
begin to suspect it's more than the
lighting that's dim.
Well, just
because a lady temporarily hasn't
got a man beside her there's no
reason to treat her like a black
widow spider.
So your lady's left you…
My
man's left me.
Who would it hurt if
we let ourselves be led via tea and
sympathy to booze and bed?
Where's your hat?
Where's your hurry?
What are the thanks for?
I've always
got plenty of instant coffee and
rapport…
Maybe he was shy.
Maybe it's a
blessing.
Polite goodnights and then
‘Why don't you come up again…
anytime you're passing.’
Liz Lochhead's Lady Writer Talkin' Blues
(Rap)
Woke up this morning to Familiar Pain
It seemed mah lover had left me 'gain Oh I
felt like cryin' so I had me a session And I
hugged mah pillah with its You Shaped
Depression I liked that Some pun Nice Ring
to it — Sounded Good.
So I dried mah eyes and examined mah pain
Felt cayerfully all over mah feelings again
So I called up Mah Muse and I tried to bribe
it To provide the Right Phrase to Describe it
Then I got it.
Brokain-Hearted.
So I dived out of bed to jot it down right
Had too many good notions run off in the night
Honey, when we was happy never wrote me a page
Typewriter stayed covered as the budgie cage
Not a cheep from it.
He said he had a new lover she was still at
school She might be dumb but she was
beautiful And if he'd caused me Pain, well
He was sure it'd pass.
I said the Main Pain
was A Pain In The Ass.


Oh I went at it, toothed and nailed
Then tearful, asked him Where I'd
failed Came on more tragic than a full
Greek Chorus I hurled every cliché in
Roget's Thesaurus I threw the book at
him Then the teaset — Said plenty
I've given you the best six months of
mah life Never darken mah door again
That kinda thing Em barrassing.
He said I'd always relished scenes
supposed I was dyin' to spill the beans
get all mah Hot Passion down in Cold
Print It was all good material I'd make
me a mint — Grist to the Mill.
He said that now he'd 'scaped Mah Hooks
He was prepared for me to Cook The Books
For the slander and the lies, any ‘mount
That I'd dredge up to dress my ‘count
Said talk about Castration and The
Written Word The Pen is Mightier than
the Sword He knew all about it Too
right!
He said Mah Work was a load a' drivel I
called it detail, he called it trivial
Tappin' out them poems in mah tacky room
About mah terrible cramps and mah Moon
Trawled Womb — Women's trouble?
Self
Pity.


He said I was woolly in my politics
And personal poetry gave him the icks He couldn't
do His Brainwork in the same house as me Because
I screwed up his objectivity So he'd be off now,
just because…
And who the f-f-fantasy did I
think I was, Dorothy Parker?
Well I haven't seen him since, well I never
thought I would And the last three weeks haven't
been too good Between the not sleeping and the
boozing and the cryin' And wallowing in the works
of Edna O'Brien…
But someday soon I'll say
enough is enough.
And I'll set myself down to
Write Him Off.
Page Three Dollies
(Rap)
We're the Page Three Dollies
And you think that we're Exploited?
Well who is
screwing who?
Frankly darling I'm delighted If
Mr Commuter's Pulse Goes Up And his eyelid
flickers.
At the photo of me with my thumbs
hooked in my knickers.
When you read me on your
way to work And I can raise a smile, Frankly,
darling, they make it all worthwhile And we're
laughing all the way to the bank.
We provide anaesthetic sex To numb your mind
For the daily bump and grind We grease the
wheels of commerce Lubricate machinery
Captains of industry know ogling at me Is
better for the workforce than bromide in their
tea And they're laughing all the way to the
bank.
We never get the credit The public don't
deserve us The way I look at it we're a public
service I reckon we keep the nation's quotient
of pleasure up — Let's face it Mrs Average is
unlikely quite to measure up And if you keep my
pic in mind As you go through the motions Of
the marriage bed's Twice weekly devotions Well
the wife is none the wiser, She's got us to
thank…
And we're laughing all the way to
the bank?


Though they sometimes fudge our edges
And airbrush our pimples Tape up our
tits and round out our dimples They
touch up our pubes And whittle down our
waists Till they imagine we appeal to
your ideal tastes And they're laughing
all the way to the bank.
As long as it isn't your wife As long as 
it's not your daughter Getting her
cheesecloth shirt drenched With a bucket
of water — Don't think that we're
indecent, Not a bit We're more rosy
aureole Than perked-up clit, But
they're laughing all the way to the bank.
What you read in the paper Might make
you see red If you were less distracted
by My centrefold spread Though my news
value's scanty, I'm sure you'll agree
If you look hard enough On page twenty
three You'll find half a paragraph On
World War Three — But they're laughing
all the way to the bank.
Feminine Advice
(Rap)
Like every other mother, mine was keen to tell her
daughter to certainly go swimming, but to not go near
the water.
To find myself a Good Career to Travel and
Have Fun and not to tie myself down at eighteen with
husband, home and bloody ungrateful children like
she'd done.
If I cut according to my cloth and didn't
get excited at around thirty I would find myself
miraculously Mister-Righted.
She said to watch my
handbag and keep myself nice.
Oh I sure was grateful for the feminine advice.
But I had a lot to learn when I went to school — like
how women weren't mechanically minded as a rule.
Headmaster, careers mistress, in subtle alliance to
remind us we were rotten at Maths and Science.
Oh, I
really shocked her when I told her, ‘Miss, I want to
be a doctor’— She asked me had I thought it out?
A
woman could do worse than be a nurse.
And ‘in fact,
with dedication, any bright girl can be the driving
force behind a really Top Man (and once you've got
him, here's how to please — via his stomach and
macaroni surprise) oh, he'll put you on a pedestal,
he'll treat you like a queen if you just put your
trust in Pristine Clean — remember in Office Practise
the thing that is most shocking is turning up with
black-rim nails, or splashes in your stocking.
So,
when you go for interview, Knees together in navyblue,


Wear little white collars and be quiet as mice..
Oh I sure was grateful for the feminine advice.
And those Women's Mags were always telling you
about thrush, the hot flush and what to do and
how to keep your husband true and what to dip
in your fondue.
How to address Royalty (with
the minimum of slanging) How to unravel old
potscourers and torn tights and Knit them up
into an Attractive Wallhanging.
How New Ways
With Eyeshadow turn a housewife to a teaser.
How to tan, bake a flan, and plan for your
freezer.
How to rescue junkshop finds and strip
them for Good Use.
And, especially for
Christmas.
Sauce for the goose.
Oh, their
serving suggestions sounded awfully nice,
So I sure was grateful for the feminine advice.
But I'm aware and now I know that men are
overrated.
I've cast my simpers, found myself,
I'm Spare-Rib liberated.
I fly above False
Consciousness I love me more, I love him less
I use Real Words for parts of me Which formerly
I hated.
The day when Women Seize the Night
will only come much nearer when male doctors
get it together and invent a pill for men.
But
if we're stuck with contraception as sure as
eggs is eggs Don't conform to sexist fancies —
refuse to shave your legs.


Oh, the Answer to Cancer and the end of Tyranny and Terror is
self-help coffee mornings with your
speculum and mirror.
So, I followed the
Y.B.A. wife campaign, decided to never get
spliced And I sure am grateful for the
feminine advice
Yes, I really am grateful for the feminine
advice.
Sharon: Incest
(Monologue)
I'm doing the Bronte Heroes at school, for my Sixth Year Studies dissertation.
It was Mr Fleming's idea.
It's quite a good subject though — I mean, I was reading this serial in my Mum's Woman's Own, all about this governess and this French Comte who was.
…dead Dark, and Moody, and Mysterious and completely copied from Mr Rochester!
I mean, they had a big influence, the Brontes, right up as far as  modren days, no doubt about it.
It was an absolute sin for the Bronte Sisters but!
Imagine being stuck in a Manse in the middle of all those moors with a minister for a father and that Mad Artist brother  Bramwell — he was really mental , an opiate-eater, and an alcoholic and everything.
Mr Fleming said it moulded their minds: Madness and the Moors.
Mr Fleming says ‘Wuthering Heights’ is all about incest.
See, mibbe Heathcliffe was Kathy's father's illegitimate son that he brought back to be brung up with his Respectable Family.
So they were half-brother and sister.
Mibbe.
Mr Fleming just said it straight out in class.
Incest.
He's dead nice, Mr Fleming, just treats you like an adult; see once you're in the Sixth Year, you could say Anything to him.
He even invited us round to the house one night, to give me a loan of a book on the Gothic Imagination.
He's not far, he lives round in the Bought Houses, that estate…you know, Spam Valley Dad calls it…it was really gorgeous, Mr Fleming's house, well not particularly from the outside .
But, see inside, it was really Brilliant, the living room had, you know, these giant bean-bags out of Habitat, and Millions of books.
I mean, one wall was practically nothing but Orange Paperback Spines.
I'd love that, so I would.
I mean, it was…dead Lived-In.
There were, you know, wee bits of Lego, and a broken Action Man and that — must have belonged to wee Steven, that's Mr Fleming's wee boy, he's only about three, I saw him with Mr Fleming in Woolworth's in Sauchiehall Street last Saturday, and he's absolutely gorgeous .
The Spitting Image.
All the same, I think Mrs Fleming might've tidied up.
Especially if she knew somebody was coming.
Mrs Fleming's…well, she's quite fat, and she looks a lot older than Mr Fleming — not that I think he's about to do a Mr Rochester, stick her up the Loft nor nothing!
Mr Fleming had Denims on.
He looked totally different than what he does at school.
Really casual.
He just said, ‘Come away in, Sharon, and would you like a wee sherry?’
He said, ‘Jessie, this is Sharon, I'm sure I've told you all about her, she's one of our Star Sixth Years, all about her dissertation.
She's our brightest hope for the Bursary Comp.’
So, she starts quizzing me and I start nattering on about the bloody Brontes — I think Mrs Fleming must've been really intelligent when she was young, honest-to-god she was firing them at me faster than Bamber Gascoigne, she says to me: ‘And tell me, Karen, how are you going to deal with the themes of Repressed Sexuality in the Brontes' work?’
I didn't know where to look!
I just sat there on that bloody Sag Bag picking bits of Farley's out of the corduroy and wishing it would open up and the polystyrene granules would swallow me!
She said, she turned to Mr Fleming and she said, ‘Darling, do you mind when we were up at the Uni, and that…
What's-His-Name, English lecturer, second year, that course on the Nineteenth Century Novel…remember how he was always wittering on about Incest in Wuthering Heights?’
Mr Fleming said, ‘Darling, is this not your Yoga Night?’
Mrs Fleming said, ‘Weight Watchers, and no, not tonight, Sweetheart, I'm right on Target.’
She said anyway she was away to make a wee cup of tea and did I take sugar?
I just sat there.
As soon as she brung the tray through, I just drank it, took the book and bolted.
He's really…
I mean, he's dead nice, Mr Fleming.
Really…intense, even though he's got blond hair.
I mean, can you imagine Heathcliffe with blond hair?
Telephone Song
Hi there, thought I would call you
(Why Why did I pick up the telephone)
I'm fine just  wondering …how are you
(Swore blind not to touch the telephone)
I've nothing new to say
Things've been OK
With me
Without you
Last time I phoned
You were not alone
Love lost lines crossed
Should have known
Midnight your time, six a.m. mine
All night trying to reach you
Time is up and I'm all strung up and we're too
Hung up to hang up the telephone
Why why did I call you up (Can't touch
you on the telephone) Long distance
loving's got to stop Cut off by the
telephone.
Alarm Clock Song
Excuse me, baby, I'm a
Little bit overwound.
You screw
me up so tightly Then you sleep
so sound.
But Rather than alarm
you Oh I'd charm you were I able
With my perfect bedside manner
I'd sit on your bedside table
With the moonlight With my hands
over my face Yes I certainly do
know my place.
Lying awake Headache.
Heartbreak.
My mind ticking
over.
I'm very calm.
I'm giving
you fair warning I'll go off
some fine morning Just like the
time bomb I am.
Excuse me, baby, I'm a Trifle
overwound.
You screw me up so
tightly, Then you sleep so sound
But Rather than alarm you Oh
I'd charm you were I able With
my perfect bedside manner With
my scarcely noticeable With my
nearly Non-existent nervous
tick.
And my breathing very
light and quick.
Oh I'll get my own back Tomorrow
I'll pack All my courage and my
last fond hope.
Listen, here's
my last warning I'll go off some
fine morning Maybe that'll wake
you up.
Clover
(Rap)
I'm into domesticity
Honey I'm in clover Hovering
with a dustpan and Grooving with
the hoover I'm cleaning out my
room and It'll soon pass muster
With my elbow grease And my
feather duster I'm brushing off
my gloom and though I Don't want
to harp it Does look rather
better since I swept you under
the carpet.
Yes I'm Into
domesticity Lover I'm in clover
Hovering with the dustpan
Grooving with the hoover.
Though
I'm Stuck here in the kitchen
its More than pots I'm stirring
Those saucy plots are thickening
and Fantasies are whirring.
Oh
don't think I don't miss you 'cos
I do awfully But hopes of
someone new keep Rising with my
soufflé No I'm far from
brokenhearted though it Was fun
lover But I'll be able to get
things done Now its over.
These
days its self fulfilment time
Though so far I find…
Well
maybe I'll get started when I
get you out of my mind.
Mealticket Song
Me and my old flame came
wining-and-dining
At this restaurant.
He handed me the
menu with a flourish And he asked me
what did I want.
Zipping in and out of our blue jeans —
All Summer naked and free — So what
was this with his new sharp suit?
It
cut no ice with me.
He tried to look me in the eye, Say
I didn't look a day older.
Hunting
madly for the Right Note to strike,
Getting colder.
Nothing Less likely to start sparks
flying Than a burnt-out flame.
You're both in the dark About why
you ever came — But Thank you for my
dinner, I'm So full up it hurts, I
adored the hors d'oeuvre But lets
skip the just desserts.
Tonight I'm sitting at the same table
Dolled-up from top-to-toe.
And I've
a new man handing me the menu.
Tonight, you're my brand new beau.
But when the waiter smiles at me You
needn't look so surprised.
I've
graced this place many times before
So I'm bound to be recognised.


Don't drum your hands on the tablecloth,
darling —
Sooner or later The Course of Time it'll
arrive On the rattling dumbwaiter.
Nothing Less likely to last for ever 
Than a brand new beau.
So, with both our
eyes Wide-open, we come and we go.
But
Thank you for my dinner, I'm So full up
it hurts.
I adored the hors d'oeuvre But
lets skip the just desserts.
Gentlemen Prefer Blonds
(Parody: Tune of ‘Diamonds Are Forever’)
I knew I had to have him but he wouldn't get the message
Though I beamed out telepathic bonds I batted
my eyelids but…
Not A Sausage — I somehow
had to shake him up And make the fancy take him
up.
My hairdresser said He could sort out my
head With Pure Henna and feathery fronds He
would tie-dye and twist me Till no guy could
resist me — Seems gentlemen prefer blondes.
He guaranteed results with a perm that was
pricey (It got crimped round these Magic Wands)
To attract Mr Nice, hey Crazy Color's dicey —
To go shocking pink You-d think would surely
make him blink.
And though Punk Green May be
fit to be seen ‘S not a flag to which this
chappy responds For from Harlow to Monroe To
Bardot, Wise Gals Know That gentlemen prefer
blondes.
He was friendly and stuff but that wasn't
enough There was This Barrier we never got
beyond.
So I decided to dare all — Now I owe
my all to Clairol Just in case the gentleman
prefers me Blonde.


Then this Other Guy moved in with him (don't think it
was his brother) He was slender and tender and bronzed.
It
seemed that my chap was wrapped up in Another — An
absolute Adonis, hell No wonder he didn't phone us,
well!
Oh nothing is worse Than to flog a dead horse
The penny dropped and finally it dawned.
A
sun-streaky beach boy With a bum like a peach, boy
The gentleman does prefer a blond!
I should be back in my pram Dumb Blonde that I am —
It was sheer self deception had me conned!
I hope
he and his chappy Will be very happy Because he
evidently prefers a blond.
Curtains
(Song)
Woke up in your sleeping bag
Lying on the floor.
They're
tearing our house down love Can't
live here anymore.
Furniture gone,
Suitcases packed And stacked up in
the hall.
Waiting for the ball and
chain Come crashing through the
wall.
And it's curtains for you and me.
We drew them all too soon That
first afternoon For some privacy.
But does it have to be Curtains
for you and me?
Woke up to hear bulldozers Rumble
through vacant lots, Saw
houseplants we forgot to water
Shrivelled in their pots.
The sun
poured through the curtaincracks,
Rained down on you and me — This
column of light, This dancing
dust, Is the solidest thing we
see.
And its curtains for our city —
Where poor people are The highway
and the car Will get priority.
But does it have to be Curtains
for you and me?
What-I'm-Not Song
(Finale rap)
I'm not your Little Woman
I'm not your Better Half I'm not
your nudge, your snigger Or your
belly laugh.
I'm not Jezebel And I'm not
Delilah I'm not Mary Magdalen
Or the Virgin Mary either.
Not a Novice or a Nun, Nor a
Hooker or a Stripper, Not Super
Shirley Conran, Not Jill the
Ripper.
No I'm no Scissor-Lady — I won't
snip at your…locks.
I'm
not a siren, you're not obliged
To get off my rocks.
Not Medusa, not Medea
And, though my tongue may he salty
I'm not the Delphic sybil —
Or Sybil Fawlty
I'm not Poison Ivy You can throw
away the lotion I'm not your
Living Doll I'm not Poetry In
Motion.
And if selling Booze and Cars
Involves my body being used, Well
…
I'm not Queen Victoria
But I'm not amused.
And if you don't like my Body
You can sodding well lump it —
I'm not a
Tart-with-a-Golden-Heart Or
Thinking Man's Crumpet.


I'm not your Woman of
Achievement
Not your Slimmer Of The Year
I'm not Princess Diana…
No Frog Princes ‘Ere!
I'm not little Ms. Middler I'm not little
Miss Muffet Make me An Offer I Can't Refuse
— And I'll tell you to stuff it!
'Cos I'm not your Little
Woman I'm not your Lady
Wife I'm not your Old Bag
Or the Love of Your Life
No, I'm not your Little
Woman Not your Better Half
I'm not your Nudge, your
Snigger Or your
Belly-Laugh!
Team Efforts and Assorted Revues
TICKLY MINCE (Merryhell Theatre Co., 1982)
THE PIE OF DAMOCLES (Merryhell Theatre Co., 1983)
A BUNCH OF FIVES (Wildcat Theatre Co., 1983)
RED HOT SHOES (with choreographer Peter Royston, the Tron Theatre Club, Christmas Show, 1983)
SAME DIFFERENCE (Wildcat Theatre Co., 1984)
Merryhell Theatre Company was: actors; Siobhan Redmond, John Cobb and Kevin McMonagle.
Some music was by Esther Allan, and some was by musical director Graham (Mendel) Whitelaw who played piano in both Tickly Mince and The Pie of Damocles.
Writers were Tom Leonard, Alasdair Gray and (he joined us for ‘The Pie’) Jim Kelman and I. Tom's black, black ironies and satires on the Lebanon, the New Right, the Media, West of Scotland sectarianism and chauvinism; Alasdair Gray's insane Grant family, his moneyed braggarts and blusterers, his quick shifts of dramatic power in curt sketches, his deranged respected old politicos; Jim Kelman's surrealist pubs and monologuing gamblers, and grim almost folk tales — like the story of ‘The Hon’ that comes up out of the lavatory pan (’Yi nivir know the minit’) meant that the broad rather lightweight stuff I wrote for these revues had plenty of stronger, more solid, meatier material contrasting with it.
The performers in their borrowed tartanry had an almost manic energy.
I will never forget Kevin McMonagle (Old Blue Eyes) singing Tom Leonard's brilliant version of ‘My Way’(’ though some may mock/the macho talk/upon the Walk/of No Surrender/I've drank the rent/I've clocked the wife/I've spewed my ring upon the fender’) or John Cobb as Alasdair's sad flowerseller, or Siobhan  Redmond's Bo'ness hippy.
After seeing True Confessions and Tickly Mince Dave Anderson and Dave McLennan of Wildcat Theatre Company expressed interest in my working with them.
At the end of 1982 joined the two Daves, Tom Leonard, Sean Hardie, as the fifth writer on the revue A Bunch of Fives .
(There were five performers too.)
It wasn't easy to make a show with such diverse voices pull together and some of what I wrote didn't fit in (I kept it for The Pie of Damocles later that year though).
But I got to write songs with Dave Anderson and Rab Handleigh for the first time and the reggae ‘Interference song’ which Terry Neason sang was a thrill for me as I'd always wanted to write something for her absolutely amazing voice.
‘Promises’ song was music first (that's hard and I've only done it once since) and ‘Sincerely Yours’was Rab Handleigh's ‘tribute’to Barry Manilow which he performed with perfect schmaltz suavity.
Wildcat then gave me a commission for what turned out to be Same Difference the following year.
This was by far the most enjoyable experience I'd had working in the theatre.
It was a musical farce with a classic swap of identity plot with people confessing to their partners their infidelities in the mistaken belief they were confiding in someone else, a daft Midsummer Musical comedy with Gerry Mulgrew as a manic, fast-talking Marlowesque (Philip Marlowesque I mean) magical dog who had Puckish powers to cause confusion in his neck of the woods — a hideous fictional Glasgow ghetto housing scheme called Low Cassil.
Elaine Smith was very warm and moving as Josie Riley who at thirty-eight with the kids grown is all energy for the community and conceives a very requited fancy for Bazz Blacker, the well-meaning social worker downstairs.
Rab Handleigh's Bazz was quite wickedly funny singing ‘Serial Monogamy’ Jack Jones-style, apart from the fact he was wearing Josie's clothes and identity.
It was a bit everything-but-the-kitchen-sink on sexual politics, and its switches from comedy to Myra McFadden's chilling incest victim's song might have been a bit startling, but I still felt pleased with it and learned (I hope) an awful lot from it, mainly about structure which I find hard , and how to pinch plots from people who knew how to do it.
At Festival time 1983, Fania Williams, who had just taken over the Tron in Glasgow, asked me if I was interested in fairy  tales.
I showed her my book of poems, ‘The Grimm Sisters’, and she asked if I'd like to work with a choreographer on a ‘dance piece’ which would be a grown-up Christmas show with words and music and story, but mainly dance.
It was to be about the –wicked stepmother’ in Snow White, something from her point of view, redress some of the balance.
I didn't know if I could work with a choreographer.
What language would we have in common?
But Peter Royston, of Scottish Ballet, had a great sense of humour and exactly the right touch.
I think ‘Red Hot Shoes’nearly worked.
Which was amazing as we started working together far too late, there was a shoestring budget, dancers speaking on stage for the first time.
But there was all the experience and help of Ann Scott Jones who somehow managed to make the lonely job of the Usherette/Narrator come to life, and the magic of Hildegarde Bechtler, the designer, turning the Tron into a real ‘Forties cinema with help from the hardpressed stage manager, Gibby, and somebody's wonderful collection of cinema architecture bric-a-brac and memorabilia.
Best of all was Peter Royston's eight-minute dance which told all-you-can-remember from Disney's film — it was as if the cartoon had come to life as there she was, on points, bluebird balanced on her finger…
I'd love to work with him again.
Not many of the words are worth anything at all by themselves.
Included here are a couple of skits on motherhood and a ‘sound-piece’ of nostalgic Glaswegian which played against a ‘Forties black and white movie as three dancers with ice-cream trays made moving silhouettes.
Multi-media, eh?
Tickley Mince and The Pie of Damocles
Calderpark Zoo Song
(from a given line by Tom Leonard)
Wir nocturnals are insomniac
And canny sleep till dark —
A' us animals are crackers,
Here in Calderpark.
Oor dromedary's plenty duende,
Wir porcupine's been in the
wars, Oor zebra's got zero
libido — He kerries aroon
His ain prison baurs.
Aw bit, naw bit, yiv goat the
wrang Orangutang — Aw bit,
naw bit, Oor orangutang's
goat Angst.
The introverted ostrich hates
The manic marmoset And oor
ibex is A nervous wreck,
she's Constantly under the
vet.
Fact is, wir praying mantis
Is a prey to irrational fears,
And big Amanda The panda
Husnae had it for years.
Aw bit, naw bit, yiv goat the
wrang Orangutang — Aw bit,
naw bit Oor orangutang's got
Angst.
Wir hyena's pure hysterical,
Wir chameleon's two faced
That big laugh The lanky
giraffe Won't genuflect to
the Human Race.


Aw bit, naw bit, yiv goat the
wrang
Orangutang — Aw bit, naw bit
Oor orangutang's goat Angst.
Oh they spike oor buns wi valium
And we swally 'em, we swally 'em.
Me an' the African Sociable Vulture
Urny happy in this alien culture —
Wir nocturnals are insomniac
And canny sleep till dark —
A' us animals are crackers,
Here in Calderpark.
Verena: Anklebiters
(Monologue)
Busy?
Busy!
Honestly I have been Up To My Eyes in it recently.
I mean with Derek you never know whether he's going to get home or not.
I mean last week the choppers werny even gettin in to pick them off the Rigs what with the gales and that so basically I've just got to expect him when I see him.
Well I thought I'd just do a freezer shop anyway — just the basics basically plus one or two Little Extras, just the odd thing Derek likes, just in case…
See that Marks and Spencers seafood lasagne Derek could eat that to a band playin…
Honestly that plus my homemade crême caramel made in the individual ramekins and he's happy as Larry.
Practically lies down and
purrs…
Well it's nice to roll out the red carpet, isn't it?
So, I'd an appointment in town at the hairdressers and for a legwax and that you don't want to let yourself go I don't want him to get back and catch me with my knickers down and my nail varnish all chipped…
Well I was just tidying myself up, och just a week lick of lipstick and a puffa blusher basically when I noticed that my mascara was on its last legs so I had to remind myself to stop by at Frazers Innoxa counter as any other tearproof bar theirs brings me out in lumps , so to cut a long story short I just nicked in the sidedoor — honest to god I was festooned with carriers laden down like a workhouse donkey —and I'd to cut through the shoe department.
Well, they'd a sale on in those Italian shoes, you know Thingwiricci the sort you normally pay an arm and a leg for, well — they're nice aren't they, as the saleslady said herself they are a lovely wee wearing shoe, and very reasonable.
So, I was just leaving when I saw them, the five inch heel, crossover ankle strap, glacé kid, suedetrimmed ridiculous!
And I was just squeezin maself into a five and a half when Moira McVitie round the crescent in the cul de sac comes by and shouts out ‘Hiya there Verena is that you trying on some fuck-me shoes for yer man gettin back.’
Excuse me for swearing but I'm just repeating what she said…
Well, I did not know wherr to look, shoutin' it out just like that.
And in the House of Frazer!
Moira McVitie is supposed to be intelligent as well.
Always going on about the Fate of the Graduate Wife and how she's fed up being a cabbage — well  as far as I'm concerned I cannot see the call for langwidge.
I mean I did not need to stay on at school or get my B.A. at Strathclyde to know when not to F or C. Fuck-me shoes, I just handed them back to the saleslady with as much dignity as I could muster and says, thanks but no thanks, I don't know when I'd ever have the occasion to werr them.
Well, I shopped on regardless.
The July Sales are a great idea for Christmas shopping particularly in slashed-price discontinued toiletries and I found several nice wee stocking fillers for Derek in the Novelty line and looked in vain for a birthday card for our Joy's eldest but there was nothing suitable.
I says have you nothin nicer for a nephew she says ‘Well if its not there we don't have it’.
He's really gorgeous wee Simeon although our Joy lets him schlepp about like a Toerag.
Derek and me went along to the new wans Christening and he was like a tink!
I goes c'mere to your auntie Verena you're giving wee Evita a showing up.
your New Wee Sister, I says your auntie will wipe the gateau off your ear but he jist laughed up his sleeve at me as per usual.
I says to Derek going home I'd prefer a girl wouldn't you.
O definitely he goes.
If it ever came to the crunch…
Not that None of a Family's not what we both want what with our lifestyles.
Course I did ask once when I went to the family plannin for a smear.
Well, you wonder if all is well.
Tubewise and that…
So I asked them.
Wish I'd never bothered.
Cue for a questionnaire.
Into the ins and outs of everything.
Did I always have A Orgasm?
I goes of course Derek wouldn't have it any other way.
Then it was ‘Did I always lie still for at least fifteen minutes afterwards?’
Cause apparently it can fall out…excuse me…personally I says I don't leap up, fling back the duvet and shake and vac the shagpile.
The upshot of it all was that they wanted me to ask Derek would he come in for a sperm count.
Honestly if it was them that had to stuff those navy blue fitted sheets into the automatic after he's been home they'd be Under No Delusions.
Personally, apropos of Wedding presents I often think that the deepdye polyester is not necessarily the best buy for newly weds when you come to think about it.
I'm not one hundred percent sure Derek is really keen.
I mean Kids…
He's a bit of a thingmy Derek.
W.C. Fields.
Anklebiters, thats what he calls kids…
Anyway I'm not sure they're compatible with an offwhite fitted carpet.
Sometimes It's Hard to be a Woman
(Parody)
Sometimes it's hard to be a woman
Giving all your love to jist wan Man — You'll have bad
times He'll have good times Goin' oot on the randan But
if you love him Bite your tongue and pass another can And
if you love him Be proud of him 'Cause after all he's
Jist a Man.
Stand by your Man Send oot fur pudding suppers — When you
are on your uppers, Eat spam yoursel', buy pope's eye Tae
feed your man — A decent wummin aye hus Some squerr-slice
in her frying pan.
To satisfy her Man.
Sometimes it's hard to be a woman Stuck in wi' the weans
without your Man — Though he gets pished on peyday Never
mind hen, every Friday He'll bring you hame a Babycham If
he tends to thump ye Before he tries to hump ye Then
snores while you lie hatching up a plan To up and leave
the schunner Oh is it ony wunner If you can't bloody
stand your Man.


Stand by your Man
Give him two arms to cling to
And something warm to come
to When nights are cold and
lonely Stand by your Man
And tell the world you love
him Keep giving all the
love you can Stand by your
Man.
The Suitor
(Sketch)
Mrs Grant and her Deirdre's young man.
He is perched uncomfortably on a settee with a photo album on his knee.
She by his side 
Mrs Grant:
I want you to know, Douglas, that the thing that hurts Mr Grant and I the most is the deceit.
Young Man:
Robert…
Mrs Grant:
That's Mr Grant and me with him in his Korea uniform.
Its the underhand way you went about the heavy petting and damp carry-on, Douglas.
Young Man:
Mrs Grant, I —
Mrs Grant:
Are you trying to deny you're responsible for her condition?
Oh she's always been a good daughter up till now, I'll grant her that, I've never been one to just blame the girl, Douglas, I blame the boy too.
A decent girl, until you came along and interfered with her.
I'm not a well woman, Douglas.
Young Man:
But I never even —
Mrs Grant:
Half my body has been cut away by the surgeon's knife.
Lies, Douglas, if there's one thing I can't thole it's a lie.
It's my humble belief you only did it to hurt me, oh yes, spit on the bourgeois, épater the middleclass, oh aye, get your own back on Mr Grant and me for our fitted carpets and crinoline toiletroll covers when you grew up on berr linoleum in a singelenn' in Bridgeton.
(Crying in justified woundedness ) Oh I can just see you lyin' there five year aul' in yer bed recess with your sixteen brothers and sisters eating snotters and planning to trap our Deirdre, tie her down by fair means or foul.
Young Man:
Mrs Grant, my Dad's a chartered accountant.
He plays golf, I grew up in Bearsden.
Listen Mrs Grant I never even touched your daughter!
I wouldny lay her with a bargepole  — I wouldny touch her with a fingerstall!
If she were the last lassie in the world I couldny
Mrs Grant:
Oh, so you find her unattractive do you?
Listen, who's been telling you stories?
Who's been gossiping to you about her running away with the married man when she was fifteen and ending up in the Daily Record?
Did they big mooths next door huv tae clipe about the topless gogo dancing in the Albany?
Unattractive?
Ah'm worn to a frazzle fighting off the toffs that have been swarming round this door since she was nine and three quarters.
Young Man:
Mrs Grant she is a lovely girl, I don't deny that, but —
Mrs Grant:
Lovely!
Lovely!
Lovely ma sweet arse, Douglas.
Excuse ma French!
She takes after his side.
She's got his hair, god love her, canny dae a damp thing wi' it, pair lamb.
He's not a hundred percent, Douglas, never has been, do you take my drift.
Young Man:
I'm not sure, Mrs Grant.
Mrs Grant:
(Gesturing to photos) Don't you think I was attractive?
Young Man:
Oh yes, Mrs Grant, lovely photos, very nice, yes, you were…very goodlooking when you were young.
Mrs Grant:
How do you mean when I was young, Douglas, I'm not old now, not so old a dog couldn't teach a young pup like you a few new tricks.
Young Man:
Mrs Grant, I'll need to be away or I'll miss my bus.
Mrs Grant:
Oh yes I was just reading in the Cosmopolitan how young men of eighteen and women in their late thirties are sexually compatible.
Both at their peak.
Young Man:
Mrs Grant, you're well over your late thirties.
Mrs Grant:
And you're well past eighteen too, Douglas.
(They fall into a clinch .)
Encore for the Arts
(Rap for three)
JEEVES, BERTIE and AUNT HORTENSE discuss TV arts coverage.
(Bertie rings, Jeeves comes, aunt Hortense sits and waits.)
Jeeves:
Shall I lay it out in the library, Sir?
Bertie:
The sherry tray?
Jeeves:
That very tray (pause)(cough).
Might I take the liberty of reminding Sir that Sir's favourite programme's on the air soon?
Bertie:
Vair'soon?
Jeeves:
Indeed Sir.
I've err plugged it in the library, Sir, so it'll warm up before it starts.
Bertie:
Splendid!
(Looks puzzled) Err, what is it Jeeves?
Jeeves:
‘Encore for the Arts.’
Aunt Hortense:
‘Course Bertie's aw-fly keen on Op-Ra — Did you catch much of ‘The Ring’?
Bertie:
Yes, by Jove, it shattered my sherry glass.
Cripes, but that Siegfried could sing!
And whatsername with the plaits and the horns on her helmet was absolutely  riveting .
Aunt Hortense:
I'm sure the Great British Public took it right to their hearts!
Jeeves:
Encore for the Arts!
Bertie:
But when it comes to Telly Ballet.
Aunt Hortense:
Did you see Nuryev's Nutcracker?
It really was outstanding!
Seemed to be sort of permanently suspended in mid-air just-so, flat out without ever landing.
Bertie:
Yet I felt his Coppelia was, in the end essentially ersatz — still, Encore for the Arts!
Bertie:
I say, I say, I say Auntie, the telly certainly does do those classic serials superbly, don't it Auntie?
Aunt Hortense:
They certainly do Bertie, they're quite, quite brilliant!
Bertie:
Yes, just fancy.
Millions and millions of peounds for a few evoc-ative shots of somebody's home-and-carstle through vaseline and old Jeremy Irons doing his voice-over bit and looking suitably moronic!
Jeeves:
Must say I find the idea of the Plebs watching Brideshead in a single-end quintessentially ironic !
All:
ENCORE FOR THE ARTS!
Bertie:
Course that Avant Garde stuff's enough to make you spew
Aunt Hortense:
Sir Kenneth's ‘Civilization’ was so much more civilized than that so called‘Shock of the New’.
Jeeves:
Begging your pardon, Sir, but some of those alleged artists that get feted on BBC Two could paint no better than a monkey in the zoo.
If they ask me Sir, they're just trying to make a monkey out of you.
Aunt Hortense:
— And yet they're cult figures at the height of their fame.
Bertie:
That's exactly the sort of Stupid Cult that gives culture a bad name.
Jeeves:
Some of those clowns should get back to Billy Smart's!
Aunt Hortense:
Still, Encore for the Arts.
Aunt Hortense :: What do you think of the South Bank Show?
Bertie:
Frankly…not much!
Aunt Hortense:
Yee…e…es, Melvin's annoyingly adenoidal but he has the Common Touch.
Bertie:
Moore's Marbles!
Aunt Hortense:
Babsy Hepworth's bronzes, everything but the kitchen sink.
Jeeves:
David Hockney, Beryl Cook, Elizabeth Frink!
Bertie:
They're into anything outré —
Aunt Hortense:
Roman Polanski's psyche, the postmodernist novella in a nutshell.
Bertie:
A grand old Dame of the Theatre interviewed about how she got her parts!
All:
ENCORE FOR THE ARTS!
Aunt Hortense:
Course Television Coverage of the Arts is mainly a matter of pearls before swine and horses before carts.
All:
Let's keep it in the possession of us Boring Old Farts — and Encore for the Arts!
Jeeves:
One instinctively knows when something is shite!
Mullicking Tyre: The Incomers Take the High Road
(Sketch)
Isabel:
Och away in wi ye Inverdarroch, ease yir feet oot o' yir wellingtons and come ben next tae the fire fur a wee dram, it's great tae see ye isn't it, Murdo?
Murdo:
It is that, lass.
Inverdarroch:
Och, Ah've been dyin' tae get up for a weekend amang yirsels.
 It's that hectic up here amang you Heuchtar Teuchtars.
Murdo:
Ah Ken, Ah Ken, we get a good laugh anywey at the antics of the incomers.
Isabel:
Oh we do that!
Inverdarroch:
Where Ah come frae there's never an incomer.
It's that unspoilt it'd drive ye roon the bend.
A man wid wait a long while fur a Glesca Keelie at a ceilidh and no mistake.
Isabel:
Well, we'd no sooner got wirsels rid of the Forsyth film crew and this new lot moved in next door to us.
What are they like, Murdo?
Murdo:
Och salt of the earth, lass.
Inverdarroch:
Real are they?
Isabel:
Och real , I canny tell you.
He's an architect and she's a bisexual social scientist.
Och, first of all they were a wee bit, you know, standoffish.
Murdo:
Oh aye, they warmed tae us a treat, wance they saw we didny look down on them.
Inverdarroch:
Course its a hail different lifestyle…
Isabel:
Och aye, aye it is that, Inverdarroch.
The way they live it's not wrong jist…different.
Och Ah shouldny laugh, bit what was that party they had like, Murdo.
Murdo:
I mean, they try…
Asked us over for drinks…
Isabel:
Meant well!
Murdo:
Course they did!
Asked us ower fur drinks and when we got there — I mean Ah'd had a bath, splashed on some of the Givenchy for  Gentlemen that Isabel got me for ma Christmas and got into ma designer tracksuit just to be casual like…
Isabel:
Course the distinctions were wasted on them, likely thought it was Badedas and Adidas.
Murdo: So they likely did, lass — but och shouldny laugh —
Isabel:
There she was in the wellies the hameknitted Aran jumper and the stonewash dungarees.
Murdo:
Och its her that wears the dungarees in that hoose right enough.
Isabel:
Well all the better for the breastfeeding — Do you know, Inverdarroch her wee Roderick-dhu, he's four and a half…
Inverdarroch:
Roderick-dhu?
Roderick-dhu?
How do they think them up?
Isabel:
There's Morag…and Sommerled, and Seonid and Eachan and Pibroch!
Invergarroch:
Pibroch!
Isabel:
Ah thought oor Damian was gonny burst a gut laughin' when he cam back fae the school and tellt us whit Miss Mackenzie had had tae pit in the register, the day the incomers signed on.
Murdo:
Ah gave him a clip roon the ear and tellt him and Sebastian no tae laugh at poor unfortunate incomers they don't know any better.
Isabel:
Well, wee Roderick-dhu though, he's four and a half and she still breastfeeds him.
Murdo:
(Blinking ) Constantly!
Isabel:
Its ma rule of thumb that if a wean's auld enough tae ask fur titty then he's too auld tae get but then —
Murdo:
Different strokes for different folks.
Isabel:
Not wrong jist —
Murdo:
Different.
Isabel:
Naw bit there was that Frazer.
Murdo:
Frazer ye cry him, the architect —
Isabel:
Staunin' there in a kilt — an' (splutters ) a Harris tweed jaikit with dung all ower his  wellies sayin' name yir poison.
Murdo:
Course I wisnae thinkin so I says Ah'll have a wee cognac and Isabel'll huv a Campari soda!
Isabel:
Ah wished the sanded flerr wid open and swally us.
Murdo:
Course turned oot we had a choice between his homebrew.
her cowslip wine or the local single malt.
Inverdarroch:
Nae sophistication, Murdy, nane at a'.
Isabel:
Laugh, Ah thought Ah'd hud a relapse of my cystitis.
But listen Inverdarroch, talkin aboot toilet arrangements guess whit they've done.
Inverdarroch:
Whit urr ye gonna be tellin' us noo, Isabel.
Isabel:
They've went and hud an ootside cludgie pit in.
Inverdarroch:
In?
Isabel:
In.
In their ootside.
Inverdarroch:
Och away yi go Isabel.
Murdo:
Nae kiddin!
Only complete wi tore up squerrs of the Mantchester Guardian.
Hung up oan a nail!
Inverdarroch:
Naw!
Murdo:
Aye.
Isabel:
Oot there fur hours tryin' tae strip doon the lavvy seat.
Sand paper,paint stripper.
Smell of nitromorse wid off knocked ye ower.
Murdo:
Didny like tae tell them it wis plastic!
Isabel:
We'll make sure ye meet them Inverdarroch, cause och they're priceless, you'll love them.
We'll ask them ower, och no for their tea — a hail evenin' wid be a bit of a strain fur them, but for, ye ken —
Murdo:
A wee tequila sunrise, a wee squint at Calum-beag's new blue video.
Isabel:
Aye a wee quiet night — and then they'll likely ask you in Inverdarroch, to theirs…
Inverdarroch:
Och man I cin jist see it.
Snottery green pottery, hame made bannocks!
Isabel:
Och dinny Inverdarroch that's them tae a T!
Inverdarroch: His typewriter,her knittin' machine, Laura Ashley patchwork kit cushion covers, jugs o' weeds on the mantelpiece and the collected  works of Lillian Beckwith takin' up a hail shelf of the stripped pine kitchen dresser!
Isabel:
Och but my my!
Wid ye jist take a keek oot o' that windae and lukk at whit the silly bitch is daein' noo!
Milkin that bliddy goat again, at it fur
‘oors and ‘oors yesterday.
Murdo:
Ah havenae seen the auld Billy lukkin sae pleased wi himsel’ since he took the rosette at the Edinburgh Royal Agricultural.
Inverdarroch:
Well it lukks as if I ll have tae mind wan thing when Ah meet your incomer pals, Isabel.
Isabel:
And whit's that, Inverdarroch?
Inverdarroch:
Well…and A'll have to be mindin' no tae tak a wee tate o' her home made yoghurt.
Country and Western in Kyle
(Parody: chorus to the tune of ‘You Picked a Fine Time to Leave Me Lucille’)
Kevin : In a Bar-room in Bargeddy
That is where I saw my Lady From her rhinestone razzledazzle I could
tell Gonna break my marriage vow, girl — Love her all night, and
How , girl, Cause my Bumbee Tartan Cowgirl Was a Honkytonk Bluebell.
Chorus What is it that satisfies 'Bout cheating ways and lies, Sad
hearts sung sentimental style Why so much, Country and Western In
Kyle.
Siobhan : Well, I looked sorta Hard to Get, son So he straightened up
his Stetson And he stuck his shrinkfit Levis in his Fryes Well mibbe
I was tipsy But I heard my twotiming lips say You're my true
bluecollar gipsy I can see it in your eyes.
Kevin : Well, I'd jist got my Giro, So I asked her for a Biro — If she
filled in my Pools I might be lucky But a beggar cayent be a chooser
The working man is a loser Whether from Beith or Tuscaloos', or
Kilmarnock or Kentucky.
Chorus
All : What is it that satisfies
'Bout cheating-ways and lies
Sad hearts sung sentimental style
Why so much Country and Western in Kyle
Siobhan :
(talking)
The appeal is international
Figger it oot, ah never did, The connection between oor
Wullie And Billy the Kid.
John : Why sing the song of the Clyde, as Hearts swell with
Pride, as Another Clydebank closedown hits the News Yes
its cheated hearts that swell as Some Kiltie redneck in his
wellies Sings out loud and proud to tell us The heuchter
cheuchter Blues.
All:
And they've cut, cut, cut the future
Between Thatcher the Bloody Butcher
Siobhan : And that Faded Rhinestone Cowboy cross the
Pond
John : I wanted to be mid-Atlantic man Now I'm going bloody
frantic , man In case they're gonna Nuke us Tae the back of
beyond.
Chorus All:
What is it that satisfies 'Bout cheating hearts and
lies Sad hearts sung sentimental style Why so much Country
and Western in Kyle.
X
Hillhead Election Song
(Rap for three)
The Graduate:
I've got ten Highers and a Ph.d.
Well, it's an
erudite constituency!
The house I live in was
once very grand Now it's hardboard partition
bedsitterland.
‘S not a patch on what it was
before With twentyfour dymoed nametags on each
door.
As I trauchle by the B.B.C. or jog to the Yoonie
Avoiding another party pamphlet from some Raving Loonie
About cuts, the E.E.C., how the Pope's Beyond the Pale —
I can't get excited about Save The Whale
When down the Clyde Polaris ticks —
No I'm not interested in politics.
Hyndland Lady:
Course it's not everybody can afford
The luggsury of a Private Ward.
You'll not ketch me complaining about my lot
But we've worked-not wanted-not for what we've got.
Oh many's the sacrifice, many's the Spam sangwidge
To avoid the comprehensive and that disgusting langwidge.
Illiteracy ‘n’ falling standards and what that'll lead to
And as for the so called unemployed, they need to
Get up a bit earlier and try a bit harder
To bring home the bacon for the larder.
No it's not just the workers in Whiteinch —
We wallyclose wallahs are feeling the pinch.
But I believe in Freedom of Choice
The power of my elbow and my Panloaf Voice
And I point-blank refuse to kowtow to a load
Of loudmouth yobs on Dumbarton Road
Social security scroungers up to their tricks —
But I'm not interested in politics.
Partick Woman : Ah've lived here a' ma life,
I'm Partick born and bred But they've the cheek tae
cry it Hillhead!
If the Yerds hudnae shut ma Man
wid be workin therr still.
And the boy?— he's no
worked a day since he left the skill.
But they're
staunin' wi' thur clipboards in the pourin' rain,
The Souls!
‘Could Ah possibly answer a question or
two fur the Polls?’
I say ‘Ah'm a lower upper
middleclass defector From the private zone tae the
public sector.
Ah'm a Unionist Cathlick Nationalist
who might vote S.D. P. Because I take Great Issue
to the monarchy.
Ach the Hale Bliddy Loat o’ Thum
make me sick.
Naw Ah'm no interested in politicks.
But nothing will never get no better until it clicks
That we're not not interested in politics.
West End Blues
(Song)
Sunday morning, West End Sunday morning
Wake up high and dry On my Sunday morning
shelf Sunday mornings I wake up All wrapped
up in myself.
The long lie is over So get up for goodness
sake Sunday, all over this City Strange
bedfellows wake Come together again, or turn
the other cheek Nobody knows the score
There's a queue of girls in the dairy buying
breakfast For far more Than they bargained
for.
I got the West End Blues.
Who is losing who?
Who's Using who's All the West End News.
Sunday morning, West End Sunday morning Wake
up high and dry On my Sunday morning shelf
Sunday mornings I wake up All wrapped up in
myself.
The long lie is over Shake yourself for
crying out loud.
Have a coffee light up a
cigarette Sit under its cloud Last night's
hide and seekers, Sunday finds out are not
the game at all.
Saturday's perfect strangers
and lovers will Feel small And separate
after All.


I got the West End
Blues.
Who is losing
who?
Who's Using who
s All the West End
News.
A Bunch of Fives
Interference Song
It's TV Newstime —
It's us and them.
Our brave
police passively resist the
undemocratic NUM.
Let's
wave the flagging Falklands
that was a TV War — But the
screen goes blank on El
Salvador.
It's a TV election Labour
would knock 'em cold if
there weren't something
wrong with the horizontal
hold.
The SDP Alliance is
decidedly lukewarm, and
Thatcher talks platitudes
in a snowstorm.
There is some interference
but this is what you get Do
not adjust your attitudes
Do not adjust your set —
The Great British public is
all too bossable — Normal
service will be resumed as
soon as possible.
If it's TV for kids then
you're white we presume and
watching with mother in a
Surrey living room?
If it's
TV ads ‘The Best Thing on
the Box’ you can get all
these goodies if you pull
up your socks.
It it's TV for
women it's  strictly soft
soap and afternoon crochet
— how to cook, how to
cope.
If it's TV for men
then it's something to do
with a bat or a ball or a
billiard cue.
There is some interference
but this is what you get
Do not adjust your
attitudes Do not adjust
your set — The Great
British public is all too
bossable — Normal service
will be resumed As 
possible.
It's a TV minority being
given its fair say f–lack
is beautiful!
I'm Glad to
Be Gay!
For Asians in
Britain.
The Gaelic News —
If you watch after midnight
you might just hear our
views.
It's TV nostalgia — Where
Are They Now?
Lord Reith
in his dinner suit, Lady
Barnett take a bow.
Cut
gless ex-cents 'cause
they'd standards to set.
Newsreels of the thirties
lest we forget.


There is some interference
but this is what you get,
Do not adjust your
attitudes Do not adjust
your set If the Great
British Public is really
this bossable, Normal
service will be resumed
As soon as possible.
Sincerely Yours
(Song with Rab Handleigh)
A song like I'm singing calms the nerves
like Valium
Or Mogadon Chords on solo piano Lyrics
that don't rhyme and go on longer than you
them to Go on
A saccharine and simple minded song
Ain't nothing wrong
You can la-along
Now the hyperschmaltz and cuckoo waltz
With synthesizer quivers
Sends megashivers up your spine
It does to mine
Now here it comes, the drums
Chorus
Love is a multi-splendoured zing
This is the chorus I falsetto out such things
As baby-baby I will die without your love
Once I was lost but now I'm found
Send in the clowns
Sincerely yours
A song like I'm singing numbs the brain
A sweet cocaine lobotomy
A song like I'm singing hits the charts
Refreshes Parts, in Hyper-Marts,
And posh hotels with five stars, Airport Bars
Company cars from Motherwell to Mars.
Colonel Saunders deep-fry lullaby
Finger lickin' gooey.
Molasses mid-Atlantic sing-along
While Ronnie kills us softly with his song


Chorus
Crisis-Point Flash, Oh it's a gas
A Swan Song for Europe, bee bop a doo wop
Tomahawk Tops S.S. Twenty
Cloud Nine's mushrooming
As Manilow sings sweet an' low
What a way to go
Sincerely Yours
A song like I am singing calms the nerves like Valium
Or Mogadon.
A song like I am singing sweetpea fog,
an LA smog like cotton wool between the DJ's ears
his smiles ‘n’ tears will calm your fears but that's
cool Now take a breath and hold this note.
Now there's a key change, God knows why Girl I will
love you till I die Tie a yellow ribbon Our love's
like a red balloon Fly me to the moon Till all the
seas run dry Sincerely yours, Sincerely yours.
Promises
(Song)
Puffed up promises
On TV ads
Make you want what you never had
All you Persil Mums
And Flora Dads
Say you live just for the Kids
All you want is for things
to be right Its Comfort Soft
Its Whiter than white
Buy them Heinz's Beans
Never forget
To buy the fruitgums for Mum's pet
Puffed up promises
Puffed up wheat
Safety, Warmth, Enough to Eat
All you want Is Life for
them all But who'll be to
blame If the bombs start to
fall?
So count the cost of the
holocaust Stand up and fight
For peace.
Red Hot Shoes
Apple Pie
When you've a bun in the oven
Everything is apple pie Men on buses
give up seats for you And don't give
you the eye.
A man will tip his hat
to you But never nip your bum.
Even
your ma-in-law will grovel With
total approval At the contents of
your tum.
Yes, when you've a bun in
the oven Everything is apple pie.
I'm a lady-in-waiting, I am
Into blatant understating
When you're in the club —
The minute
 It's confirmed that you're in it,
You barber off your locks
And to celebrate your new serenity
You take to wearing smocks.
You indulge
Your non existent bulge
In a pash for Laura Ashley
Who you said you'd never
Be seen dead in ever —
But when you've a bun in the oven
Everything is apple pie Though first
the news you're overdue Is a bolt
from a blue sky Soon he'll warm to
marriage and the chapel, You're the
apple of his eye!
All His, and he
knows you're gonna Make a swell
madonna — No problem, Hushaby!
Cause when you've a bun in the oven,
Everything is apple pie.
A Mother Worries
From the moment the Little White Bundle is stuck in your arms
And you're terrified in case you drop it, or it stops breathing,
And, whether it's three hundred decibel howls mean a terminal tumour
Or else it's ‘only teething’…
Or else it's the Croup, the Colic, the Beads it just swallowed or double
pneumoniacutependicitis…
(And then when they're older, a mother tends to worry about what the reason for
the Ominous Quiet is)
But let's face it, in this infectious old world
Itching with  Lasa Fever, diphtheria.
smallpox, meningitis, teenage
pregnancy, gonorrhoea and infantile paralysis.
While all a mother's got is a bottle of Dettol in the final analysis.
Well…
A Mother Worries.
A mother knows she shouldn't try and keep them tied to the apron strings
because they're bound to flee the coop
And the best a mother can hope for is that they'll occasionally pop home
for the odd loan of ten quid or bowl of chicken soup,
But A Mother Worries.
A mother does her level best to warn them about the ever present dangers
Of alcoholism and sex and dope and taking sweets from strangers
But it's all water off a duck's back
As well to save your breath
Consideration of a Parent's Wishes
Is a fate worse than death —
Try and instil a sense of what's right
And still they treat this house like a hotel —
Day in day out, morning noon and night.
Well a mother doesn't want to nag or harp on, or use clichés or run the
risk of sounding shrewish
But a mother whatever her colour and creed is fundamentally Jewish —
She worries!
Usherette Scene
NETTIE, SALLY and QUEENIE are usherettes/ice-cream girls with trays.
Queenie:
I should of stayed on.
Should've stayed on I suppose and got some qualifications.
But you never listen, do you, not at that age.
Fifteen.
Water off a duck's back.
Wanted to start living.
Wanted excitement.
Wanted a paypacket on a Friday night and a new skirt out of C and A's on a Saturday.
Wanted life.
Big joke, ribbon of dreams, the movies…
Ended up shining my moonbeam torch on other people's big night out.
Went to work in the Regal, some movie palace, a right fleapit.
Manager, Mr Rex King…
Nettie:
Golden Divans Three and Nine, back stalls two and nine, front stalls one and nine.
You've missed the beginning of the full supporting feature…
Sally:
Some night aff.
As well stine in.
The Majestic.
Over twentyfives night.
Bunch a bloody geriatrics.
‘You dancin'’…
Nettie:
Queenie, stock up with butterkist its verr near the intermission!
Sally:
‘Naw its jist the wey Ah'm staunin' haw-haw yir patter's like watter.’
Re-partee, that will be right!
Tried to get us to stey up fur a slow wan.
Nae chance!
Nettie:
Hard bith her, seen the Nun's Story twenty seven times and never grett wance…you mibbe need merr Mivvis…
Sally:
Likely merrid onywey.
Nettie:
Ah'd dae onythin, tae get oot of this dump…
Sally:
Gee me a dissy?
An' Ah don't think.
Who Kerrs?
Definately not Deborah!
Pure hackit anyhow Ah'd never have lumbered him in the daylight.
Nettie:
Night school.
Only therrs nae night school durin' the day.
An' at night Ah'm workin.
Sally:
Ah goes listen Romeo you been in the Furrin' Legion?
Desert disease he hud.
Wanderin' Palms…
Nettie:
Shorthand typost…
Sally:
Big Senga got a lovebite affa guy that was the dead spitta Bible John.
no kidding ya.
Nettie:
Pitmans.
Contometer operator, they get good money…
Away'n Lysol the lavvys — and Sundays stuck an Irish sixpenny bit in the spray perfume ‘hing.
Sally:
Knock knock who's therr, Eureka.
Eureka Oxterguff, na hauff, see the Majestic, the smella lacquer in the lavvys wid've knocked you miroc amok never mind knocking back the quarter bottle.
Nettie:
You're ver near outa S.T.s in the ladies, Queenie.
Machine's emmty.
Sally:
Want a wee dab of Evening in Paris?
Nettie:
Tell her no, it'll take the colour out of your cardigan!
Sally:
He goes you smell gorgeous is that California Poppy I goes merr like California syrup of Figs sumdy's let aff, definately.
Nettie:
Dampt disgrace that couple that done it in the Golden Divans.
Sally:
(Shouts ) Drinks on sticks!
(To herself ) Oh don't!
Ah was affronted fur her, imagine gettin' stuck ‘n’ huvin' to get rolled on to a stretcher, the perr o' them, and kerted oot covered up wi' his poplin shortie.
(Shouts ) Tubs!
Nettie:
And you'd huv thought a choc ice wouldny have melted in her mouth the wey she cam' in clutching her quarter of matinee mixture quite the cats pyjamas her fur collar swagger.
Sally:
Butterkist!
Kiaora!
Queenie:
Mr King's nice isn't he…
Nettie:
Mr King!
He's the manager!
Sally:
Sex mechanic!
Thon wee Marie Tress that used to work the upper circle got stuck ahint the safe in the office way him an he vernear tane the blouse affer.
..(Burst of national anthem with them very bored, cracking gum etc., then lights change and they come together to do a little knackered home-time dance, they sing unaccompanied by the silver screen .)
All:
You can dance like Ginger Rogers You've a figure like Marilyn Monroe You've been a blonde since a week last Thursday So yir roots haven't started to show…
Yiv a beestung mooth like Joan Crawford Yiv got Bette Davis eyes
Nettie:
Yi'd have legs like Betty Grable If it wisnae for the varicose thighs.
Sally:
You've been rode merr often than Trigger By the light of the silvery moon Ye think he's Clark Gable, turns oot he's The Creature Fae the Black Lagoon.
All:
Ye can sing like Judy Garland Ye can whistle like Lauren Bacall Yir lovelier than Liz-beth Taylor But still yir worth —(Interrupted by the sleazy pinstriped figure of Mr King )
Mr King:
Pack it in girls!
Queenie, come up to my office right away will you, I want to go over a mistake in the takings.
Same Difference
The Babygrow Song (The Naked Truth)
When naked you fall into.the world
(Nothing newer, nothing truer) You can
gurgle in a true and brave new world Or you
can lie and squirm in a sewer.
Depends on
whose you are, Depends on whose you are,
and Who's Who In the pecking order of the
Human Zoo.
And that's the naked truth Yes
that's the naked truth.
So grow, baby grow
How you'll end up I don't know
How you'll end up I don't know
Whether ma's on the breadline, or daddy's
got loot (silver spoon or dummy tit) You
will look cute in your birthday suit — But
depends on how you button it.
Depends on
what you are, Depends on what you are, and
what's what, On the sort of naughty bits
you've got.
And that's the naked truth And
that's the naked truth.
It's a Dog's Life (Toby's Song)
Toby Dug:
I'm a Mad Bad Dug I m Toby the Dug Alsatian tae the oaxters wi Labrador's lugs I've Irish Setter's eyebrows (ain't they set real neat?)
I've got Bulldog's drumsticks And Saint Bernard's feet.
I'm a dog.
Top dog.
Girls:
Dubby Dooh Wah.
Dubby Dooh Wah.
Toby Dug:
Ma Da wis half boarder-collie Half Doberman Pinscher — Ma Maw goes ‘Help Ma Black Boab!’
When ma da came to winch her Well, it wis kinuffa a case o' Lady and the Tramp — A bit o' a vamp, A high-class bitch, my ma — Nine tenths purebred Alsatian One part je-ne-sais-quoi —
Girls:
Dubby Dooh Wah, Dubby Dooh Wah.
Toby Dug:
But I'm a dog.
Top dog.
Stare me straight in the teeth And I'm sure you'll agree I've got a high class pedigree I don't gie' a monkey's for the world and its wife It's a dog's life!
Girls:
Top dawg!
Dubby dooh wah, dop dubby dooh wah, dop, dop, dop.
That's Why the Princess is a Puke
(Sandra's Song)
(Tune: ‘The Lady is a Tramp’, but becomes punk double time in second verse)
Her herrs always golden, her slippers are glass
Though dumb she'll become some rich man's tits ‘n’
ass If she starts out a goosegirl she'll shit on
her class That's why the princess is a puke.
She don't regret Debrett pedigree, Won't sell
herself short and in short she ain't free When
flat on a mattress feels the need of a pea —
That's why the Princess is a puke.
Babe this bint can't love she can't share Or let
doon her hair This parasite is too uptight
She'll squirm in her ermine, refuse to be shook —
That's why the princess is a puke.
She's had a bobbed nose job, she's lukked doon it
since Hung oan to her cherry jist to merry a
Prince Wi jumbo size ears and a heid full o mince
That's why the Princess is a puke.
Puke Puke Puke
Puke!
A Bit of the Other
(Trish and Frank's Song)
Trish:
I don't know what I see in him
But a bit of the other
He's not exactly the kind of guy
One could take home to mother
But I see myself in a different life
A tied and a true and a tidy wife —
Oh its all for the fantasy, one suspects
One puts up with the sex for the secret,
One puts up with the secret for the sex
Frank : I know exactly what I see in her We
don't much like each other She's no a wummin
I'd call a wummin Like ma wife or my mother
But when I turn to her and part her thighs I
pull the wool over Josie's eyes And I've got
something of mines that no one suspects, I
put up with the sex for the secret, I put up
with the secret for the sex.
Frank and Trish : Lies, Secrets and Silences
Lies, Secrets and Silences Pull the wool
Cock and bull The crocodile tear, the Judas
Kiss The snake in the grass with ssseductive
hiss Will sink his fangs in your wedded bliss
Lies, secrets and silence, Lies, secrets,
silences!
Change of Life (The Usual)
(Josie's Song)
It's ma thirty ninth year
And the kids are grown
Soon Frank and me will be on our own
Maw and Paw Kettle wi' a colour TV
Thorn Birds, Dallas, Dynasty
The fifty seventh variety
Of sweet damn all
Drives me up the wall
And them next door that don t get along
Are playing our song
They're playing our song
I'll die of boredom if I live that long —
Sitting waiting
Waiting for the change of life
Chorus
And I don t know what I want
But what I want's
Not this
I don t want Frank s kiss
Cause it's jist
The Usual
I see Frank an' me sat there, I repeat
Till our bums wear through the three piece
suite The Hoover's on the blink but I don
t care Polyester, teflon, tupperware
Gets you nowhere — Such sweet damn all
Drives you up the wall If your rent is
late the slightest delay Means hell to
pay there s hell to pay For a wee
refreshment on Giro Day
Sitting waiting
Waiting for the Change of Life
Midsummer Night's Dog
(Toby's Song)
I'm a mad bad dog
I'm a Midsummer Dog
And I'll tummle your world right over
And my wildest night s dream
Cowps this hale bleak housing scheme
And rolls it in the Clover
Bow Wow Bow Wow
The Christians hate the Muslims
I seen it on the News —
The Cathlicks hate the Proddys
And the Arabs hate the Jews
Bow Wow Bow Wow
The poor hate the rich
And the ugly hate the pretty
White hates black
And the country hates the city
Bow Wow Bow Wow
Men have hated Women
Since the world began —
The haves hate the havenots And Woman hates Man
Bow Wow Bow Wow
I canny thole intolerance
That's wan thing I detest —
The old hate the young
And East hates West
Bow Wow
Bow Wow


So I'm glad bad dog
To be a midsummer dog
And to roll you in the clover
While this magic moon shall sail
In two shakes of my tail
I'll tummle your sane World over
So no more underdog I'm a blood
and thunder dog I'm not a
sleeping dog and I won't lie!
I'll not say please And I'll not
beg Sniff your kickers at the
vicars Hump your leg — I'm not a
sleeping dog and I won't lie!
I'll nosh your sausages And snap
at the nippers I'll shit on your
doorstep And I'll chew your
slippers — I'm not a sleeping dog
and I won't lie!
Men have hated Women
Since the world began —
The haves hate the havenots
And Woman hates Man
Bow Wow
Bow Wow
The Sins of the Fathers
(Sandra's Song)
When I was one I ate a bun
When I was two I buckled my shoe
When I was three I hit my knee
When I was four he shut the door
When I was five, when I was five
When I was five…
And the sins of the fathers
Will visit the children
Nightly in their beds.
And
there's grown-up women
Who're scared little children
Screaming inside their heads.
I've got hair like Shirley
Temple I've a figure like
Marilyn Monroe!
Look at me, I'm only three
Sittin' on ma daddy's knee
Who would guess I'm gonny be
His next victim victim
victim.
Shoogy-shaggy ower
the glen Daddy's pet and
mammy's hen Mammy's pet and
daddy's nen.
And the sins of the fathers
Will visit the children
Nightly in their beds And
there's grown-up mothers Who
are still little children In
the darkness of their heads.
I'm the King of the Castle
You're a durty wee Rascal!
And the sins of the
fathers Will visit the children
Nightly in their heads.
Men lie
beside women Who are terrified
children In the darkness of their
beds.
Shocking shocking shocking A
mouse ran up my stocking The
higher up the mountain The
greener grows the grass The
higher up that mousie climbs The
nearer to my — Ask no questions,
tell no lies, Keep your mouth
shut Catch no flies.
And the sins of the fathers Will
visit the children Nightly in
their beds — Nelly ate jam, Nelly
ate jelly Nelly left home with a
pain in her — Don't be mistaken,
don't be misled Nelly left home
with a pain in her head.
And the
sins of the fathers Will visit
the children Nightly in their
beds.
The Life of Mrs Riley
(Josie's Song)
I was eighteen years old in sixty-four
Another three years till the key-of-the-door!
My Mammy said When I smell Pink Camay I can
picture it yet John and Paul on my Dansette
Jumbo rollers in my hair and nothing in my
head My Daddy said.
My Da said no one was good enough — Rockers
were mental and Mods were tough In
sixty-four And I giggled at Problem Page
Advice And I sappled through my nylons and
kept myself nice.
Wore panstick wore Mohair
I wore angora In sixty-four.
There was this lawyer bloke who took a notion
— My Auntie said he would go far Apparently
he was articled And a…sorta trainee at
the Bar You often wonder, don't you?
But
what's for you won't go by you You often
wonder why you — But mibbe I should thank ma
lucky star.
Because when — I don't know what it was —
In the clinch, his winching made me ill
Couldny put ma finger on it, but I thought it was
The caked-on  Clearasil , the cavalry twill
And — in the Beatle-era
He'd lard mair than a smeara
Brylcream on his crowning glory —
Well to cut a long story —
Stood up this Kenneth went on a blind date
Turned out to be Frank, I thought he was
great, I couldn't wait For the life of Mrs
Riley.


For ma Christmas he gave me an H. Samuel locket
Engraved F. R. loves J. D.
Said I'd find somethin' nice in his pocket
— and a packet of three
And for him wel I went for
A lovely charcoal jumper
That I got out Marks and Spencer
And wrapped it round the Hollies new LP
When emdy asked us was it getting
serious We laughed and said we had no
future plans Hogmanay saw Frank and me
delirious On five pernod and
blackcurrants plus four cans Of special
plus a snakebite We didny know how to
make right And we arsed a half bottle
of bacardi…
At Jessie Pearson's
party.
We kissed and we kissed till we couldny
resist — Totally pissed!
We were in no
fit state — But I couldn't wait For
the life of Mrs Riley.
We switched Luxemburg up till full volume
And jammed a chair below the handle of the door
It was Jessie Pearson's wee brother Paul's room
There was, I think, another couple on the floor
Frank said everything would be all right 
Luxemburg announced A-mami night
And Horace Batchelor's Infradraw —
It didny work at a' —
By Valentine's day I was five weeks late
I couldn't keep doon a thing I ate.
I
couldn't wait For the life of Mrs
Riley.
My Mum said I was too easily led
Better call the banns cause we'd made our
bed We'd have to lie…
I wore a lemon
tent dress down the aisle When I look at
the photys I have to smile — To say we
could have done it different, Frank and I
We'd have to lie!
We've been very happy — nothing great But
I doubt if I would hesitate — 'Cos I
couldn't wait For the life of Mrs Riley.
Bazz's Serial Monogamy Song
We have different lifestyles
The husband-and-wife style's
Not for me.
Me and my Lady live
In Serial Monogamy…
A baby carriage Don't mean a marriage —
That bit of paper is not necessaree For
live-in lovers What is a love-child or
three?
Time the whole world discovers
Serial Monogamy.
Somewhere in between 
The teenage libertine
Who nightly paints the town
And the pipe-and-slippers type
Pa-of-Two-Planned-Nippers type
Tied and true and…settled down
(All I suspeck —
By heck
Dead from the neck on down)—
There's got to be a Happy Medium Between
till-death-us-do-tedium The one night
stand and cold anonymity Seems to me —
Could it be Serial Monogamy?
Nell and Gideon and Sam All know exactly
who I am (Actually the third Life
Partner Trish has had!)
And the older
pair call me by my first name too as if 
I was (biologically) their Dad!
I've an alternative
lifestyle That husband and
wife style ‘s not for me Me
and my Lady share (more or
less) Serial Monogamy.
Trish's Serial Monogamy Song
Somewhere between
The open marriage And the bloody
rigor-mortgage The two-car garage Is
ultra sensible Morally defensible
Home-free, one-two-three Serial Monogamy.
Would you, should you Come a cropper
Ten-to-one, old son, Your ‘amours’ are
improper Peut-etre, I suspect Politically
incorrect Unlike one-two-three Serial
Monogamy.
Say, mon brave,
You get caught in the lavvy
With thy neighbour's wife
And a bottle of Soave
At how-you-say?— Hogmany
Bugger me, monogamy.
It breaks the monotony…
We sing dumb anyway Turn a blind eye,
essentially And nothing will be said But
don't put a cuckoo in the nest Or thrush
in the un-marriage bed.
Should the Next Man care
To (redeemably) share
My All-My-Worldly-Goods
And be my Old Man, my mucker,
Share my Sartre, my yukka,
My non-sexist breakfast foods,
My Habitat, shabby tat my premenstrual moods…
And once it's ended All
is soon mended No tears, no
fears, perhaps three years And
then you part, no?
No broken
heart, you're free.
Because no
one depended (did they?)
On
Serial Monogamy.
For the next in the series — Or
so the theory is — You're free.
No wedding bells, hell.
Just
Serial Monogamy.
Who's Screwing Who — Who's Paying For All This?
Intro:
Big cities, little lives
Fathers mothers husbands wives
Brothers sisters sons and daughters
Good citizens, good friends —
Can you pardon, make amends?
Verse:
And there's cranes still standing on an empty river,
It's raining and shining on a high-rise tower,
A thousand sordid images
A million middling marriages
Family, community, the nation.
A hardworking past, perilous future —
A hopeless generation.
Here's a tenement that bares a heart we cannot comprehend —
Torn wallpaper on a gable end —
One face, a high window.
Chorus:
In the jungle of the cities in this human zoo
Be done by as you're doing to
The fundamental questions show right through:
Who's really screwing who —
Who's paying for all this.
Verse:
Like a world war beginning from a lovers' quarrel
Like a rotten freckle on an apple in a barrel
From the pinpoint of the father's crime
Ripples go out through space and time
Family, communities, nations
And back through the past and into the future
Of unborn generations
And if the marriage bed is an island in a sea of desire
Why oh why do the mothers conspire
With the sins of the fathers.
Intro Form Bridge:
Who screwed up the father
Who screwed up the children
Who are going to screw up theirs
Unless everyone declares
The nuclear family
An A.P.T.
Toby Dug:
Area of priority treatment!
Toby's Verse:
And the show'll go on there's no dress rehearsal
You can drop all the masks, do some role reversal
Learn your part, you've still-got time
It's a farce, a pantomime —
All the tricks and transformations
It comes down to the clowning, the pratfalls, the catcalls,
The standing ovations
And if it's a paper moon and just a cardboard sea
We must do more than makebelieve we're free
Or drop the curtain.
Chorus:
Will you change yourself, are you going to?
Be done as by you're doing to?
The fundamentals still show through
Who's really screwing who —
Who's paying for all this?
Chorus (Reprise):
In the jungle of the cities, in this human zoo
Be done by as you're doing to
The fundamental questions show right through:
Who's really screwing who —
Who's paying for all this?
New Clichés
Over the past four years, since True Confessions , I have been working more on straight drama.
Blood and Ice (1982) at the Traverse and since rewritten (1984) for a small London fringe company.
Disgusting Objects for the Scottish Youth Theatre (1982),Sweet Nothings for BBC Television (broadcast 1984),Shanghaied for Borderline Theatre co. (1983 and revived Mayfest 1984),Rosaleen's Baby (1984), Scottish Youth Theatre, and Dracula rather freely adapted from Bram Stoker's classic 1897 novel (Royal Lyceum, Edinburgh, 1985).
But between plays and poems odd new characters do begin monologuing away and asking to be written down.
Old ones pipe up again on other subjects.
Mrs Abernethy grows more awful and Verena is no nearer to what she still can't seem to own up to as her heart's desire…
This then is a ragbag of pieces, some still to be performed out loud, which I haven't collected together till now.
I Wouldn't Thank You for a Valentine
(Rap)
I wouldn't thank you for a Valentine.
I won't wake up early wondering if the postman's been.
Should 10 red-padded satin hearts arrive with a sticky sickly
saccharine
Sentiments in very vulgar verses I wouldn't wonder if you meant them.
Two dozen anonymous Interflora roses?
I'd not bother to swither over who sent them!
I wouldn't thank you for a Valentine.
Scrawl SWALK across the envelope
I'd just say ‘Same Auld Story
I canny be bothered deciphering it —
I'm up to here with Amore!
The whole Valentine's Day Thing is trivial and commercial,
A cue for  unleashing clichés and candyheart motifs to which I
personally am not partial.’
Take more than singing Telegrams, or pints of Chanel Five, or sweets,
To get me ordering oysters or ironing my black satin sheets.
I wouldn't thank you for a Valentine.
If you sent me a solitaire and promises solemn,
Took out an ad in the Guardian Personal Column
Saying something very soppy such as‘Who Loves Ya, Poo?
I'll tell you, I do, Fozzy Bear, that's who!’
You'd entirely fail to charm me, in fact I'd detest it
I wouldn't be eighteen again for anything, I'm glad I'm past it.
I wouldn't thank you for a Valentine.
If you sent me a single orchid, or a pair of
Janet Reger's in a heartshaped box and declared your
Love Eternal
I'd say I'd not be caught dead in them they were
politically suspect and I'd rather something thermal.
If you hired a plane and blazed our love in a banner
across the skies;
If you bought me something flimsy in a flatteringly wrong
size;
If you sent me a postcard with three Xs and told me how
you felt
I wouldn't thank you, I'd melt.
St Valentine's Day Heart Catalogue
(Rap)
1
hearts are always red and shiny
2
hearts come in all colours
3
hearts are made of padded satin
4
hearts can be candystriped
5
hearts make neat pincushions
6
hearts take long slow cooking but with care and the right sauce they rival liver braincheese or sweetbreads any day.
7
Heartbroken Doctor Tells Court How Gorilla Played Cupid (Globe and Mail)
8
'Ave a 'eart 'Arry she panted and 'ang on a tick!
(Cockney porn-novel)
9
King's Road's Mary Quant told the conference that with the advent of the miniskirt in the sixties the crotch had been redefined as the new erogenous zone.
Ms. Quant confided to delegates that she often jollied Plunkett (her husband, entrepreneur Alexander Plunkett-Green) into helping her dye her pubic hair some fantasy shade, or to trim it to a neat heart shape.
(New Statesman.)
10
Hearts will definitely not be worn on sleeves this season (Harpers)
11
My Husband Had A Heart Transplant And Now He Loves The Donor's Wife (Confession Magazine)
12
The Heart is just another pumping muscle (Doctor Christian Barnard)
13
Having asked for directions from a friendly policeman.
here she was en route to his heart, via his stomach.
With a half-shudder, she left the lower bowel and set off gingerly along the rather treacherous surface of the greater intestine which coiled before her — a tunnel she wasn't too sure she saw the light at the end of.
She wondered if she would have let herself get involved had she known in advance that it entailed so much messing with entrails.
However, it was too late to think of that now.
She loved him.
She was in it, up to here.
14
Heartbreak Hotel offers cheap, out of season rates for Winterbreak Weekends.
15.
Heartsease makes a sweet Victorian posy.
Combined in a nosegay with love-that-lies-bleeding and a sprig of maidenhair fern, spring brides should find it a piquant bouquet.
16
Heartshaped pastrycutters can make candykisses of common or garden cookiemix.
When cool, sprinkle with a little cinnamon and powdered rhinohorn.
17
How the heartshaped sunglasses and the lollipop of Lolita catapulted lovely Sue Lyons to stardom.
18
There are all manner of betrothals, and any are blessed as long as the heart be true.
19
Nowt up with the ticker, any trouble with the waterworks?
20
The heart is a lonely hunter.
21
My heart's in the Highlands.
22
Half a heart is better than no.
23
Remember, don't take any wooden Hearts.
How Do I Love Thee, Let Me Count The…
(Rap)
I go ape
I go bananas I go spare I go for you in a big way I go for you with
a knife.
I go curly I get jealous I act reasonable I change my mind.
I put on an accent I slip into something more comfortable I turn
nasty.
I am one man's meat I am nobody's fool I refuse to make fish of the
one and flesh of the other I sing dumb I sit pretty I stand for my
rights.
I am hard hearted I am self centred I must be soft.
I play by ear I use my loaf I suspect fair play.
I cash in on my sex appeal I take all the credit I give you the
benefit of the doubt.
I take it as it comes I take it
for what it is I take it with a pinch of
salt I take it very seriously indeed I
will cross that bridge.
I made the whole thing up from the start to
finish I will make it up to you somehow I
have made you up a bed in the spare room I
have made up my mind.
I am not like that I am neither here nor
there I am not the same I am not kidding.
Adultery Song
Chorus
I'm nothing
To write home about
I'm the best thing in your life
But I'm best kept secret
From the kids and the wife
We keep each other 's counsel Find our
confidences sweet, Ignore each other in
crowded rooms Where even our eyes can't
meet — Till sick of feeling lovesick We
seek temporary cures — Always my place
Never yours.
Chorus
Because I'm nothing
To write home about
(I'm the best thing in your life)
But I'm best kept secret
From the kids and the wife
We talk of somewheres we'll go sometime As
soon as you can — Till then I'm snatching
stolen time With a borrowed man.
We salt
our suppers with secrecy, Steal kisses in
the park Then you love me half the night
with the light on — But you keep her in
the dark.
Chorus No, I'm nothing To write home
about I'm the best thing in your life But
you have to keep me secret From the kids
and the wife.


You say you're sorry to leave me
I say it is OK.
And skin to skin we cling once more Then you shower love away,
Take the carkeys by my ticking clock
Go and leave me in my bed
With her photo in your wallet —
My phone number in your head
Chorus
Cause there's nothing
I could phone your home about —
There's the kids, and the wife
Even for a matter of life and death
I can't interrupt your life
Chorus No, I'm nothing To
write home about I'm the best
thing in your life But I'm best
kept secret From the kids and
the wife.
Bluejohn Pockets
You came to the city.
You came to see me, Bringing me
driftwood you found by the sea.
One
night in my tower And the next thing
I knew I was out on the motorway
Hitching with you Next to nothing in
our pockets To live on.
It wasn't so always.
Not you and me.
And once this mountain lay under the
sea.
Look close at the surface, You
can easily tell How it changed, how
it hardened To fossilised shell That
lies in deep caves by the pockets Of
bluejohn.
Bluejohn, oh bluejohn Marbled and
scarred Blue, bright and hard Oh it
runs like a vein through the rock
seam.
Never a day but you think of
her And I of him.
It's easy together, But we need to be
free.
You can't cut through rock
seams that easily.
Though we went at
it goodstyle, With your penknife, My
nailfile.
And filled up our pockets
With bluejohn.
Bluejohn, oh bluejohn Marbled and
scarred Blue, bright and hard It runs
like a vein through the rock seam.
Never a
day but you think of her And I of him.
Back now in the city.
What can I save But
this mantelpiece full of the bluejohn you
gave Yes we each loved another But times
have moved on Ask me once to go with you
I'll be packed up and gone With nothing in
my pockets But bluejohn.
Plenty
(Rap)
Come.
Come and take potluck eat humble pie whatever.
Midweek I don't
promise much but it'll certainly stretch to one extra, anytime.
Plenty.
I've never been one to rustle up some loaves-and-fishes
miracle out of a mini-tin of storecupboard pomodoro and a lump of
rat-trap cheddar.
God!
Our house when we were wee
day-before-payday pan-haggis was neither here nor there so I well
mind the time high tea was a glittering vision of a teetering
cakestand and our snottery noses at the pane well and truly up
against it!
Not at all.
No.
No.
Come as you are.
Just bring
yourself.
Well.
Well if you're passing one bottla pink plonk
whatever.
Wouldn't go amiss.
Favourite Shade
(Rap)
She's getting No More Black, her.
You've got bugger all bar black, Barbra.
Black's dead drab an’ all.
Ah'd never have
been seen deid in it, your age tae!
Dreich.
As a shade it's draining.
Better aff
somethin tae pit a bit a colour in her
cheeks, eh no?
Black.
Hale wardrobe fulla black claes.
Jist
hingin' therr half the time, emmty.
On the
hangers, hingin.
Plus by the way a gloryhole
Chockablock with bermuda shorts, the lot.
Yella kimono, ah don't know whit all.
Tropical prints.
Polyester everything
Easy-Kerr.
Bit naw, naw that was last year,
noo she's no one to give nothing coloured
houseroom.
Black.
Black.
Ah'm fed up tae the
back teeth lukkin' ett her.
Feyther says the
same.
Who's peyin' fur it onlywey?
Wance yir
workin' weer whit yi like.
No as if yiv
nothin' tae pit oan yir back.
Black!
As
well oot the world as oot the fashion.
Seen a wee skirt in Miss Selfridge.
Sort of 
dove, it was lovely.
Would she weer it, but?
Goes: see if it was black If it was black
it'd be brilliant.
Donkey
(Monologue)
I didn't want the donkey.
I didn't know whether to go for the oatmeal for second choice or whether to stick to the saxe, but I definitely did not want jet or donkey, that I did know.
Mibbe I should send it back.
I never ticked it, it does damn all for me, I don't see why I shouldn't insist on my first colour-choice or nothing.
It was the very same story the time oor Isa sent for the stilettos very much against my advice as it happens but they were supposed to be real made-in-England leather uppers available in three colourways, aubergine, aqua or  avocado well, as she said herself she was expecting green but nothing quite as Irish as they turned out in fact to be.
She had thought they'd be more of a bottle.
What I really wanted was the nigger, or mibbe the navy.
I've got sweet fanny adams to go with donkey!
A catalogue can mean a pig in a poke, I really don't advise it.
Mrs Rintoul: Standard English
(Monologue)
I'm terrified to tackle poetry with them.
Exactly, Eileen, don't tell me, if they're anything like my 4×4 they'll have you demented…
I mean you get Sweet Fanny Adams done with them on the run up to Christmas anyway, E.l.S.
Industrial or no E.l.S.
Industrial Action and we're only three days back in January before the Prelims, so as far as I can see that is St Agnes's Eve out the window.
So I've just advised them to stick to Billy Liar and a character-sketch and told them to hedge their bets a question will Come Up.
As it very likely will.
Turns out they've done damn-all since Flannan Isle in the First Year.
But you give up.
I despair.
I goes, ‘4×4, C'mon you've all read the book — read it, it's coming out their ears — I goes, let's examine the character of the Witch.
You know, his girlfriend, c'mon how would you describe her personality.
Give me some words.
Not necessarily adjectives.
Just words.’
Course, Derek Weintraub just sat there, totally gormless and I-know-it-all at the same time as only a fifth-year O-level repeat can be.
Eventually, after knocking my pan in, and doing my nut generally till I was blue in the face I manage to get a Response out of Annemarie Barr.
Sticks her hand up and goes, ‘Moany.’
I goes ‘Annemarie I hope and trust and pray you are not going to put that down on the paper.
Could you not at least say ‘short-tempered’?
Something Standard English anyway…
Made them ink-exercise it for the Thursday and when I got in the results I was tearing my hair.
Annemarie's every-second Billy was with a small ‘b’.
I goes Annemarie I doubt if there would be any chance for you even under Munn and Dunning unless you can conquer the capital letter.
Actually I am still in two minds about mibbe squeezing in a quick Hughes or a Heaney somehow.
I cannot believe that it can be right that this late in the game Poetry is still a closed book.
Mrs Abernethy: Festive Fayre
(Monologue)
Well…wait till I tell you.
It was no Christmas for me this Christmas.
Telling you Christmas dinner's no picnic for The Lady of the House at the best of times and this year was no exception.
I just said to my hubby this morning, I said, ‘The sooner its the Sixth of January and we've got a they decorations back up the loft and poked all they clogged-up pine needles out the Hoover tube with a Knitting needle and its back to auld claes and parritch the better pleased I'll be.’
Honestly its been bake, bake, bake.
The beaters of my Kenwood have seldom been still since the end of November.
Between the Cubs Christmas Fayre and the Girls Guildry conversazzione, and I'd two dozen melting moments for the Brownies Bring And Buy.
Still it was appreciated and thats the main thing.
Brown Owl said to me. your melting moments go like snow aff a dyke.
Still it'll be with folk knowing where they came from.
Our Gillian got terrible food poisoning off strange tablet at a Garden Fete once.
Och but don't mention our Gillian to me.
Its her that I'm vexed at.
That girl ruined Christmas for the whole family.
Well, its a busy time for her dad as well, what with those extra services — and a lamentable feature of this day and age is the amount of toerags that roll in bold as brass to the Watchnight Service reeking of drink.
Well, Gillian's always been very independent.
Well we've encouraged that.
We've encouraged that.
My Better Half's always maintained, and I agree with him, if they don't want to go to the Church then we won't force them.
After all one of the dogmas of the Protestant faith has always been a freedom of choice.
I mean John Knox and Martin Luther Thingmy, I mean they built the Kirk on the tenets of independence.
I mean I'm no historian, you'd have to check up on this with my hubby, but as far as I know the Reformation started up North in Europe a guid lang mile away from Rome and the Pope and that, up in the Region of what we now know as Holland, and Germany and Alsace Lorraine.
In fact, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think that Protestantism was originally an Alsatian Dogma.
So they've not been regular attenders since the age of fourteen or so and their dad and me have always been very  tolerant.
And Valerie, that the elder girl, has been a model daughter in every other way.
Five Highers, Jordanhill, married in the University Chapel to an awful nice electrical engineer who wouldn't say boo, taught for two years till she got her parchment before starting a family.
And wee Kate and Joshua are just plain gorgeous even though it's their Granny talking.
Valerie's got some wee ‘do’ on tonight and I popped over to Hyndland Road this morning because she was short of ramekins for her starters and the wee souls were all over Gran with their Selection Boxes, honestly any more would sicken me.
But that Gillian…
Well, she phones me up to say could she bring a friend home for Christmas.
I says you know your friends are always welcome, you don't have to ask.
So she says Michael and I will be off the six fifteen at Central on the twenty third.
Michael.
Well, I thought nothing of it, because she's always palled up with a lot of English chaps since she was up at St Andrews and there was the odd Michael among them.
Simon and Timothy and what not.
Dampt few Alastairs and Kenneths anyway!
So, to cut a long story short, she arrives with this…
Michael.
And he seems very nice.
Turns out his Dad is a head master in the Bathgate area so I says ‘Oh what's the school called?’
All innocence.
St Francis Xavier says he without turning a hair.
I didn't know where to look, and that bisum just sat there cool as a cucumber wolfing down my Celebration Chile Con Carne Surprise.
I mean, as I said to my hubby later on, we didn't scrimp and scrape to send her to Hutchy Girls so she would grow up to give us grandweans saying merr, flerr and sterr.
Still, it's her life to ruin and one word from us and she'll do the opposite so good luck to her, I wash my hands, I wash my hands absolutely.
And now there's the Ne'erday to get by.
I'll better away and get my black bun out the oven.
I don't like to blow my own trumpet but My Better Half could eat it to a band playing.
I like it, I like it alright, but does it like me, that's the trouble!
At least I've my shortbread baked, I wouldn't give the bought stuff houseroom.
Willie Learmouth the session clerk came by today for the Intimations and he's an awful nice man, one of Nature's Gentlemen, went to Allan Glen's when that meant something, his wife's got a plastic hip but you never hear him  complain, anyway he sat down to a wee cup of tea and naturally he could not resist my all butter shortbread ‘Nettie,’ says he, ‘your petticoat tails would melt in a man's mouth.’
Mibbe another batch wouldn't go wrong?
Happy New Year everybody, although it'll be no holiday for me.
Verena: Castaways
(Monologue)
I've never been a big knitter.
Unlike my mother.
Never not knitting something.
Tension, that's the trouble, she's a terrible slack knitter.
Anything she does you tends to damp near drown you.
She's good hearted, but basically it's a waste of money for the wool.
Neither oor Joy nor me have ever been handy.
Hopeless with our hands.
As Joy herself says, I can cast on, I can cast on OK but I canny cast off.
Never been much of a book fan either.
Well not till Derek went away Up There.
Now I tend to find I need something else to put me to sleep.
No, not at all, I'm not nervous, no I've never been bothered with things that go bang in the night.
Unlike some.
Derek was telling us about some roustabout's wife who will flit back in with her mother every fortnight.
Back and forth.
Terrified.
Lovely bungalow in Bishopbriggs an' all.
Apparently some of them nervous wrecks.
Alsatians and everything.
Lodgers.
Getting the weans in to sleep with them in the Kingsize and of course will they move back to their bunkbeds once He's back?
Causes problems.
Well, I read a lot these days.
Well it's either that or TV and that is a lot of damp nonsense as per usual.
Not worth the licence fee as Derek says.
Of course I am addicted to Alexis although I admit the entire thing is very far fetched.
But some of her rigouts are gorgeous and I wouldn't mind getting to that age with a figure like that.
Actually I have been something of a clothesaholic recently, don't tell Derek, but I have to put that fitted wardrobe under lock and key when he's back and hope he doesn't keek in through the louvres because I wouldn't want him to think I was extravagant.
But he likes me to look nice when we go out anyway which is not often, granted.
Well as he says when he's at home he likes to get down the pub with the boys for a pint because of course it is dry Up There.
Although apparently some of them go to all lengths, resealing Coke cans what have you, to smuggle drink in.
Instant dismissal if they're caught as well.
I don't anyway, wouldn't care if I never so much as sniffed it again.
Drink's never been either here or there for me, bar a wee Baileys with my coffee if we go out for a meal and I always  buy it in at Christmas, because most women like it.
Bacardi and coke is my only tipple and I do sometimes get through a couple on nights when I'm in myself, well it's better than turning to the biscuit barrel isn't it?
Moira McVitie is fairly putting on the beef since she gave up the teaching when wee Scott was born.
Moira never knows what to be at.
Well, as I said to her boredom is all in the mind, it's up to yourself isn't it?
Wants to start a Book Group or some damp thing, lending out and discussion groups on a Wednesday morning over coffee.
Not my cup of tea.
As I said to her we've got two shelves of hardbacks in the alcove because I do think they furnish a room as the man said, but I wouldn't be on for lending them out because you don't know the condition they'd come back in.
Sticky fingers etcetera.
Some people let their under-fives run riot.
But Moira says no it's paperbacks only, insisted on lending us some of those Virgo Books and Woman's Press and that, you know ‘I Stand Here Ironing’ and so on, couldn't be bothered to try and make sense of them.
Not what I'd call escapism anyway.
Course I do get the Woman and the Woman's Own plus I swap Options for the Cosmopolitan off our Joy.
I wouldn't give Woman's Realm houseroom.
Course it's Princess Di and the Queen Mother this that and the next thing.
Actually I am sorry for her.
Prince William, Prince Harry, they're only interested in her as a breeding machine.
I thought it was a sin publishing her gynaecological details all over the Sun and the Record etcetera before the Royal Wedding.
I mean it's everybody's Own Business as I keep telling my mother and our Joy.
Moira McVitie says she's got a pal that went to that Steptoe's Clinic.
I have to laugh, I can't not picture that old, what do you call him, Wilfrid Brambell wasn't it, mind the time he lost his false teeth in the bath and Harold goes ‘oh you dirty old man’…?
Anyway apparently that clinic, you know, they do that, you know, in vitrio fertilisation, test tube babies etcetera.
I don't know what all.
Apparently they blast you with hormones, so Moira's pal says, to make you ovulate and everybody is sitting around going, ‘how many eggs did they get out of you?
Only six?
I produced twelve!’ and then of course hubby's got to do the business on them and once they're fertilised they re-implant them, maximum six and  hope one of them takes.
I cannot picture Derek being up for it quite honestly, can you?
I'm not one hundred percent keen on meddling with nature, anyway.
It's like all that surrogate stuff.
Too commercialised, same as Christmas.
Course Moira always has had a vivid imagination, you have to take what she says with a pinch of salt.
Honestly I was round there for a coffee the other day — actually wee Scott was awful quiet.
Moira shouts ‘Scottie is that you up there watching a mummy's and daddy's video?’
I had to laugh.
Imagine Malcolm, the big intellectual, with a dirty video.
And him always bumming on to Derek about how he'd taped the whole of Brideshead Revisited.
Who was he trying to impress?
But Moira, you never know what she'll be telling you next.
She says there's a Coven round the cul-de-sac.
I ask you.
I said to her what the hell would anybody be getting involved in all that damp nonsense for?
She says boredom.
Boredom.
Some folk just don't know what to be at.
Postcard Us When the Wean Says Bananas
(The Greeting Card Song)
Happy Silver Anniversary,
Deepest Sympathy On Your Pregnancy, Birthday
Greetings (Humorous), Please Say Its Not Too
Late For Us — Forget Me Not, Let's Tie The
Knot, Thanks a Lot Gift Much Appreciated, To
a Mother Dear…
, A Guid New Year, Wish You
Were Here, Valentine's Day (Belated).
Was Sad to Hear, So Glad to Hear, Too Bad to
hear Your News.
Someone somewhere wants a
card from you.
Drop us a line to say you're
fine And how highly you regard us — And
postcard us When the wean says bananas.
New Wave Designs, Old Valentines Or Repro
Victorianas Drop us a line to say you're fine
And how highly you regard us — Oh, and
postcard us When the wean says bananas.
The Key of the Door, Have a great Yom Kippur,
White Heather for good Luck, A Hallmark Card,
Tell Vernon Ward Go take a Flying Duck.
Kitten-In -Boot, or Snoopy Cute, or Beryl Cook
— Something Sweet and Silly, A Billet-doux,
A Seaside view or a Bamforth Blue (I've lost
My little Willy).
U.R.21, So It's a Son!,
Have
lots of fun, I'm blue!
Someone,
somewhere wants a card from you.
Drop us
a line to say you're fine And how highly
you regard us And postcard us When the
wean says bananas.
Roman Orgies, Royal Corgis or
Charleses-and-Dianas.
Drop us a line to
say you're fine And how highly you
regard us And postcard us When the wean
says bananas.
Seasons Greetings, Aw the Best Good Luck
on Your Driving Test Blank for Your
Message, Glad to Be Gay Have a swell St
Swithin's Day, How you doin'?
I love
you, ‘n’ Get Well Soon.
Bon Voyage of
course Please be Mine, Hello Sunshine,
the food is fine Congrats on your
Divorce.
I hope you're free, R.S.V.P. With love
from me, To you.
Someone somewhere
wants a card from you.
Drop us a line to
say you're fine And how highly you
regard us And postcard us When the wean
says bananas.
Men Talk
(Rap)
Women
Rabbit rabbit rabbit women
Tattle and titter
Women prattle
Women waffle and witter
Men Talk.
Men Talk.
Women into Girl Talk
About Women's Trouble
Trivia ‘n’ Small Talk
They yap and they babble
Men Talk.
Men Talk.
Women gossip Women giggle Women
niggle-niggle-niggle Men Talk.
Women yatter Women chatter Women
chew the fat, women spill the beans
Women aint been takin' The oh-so
Good Advice in them Women's
Magazines.
A Man Likes A Good Listener.
Oh yeah
I like A Woman
Who likes me enough
Not to nitpick
Not to nag and
Not to interrupt 'cause I call that treason
A woman with the Good Grace
To be struck dumb
By me Sweet Reason.
Yes —
A Man Likes a Good Listener


A Real Man
Likes a Real Good Listener
Women yap yap yap Verbal
Diarrhoea is a Female Disease
Woman she spread she rumours
round she Like Philadelphia
Cream Cheese.
Oh
Bossy Women Gossip
Girlish Women Giggle
Women natter, women nag
Women niggle niggle niggle
Men Talk.
Men Think First, Speak Later
Men Talk.