

University of Ulster Ulster Business School GRADUATE ENTERPRISE PROGRAMME NORTHERN IRELAND SMALL BUSINESS INSTITUTE
Graduate Enterprise Programme
The Graduate Enterprise Programme (GEP), is a business start-up programme organised and run by the Northern Ireland Small Business Institute (NISBI).
GRADUATE ENTREPRENEURS
Most of the 5,000 graduates each year in Northern Ireland choose to work for large firms, for the public sector, or enter the professions.
A mere handful set up their own business.
In the USA, Japan or Germany, the story is different.
There graduate led businesses play a key role in their country's economic success.
In fact, one in three new ventures in the USA is started by people under thirty — the majority of whom are graduates in their early twenties.
Part of NISBI's role is to encourage more graduates in Northern Ireland to investigate the benefits of self-employment.
To date almost 100 graduates have participated in the GEP and the majority have gone on to successfully launch their own businesses.
THE NEED FOR TRAINING
To compete in business you'll need more than just a good idea — you'll need commercial ability and experience to create that viable growing concern.
Too many new businesses fail due to lack of coaching at the start.
The Graduate Enterprise Programme can change that by helping you jump each hurdle, rather than letting you in for the high jump.
It will give you the opportunity of turning your idea into commercial reality with a comprehensive training programme.
WHO CAN APPLY
The GEP is aimed at individuals with a viable business project that may be at the planning stage or in the early stages of trading.
Applicants may be in full-time employment, self employment or unemployed.
GEP participants who intend seeking support from either LEDU or T&EA (Enterprise Allowance Scheme) are exempt from ‘Enterprise Training’
‘The practical help in developing my business plan was invaluable in focusing my idea and helping me obtain LEDU assistance’.
Michael Hall, who graduated in 1990, took possession of his new industrial unit in Craigavon's Carn Industrial Park while on GEP.
His company, KESTREL CONTRACT PACKERS, offers a flexible packaging service for the food industry and currently packages dried food stuffs for export and local distribution.
Michael, like all participants on the programme, developed his business plan through a combination of market research, group counselling, talks and presentations by business specialists.
The process of actually researching and producing their own business plan is regarded by many of the graduates as the most challenging but rewarding  aspects of the programme.
‘The advice and support from other programme participants, NISBI staff and guest speakers, was excellent.’
Robert, set up Marketing Exports Ltd, while on the programme.
His company is dedicated to placing Northern Ireland products in world markets by providing a total marketing service.
Marketing Exports has already landed contracts with a number of local companies in the horticultural sector.
Michael Hall (left) and Robert Park discuss food packing for the export market at Michael's ‘Kestrel Contract Packers’ factory.
The Selection Process
Selection for the GEP is competitive and based on the potential viability of your business idea, your personal attributes and commitment to self employment.
GRADUATE ENTREPRENEURS
Those who have been successful in their applications to the GEP have come from a wide range of backgrounds.
The products and services provided by these graduate entrepreneurs are diverse in nature and need not necessarily be related to their educational backgrounds or degree subjects.
INDUCTION DAY
Once you have registered for the programme you will be invited to the GEP INDUCTION DAY where you will hear about the benefits and indeed the difficulties of self employment and will be introduced to your LOCAL GEP advisor.
He or she, will have extensive experience of small business counselling and will take an active part in helping you clarify your ideas and prepare your application form.
The INDUCTION DAY will give you the information you need to start making an objective evaluation of your idea.
STAGE ONE RECRUITMENT
Next you will be asked to attend a selection seminar to assess your progress.
If you are recommended by your advisor and the interview panel, you may gain a place on the programme at this stage.
If not, you may be given action points to develop your business idea for Stage 2.
STAGE TWO RECRUITMENT
Stage 2 is aimed at the people who have worked on their business idea with the help of their counsellor over the summer.
Late applicants are also invited to participate in this selection seminar.
SELECTION
The decision to offer a place is not an easy one and it is not made without very careful consideration of each candidate's proposal.
The selection panel have to bear in mind the viability of the proposal as set out in the application form, the growth potential of the business, the capital cost of setting up and, most important of all, the commitment, enthusiasm and competence of the candidate.
Selection  Calendar 
Julian Crozier (left), Chief Executive, Training & Employment Agency — the major funders of the programme — presents Vivienne Manley with her certificate upon completion of the GEP.
During the programme Vivienne set up her company — Healthcare Dynamics — which provides a service to both individuals and organisations committed to tackling the problem of physical injury in the workplace.
Programme Content
The GEP emphasises a practical approach to business development which involves comprehensive training and advice in those key areas that determine business success.
business planning
market research
raising finance
marketing, advertising and promotion
sales training
cash flow forecasting
financial control
staff recruitment and industrial relations
business law and insurance
interpersonal skills
using support agencies
In addition to specific training, participants receive tutoring and business counselling to assist with individual problems.
During the programme there is considerable emphasis on personal communication skills and assertiveness training encouraging participants to develop their self confidence which is vital in dealing with customers, businesses, financial organisations and employees.
An important aspect of the programme is the network of business contacts which can be established.
This includes not only the staff of NISBI and the University, but also specialist guest speakers and influential representatives from Northern Ireland industry, commerce and government.
A planned European visit, to take advantage of the new opportunities that will come with the Single Market, is regarded as particularly important both for self development and the identification of business opportunities.
Alison-Jayne Matthews — GEP 5 Success
‘Without the programme I would not have prepared a proper business plan or met the contacts essential to business’.
After completing a BA Hons in Fashion and Textile Design at the University of Ulster, Belfast in June 1989, Alison-Jayne Matthews went to work for Royal wedding dress designers David & Elizabeth Emanuel.
Employed as ‘couture assistant’ to David Emanuel and based at their exclusive Knightsbridge couture salon, Alison-Jayne was involved in all aspects of the couture business.
After the break up of the famous ‘Emanuel’ partnership and subsequent liquidation of the company, Alison-Jayne decided to return home and use her knowledge and skills to set up her own couture bridal and evening wear business in Northern Ireland.
Participating in the Fifth GEP Alison-Jayne entered the Northern Ireland Livewire Competition and won two top prizes.
The overall 1991 start up award of £1000 and the Belfast Telegraph prize of £2000 worth of advertising.
She subsequently went on to win the overall UK Livewire title in London.
By happy coincidence the award trophy was made by a ‘graduate’ of GEP2, Pamela Wilson, herself a Livewire finalist.
Indeed several graduates have done exceptionally well in Livewire after completing the GEP.
Alison-Jayne (left) with Michael Brennan, NISBI, Carol Cochrane of Livewire.
Pamela with the silver, steel and yew wood Livewire Trophy.
Benefits of The Graduate Enterprise Programme
By participating in the GEP you will receive:-
The knowledge and skills to start up and run a business.
An opportunity to make a research visit to a mainland European country.
A training allowance and travelling expenses for the 16 weeks of the programme.
A feasibility study grant.
A business advisor who will help you develop your own business plan.
An introduction to the business network in Northern Ireland and beyond.
Winnie Magee (left)‘Bonaparte Executive Rainwear’ and Heather Montgomery ‘Fine Linen’display their wears to guest  panellists on GEP 4 in 1990.
The panels assist in the development of the participants' business plans.
Between Winnie and Heather in the front row is: Ian Hurst of the TSB.
Back row from the left: John Weir (Northern Bank); Adrian Stinston (TSB); Kevin McCann (LEDU); Ken O'Neill (NISBI) and Gerry Lavery (T&EA).
WHAT IS NISBI?
The Northern Ireland Small Business Institute (NISBI) mission is to be identified as the foremost source of small business management development in Northern Ireland and to maintain, through its activities in this field, a standard of excellence comparable to the best available training/development performance criteria in the UK and the Republic of Ireland.
NISBI offers a range of management development programmes which provide knowledge, skills and contacts which are designed for specific market segments under five main headings:-
1.
New Business Programmes.
Aimed at those who wish to start up and run their own small business or develop a recently started business.
2.
Established Business Programmes.
For owners who seek advice and guidance on development of an established business.
3.
Attachment Programmes.
Aimed at graduates and others seeking employment in the Small Business Sector.
4.
Business Advisors and Trainers.
For those who provide advice and counselling for small firms.
5.
International Programmes.
HOW IS THE GEP FUNDED?
The Graduate Enterprise Programme is funded by the Training & Employment Agency and NISBI private sector sponsors.
THE ONLY COST TO THE PARTICIPANT IS HARD WORK AND COMMITMENT IN RETURN FOR POTENTIAL YEARS OF PROFIT AND SUCCESS.
If you would like further information or an application form, contact:-
The GEP Co-ordinator 
Current Funding Organisations include:
AIB Bank
Business in the Community
British Petroleum plc
British Telecom Northern Ireland Ltd
Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte
Digital Equipment Corporation
European Regional Development Fund
European Social Fund
IBM
ICL
LEDU
Northern Bank
Training & Employment Agency
TSB (Northern Ireland) plc —
Ulster Bank Ltd