

IMPORTANT NOTE: PLEASE READ
Full-time Students
In order to be enrolled you must bring to the University:
the completed enrolment form;
a letter from a grant awarding body (e.g. education and library board, local education authority) stating that it will pay your fees (if this is not provided you will be responsible for the payment of your fees);
a minimum of two passport-size colour photographs;
your birth certificate or passport;
documentary evidence of all examinations taken from GCE ‘O’ /GCSE level (or equivalent) onwards.
(Please read carefully the sections on Enrolment Procedures, Fees and General Information).
Part-time Students
In order to be enrolled you must bring to the University:
the completed enrolment form;
a letter from a grant awarding body or your employer, stating that fees will be paid on your behalf (if this is not provided you will be responsible for the payment of your fees);
a minimum of two passport-size colour photographs;
your birth certificate or passport;
documentary evidence of all examinations taken from GCE ‘O’ /GCSE level (or equivalent) onwards.
(Please read carefully the sections on Enrolment Procedures, Fees and General Information).
Dear Student,
I am delighted to welcome you to the University of Ulster.
I hope that your time here will be rewarding, both academically and socially.
The purpose of this Guide for New Students is to tell you about enrolment procedures, and to give you some general information about the University.
All students are required to enrol initially at the beginning of their course of study at the University, and to re-enrol annually, at the beginning of each academic year.
Enrolment will take place at one of the University's four campuses — at Coleraine, Jordanstown, Belfast or Magee College, Londonderry.
You should check the section on enrolment to find out when you should attend, and what documents you need to bring with you.
In addition to this booklet, a volume containing details of the University's Charter and Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations is available for consultation in Faculty Offices and in the University Registry.
A copy will be supplied to each student on request.
An extract from the General Regulations for Students is included on pages 24 & 25 of this guide.
At the time of enrolment you will also be given a timetable of lectures and practicals, and details of Faculty and campus induction programmes, which you are expected to attend.
These programmes take place after enrolment, but before teaching begins.
If you have any problems with enrolment you are invited to contact your Faculty Administrative Office.
We look forward to meeting you and wish you every success in your academic career.
K.I. MILLAR (Dr) ACADEMIC REGISTRAR 
SECTION 1
This Section includes the dates, times and locations of enrolment on each campus and additional information concerning enrolment 
DATES OF TERMS 1991–1992
Autumn Term Monday 7 October 1991–Friday 20 December 1991
Spring Term Monday 13 January 1992–Friday 3 April 1992
Summer Term Monday 27 April 1992–Friday 19 June 1992
Examinations Monday 11 May 1992–Friday 19 June 1992.
Some courses have an early commencement date.
Details of these are given in SECTION 1.2.
Grant awarding bodies will be notified before the end of the Spring Term of the exact period of required attendance for courses exceeding 213 days.
DATE, TIME AND LOCATION OF ENROLMENT
1.3 ENROLMENT PROCEDURES
Before you Arrive at the University you should:
Check the date, time and location of your enrolment;
Complete the enclosed enrolment form according to the instructions;
Make arrangements for meeting the requirements for payment of fees;
Obtain a minimum of two and a maximum of eight passport size colour photographs (see page 13 for information on additional photographs).
Documentation Required for Enrolment
The completed enrolment from;
Payment for fees (where appropriate);
A minimum of two and a maximum of eight passport size colour photographs (see page 13 for information on additional photographs);
Your birth certificate or passport;
Documentary evidence of all examinations taken from GCE ‘O’ /GCSE level (or equivalent) onwards.
Completion of Enrolment Form
Each student is required to complete the coloured boxes in ink using capital letters.
Some details may have been completed before you receive the form.
Please check that the pre-printed details are correct and make any necessary amendments .
Section I — Personal Information
Forenames should be printed in full exactly as they appear on your birth certificate and/or passport;
Please state your full term-time address.
If you do not know your term-time address at the time of registration please notify your Faculty Office and the University Registry of your address as soon as it is known.
Section II — Course Information
Please state the full title of your course;
Where asked to indicate CAMPUS please enter B, C, J or M to indicate Belfast, Coleraine, Jordanstown or Magee College;
When asked to indicate Source Of Fees please state the name and address of your grant awarding authority.
If you are personally responsible for the payment of fees please state SELF.
Republic of Ireland students having fees paid by the North Eastern Education and Library Board should, in addition, indicate their grant awarding authority, if any.
Section III — Finance Information
This section will be completed by University staff.
Section IV — Education and Qualifications
Please complete Section IV in full;
You should not sign the form until the time of enrolment when you will be asked to do so in the presence of the Enrolment Officer.
1.4 FEES
IN ORDER TO ENROL STUDENTS MUST FULFIL UNIVERSITY CONDITIONS RELATING TO THE PAYMENT OF FEES
Each Student Is Required To Pay
An annual composite fee which covers tuition, supervision, examination and enrolment fees where appropriate;
Such other charges as may be prescribed.
Full-Time Students — United Kingdom
Students eligible for a MANDATORY AWARD from a grant awarding authority should bring a photocopy of their offer of award letter to hand in at enrolment.
If such a letter is not available at enrolment then the name of the grant awarding authority which will be responsible for payment of fees must be provided.
In the event of the named grant awarding authority refusing to pay fees, students should note that payment of fees will then become a personal responsibility .
Students not eligible for a MANDATORY award from an appropriate grant awarding authority, e.g. Education and Library Board or Local Education Authority, must bring a satisfactory letter of authority from another source or pay the fees in full.
The letter of authority must clearly state that fees will be paid directly to the University.
NOTE:STUDENTS WHO HAVE MADE A SUCCESSFUL APPLICATION FOR A DISCRETIONARY AWARD e.g. ACCEPTANCE FOR THE BTEC HNC ENGINEERING (Electronics and Communications), CERTIFICATE IN FOUNDATION STUDIES IN ART AND DESIGN, OR FOR POSTGRADUATE COURSES, MUST BRING A LETTER OF AUTHORITY FROM THE GRANT AWARDING BODY.
Full-Time Students — EC (Excluding United Kingdom)
Students from states of the European Community accepted on to full-time undergraduate courses (excluding foundation certificates and higher national certificates) may apply for a mandatory award.
These awards cover the payment of tuition fees only and do not provide a maintenance grant.
A form to apply for these awards is sent by the University to each student prior to enrolment at the start of the course.
The form should be completed and returned as soon as possible to the North-Eastern Education and Library Board.
Students who fail to return the form or who are deemed ineligible by the Board will be responsible for the payment of their fees .
Full-Time Students — Overseas (Non-EC)
A satisfactory letter of authority must be produced or fees paid in full at the time of enrolment.
The letter of authority must clearly state that fees will be paid directly to the University.
Part-time Students
If eligible for an award from an appropriate grant awarding authority or if fees are being paid by an employer, a letter of authority must be produced or fees must be paid in full at the time of enrolment.
The letter of authority must clearly state that fees will be paid directly to the University.
NOTE:IF A RESIDENTIAL PROGRAMME FORMS PART OF YOUR COURSE THE APPROPRIATE RESIDENTIAL FEE MUST BE PAID AT THE TIME  OF ENROLMENT.
NO INVOICES CAN BE SENT TO EMPLOYERS FOR THESE FEES.
FEES: SCALE OF FEES FOR THE ACADEMIC YEAR 1991/92:
1.5 GENERAL INFORMATION
The following notes are intended as an additional guide for new students:
a)
HEALTH
If you are living away from home you should bring your NHS card with you so that you may register with a doctor.
If you are a disabled student please inform your Faculty Office and, where necessary, the Accommodation Office.
b)
ACCOMMODATION
If you are living away from home you should make preliminary arrangements for suitable accommodation (for additional advice see the section on Student Services on page 18).
c)
PHOTOGRAPHS
You will require two passport size colour photographs for enrolment — one for your faculty office and one for your ID card.
You should write your name and address on the back of these photographs.
In addition to the two photographs required for enrolment you may wish to bring additional passport size colour photographs as follows:
Sports Centre
Two
Residential Accommodation on Campus
Two
Chaplains One
Students' Union
One
NOTE:FULL-TIME STUDENTS IN THE FACULTY OF BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT SHOULD BRING AN ADDITIONAL PASSPORT SIZE COLOUR PHOTOGRAPH.
d)
INDUCTION MEETINGS
Campus induction meetings (which full-time students are expected to attend) will take place as follows:
e)
MAINTENANCE CHEQUES
Cheques which have been received from grant awarding authorities will be issued as follows:
You must show your ID card before your cheque will be issued .
f)
PERSONAL LOCKERS
Personal lockers are available for hire on all four campuses;
Hire charges for lockers are £3 per year.
A refundable deposit of £5 is also required;
Please check the notice boards outside the Registry Offices at Coleraine and Jordanstown and the Faculty Office at Belfast for further details;
Replacement keys will be issued on payment of £5.
g)
STUDIES ADVISERS
All registered students on taught courses are assigned to studies advisers who guide in matters affecting course content, assessment and progress.
Students are encouraged to talk to their advisers about their work and progress and to seek assistance, if required, with study or examination skills;
Studies advisers will be pleased to provide students with information about the range of support available e.g. Student Services, Chaplaincy, Careers Advisory Service and, if requested, will make arrangements for students to seek specialist advice or help;
You will be given the name of your studies adviser during the first week of term.
h)
CHANGE OF ADDRESS
Any change to your home or term-time addresses must be notified immediately to your Faculty/Campus Administrative Office (for use in case of emergency).
i)
CHANGE OF STATUS
Any change to your surname through marriage or for any other reason during your course of study must be notified to your Faculty/Campus Administrative Office which will, in turn, notify the Registry Office.
j)
CHANGE OF COURSE Any proposed change of course should be discussed with your Studies Adviser and also with the Senior Course Tutor of the course to which you intend to apply.
All applications for a change of course or units of study must be made on a Student Record Amendment Form obtainable from your Faculty/Campus Administrative Office.
CHANGES SHOULD NOT NORMALLY BE MADE AFTER THE FIRST TWO WEEKS OF THE TEACHING PERIOD.
You should note that a mandatory award for a new course is continued provided that the change of course is on educational grounds and that the change has been notified to your grant awarding authority within 16 months of the date of initial enrolment.
k)
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
If you intend to apply for leave of absence you should contact your Studies Adviser or Senior Course Tutor who will advise you of the procedures to follow before leaving the University.
l)
WITHDRAWAL
If you find it necessary to withdraw from your course you should immediately consult your Studies Adviser or Senior Course Tutor who will advise you of the procedures to follow before withdrawing from your course.
COURSES OF STUDY AND CRIMINAL RECORDS
Any applicant for a course of study who has a criminal record should, at the time of application inform the Academic Registrar who will advise the applicant whether or not he or she is likely to be able to satisfy certain eligibility requirements for the course.
Any advice offered by the Academic Registrar must not be construed as an undertaking by the University that the applicant, if admitted to the course and if his or her academic progress thereafter is satisfactory, will be eligible to complete all parts of the course.
STUDENT LOANS
Applications for student loans are handled by the Registry Office on the Coleraine and Jordanstown campuses and by the General Offices at Belfast and Magee College.
Students wishing to apply for a loan should request an Eligibility Questionnaire from one of these offices and at the same time make an appointment to obtain an Eligibility Certificate.
Once the certificate has been issued a student may apply to the Student Loans Company for a loan.
When being assessed for the Certificate of Eligibility a student must provide the following documents:
Student Registration Card (i.e. ID card);
birth certificate (or adoption certificate);
cheque book, savings book or other evidence giving the student's account number and sorting code with a bank or building society (this is necessary as payment is made by electronic transfer);
a letter from a grant awarding authority confirming eligibility for a mandatory award (students not receiving an award, e.g. those repeating a year, should provide evidence that they have previously been eligible for an award);
completed Eligibility Questionnaire.
Generally speaking, students from the United Kingdom who are under 50 years and are on a full-time course (undergraduate degree, Higher National Diploma or Certificate, Diploma of Higher Education or Postgraduate Certificate in Education) will be eligible for a loan.
Students are eligible for a loan during the sandwich or placement year and may apply by post.
Students who are on a part-time course or on a postgraduate course, or students from outside the United Kingdom, will not normally be eligible for a loan.
Loans are made for one year at a time and a student may apply only once in any year.
A higher rate of loan is available for students who are living away from home.
Students in their final year will receive a lower rate of loan than in earlier years of the course.
Loan repayments are spread over 60 monthly instalments.
Repayments commence in the April following completion of the course and are by direct debit.
Interest is added each year at the rate of inflation for the previous year in order to maintain the value of the loan in real terms.
The rate of interest may, therefore, vary from year to year.
SECTION 2
University and campus student services
ACCOMMODATION SERVICE
The Accommodation Service allocates on campus accommodation to students.
It also maintains a list of off-campus accommodation available to students in lodgings, flats and houses.
While advice and assistance is available, students must book the accommodation direct with the householder or landlord.
Information and assistance is available concerning housing benefits, tenancy agreements, public health matters and any other issues of concern relating to accommodation.
If you live outside reasonable travelling distance of the campus, you will have been sent details concerning accommodation at the time of confirmation of your place at the University.
Remember that as far as possible you should make your living arrangements prior to your arrival at the University, whether in on-campus or off-campus accommodation.
The Accommodation Service is available to provide assistance during the vacation periods as well as during term-time.
BELFAST
There is no University-owned residential accommodation available at the Belfast campus, but a number of Belfast students may be accommodated on campus at Jordanstown, some seven miles away.
Most students at the Belfast campus who live away from home live in off-campus accommodation in Belfast.
A member of the staff of the Accommodation Service is normally present every Monday, Wednesday and Friday morning from 10.30 am–12.00 noon in the Student Services Office on the fifth floor of the York Street building.
The telephone number is Belfast 328515, Extension 3299.
Members of the Accommodation Service, who are based in the Student Services building on the Jordanstown campus, can be contracted during office hours on any weekday at Belfast 365131, Extensions 2394/2941/2942.
COLERAINE
The Accommodation Service is located on the first floor of the Tower Building.
The Accommodation Officer is John Evans (Ext. 4664) and the Assistant Accommodation Officer for off-campus accommodation is Anne Mullan (Ext. 4380).
Queries relating to accommodation should be directed as follows.
Residential Accommodation (on-campus)
John Evans Telephone: Coleraine 44141, Extension 4664.
Off-campus Accommodation (flats, houses and lodgings)
Anne Mullan Telephone: Coleraine 44141, Ext. 4380.
The opening hours are:
Monday–Thursday 9.30 am–5.00 pm
Friday 9.30 am–4.00 pm
(Closed for lunch 12.30 am–2.00 pm).
JORDANSTOWN
The Accommodation Offices are based in the Student Services building and may be contacted at Belfast 365131.
The Accommodation Officer is Hazel Bell (Extension 2942) and the Assistant Accommodation Officer for off-campus accommodation is Harry Knight (Extension 2941).
The opening hours are:
Monday–Thursday 9.30 am–5.00 pm
Friday 9.30 am–4.00 pm
MAGEE COLLEGE
A student with accommodation queries should contact the Accommodation Service at:
The opening hours are:
Monday–Thursday 9.30 am–12.30 pm
2.00 pm–5.00 pm
Friday 2.00 pm–4.00 pm.
The Assistant Accommodation Officer (Anne Mullan) visits Magee College, at the Portakabin at the rear of the Refectory, each Wednesday and Friday.
HEALTH SERVICE
All students are asked to complete the confidential Medical Questionnaire on page 31, and return it before 27 September 1991 to the Medical Officer on the campus which you will be attending.
The medical staff would like to know if you suffer from any physical disability or illness such as asthma, diabetes or epilepsy.
If you have any continuing illness or condition or if you are registered as a disabled person you should make an early appointment with one of the doctors.
Students living away from home are required to register with a doctor as they may require medical treatment at night or weekends outside the times of normal surgeries .
Students may register with the University Medical Officer or with a local doctor of their own choice.
Registration is easily achieved by presenting a Medical Card to the doctor of your choice or to the University Medical Officer.
All students who have become temporary residents in Northern Ireland and have been accepted at the University should apply for a Medical Card through the University Health Centre.
Campus Health Centres will give advice on prescription and dental charges.
BELFAST
The Health Centre is in the Student Services suite on the top floor of the building at York Street.
Male and female doctors attend for consultation on alternative days.
Surgery hours during term-time are as follows:
Monday 12.00 noon–1.00 pm
Wednesday 12.00 noon–1.00 pm
Friday 12.00 noon–1.00 pm
The telephone number is Belfast 328515, Extension 3298.
COLERAINE
The Student Health Centre at Coleraine is on Level 1 in the Tower Building and is staffed by a receptionist, an experienced nursing sister and male and female doctors.
During term-time there is a surgery each morning and every afternoon except Wednesday.
A limited number of surgeries are available each week out of term-time throughout the year.
The nurse is available at the Health Centre as follows:
All consultations are by appointment except in the case of emergency, when a patient will be seen immediately.
The Health Centre offers a full range of services including advice and vaccination for foreign travel, treatment of sports injuries, health education and all other routine medical matters.
The premises have been designed with the disabled student in mind.
JORDANSTOWN
The Health Centre is on the ground floor of the Student Services Building midway between the Student Residences and the main building.
Access for staff and students in wheelchairs is at the rear of this building.
Registered general nurses and male and female doctors are available in the Health Centre to deal with general illnesses and accidents and to advise students and staff.
The nurses are available in the Health Centre at the following times:
A number of Health Promotion Clinics are run at the Health Centre, details are available from the receptionists.
Consultations are by appointment, and only in the case of an emergency will a patient be seen without an appointment.
During vacations a doctor will attend the Health Centre for a few sessions only each week.
Telephone Belfast 365131, Extension 2138/2139 for hours of attendance during  vacations .
MAGEE COLLEGE
The University Medical Officers at Magee College are the general practitioners in the Aberfoyle practice situated in the Strand Road on the fringe of the campus.
2.3 COUNSELLING SERVICE
The Counselling Service is open to all students of the University and their immediate family and friends.
It is a confidential service staffed by professionally trained counsellors.
People can use the Counselling Service to discuss any kind of personal, academic or emotional problem or issue which is concerning them.
If you feel that you might benefit from using the Counselling Service you can make arrangements to see a counsellor by telephoning, writing to, or calling at the campus office.
If it is a matter of urgency a consultation can be arranged quickly.
An information package about how counselling might help with particular problems is available on request from any of the campus offices.
The Counselling Service offers a number of Student Success Courses and skill acquisition classes during the academic year.
As far as possible the workshops will be offered on all campuses.
Students who are interested in participating in a workshop should contact the Counselling Service on their campus.
There is a Counselling Service on each campus of the University, further details of which are given below:
BELFAST
Should these days be unsuitable arrangements can be made to see a counsellor at Jordanstown.
COLERAINE
Meetings are by appointment.
In the case of urgent difficulty, meetings can be arranged at short notice.
JORDANSTOWN
MAGEE COLLEGE
Meetings with the counsellor are by appointment.
Help with financial and welfare problems can be obtained from Deirdre Busby who will be available on weekdays.
It is advisable to make an appointment to see a counsellor, however in cases of urgent difficulty these can be arranged at short notice.
SECTION 3
Other University Services
3.1 CHAPLAINCY
Chaplains have been appointed from the Church of Ireland (Anglican), Methodist, Presbyterian and Roman Catholic traditions to provide a pastoral service to the University.
The Chaplains organise public worship, discussion groups, excursions and other activities all of which are advertised in the University.
New students are encouraged to complete the Chaplaincy Registration Form on page 33 of this booklet, and to return it with a photograph (see Photographs on page 13) to the Chaplain on duty at enrolment.
The information will be regarded as strictly confidential.
The Chaplains are always glad to see members of the University who may seek their help or advice.
The main Chaplaincy rooms are near the Bookshop at the Coleraine campus, and near the Ulster Bank at the Jordanstown campus.
There are also arrangements for pastoral care at Belfast and Magee College.
When you hand in your Chaplaincy Registration Form, ask for fuller details of Chaplaincy events.
3.2 LIBRARY
The Library is a relatively large, complex and at times daunting organisation.
At an early stage in your course you should have the opportunity to learn how to use the Library and you are advised to take advantage of this.
If for some reason you miss this opportunity or at a later stage wish to know more about particular parts of the Library's stock and its services, then ask a member of the Library staff to explain how the material in the Library is arranged and listed and how it may be used.
A series of leaflets is available which describes how the various services which are available can be used.
The libraries at each campus are to be found as follows:
Belfast: Orpheus Building
Coleraine: Central and South Buildings
Jordanstown: Block 13
Magee College: Library/Student's Union Building
.
Your University enrolment card with a bar coded label attached is needed for efficient use of the library system.
3.3 SPORT AND RECREATION
Sport and recreation are an integral part of the experience of being at University, and lasting friendships are often made within both the social and sporting contexts.
Sport at the University of Ulster is available at all levels from recreational to highly competitive.
The questionnaire on page 35 of this booklet should be completed and handed in at the Sport and Recreation Display on enrolment day or at the Sports' Centre Reception.
The completion of the questionnaire does not commit you in any way, but the information you provide will be used in the future planning of sport and recreation facilities.
The staff of the Department of Sport and Recreation are always available to advise on how to make the best use of the facilities provided, and look forward to meeting you.
3.4 THE CAREERS ADVISORY SERVICE
The Careers Advisory Service has offices on the Coleraine, Jordanstown and Magee College sites.
The Belfast site is covered from Jordanstown and has an information area in the Library.
Careers Advisers are in constant contact with a very large number of employers and help students to acquire a realistic awareness of opportunities for employment, professional training or further study which will become available to them.
Students are reminded that their eventual employers will expect them to have made good use of their time at university.
In addition to academic qualifications they will expect you to demonstrate that you have the intelligence to understand the demands of their businesses, the fluency to communicate ideas to others and the flexibility to develop other people's ideas.
Above all they will expect you to be self reliant, to take decisions and to demonstrate a potential to motivate and lead others.
Do join clubs and societies and play an active role in them.
Build your Curriculum Vitae from the beginning.
Please use the Careers Advisory Service and get to know what it can do for you.
It is for you, whatever your year of study.
Staff will always be available to help and advise you.
3.5 STUDENTS' UNION
Once you become a student of the University of Ulster you automatically become a member of the Students' Union and therefore can participate in, and enjoy the wide range of social, political and sporting activities which the Union organises.
The Union exists to promote your interests and to represent those interests both within and outside the University.
Students elect nine of their members to serve each year as sabbatical officers to organise and run the Union in the interests of its members.
The Union organises meetings of its members, presents a comprehensive entertainments programme on all sites, and provides funds for the many clubs and societies in the University, as well as offering a wide range of services to students.
The Students' Union in the University of Ulster is concerned about your involvement and about helping you to enjoy your student days.
There will be plenty of opportunity to join clubs and societies and to socialise in the evenings.
The Student's Union encourages your active participation.
SECTION 4
REGULATIONS AND GENERAL INFORMATION
This Section includes an extract from the University Regulations, a code of Conduct for Use in Computing and Data Communication Facilities, Health and Safety, Car Parking and Security 
REGULATIONS FOR THE ENROLMENT OF STUDENTS
1.
Subject to the Charter, Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations of the University, intending students shall apply for initial enrolment at the commencement of their courses of study or research.
Thereafter students shall enrol annually as required, normally at the commencement of the academic session.
2.
Enrolment is affected by the completion and endorsement by the Academic Registrar or his nominee, acting on the authority of the Senate, of the appropriate enrolment form.
3.
The Senate shall prescribe the procedures to be followed at enrolment.
Enrolment is conditional upon the fulfilment of such conditions relating to the payment of fees and debts as the Council may determine.
4.
At initial enrolment all students shall sign an undertaking to comply with the Charter, Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations of the University as are from time to time in force.
5.
Persons who are unable to satisfy the conditions for enrolment at the appropriate time, being the time laid down by the Senate under Section 3, may at the discretion of the Senate be provisionally enrolled for such period not exceeding three months as may be authorised by or on behalf of the Senate.
Students who are provisionally enrolled are subject to the Charter, Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations of the University as are from time to time in force.
The provisional enrolment of a person shall become null and void if he has not  fulfilled the conditions for enrolment by the end of the period allowed for provisional enrolment.
6.
If a registered or occasional student fails to meet such requirements in relation to the payment of debts as the Council may prescribe, his enrolment may be revoked at any time by the Academic Registrar acting under the authority of the Senate.
7.
A registered or occasional student who has been granted an intermission in his studies or leave of absence from his studies shall not be required to enrol for the period of intermission or leave.
8.
A registered student may be excused enrolment for part of his course of study or research following his election or appointment to office in any representative student body approved for the purposes of this paragraph by the Senate, and a student so excused shall remain a registered student for as long as may be approved by the Senate.
GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR STUDENTS
1.
At initial enrolment all students must sign the following declaration.
‘I undertake, as a Student of the University, to comply with the Charter, Statutes, Ordinances, Regulations and Rules of the University as are from time to time in force’.
2.
Students are required to notify the Academic Registrar immediately of any change in the information provided by them at the time of enrolment.
3.
Students are responsible for keeping themselves acquainted with notices posted on official notice boards.
4.
Every registered student shall have an adviser of studies or research supervisor and shall be required to see the adviser or supervisor at the beginning of the academic year, at the end of each term, and at such other times as may be required.
Attendance
5.
Students must be punctual and regular in their attendance at such classes or other forms of instruction as may be prescribed.
6.
Students shall keep the prescribed terms for their courses and at the direction of the Senate may have to fulfil such additional requirements either in vacation or in intercalary periods as may be specified in course regulations.
7.
A student who has not been in attendance for more than three days through illness or other cause must notify immediately either the course director or senior course tutor, or the research supervisor, who shall inform the Academic Registrar.
The student shall state the reasons for absence and whether it is likely to be prolonged, and where the absence is caused by illness shall arrange for a medical certificate to be presented in accordance with section 17 hereof.
8.
Students may apply in accordance with rules approved by the Senate for a period of leave of absence from their courses of study or research.
Applications shall be considered on behalf of the Senate by the board of the faculty which, in granting leave of absence, may prescribe that the student be required on resumption of studies to repeat any part of the course of study or research, or that the point of resumption be not decided until the time of the student's return.
9.
A student who for any reason intends to withdraw from the University before the completion of the course of study or research must inform the Academic Registrar.
10.
The board of the faculty shall deem a student to have withdrawn from the University if the student has been absent without leave from prescribed instruction for a period of four weeks.
Progress
11.
The Senate reserves the right to discontinue at any time the studies of any student whose academic work proves unsatisfactory.
A decision that a student should discontinue his studies may be taken by the Senate in accordance with section 12 hereof, or by the board of examiners in accordance with the Regulations Governing Examinations in the Courses of Study.
12.
If at any time the board of the faculty, on the advice of a course committee, is of the opinion that a student's progress is unsatisfactory it shall send to the student due notice in writing that, unless there is an improvement, it will debar the student from taking examinations or will recommend to the Senate that the student be required to discontinue his studies.
The notice shall state the date on which it is proposed to take such action and shall in no case be given less than four weeks before the examination is due to be taken.
13.
A student who has been debarred from taking an examination or whose studies have been discontinued by decision of the Senate may ask for his case to be reviewed.
Provided that the student lodges his request in writing with the Academic Registrar within ten days of the Senate's decision, stating the grounds for requesting a review, the Senate shall review the case and confirm or amend its decision.
In reviewing this decision, the Senate shall be advised by the appropriate Senate committee.
Accommodation
14.
Students are required to notify the Academic Registrar immediately of any change in their term-time address.
Health
15.
Students may be required by or on behalf of the Senate to arrange for the provision of appropriate evidence about their state of health.
16.
Students living in the University residences are required to register with a local medical practitioner or with the University Physician, and to report the name of the doctor to the Accommodation Officer.
17.
Any student who wishes to submit a medical certificate shall arrange with his doctor for the certificate to be forwarded directly to the course director or senior course tutor for the course on which he is enrolled.
4.3 EXTRACT FROM REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXAMINATIONS IN COURSES OF STUDY
Conduct of Examinations
9.
Examinations for degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions shall be conducted under conditions determined by the Senate.
10.
To be admitted to an examination a candidate shall have complied with the conditions laid down in ordinances and regulations and paid the prescribed fees.
11.
A candidate using or attempting to use unfair means in an examination or other form of assessment shall in the first instance be reported to the Secretary of the University.
A candidate who engages in plagiarism shall be subject to disciplinary proceedings.
12.
Except by special permission candidates shall not bring written, printed or similar material to their examination places, and any candidate found to be in possession of such unauthorised material shall be reported to the Secretary of the University in the first instance.
Smoking is not permitted.
No food or drink is allowed into an examination without prior permission from the senior invigilator.
13.
Candidates may not remove from an examination any answer books or material provided for the examination, other than the question paper unless it is specified that it may not be removed.
14.
Candidates shall not communicate with one another during an examination.
15.
Candidates shall not be admitted to an examination later than half-an-hour after it has commenced, except with the permission of the senior invigilator.
16.
Candidates may not leave an examination until half-an-hour after it has commenced, or within the last ten minutes, except with the permission of the senior invigilator.
17.
Candidates may leave an examination temporarily only with the permission of the senior invigilator, and when accompanied by an invigilator or other authorised person.
18.
Except when prevented by medical reasons or other sufficient cause, candidates who fail to present themselves for an examination, or to submit cumulative or other forms of assessment work by the due date, shall be deemed by the board of examiners to have failed in that examination or assessment.
19.
It is within the competence of the examiners not to mark examination work judged by them to be illegible.
20.
A person who is considered by the senior invigilator to be disruptive during an examination may be required to withdraw from that examination.
21.
If the senior invigilator considers that annotation of prescribed texts used in an examination could give a candidate an unfair advantage, the texts may be retained at the end of the examination.
22.
Except with the permission of the senior invigilator, no person other than the candidates for the examination and other invigilators shall be allowed in the examination room.
23.
No candidate may leave his place until an invigilator has made arrangements for the collection of his script.
It is the responsibility of each candidate to ensure that his script is received by an invigilator.
24.
Instructions to invigilators setting out the details of the procedures to be followed in the conduct of examinations shall be approved by or on behalf of the Senate.
Presentation of Evidence of Extenuating Circumstances
25. a)
Save in exceptional circumstances:
i)
written medical evidence, or evidence of compassionate circumstances relevant to the performance of a candidate in a written examination must be presented to the course director or senior course tutor not later than five days following the examination;
ii)
written medical evidence, or evidence of compassionate circumstances relevant to the performance of a candidate in cumulative or other forms of assessment must be presented to the course director or senior course tutor by the date on which the work was due to be submitted.
b)
The term ‘exceptional circumstances’ will be given a restrictive interpretation, and a candidate claiming such circumstances must do so in writing in accordance with Section 30.
c)
Evidence of ill-health must be authenticated by the candidate's medical adviser.
Medical certificates should be forwarded directly to the course director or senior course tutor.
Self-certification will not be accepted.
Publication of Results
26.
The list of results obtained by candidates in each examination, and the decisions about the academic progress of candidates, shall be drawn up by the board of examiners.
The board shall forward:
a)
to the Senate the pass and classified lists of candidates who have successfully completed the final examinations leading to a degree, diploma, certificate or other academic distinction of the University;
b)
to the appropriate national or professional body results of candidates in examinations leading to an award of the body concerned.
27.
Boards of examiners shall publish pass lists in accordance with course regulations.
It is the responsibility of all candidates to find out their results and of unsuccessful candidates to request their course director or senior course tutor to provide them with a written record of the decision which the Board of Examiners has taken about their progress.
Retention of Examination Material
28.
Except where alternative arrangements have been approved by or on behalf of the Senate, a candidate's written examination scripts and work on which cumulative and other forms of assessment have been based shall be preserved until the end of December following the date on which the candidate qualified, or was due to qualify, for an award.
29.
Candidates shall not have access to examination scripts.
Work on which cumulative and other forms of assessment have been based may be returned to candidates on a written undertaking that it shall be given back, if required, at any time within one year from the examination.
Failure on the part of a candidate to return work as required will be a sufficient reason for a board of examiners not to take the work into account in determining the results of a candidate.
Review of Decisions on Academic Progress
30.
A candidate may present information, relevant to his examination performance which, in his view, was not in the possession of the Board of Examiners at the time of the Board's initial decision about his academic progress.
The Board of Examiners shall review the case and confirm or amend its decision provided the information is presented in writing to the Academic Registrar by the date specified by or on behalf of the Senate.
NOTE:For the purpose of these regulations the word ‘faculty’ shall include the Board of the Department of Adult and Continuing Education.
4.4 DATA PROTECTION
You may find the following details of the Data Protection Act 1984 of interest and of relevance during your time at the University.
The Data Protection Act 1984 has introduced major new provisions which will affect the University, members of staff and students.
The Act regulates the use of automatically processed information about living, identifiable individuals (personal data) which is held on computers and other ‘equipment operating automatically in response to instructions given for that purpose’.
The Act imposes obligations on the University, including a requirement to register automatically processed information relating to individuals, provisions in respect of holding data on individuals and rights of subject access to it.
In some instances it is essential for students to have access to automatically processed information in connection with their academic work, particularly involving the use of the computer terminals.
In such circumstances it is essential that members of staff are fully aware of the situation and that students abide by the Provisions of the Act.
Under Ordinance 1990/1: Student Discipline, breaches of discipline by a student include ‘infringing arrangements made by the University in order to permit it to comply with the provisions of the Data Protection Act’.
Further information may be obtained from the Secretary, University House, Coleraine.
CODE OF CONDUCT
Review of Decisions on Academic Progress
This code applies to the use of the central computing and data communications facilities and to all other such facilities.
In all cases the facilities will be used for the purposes of the University.
CODE OF CONDUCT
Users are required to adhere to all legal requirements, contractual licences and agreements approved by the Senate, the Educational Services Policy and Planning Committee, the Computer Policy and Planning Committee or the Director of Computer Services in relation to the protection of data, software and network access or usage.
Users should not:
a)
divulge their own password except with the written approval of the Director following their expressed request;
b)
access any facility under another user's password;
c)
access another user's files except with the expressed approval of the owner for each occasion unless the files have been established for such access;
d)
damage any other user's data, program or directory structure;
e)
cause offensive display directly or indirectly;
f)
override systems management actions on any computing or communications facility;
g)
access any systems management file or command, or use restricted commands except in conjunction with Computer Services staff;
h)
upset booking arrangements or other administration associated with the use of facilities;
i)
deliberately consume excessive resources, or the time of computer staff;
j)
copy any programs or data on to removable media without the owner's permission and proper regard to licence and copyright;
k)
load unapproved software packages on Computer Services equipment;
l)
use any facility for any chargeable or funded purpose or for the direct or indirect commercial benefit of another organisation or individual without the written approval of the Director;
m)
transfer commercial data over Janet;
n)
use Computer Services facilities for any work outside the guidelines without the approval of the Director;
o)
disseminate or make use of any information that would allow a breach of security without the authority of the Director;
p)
retain any user files on hard discs for student microcomputer clusters without the approval of the Director.
GUIDELINES ON USE
Academic staff may use appropriate systems for the development of their computing expertise; for research projects; for the support of teaching; for the exchange of academic information with their peers or with their students throughout the Janet linked institutions in the UK or elsewhere; and for related access to public domain facilities.
Computing Services facilities may be used by students of the University for course work, projects or other assignments set by their lecturers or for development related to their studies.
Such work may be on an individual or group project basis.
Students may exchange information by mail with other students on their lectures under the special communications facilities provided.
Student access of personal data is strictly controlled under guidelines issued by Computer Services to ensure compliance with the Data Protection Act.
WITHDRAWAL OF ACCESS
Access in contravention of these rules will be considered a serious offence.
The Director may withdraw or restrict access to the facilities in response to an offence or a suspected offence against these rules or to protect the services.
All withdrawals of a disciplinary nature will be reported to the Pro-Vice-Chancellor responsible for the computing service whose approval will be required for any action extending beyond seven days.
In the case of a student the report will also be made to the relevant member of academic staff.
Students failing to comply with the rules will be subject to the provisions of Ordinance 1985/7, Students Discipline.
APPROVED SOFTWARE
Approved software is software which meets the requirements of Computer Services and which is:
a)
released by Computer Services;
b)
commercially marketed and proven elsewhere; or
c)
developed in-house by or under the supervision of academic staff.
All software should be formally accepted by Computer Services and microcomputer software should be tested to the satisfaction of Computer Services staff on a standalone microcomputer in the user's own department.
Consultation with Computer Services, and acceptance of any conditions arising, would be required where any other approach is to be used.
A code of conduct relating to the use of software acquired for educational purposes has been adopted by the University.
All staff and students will be informed of this code and all users of a software product will be advised of the conditions under which software may be used.
The University will organise arrangements for backup, copying and distribution of software and documentation subject to the conditions of the relevant licence.
Individual users of software will not be permitted to copy or distribute copies of any software product or its documentation unless permitted to do so under the terms of the licence.
This restriction on copying applies equally to single, group and site licences.
In the last case, the University will make arrangements for copying on request.
All such requests will be recorded.
4.6 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Health and Safety at Work (Northern Ireland) Order 1978
The Health and Safety at Work (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 requires the University to ensure, as far as is reasonably practicable, that students are not exposed to risks to their health or safety.
Students are therefore required to comply with all verbal or written instructions on safety given to them by staff.
It is also a requirement of health and safely legislation that no person shall intentionally or recklessly interfere with or misuse anything provided in the interests of health, safety and welfare.
University Safety Policy
The University has produced a substantial policy document detailing the organisation and arrangements for safety within the University.
Copies of the introductory General Policy Statement are displayed on notice boards throughout the University.
University Safety Committee
A representative of the Students' Union attends meetings of the University Safety Committee.
If you have any general observations on safety within the University or specific recommendations for improvements of safety procedures you should submit these to the Safety Committee through the appropriate officers of the Students' Union.
Fire/Emergency Procedures
Misuse of fire fighting equipment is a criminal offence and could endanger the lives of students and staff.
Notices are posted throughout the University detailing specific fire and emergency procedures for the areas concerned.
Students are advised to familiarise themselves with these procedures.
Accidents
In case of injury during working hours at Coleraine or Jordanstown contact the Student Health Service.
Outside normal hours and at Belfast or Magee College contact the Security/Portering Staff.
Your supervisor or warden should be informed of all accidents, whether or not they result in injury and an accident report form must be completed.
These forms are available from the nursing staff and Faculty Offices.
CAR PARKING
The University has car parks on all campuses (apart from Belfast) and parking is restricted to the areas designated as car parks.
Vehicles should be parked so that they will not cause an obstruction to other vehicles using the car park, or to the entrance and exits or the traffic lanes.
Staff and students wishing to use the car parks must register their vehicle each academic year and each time it is changed.
If a vehicle is abandoned in a car park the University reserves the right to have the vehicle removed and/or disposed of as it sees fit.
Students should make themselves familiar with Traffic Regulations which are widely displayed throughout the University.
Copies are also available from the Secretary's Department.
SECURITY
Personal property is the responsibility of the individual and the University will not accept responsibility for items lost or stolen.
Items lost or found should, however, be reported to the Campus Security Desk and, if applicable, a Lost Property Form completed.
Should a student have any security problems, he/she should take the matter up with Security Staff.
SECTION 5
This Section includes Questionnaires from the University Health Services, the University Chaplaincy, Sport and Recreation.