

PURTON EAST.
GLOUCESTERSHIRE.
Late April: 1947
THE CATCH
A cold full moon bathed the wide reaches of the Severn estuary in a brilliant ghostly glow.
Several old barges, beached deliberately years before in an attempt to slow down the river bank erosion, stood out against the moonlit water like defiant skeletons.
Vast stretches of mud, still wet from the last tide, glittered like a carpet of diamonds in the eerie light
A light wind stirred the coarse grass which grew thick and rough on the eroded banks, but thinned to the odd clump as it reached the river's thick, iodine coated mud
The tide had ebbed now, leaving a strange quietness along the shoreline.
The contrast was startling.
Only a few short hours before, the world's second highest rise of tide had arrived with that familiar roar, and in a little over three hours had filled the mile wide estuary with twenty five feet of salt water.
This was the famous Severn Bore tide.
Yanto Gates broke through the blackthorn hedge which separated the Severn bank from the adjacent Berkeley to Gloucester canal towpath, and surveyed the scene before him He loved this river, but tonight, bathed in this unusually bright moonlight, it moved him to the point of goose pimples.
He gazed up, and downstream.
The only sign of human life was the beacon light at the end of the pier which skirted the entrance to Sharpness docks, a mile or so downstream.
He needed the loneliness this night Yanto Gates was a salmon poacher.
He had left the warmth of the Blue Boar after the usual extended throwing out time, and now felt elated as the four pints of rough local cider began to work on him.
Having spent a couple of hours checking his rabbit snares around the low Severn grounds, the two fat rabbits now secure in his waist bag would indicate that this could be his lucky night It was now one thirty a.m.
Time for the  real business of the night If his luck held, maybe a fine succulent Severn salmon.
Satisfying himself that he was absolutely alone, Yanto sat down on a handy clump of grass and removed his boots, which together with the two rabbits, he placed under a nearby blackthorn bush.
After struggling into his hip length waders and taking a final look around, he moved towards the mud line.
Immediately in front of him, stretching out into the mud and sand of the now almost empty estuary, was a barrier of salmon traps.
They were placed in a gentle curve, about twenty traps in all, facing the outgoing tide.
Made of strong willow cane, the cone-shaped traps were about five feet in diameter at the mouth tapering to a point Once the unfortunate salmon had entered the trap, it was doomed Yanto hoped the recent tide had yielded a fish which he would grab before the traps were checked the following morning.
At low tide the bed of the estuary was mainly hard packed sand which stretched for miles, up and downstream, and for most of its mile width.
Before reaching the high sand, one had to cross a fifty yards wide trough of mud and water, the depth of which varied from six inches to six feet The trough was probably the only reason the area had not become a popular tourist resort years before.
It was down this trough that the Severn tide roared twice daily, before relentlessly covering the high sand in the middle estuary at a rate of which the eye could see.
The locals knew that the trough was traversed at regular intervals by natural rock bridges showing just above the mud Over the centuries, millions of rip tides had worn away the softer sandstone, leaving the harder rock strata a convenient, if slippery way for the knowing locals to gain access to the sands.
Every Summer, visiting day trippers could be seen enviously watching the local people enjoying themselves out on the sand and wondering how the devil they got out there.
Yanto recalled talk at the Blue Boar about recent good runs of fish and was full of anticipation as he carefully  picked his way across one of the rock bridges.
He cursed loudly as his rubber clad right foot struck off a slimy rock and plunged knee-deep into the mud and water.
Using his hands to steady himself, he managed to free his leg from the sucking morass.
As he straightened up and regained his balance a spasm of pain shot through his left thigh.
The pain was the result of a German mortar fragment which had smashed his thigh at the battle of Arnhem, three years before.
Yanto had loved the army, and although he felt ashamed to say so, he had enjoyed the war.
He loved the tough life of thrill and fear and his excellent war record had made it easy for him when, in 1941 he had decided to apply to join the newly formed Parachute Regiment.
The Arnhem mortar fragment had ended his war however, and by the time he got out of military hospital it was more or less over.
He had then been returned to the dull monotony of rural country life in his native Gloucestershire.
He worked hard as a stevedore on Sharpness docks, but it was still the thrills of life that kept him really alive.
Poaching, strong cider, and women.
Yanto reached the end of the rock bridge where it disappeared into the hard sand The walking was now relatively easy as he made his way towards the first of the salmon traps, or kipes as they were called locally.
Looking into the yawning mouth of the trap with the moonlight flickering on the wet slimy seaweed within, was not unlike looking down the throat of some attacking monster.
Yanto hesitated for a moment then plunged his hands into the evil smelling, mess.
Taking care not to scratch his hands on the holding spikes, he rummaged through the weed feeling for that spasm of movement which would indicate a dying fish.
With his head and shoulders inside the trap, he reached to the base.
No movement, no luck With a silent curse he extricated himself from the first trap and moved on to the next
A full half hour had elapsed and Yanto's enthusiasm was beginning to wane.
So far his nocturnal activities had produced scratched hands, a smell on his clothes that would ensure tongue pie from his mother next morning, and a great pile of seaweed.
With his hands deep inside the penultimate trap, his body stiffened He felt a surge of excitement as something moved between his hands.
His hands were cold He couldn't tell fish from weed.
Spurred on by excitement, he snatched out another double handful of weed and there, moonlight flickering from it with every feeble movement, was a small Severn salmon.
Taking care not to damage the fish, Yanto withdrew it from the trap.
He was disappointed, ‘just a babee’ he muttered to himself; still, it would keep him in cigarettes and cider for a week.
The last trap yielded nothing.
Yanto hit the fish on the back of the head, pushed it into his waist bag and stretched his aching back.
He lit a Woodbine, took a deep drag and stared about him.
Away on the far side of the estuary he could still see the odd lights shining from the little cottages in the Forest of Dean.
‘Better get moving,’ he thought He stopped as he turned Had he imagined it, no, he was sure something had flashed in the moonlight It must have been a good quarter of a mile away, towards the middle of the estuary.
Could it have been a stranded salmon?
The tide went out as fast as it came in, and it was not unusual for large fish to be stranded in one of the various sized lakes left behind in the sand hollows.
The wind was getting up and Yanto realised he had a problem.
The flash could easily have been the moonlight catching a wavetop on one of the larger pools.
There was also the time element The next tide could not be far away and if he was caught by the tide he would be in real trouble.
He pondered the problem.
It must take him at least half an hour to get to the point of the flash and back to his own bank, even if it turned out to be a wild goose chase and he was able to return immediately.
‘I wish I hadn't seen the bloody flash,’ he muttered under his breath.
To go, or not to go?
The possibility of a big fish was too much for him.
Yanto started out across the sand at a brisk pace.
Having made the decision he now felt elated again.
As always, the risk element was the icing on the cake as far as he was concerned He breathed in the fine night air and hummed the tune of Colonel Bogey in time with his silent footsteps.
He could have been walking on another planet The flat, moonlight illuminated landscape, interrupted by large and small pools of bright water seemed unreal.
He became aware of the wind getting up a little more, sending the small clouds scudding across the face of the moon.
It seemed ridiculous, but a frown crossed his face when he remembered that in a very short time the hard fiat sand that he was walking on would be thirty feet under the water of one of the most unpredictable estuaries in the world He also knew that the tide was usually preceded by a rising wind
He increased his pace and almost immediately saw another flash, very close now.
He skirted a small lake and walked straight into a patch of quicksand He was up to his shins before he realised what had happened.
Yanto had been in Severn quicksand many times before.
As a child between the wars this had been his playground.
He and his friends would deliberately allow the quicksand to take them up to their knees before being extricated by the other members of the gang.
These things were done without the knowledge of parents, needless to say.
Holding his body rigid, Yanto used the weight of his body to fall forward He fell forward very slowly until his hands came in contact with the sand by which time the suction on his feet had been broken.
It was now easy to wriggle his feet free of the clinging mess.
He hurried on his way.
He was now approaching quite a large area of trapped water, roughly fifty yards square.
After studying the small lake he knew instinctively that if there was a fish it was in this pool.
He stood dead still, watching the wind ruffled surface of the water.
It could not have been more than three feet deep at the deepest point and as little as six inches  in others.
Any decent sized salmon would be bound to show itself as it moved around waiting for the next tide to free it.
Yanto waited another five minutes and became aware of the ever increasing wind as it began to flap his collar.
‘Come on you bugger, show yourself,’ he muttered He decided to wade into the pool.
That should stir him up if he's in there, he thought.
Before he could take his first step into the water he saw the fish.
It surfaced about twenty feet from the edge of the pool, slid its full length over a shallow sand bar and disappeared again.
For a second Yanto remained rooted to the spot ‘Jesus Christ,’ he gasped From that first moonlit glimpse he knew he had a specimen here.
With a whoop of  exhileration , he charged into the shallow water.
His quarry surfaced immediately.
As it tried to thrash away from its attacker the fish stranded itself in a shallow section.
In his excitement Yanto soaked himself in his effort to grab the fish before it found a deeper refuge.
His hand found the monster's tail.
‘Got you my beauty,’ he gasped His triumph was shortlived With a massive burst of energy the fish broke free of his grasp and leapt six feet in the air.
‘Blast it,’ he yelled in frustration.
‘Calm down you pratt,’ he told himself.
He knew the fish was doomed Methodically, he began to splash up and down the large pool almost falling several times as he traversed the uneven sandy bottom.
To any casual observer it would have been a very comical sight A six foot one inch hulk of a man cavorting about and shouting at nothing in particular in a moonlit pool.
All this at three o'clock in the morning in the middle of the most dangerous estuary in the country.
Again, the fish stranded itself.
Again, Yanto managed to grab the tail, and yet again the fish broke free and leapt in the air.
Yanto's already wet head and shoulders received another soaking as it hit the water.
That did it With his well-known temper getting the better of him, he jumped on the fish with both feet The fish was almost spent With both hands locked around the monster's tail, the gleeful Yanto dragged it through the shallow water  on to the hard sand.
He sat down heavily and while holding on firmly to the still struggling fish, put his head between his knees, panting loudly for a full minute.
Only then did he realise the extent of his prize.
‘Bloody hell,’ he breathed in admiration, ‘you must be fifty pounds if you're an ounce.’
The moonlight appeared from behind a skulking cloud and lit the king of fish in all its glory.
Almost reluctantly, Yanto took out the small cudgel designed for the task and struck the fish sharply on the back of its shining head
With a final spasm, the fish lay still.
Now for the problem of getting the fish home.
A salmon is slippery enough to handle at the best of times, but one of this size….
He took a hook from his waistbag.
The big hook which had once been part of a hanging scales was in the shape of the letter S, and sharpened to a point at both ends.
He jammed the point firmly under the great fish's jaw bone and used the other curve of S as a carrying handle.
Now he was ready for the return journey.
THE TIDE
With the big fish draped over his shoulder and the small one secure in his waistbag.
Yanto happily began to make his way back towards the home bank.
He laughed quietly to himself as he followed his original footprints still visible in the hard sand.
‘I wonder what Herbie would say if he could see us now, my beauty.’
he said.
and patted the huge fish's head.
Herbie Connors was the local water bailiff who had been involved in a personal battle of wits with Yanto ever since his return home from the war.
‘Herbie had been overheard to say he would happily give up his army pension just to catch Yanto red handed.
The fish began to weigh heavily, but he accepted it happily.
He began to work out the probable returns from his night's work.
‘Let's see,’ he mused ‘at ten bob a pound, this fish must be worth twenty five quid I reckon.
If I throw in the little un, Sid Watkins will be happy to give me twenty quid Yes, I reckon Sid will be glad to see our Ma in the morning.’
Sid Watkins was the slick manager of the Berkeley Chase Hotel in the nearby town of Berkeley, who never missed the chance of a bit of extra profit.
He became aware of a new sound in the night It was a rushing, roaring sound.
‘Sounds like the Cornishman coming,’ he thought dreamily to himself, remembering the time he had watched the express thunder through Berkeley Road station.
Then he froze with alarm as the full implication of the sound hit him.
‘Christ, the tide,’ he gasped, as he broke into a staggering run.
‘Of all the stupid bastards.’
With the excitement of the fish he, of all people, had forgotten the tide.
The mistake was made even more stupid by the fact that he had known for some time the big tides were due.
The very high bore tides rarely  occured during the hours of darkness, but he knew this one was predicted to be a twenty seven footer, and that meant danger.
The thought of it brought him out in a cold sweat  as he ran desperately on.
Held back as he was by the fish and his clumsy waders, he finally reached his original crossing point.
One glance confirmed what the noise had already told him.
The trough was now a fifty yard wide torrent of deafening crazy water, made even more awesome by the brilliantly revealing moonlight.
For a split second he experienced that same numbing fear he had felt the first time he had come under enemy fire.
‘Calm down and think, you stupid pratt,’ he told himself fiercely.
Crossing here would be impossible.
After a moments thought, he decided he would have to try and race the tide.
He remembered the last time he had been in this situation.
On that occasion he had been ten years old As children between the wars, Yanto and his friends spent most of their Summers out in the estuary between tides.
They could all swim like fish and occasionally, just for the hell of it, he and one or two of his braver friends would deliberately allow themselves to be cut off from their home bank by one of the smaller, less fearsome tides.
Once the trough had flooded to a manageable width, the boys would swim for it, usually finishing up about one hundred yards upstream by the time they had struggled through the rough water and reached the home bank.
The one occasion which was flashing through Yanto's mind at this moment involved just three of the local water babies.
Yanto, his best friend Simon Midgeley, and that danger loving beautiful tomboy, Julie Murchison.
Julie was a rich kid who loved to associate with the tougher, more daring local boys.
She couldn't resist the challenge of swimming back over the tide when the boys suggested it.
What they had not realised however, was that the tide they chose for Julie's initiation was a late Spring bore.
The noise of the incoming tide had interrupted their games on the sand further out in the estuary.
All three ran back to the trough prepared to swim for it as the boys had done several times before.
One look was sufficient to make them realise they had made a dreadful mistake.
They realised they would have to race the tide.
About half  a mile upstream the trough was traversed by the Purton breakwater.
The breakwater was a finger of massive boulders sticking straight out into the estuary for a couple of  hundren yards.
Yet another effort to save the banks from the destructive effects of this river.
The breakwater was very effective.
It stopped the initial rush of water for a while, but once the large depression around the barrier had filled, like a bowl filling before your eyes, the tide would roar on down the trough on the other side of the barrier.
The breakwater had given the kids the precious time they needed.
By sprinting like Olympic champions on the hard sand they had managed to cross the almost empty trough on the far side of the breakwater before the flood arrived.
But it had been close and the children had never taken liberties with the river again.
On that occasion their predicament had been spotted and a boat had been sent out from Sharpness on a wild goose chase.
Yanto's father had got hell from the harbour master and Yanto had got hell from his old man.
But there would be no boat tonight.
Having decided he must again race the tide, he began a desperate cumbersome run along the edge of the trough towards the breakwater.
He quickly realised a ten year old in swimming trunks can run a good deal faster than a twenty eight year old clad in hip high waders with a bloody great salmon on his back.
As he staggered on he could visualise the young Julie running alongside him, red faced and tight lipped.
He had loved that girl from afar after that first incident, but she had been too full of fun and the love of life to worry about boyfriends.
As the war approached, her father, Colonel Joshua Murchison had sent her to live with his sister in California It had almost broken Yanto's heart at the time.
A patch of soft sand almost sent him sprawling.
God, he was tired.
Should he ditch the salmon?
No, he wasn't that tired.
He considered tearing off his waders but there might still be time to cross the far side of the breakwater without having to swim for it.
The huge boulders of the breakwater loomed ahead of him, the grey stone showing white in the moonlight.
His heart sank.
The depression around the breakwater already resembled a great lake, full of swirling whirlpools.
He knew the grey tide must already be at full flood on the other side.
He pressed on doggedly.
His position was now becoming desperate and he cursed himself again for his stupidity.
He was forced to run wider now because of the ever expanding lake.
His chest was heaving.
He was a big fit man but he realised he could not go on much longer, and his iron resolve began to melt in the face of the powers of nature surrounding him.
As he stumbled around the far side of the breakwater, the hard sand was replaced by thick mud.
Getting through it took the last of his energy.
He was forced to stop.
His war wound which had pained him earlier was now turning to agony.
The incessant roar of the tide forced him on again.
When he finally reached the trough, it was by willpower alone.
The torrent here was almost as fearsome as it had been at the original crossing point, but not so deep.
‘About waist deep in the middle I reckon,’ he told himself.
But it was filling before his eyes.
He desperately wanted to rest, but it was now or never.
Taking a firm grip on the hook, still jammed securely in place, he lunged determinedly into the rushing water.
Before the water reached his knees he knew without a shadow of doubt that he would never be able to stand at waist depth.
As the water ripped at his thighs he turned and staggered backwards, using his stronger right leg as a brace against the frightening force of the water.
As he reached the middle of the trough, the water was forcing itself over his shoulders.
The cold water shocked him as it tore at his bare neck His fear turned to blind rage.
‘You won't get me, you bastard,’ he yelled in defiance.
At that moment a rock moved under his right foot and he went under.
The cold salt water on his face caused him to come up gasping.
He held on desperately to the dead weight fish, but try as he might, he was unable to regain his feet.
Relentlessly, the amazing force of the tide rolled and  twisted his body along like a dead sheep.
He tried to dig his heels into the bed of the trough in an attempt to slow down his headlong rush, but each time the soft bottom gave way and on he went.
He gasped in agony as his knees smashed into a rock.
Yanto Gates was afraid of no man, but now he was terrified.
Suddenly his body hit a shallow rocky section of the trough bed.
By digging his heels into the rocks he was able to lunge a good six feet nearer the home bank.
‘A couple more of those and I shall be out of the main current,’ he told himself wildly.
Mercifully the shallow section continued.
Again, hidden reserves came to his aid.
Another series of lunges took him out of the central current and somehow he managed to regain his feet.
He staggered and fell the last few feet and finally collapsed on the mud and grass of the bank.
Cursing and gasping, he lay there for a full five minutes, the surprisingly intact fish by his side.
The cold eventually forced him to his feet.
He looked at the river which was now in full flood.
The roaring bedlam of the tide's initial onslaught was being replaced by a menacing quiet as the deep black water sucked and heaved around the boulders.
The moon lit a silvery path across the estuary, interrupted only by the high sand still visible way out in its centre.
Even that was rapidly being engulfed by the hungry tide as he watched.
Then, there was a mile of deep treacherous water separating him from the Forest of Dean.
MOLLY
It felt as though he had been fed through a mincing machine.
After gingerly feeling himself all over, he decided there were no bones broken.
Having looked around, he also realised just how far his reluctant running and swimming had taken him upstream.
His boots and rabbits would have to wait until tomorrow; that was certain.
He looked across the field cum river bank in the general direction of civilisation, and with the aid of the moonlight was able to make out the familiar gables of the Blue Boar, a hundred yards away.
He decided the quickest way home was through the Blue Boar's yard.
Once again he threw the cumbersome fish over his shoulder and began squelching his way across the boggy field.
After climbing the ancient fence which bordered the pub's premises, he leaned back against the fence for another breather.
The old pub looked cold and lifeless in the moonlight, a total contrast to the turmoil which normally prevailed during licensing hours.
The building had originally been a manor house and must have looked beautiful in its heyday.
With its Georgian frontage and those imposing pillars holding up the front porch, it still looked impressive.
Ivy draped the whole frontage of the building and mingled with the moss of the large dilapidated lawn.
Yanto could imagine crinolined children playing with their nanny on this lawn in more sane and settled times, when Britannia ruled the world.
He shivered.
Having rested he now felt the chill from his soaked and muddy clothes.
He walked through the Blue Boar's yard and on up the narrow lane which ran directly to the village of Purton, a distance of a quarter of a mile.
It was now three thirty a.m. and he stopped on the swing bridge over the Berkeley to Gloucester canal and tried to hide the fish as much as possible.
It was not unknown for Herbie Connors to be about at this time, and  Yanto had done enough running for one night.
He suddenly decided not to go home to the cottage he shared with his widowed mother.
Even with his poacher's stealth, his mother always heard him enter the house and he didn't feel like explanations tonight.
A sly grin crossed his face as he thought of an alternative billet in which to spend what remained of the night.
He felt a stirring in his loins at the thought of it.
I'll bloody have her tonight, he decided.
Instead of turning left over the canal bridge which would have taken him into the village, he turned right and began walking out of the village on the Brookend road.
The air was warm for April and he felt comfortable again.
The night was dead still now, not a breath of wind.
‘What a bloody contrast to an hour ago,’ he thought to himself.
Even the smell of the Spring flowers became apparent, something he had never even noticed before in daylight.
After walking for approximately a quarter of a mile he stopped outside a small detached cottage on his left.
The moonlight illuminated a hand carved wooden name plaque on the freshly painted gate, Honey Cottage.
Hanging around the gate were various other crudely written notices advertising fresh garden produce for sale.
Yanto carefully opened the gate.
There was the inevitable screech which, in the dead of night, sounded like a cock fight.
He carefully placed the fish on the wooden water butt at the side of the house then looked around the ash path for a couple of handy sized stones.
He tossed the first stone at the small wooden framed bedroom window on the lefthand side of the cottage, keeping a wary eye on the righthand window at the same time.
The stone struck the wooden window surround and fell back hitting the metal cover of the rainwater butt with a loud clang.
He froze for a full minute, but all was silent.
Taking more care with the second shot, he was rewarded by the cracking sound of stone hitting glass.
After what seemed like an age, he heard the metal window catch being released.
This was followed by a heavy thump on the warped wooden frame and the  window.
‘Who is it, what's going on down there?’ the head demanded.
‘It's me Moll, Yanto,’ he answered with an urgent whisper, still keeping his eye on the other bedroom window.
‘What the hell have you been up to?’ she demanded, glancing down the road as if she expected Herbie Connors to appear on his bike.
‘Let me in for Chris' sake and I'll tell you.’
The head disappeared.
Half a minute later the front door was tugged gently open, and there stood the slim nightgowned figure of Molly Hopkins, curlers and all.
‘Hello sweetheart,’ he smiled, and walked past her up the narrow passage and into the back kitchen.
He stood with his back to the fireplace, still glowing with the remains of last night's fire.
Molly followed him into the room, struck a match and lit the oil lamp.
‘Good God,’ she breathed as she saw the state of him.
‘You look like the combination of tramp and a fairy.’
‘Whaddya mean, a fairy,’ snapped Yanto.
He tended to be a little touchy about remarks concerning his manhood.
‘Well, look at all that shiny stuff all over you,’ Molly continued, ‘you look like a Christmas tree.’
Yanto laughed as he realised his shoulders were covered with fish scales which were flashing in the dim light of the oil lamp.
‘I've got something to show you,’ he said, and disappeared back down the passage.
When he reappeared carrying the fish, Molly gasped with admiration.
She had never seen such a fish.
‘You never caught that in the Severn did you?,’ she whispered.
‘Where do you think I got it…. the bloody fishmongers?,’ he replied, with mock exasperation.
‘How much is it worth?’
Molly asked, unable to take her eyes off the beautiful specimen.
‘I shall want twenty quid off Sid Watkins for her,’ came the reply.
Molly started to rebuild the fire.
‘Get those wet clothes off,’ she demanded.
‘I'll make a pot of tea then you can tell me all about it.’
Yanto sat in front of the now blazing fire, naked, except for an ex-army blanket draped around him.
He sipped the hot mug of tea and watched Molly lay  out his clothes by the fire with one hand, and remove her curlers with the other.
They began to steam immediately.
‘Moll, you're a good un,’ he said, as he watched her well rounded posterior moving under the thin nightgown.
He also began to experience that old feeling.
He had been seeing Molly on and off for about six months.
She was different from most of the considerable number of women he had known.
Sensible, efficient, and a heart as big as a football.
When her mother had died early in the war, Molly had smoothly taken over the running of the house and also the more difficult job of looking after Selwyn, the father she adored.
All this in addition to her full-time job in the Sharpness dock office.
Yanto grudgingly admitted to himself that she was also different by the fact that she was still a virgin.
Molly finished laying out his clothes and put the re filled tea pot on the hob to brew.
Yanto watched her with affection.
She was tall, only five inches less than his own six foot one.
‘Right,’ she said, as she dropped into the old chintz covered settee beside him, ‘what are you going to do with all that lovely money?’
‘Well, I've been thinking,’ he said, as he slid his arm around her waist and pulled her close.
‘Yes,’ she said expectantly.
Her pretty elfin face, accentuated by her short bobbed hair, looked up smiling.
‘Well, you know you are always moaning about me not taking you out enough.’
‘I do not,’ she started to interrupt.
‘Anyway,’ he continued.
‘I managed to save a few bob and Billy Tolboys, my mate on the docks, was telling me there is a motorbike and sidecar in Bert Midgeley's garage in Sharpness and he reckons Bert could be persuaded to sell it.
Molly's smile faded slightly.
She had hoped his ideas lay in another direction, like an engagement ring.
But then again, she knew him too well.
She had never told him she loved him, but she guessed he knew, with the confidence that comes easy to good looking men.
Yanto was one of those men who stood out in a crowd.
Tall, and as strong as a lion.
With his blue black curly hair and ice blue eyes, he  could melt most women with a glance.
He also had brains.
Being one of the few local boys who had gone to grammar school had given him that extra confidence early in life.
He was a born fighter.
Making a name for himself as a boxer in the army had come easy to him, and had it been peace time he could probably have gone a long way in the sport.
All this and a war hero to boot.
Molly remembered the day he came home from the war.
All the local folk were out in the street to welcome him home in his uniform and red beret of the Parachute Regiment.
With just the aid of a walking stick he had made his way to the Blue Boar followed by most of the kids in the village, who must have thought he was some sort of God.
No, Molly had long since decided to play this one cool.
‘Yanto Gates,’ she squeaked, ‘if you think I am going to hare around the country in all winds and weathers in a contraption like that, you've got another think coming.
Anyway,’ she continued, ‘I've heard that the sidecar can come off.
I can imagine you turning right in one of the lanes around here, and me going straight on into some duck pond or other.’
Yanto almost laughed out loud, but remembered Selwyn asleep upstairs.
‘Don't be daft,’ he chuckled, ‘just think, I will be able to take you to dances at Listers Hall in Dursley, even Gloucester if you like.’
‘By the time I get there in that thing I shall look like something the cat dragged in,’ she chortled.
Yanto could see she was sold on the idea Then he pulled her close and kissed her on the lips.
As she melted against him, he slipped his hand inside her dressing gown and gently caressed her right breast.
He kissed her again and her breathing rate increased.
Yanto resisted the urge to rush things.
He was not in a French whorehouse now with his paratrooper mates.
This was Molly.
That was all very well, but the feel of Molly's firm large breast in his hand was having a strong effect on his animal instincts.
He took hold of her hand and gently directed it under the blanket which shrouded him.
Molly showed a momentary resistance once she realised where her hand was going, but with a soft moan she gave in and  her fingers closed around his erect manhood.
‘Jesus, I'm there at last,’ he thought deliriously.
Then allowing his hand to drop, he began a gentle circular massage of Molly's flat soft belly.
All the weeks of reluctantly keeping Yanto at bay, plus having her hand on a male sexual organ for the first time in her twenty five years of life, was too much for Molly.
‘Don't let Dad hear for God's sake,’ she moaned quietly, as all her inhibitions went out of the window.
That was enough for Yanto.
He threw off the blanket, picked up the limp girl and gently placed her on the mat in front of the blazing fire.
From a kneeling position, he turned and doused the oil lamp hoping to reduce the chance of any embarrassment changing Molly's mind at the last minute.
As he turned and looked into her eyes he knew instinctively there was no need to worry on that score.
This had a marvellous calming effect on him and made him determined to do the job right, especially as it was Molly's first time.
He undid her nightgown and admired her body for the first time.
The light from the fire bathed her in a warm flickering glow as he lay down beside her.
First he kissed her forehead, then her eyes, her mouth, her throat.
Then he gently stroked her stomach in a circular motion, luxuriating in the feel of her pubic hair brushing the edge of his hand.
Finally, he could stand it no longer.
He gently forced his hand between her tightly closed thighs.
With a small guttural sigh she relaxed and allowed him to part her thighs.
He lay there rigid with excitement as his hand probed her moist femininity.
‘Please Yanto, please,’ she gasped, ‘now.’
In one movement he lay across her.
Remembering to take his weight on his elbows as a gentleman should and desperately trying to restrain his passion, he entered her gently, but firmly.
At first he thought she was going to scream.
But no sound came.
Instead, she grasped him as he had never been grasped before.
For the next three minutes they experienced sensations that only  requited sexual lust can bring.
Suddenly, Molly's back arched and lifted his entire weight off the floor as she reached her climax The noises she made  finally triggered Yanto who, with great effort, managed to withdraw at the last second.
They lay there together for several minutes gasping and perspiring.
 Finaly the heat from the fire began to  burn Yanto's left side and forced him to roll off the still inert Molly.
He sat up and their eyes met.
‘That was wonderful,’ she breathed.
‘I would never have believed it could be like that.’
‘You've got to have the right bloke mind,’ Yanto smiled at her, as she stood up and shrouded herself in his blanket.
‘You might as well have a couple of hours on the settee,’ Molly suggested, then turned away in her embarrassment.
‘I'll go and get you a quilt.’
Yanto stretched himself full length on the settee and felt that lovely feeling of total contentment creep over him.
Molly re-emerged and threw the quilt over him.
She looked at him quizzically.
‘You won't tell anybody will you?’ she said pleadingly.
‘Don't be so bloody daft,’ Yanto replied, ‘What do you take me for, a peasant?’
Molly disappeared up the stairs and Yanto heard her bedroom door open and close quietly at the end of the landing.
‘Jesus, what a bloody day.’
he said to himself as his eyes closed.
DOCKLAND
Yanto awoke with a start.
‘What the hell, where am I!’
He could feel a moving weight on his legs.
He raised himself on one elbow and gingerly felt around his feet.
He jumped as his hand came into contact with something warm and furry.
It was Rats, Molly's huge tortoiseshell cat.
He fell back on the settee with a thump as the memories of the previous night's activities came flooding back.
Rats walked up his chest and began to lick his stubbly chin, obviously enjoying the salt from Yanto's late night swim.
The cat jumped to the ground and disappeared into the kitchen as Yanto swung his legs off the settee and sat up.
It was almost light outside.
He pulled back one curtain and looked at his watch.
Shit!
The watch had stopped at three o'clock.
About the time he had taken his reluctant swim.
Making a mental note to drop the watch into Merryfields watch repairs on his next visit to Berkeley, Yanto hitched the blanket around him and walked through the silent house into the kitchen.
Rats looked up from a saucer of milk as the monklike figure entered the room.
A horrible thought struck Yanto as he saw the cat eating.
Where was the bloody fish.
The cat could have eaten half of it while he had been asleep.
A sigh of relief whistled through his teeth as he stuck his head into the pantry.
Molly had put the fish in the meat safe.
The safe being a large cabinet with a fine wire-mesh door to keep flies off fresh food.
He opened the safe door and took out the fish as though it were stuffed with rubies.
He dressed quickly.
His clothes, although dry, felt stiff and unpleasant.
‘Damned Severn water,’ he muttered.
The kitchen clock read six thirty, plenty of time to walk home to his mother's cottage for a wash and a bit of breakfast.
Then on his bike a report for work at Sharpness Docks for eight o'clock.
It was five minutes to eight when Yanto cycled over the low swing bridge on to the wharfs of Sharpness Docks.
The sun appeared and sparkled on the railway lines, wet after the recent April shower.
The rails were set flush with the concrete and he negotiated them carefully.
A bicycle wheel fitted into the rail slots perfectly, with  disasterous results as Yanto had often discovered after the odd liquid lunch at the Sharpness Hotel.
The great boom of the war years had passed and the docks were settling down to the post war doldrums.
A docker was never sure what to expect when he reported for work in the morning.
Sometimes there was work, sometimes not.
If he went a week without work there was just seven pounds a week pool money to take home.
Not much if you were married with a family.
On the other hand, he could find he had been selected to unload a valuable cargo such as palm kernels.
On such a cargo he could easily make himself twenty pounds a week, plus.
These cargoes were few and far between, however.
Much more likely to be a timber boat.
Hard work for about fourteen pounds a week.
Yanto cycled on down the wharf, dodging the mooring ropes until he arrived at the berth of a small Norwegian timber boat called ‘Marit,’ registered in Oslo.
Yanto and his gang had started work on her the day before.
As he threw his bike into the timber shed Yanto spotted his friend and workmate, Billy Tolboys, leaning over the ship's rail.
‘Welcome aboard Cap'n,’ grinned Billy as Yanto reached the top of the gangway.
Billy had been a close friend for over a year now and they had had some good times together.
Tuberculosis as a child had kept Billy out of the war, but he was now a fit twenty-six year old, as tall as Yanto, but as thin as a rake.
His mop of red hair and boyish good looks made him a favourite with the ladies.
‘I don't like the look of yours much, Yant,’ was his favourite expression as the two of them prepared to chat up a couple of strange girls.
But it was usually Billy who finished up with the lesser of the two.
‘What the hell were you doing last night?’
Yanto  asked, as they climbed down into the half empty hold of the ‘Marit’.
‘Why?’
Billy looked at him a bit old fashioned.
‘Look at your eyes, they're like piss holes in the snow,’ laughed Yanto.
Billy laughed in return.
‘Well, you know my old man keeps a fifteen gallon cask of scrump in the shed?’
Yanto nodded.
‘Well he needed a refill so I gave him a hand to push his hand cart into Berkeley last night.
He gets his cider from Tom James's cider press.’
‘Christ,’ interrupted Yanto, ‘Old Tom's cider's as rough as a badger's ass.’
‘You're telling me,’ Billy continued.
‘Anyway, Tom wouldn't let us go, kept fillin' up them old cracked china mugs of his.
We both finished up pissed.
Can you imagine what it was like getting that bloody cart home?’
They were still laughing as they stepped down into the hold.
The sun was now shining out of a cloudless sky as they removed their shirts and allowed the sunlight to bathe their pale bodies.
In the confined space of the ship's hold the air was already thick with the powerful, but pleasant aroma of unseasoned timber.
A couple more members of the gang came scrambling down the companionway ladder.
After exchanging greetings, Billy turned to his mate.
‘Anyway,’ he said ‘you don't look as though you'd give Joe Louis much trouble this morning.
What were you up to last night?’
Yanto went through the events of the previous night, carefully leaving out his conquest of Molly.
‘Christ,’ breathed Billy, ‘you were lucky there mate, that was a pretty big un' for a night tide, I heard it was a twenty seven footer.
‘You don't have to tell me, you pratt, I had to swim the bastard didn't I.’ Yanto grunted.
The rest of the gang arrived swearing and moaning, ex-army haversacks hanging over their shoulders containing their precious bait.
‘By the way Bill,’ Yanto turned enquiringly, ‘has Bert Midgeley still got that motorbike combination you were telling me about?’
‘Far as I know, why?’
‘Cause I'm gonna buy it, that's why.’
Billy looked aghast.
‘You got that sort of money?’ he said, ‘even if Bert lets it go, he  will want a pretty penny for it.
You can't get 'em for love nor money.’
‘We'll see,’ said Yanto.
‘I get on well with old Bert.’
A huge steel crane hook suddenly descended quietly between their faces and made them both leap back in alarm.
Yanto shook his fist at the face of the crane driver grinning down at them through his cab window.
‘You shitbag, Tiny, you could have given us a bloody heart attack.’
Tiny Bennion grinned again and pointed up the wharf towards the dock office.
Obviously Cliff Barrett, the dock foreman, was on his way.
‘Did you pick up my tompaw from the stores Bill?’
Yanto shouted, as the gang began to slap the heavy deal planks into slings.
Billy pulled a short wooden handled instrument from his belt and tossed it to Yanto.
‘Cheers pal.’
With a quick reflex action he caught the tompaw, a short stout wooden handle with a steel claw set in the end, and thumped it into the first deal of the day.
Yanto worked with a will.
Making up the slings of timber ready for Tiny Bennion's crane to pick up and dump on the wharf.
The other half of the gang, working on the wharf, then took the individual timbers on their leather padded shoulders, and with that strange loping run, their steps synchronised to the bending motion of the plant, would deposit them into the timber sheds.
The docks were alive now.
Alive with the sound of honest toil.
The roar of the grain elevators and the slap of timbers rent the sunlit air.
It was going to be a good day.
THE SALE
Mary Gates cycled through the village of Wanswell towards the town of Berkeley.
Her back was as straight as a ramrod, which made her feel a little more dignified while engaging in what she considered the unladylike art of cycling.
The black vintage Humber bicycle was a little unsteady today.
This was probably caused by the roll of linoleum, one end of which was tied to the carrier behind her saddle, the other to the handlebar.
It looked awkward, but not heavy, unless you take into account the fact that this linoleum was rolled around a fifty pound salmon.
‘The things I do for that boy,’ mused Mary, as she jumped off the bike and began to push it up Station Hill.
The lino had been Mary's idea Just as well.
Because as she cycled out of Purton, she had passed Herbie Connors cycling in.
Herbie had passed her with a respectful ‘good morning.’
His back was also as straight as a ramrod and his highly polished black gaiters had flashed in the sun.
‘Sly old devil,’ Mary had sighed with relief.
Herbie's face had also lit in a sly smile as Mary had passed.
She had reminded him he would have to speak to a certain young man in the Blue Boar this evening.
It concerned a pair of boots and a brace of rabbits.
Mary cycled into Berkeley's ancient square and acknowledged a cheery greeting from ‘Old Jesus,’ the bearded local tramp, who was resting on the Town Hall seat.
She turned right into the High Street then jumped from the cycle and began pushing it up an alleyway on her left which led into the stables cum car park at the rear of the Berkeley Chase Hotel.
As she entered the alleyway she heard someone call.
She turned and saw Tommy Hook standing outside his butchers shop in the High Street.
‘Mornin' Mary.
I see e's bin at it again,’ he said with a knowing wink.
‘Can't you get him to rustle me a couple of good bullocks?’
He doubled up laughing at his own joke.
Mary fixed a frosty gaze on him.
‘It's nothing like that Tom Hook,’ she  countered, going red in the face.
Sticking her nose in the air she hurried into the car park and banged the bike against the wall of the hotel kitchen.
The heavy ornate kitchen door swung silently open on well-oiled hinges.
Mary found herself looking down at the small dapper figure of Sidney Watkins, manager of the Berkeley Chase for the last ten years.
Sid's face lit up at the sight of her.
Mary was still a good looking woman and Sid had admired her from afar for a long time.
He had never found the nerve to ask her out.
‘Come on down my love.
Lovely to see you.’
he said, with an accent that betrayed his Cockney past.
Mary smiled as she negotiated the three awkward steps down to the sunken floor of the huge kitchen.
‘How's that scallywag of a son of yours?’ continued Sid.
‘Actually, I have come to see you on his behalf,’ said Mary pompously.
She always found herself adopting this haughty attitude when entering big houses or hotels of above average splendour.
It was her natural defence after her early years of domestic service.
From leaving school at twelve years of age until her marriage to Hywell Gates at the age of twenty-five, she had slaved in other peoples houses for a pittance.
‘That's how I spent the best years of my life,’ she often said to her son.
She had also instilled into Yanto at an early age, that he was better than most and as good as anybody.
Another reason for Yanto's fantastic confidence.
When she married she swore on oath that she would never work for anyone outside her own family again.
Each time she helped her son dispose of a poached salmon she felt good.
It was another smack in the eye for the establishment.
She looked at Sid, a good clean looking man in his late fifties.
With dark hair and moustache, he was always well dressed, regardless of the time of day.
He was in shirt sleeves but still looked dressed in his dark tie, trousers and waistcoat.
‘What can I do for you then Mary?’
Sid's soft, wide spaced brown eyes looked at her, betraying his obvious affection.
Mary knew she could twist him around her little finger.
So did Yanto, which was the main reason Mary  did the selling.
‘Yanto has sent something over for yon,’ Mary said softly.
‘It's hanging on my bike in the yard, inside a roll of lino.’
‘I see,’ said Sid knowingly, ‘help yourself to a cup of tea my love, while I fetch it in.’
Mary poured herself a cup of tea and savoured the aromatic smells of good food for which this house was known for miles around.
To be frequented by the blue blooded followers of the nearby Berkeley Hunt was the ultimate praise.
Mary heard the expected whistle of surprise from the car park.
A minute later Sid staggered down the steps with the fish still in the roll of lino.
Red in the face he dumped the burden onto the massive wooden kitchen table, which gleamed white after countless years of daily scrubbing.
With Mary holding the roll firmly, Sid took hold of the salmon's tail, and with one hard steady pull, freed the fish from its linoleum case.
Sid's eyes opened wide with wonder.
‘Jesus Christ,’ he breathed, momentarily forgetting Mary's presence.
‘Sorry Mary,’ he apologised, ‘but that's the biggest salmon I have ever seen.’
He went to the far kitchen wall and took down a large hanging scales.
‘You will find it's just over fifty pounds,’ chirped Mary, as he hung the scales on a large nail hammered into one of the exposed beams.
Using both hands, Sid hoisted the fish up towards the scales.
‘Stick the hook in his gill slit Mary,’ he gasped, again going red in the face.
Steadying the hook, Mary negotiated it into the fish's gill slit.
‘O.K.,’ she said.
Sid slowly allowed the scales to take the full weight of the fish.
It read fifty one and a quarter pounds.
Sid could hardly believe his eyes.
‘Told you,’ said Mary triumphantly.
‘Well, that's some sort of fish, alright,’ Sid muttered thoughtfully.
‘Mind you Mary, they don't command as high a price as the smaller ones.
We have to expect more wastage, can't keep putting it in and out of the fridge, could poison somebody.
I could go to seven and six a pound.’
Mary's eyes hardened.
‘Don't give me that rubbish, Sid Watkins,’ she began, ‘with the average party in  this place, that fish would go in one sitting and you know it.
Yanto wants twenty pounds for that fish, in which case….’
She hesitated as she went to her large shopping bag.
Yanto had told her to give the small salmon to Sid, providing he coughed up the twenty quid, but Mary decided she could get something out of it herself, especially after that uncomfortable bicycle ride.
Mary took the five pound salmon from her bag, wrapped in newspaper, ‘in which case,’ she continued, ‘Yanto said you could have this one for a pound, and it's worth a least two pounds ten, as you know.
Of course, if that's too much for you, there is always the Princes over at Newport, but they will get all the future fish as well .’
Her bluff worked well.
‘All right Mary.
I know when I'm licked.’
Sid held up his hands in surrender.
He left the kitchen and picked up the hotel cashbox from his office in the foyer.
With Mary leaning over his shoulder, he took out four large white five pound notes and one single note, folded them carefully and handed the money over to her.
‘Tell him not to spend it all at once,’ he said with a grin.
‘I will Sid, and thank you.’
She put the money in her purse with a reverence shown only by people who rarely, if ever, had handled notes of over one pound denomination.
‘That's some sort of women,’ thought Sid, as he watched her skip up the kitchen steps and disappear into the bright sunlight of the car park.
‘One of these days,’ he mused.
Leaving her bike in the Berkeley Chase car park, Mary hurried down the High Street.
A wave of cheerful elation swept over her as she separated her pound note from Yanto's fivers.
‘Oh, Mary Gates,’ she said to herself, ‘you should go into business for yourself.’
Her smile grew even wider as she walked into Shorelands dress shop.
THE BIKE
After enduring the terrible Winter of 1946–47, this, the first really warm day of spring, was having a remarkable effect on the dockers unloading the ‘Marit’.
They worked with a will, luxuriating in the feel of the sun on their bare backs.
They also worked with the knowledge that there was a big Russian timber boat due in on the midday tide.
If they could finish the ‘Marit’ today, there was a good chance they would be working on the Russian boat tomorrow.
That would guarantee a full week's work.
Yanto attached the crane hook to his latest sling of timber, steadied it as Tiny Bennion took the strain, and watched it disappear through the hatch.
As he stretched his back and wiped the sweat from his eyes, somebody yelled ‘Bait Time’; it was ten thirty.
Bait time in dockland meant fifteen glorious minutes of rest.
Time to eat their sandwiches and drink their bottles of cold tea or cider.
Yanto picked up his ex-army haversack, and sat down beside Billy on a handy sling of timber, Billy mopped his face with a large red handkerchief as they examined the bait of the day.
‘Whaddva got?’ grunted Billy.
‘Faggot sandwiches,’ came the reply.
‘Swap one for a cheese and pickle?’
‘O.K. Variety is the spice of life,’ grinned Yanto.
‘Can't you ever stop talking about women?’
Billy grunted back.
They ate in silence, listening to the murmured conversation and occasional laughs of their comrades.
A noisily closing door made them glance up at the ship's sunlit bridge.
A seaman was leaning on the bridge rail, his bland Slav face scrutinising the resting dockers.
Yanto caught his eye with a nod.
The seaman returned the nod and jerked his head towards the rear of the bridge.
Picking up his now empty haversack, Yanto climbed up the ladder on to the deck.
A quick glance up and down the wharf showed no sign of Cliff Barrett.
He went up the companionway ladder to the bridge two rungs at a time.
‘Don't forget you know who,’ Billy shouted from the top  of the hatch ladder as Yanto and the seaman disappeared through a door at the rear of the bridge.
Yanto stood alone in the oily smelling cabin, allowing his eyes to grow accustomed to the gloom after the bright sunshine outside.
He listened to the throb of the ship's generators, a noise he associated with every ship he had travelled on.
The Campbells steamer his mother had once taken him on for a day trip to Ilfracombe.
The troopship which had taken him to war.
They were all the same.
He hated their claustrophobic atmosphere.
He would rather have parachuted out of an aircraft a dozen times with full equipment in the dead of night, than spend a night on a ship.
The seaman reappeared from behind the curtained off bunk section of the cabin.
He handed Yanto two bottles of Martell three star brandy and two cartons of American Chesterfield cigarettes.
Yanto quickly stuffed the goods into his haversack.
The sailors face split into a grin for the first tame when Yanto handed him four pound notes.
This was standard dockland charges.
One pound for a bottle of spirits, one pound for a carton of cigarettes.
This was always provided the customs boys didn't catch you.
The two shook hands and after another quick look on deck, Yanto sprinted around the wheelhouse and down the ladders into the hold to join Billy ‘That's two quid you owe me Bill,’ he grunted.
‘Pay you Thursday, 0.
K.?’
Later that morning, Yanto stopped and stretched to ease his aching back.
‘You fancy coming down to Bert Midgeley's with me, dinner time?’ he asked Billy.
‘Nuthin I'd like more mate,’ came the reply, ‘but it's high tide at twelve o'clock, and they're opening the gates to let the Russian timber ship in.
Josh Cornock was telling me the big tides of the last few days have brought the elvers down.
He reckons when they open the gates, the basin will be full of 'em.’
‘So what,’ said Yanto.
‘Well I promised my old man I would take home a feed for him tonight.
I brought my net with me to have a go at 'em dinner time.’
‘Please  yourself,’ Yanto grunted, and thumped his towpaw into the next section of deal.
It was ten minutes past twelve when Yanto propped his bike against the wall of Bert Midgeley's garage.
Nailed over the doorway of the ramshackle clapboard frontage of the building was a large rectangular sign.
He could just make out the name in spite of the peeling paint.
‘ALBERT MIDGELEY & SON.
MOTOR ENGINEERS.’
Yanto felt a tinge of sadness as he looked at the sign.
He remembered the morning he had watched Bert proudly hang up the brand new sign.
It was the morning that Simon, Bert's son, and Yanto's best friend, had joined his father's business after leaving school.
That was thirteen years ago, but to Yanto it seemed an eternity.
He walked into the cool, gloomy interior.
The signs of neglect were everywhere.
The garage had a dirt floor, but decades of oil and grease, plus vehicles and feet, had made it harder than concrete.
Several bicycles, left days before for repair, would probably have to wait days more to be completed.
Car springs and axles littered the floor.
A punctured car wheel that someone was repairing lay in the centre of the floor with half its inner tube hanging out like a paunched rabbit.
‘What a bloody mess,’ thought Yanto ‘Anybody at home?’he bawled.
The back of the garage was boarded off.
With the screech of rusty hinges, one section of the boarding which served as a door was partly pushed and partly kicked open.
The tall hunchbacked figure of Bert Midgeley came shuffling out.
Bert was in his sixties, balding head with a thin weazel face and a nose that never stopped running.
Winter or Summer.
Yanto could not recollect ever having seen him out of a boiler suit.
‘Hello Son,’ said Bert fondly, as he took out the inevitable packet of Woodbines and offered one to Yanto.
‘To what do I owe this pleasure?’
Bert had always held Yanto in high regard.
Being so close to Simon, Yanto had spent a great deal of his childhood here at the garage.
‘Almost a second son,’ Bert had always said.
They had joined up together in ‘39  and, when Simon had been killed at  Alamein , Bert had died with him in spirit.
‘Hello Mr Midgeley.
Nice to see you again,’ said Yanto respectfully.
‘I was told that you had a motorbike and sidecar.
Just popped in to have a look.
Is it for sale?’
‘Not to anybody lad,’ came the reply, ‘but for you I might make an exception.’
‘Can I have a look?’
Yanto tried not to look too eager.
‘It's through here.’
Bert shuffled back through the door into the boarded off section of the garage, followed by Yanto, who was frustrated by the old man's slowness.
This part of the garage was a little more presentable.
It was Bert's private workshop, complete with a lathe and other skilled men's paraphernalia.
Bert started to move a huge pile of cardboard boxes which had once housed a variety of motor spares.
Yanto could see something behind the boxes, covered by a tarpaulin.
The end wall of this part of the garage was almost all window, but it was so filthy and flyblown that it was even darker in here than the front of the building.
‘Give me a hand son,’ Bert grunted, ‘I'm not as young as I used to be.’
Yanto needed no second bidding.
He moved the rest of the boxes in less than a minute.
Bert took a long sniff and looked at Yanto.
‘I bought it off George Holder's widow,’ he said.
‘You remember old George?
Got killed when that horse kicked him in the head.’
He paused as he tugged off the filthy tarpaulin.
‘Happened about six months ago, up at Wilf Tillet's farm at Halmore,’ Bert continued, ‘Surely you remember?’
Yanto didn't answer.
He was gawking at the beautiful red and silver machine which was revealed as the tarpaulin fell away.
‘Christ Bert, it looks brand new,’ he gasped.
‘Yeah she's a beauty all right.
She was old George's pride and joy.’
Yanto noted the B.S.A.
motif on the petrol tank ‘What model is it Bert?’
‘She's a '37 500 cc Sloper,’ came the reply, ‘a fine machine, not many around these parts.’
‘Will she start?’
‘Course she will.’
Bert answered Yanto's question with another sniff.
‘I'll get  her out in the middle of the workshop, then you can have a good look around her.’
The bike started with Bert's second kick.
The noise was deafening in the small confines of the workshop.
After a couple of noisy tweaks on the throttle he allowed the engine to idle.
They both listened to the gentle burble of the exhaust for another minute, then Bert cut the engine.
‘What do you think then?’ he asked, and sniffed again.
‘Well I want her of course, who wouldn't?’,
Yanto began, ‘but what sort of money do you want for her?’
‘Well, with the sidecar, plus the condition of the bike, she is worth every penny of two hundred,’ Bert said cautiously, ‘but from you I would take a hundred and seventy five.’
Yanto looked a little crestfallen, and he wondered how his Mother had fared with Sid Watkins.
‘I have been saving for a while now,’ Yanto began, ‘and by tonight I shall have a hundred and fifty.
Not enough, eh?’
Bert looked at him for a full half minute.
He could see Simon standing there.
He remembered that Sunday morning in '39, when Wilf Bullingham, the local amateur photographer, had come around at Bert's request.
Wilf had photographed the two boys in their brand new uniforms outside the garage.
He still had the photo upstairs.
That was the last photograph ever taken of Simon and it was Bert's most precious possession.
Yanto began to fidget under Bert's gaze.
‘I hear on the grapevine you can get your hands on the occasional salmon,’ Bert said suddenly, with a wink.
Yanto smiled.
‘Occasionally,’ he replied.
‘Well I am partial to a bit of Severn salmon,’ Bert continued, ‘if you promise me that next half tidy salmon that comes your way, you can have the bike for a hundred and fifty.
How's that?’
Yanto could have hugged the old man.
‘Mr Midgeley, you are a gentleman,’ he said, and grabbed his boney hand.
‘There's nobody I would rather see have it son,’ Bert said sadly.
They walked back out into the sunlit street together.
‘Have you got a licence?’
Bert asked.
‘Yes,’ Yanto replied.
‘I was in the R.A.S.C. before I transferred to the Parachute Regiment.
Did some despatch work.’
‘Good,’ said Bert.
‘I will service her up for you.
Let's see.
Today's Wednesday, you can pick her up after work Friday.’
‘Bloody marvellous,’ came the excited reply.
‘I'll pick her up Friday, and pay you in full then.’
Bert watched Yanto jump on his bike without touching the pedals.
He looked back over his shoulder.
‘Thanks again Bert,’ he bawled.
‘You're welcome son,’ replied Bert in his sad monotone voice.
He tried unsuccessfully to sniff back the tears as he watched Yanto race back towards the docks.
Billy Tolboys gave a whoop of excitement.
Old Josh had been right, as always.
The old river man had said this big tide would bring the elvers down, and sure enough the muddy water of the dock basin was full of them.
A half hour before, the massive lock gates which separated the dock basin from the estuary had been opened to allow the ancient Russian ship to enter.
She was the largest ship to enter Sharpness Docks since the war, and many local people had turned up to watch her berth.
After entering the basin she had to negotiate the lock, a narrow channel which connected the basin to the dock proper.
As she passed through the channel there had been less than a foot clearance between the ship's sides and the concrete wharf.
It had been a slow job, but as all this had been going on the elvers had been flooding into the basin.
What miracle of navigation brought these baby eels from their birthplace in the Sargasso sea to their ancestral waters in the River Severn, nobody knew.
The fact that they did arrive however, was much appreciated by people in this part of Gloucestershire.
The eel fry, awaited impatiently each year, provided sport and income.
Nobody in the area was happy unless they had at least one feed.
When the elvers were running, each tide saw an army of hopefuls with their elver nets, scooping the waters from Sharpness to Gloucester and beyond.
Billy walked slowly along the lip of the dock basin sieving the water, still brown and muddy from the passing of the Russian ship.
As he reached the spot where Josh Cornock was likewise occupied, he heaved the elver scoop from the water and was delighted to find it a quarter full of the writhing silver baby eels.
Billy whooped again.
‘Look at this bloody lot Josh,’ he jabbered excitedly, ‘I've never sin the water so thick with 'em before.’
‘Well, make the bloody most of it,’ grunted Josh, as he stood up and mopped his bearded face with a large brown handkerchief.
The hankie had once been white, but Josh liked his snuff.
‘You got to keep going when you find 'em,’ he continued, ‘the little buggers disappear as fast as they come.’
Billy squatted down on his haunches and took a single elver from his scoop.
He was surprised at  its strength as it curled  sic three inch long body around his index finger, and squeezed.
The tiny eel was almost transparent, except for the jet black, pin prick eyes.
‘You would never think he'll be a bloody great eel one day, would you?’
Billy said thoughtfully.
‘Ee won't, will 'e?’
Josh said with a twinkle in his watery blue eyes, ‘cos you're gonna eat the bugger, 'ent ya?’
Billy ignored the remark as he tipped the elvers into his bucket.
He banged the upturned scoop on the lip of the bucket to dislodge several writhing bodies which seemed reluctant to leave the fine mesh cloth of the scoop.
The bucket was half full of Severn water.
It was important to keep the elvers alive.
The traditional way to cook them was fry them alive in hot bacon fat, then add an egg, which had the effect of binding them together.
The result was a delicious nourishing meal, and many swore, an aphrodisiac to boot.
Josh shuffled off down the lip of the basin still sieving the water.
He had brought a zinc bath with him which he hoped to fill that afternoon.
Billy watched him as he concentrated on his task.
The elvers were important to Josh.
When he sold them around the pubs and to neighbours that evening, the money would subsidise his meagre pension.
‘It's a crying shame,’ thought Billy, ‘here's a man who knows more about this river than any man alive.
He was a river pilot in the sailing ship days and look at him now, having to catch elvers to  supplement his income.
I wonder if that's how I shall finish up?’
His thoughts were interrupted by a yell from further down the dock.
His boyish face split into a grin as he saw Yanto cycling down the edge of the wharf like a lunatic.
As he stood up, Yanto arrived and threw his bike into a beautifully controlled side skid, jumping off just as the bike crashed to the ground.
‘Smart pratt,’ snorted Billy ‘you are going to catch your balls on the handlebars doing that one day.’
Yanto ignored he remark.
‘I got the bike, Bill,’ he shouted, and slapped Billy between the shoulder blades, almost knocking him to his knees.
‘You're joking,’ Billy gasped.
‘No I bloody ent,’ Yanto laughed, ‘it cost me a hundred and fifty, and my next salmon.
Old Bert is one of the best.’
Billy's eyes shone as Yanto told him about the bike.
He was already imagining a widening of their nocturnal activities.
‘When're we goin' out then,’ Billy demanded.
‘Well I thought we might give her a spin on Friday night,’ Yanto answered with a grin.
‘Do a tour of the river pubs, 0.
K.?’
Billy whooped again.
‘I think I will ride pillion on the way out, but I reckon it'll be the sidecar for me on the way back.’
Yanto grabbed the bean pole handle of Billy's elver net.
‘I might as well get a few elvers for our Mother while we're here.
She likes 'em.
I can't stand the bloody things myself.’
‘Rubbish,’ laughed Billy, ‘they put lead in your pencil.’
After another ten minutes they had half a bucketful of the squirming delicacy.
‘Better get back, I reckon,’ Yanto grunted, looking at Billy's watch.
Giving the still busy Josh a parting wave, the two of them started back.
After crossing the dock channel by way of the lock gates catwalk, they paused for a while watching and listening to the bedlam of noise from the riveting guns as the shipyard men worked on a small coastal tanker in the dry dock.
‘Amazin' how much bigger they look out of the water,’ commented Billy.
They walked on down the wharf until they reached the ‘Marit’, still talking about the coming Friday night.
THE BLUE BOAR
There were three public houses in the village of Purton.
The Blue Boar was, however, the undisputed centre of village life.
The place where rivermen dockers and farmworkers could relax after a hard day's work.
It was a wonderful gas lit haven with all the right smells and atmosphere, where a man could laugh, share his worries, and escape from wives' tongues.
On the odd occasion the jollities would get out of hand and the fists would fly.
Maybe a visiting foreign seaman, whose  unitiated brain having been blitzed by the local rough cider failed to appreciate a gem of cutting local humour.
Such pugilistic interludes were usually short-lived however, for it meant incurring the wrath of the landlord, one Nathanial Nelmes, better known as ‘Knocker’.
Knocker had descended on the village just after the Great War at the tender age of twenty five.
He had been a successful prize fighter at the time and had the good sense to buy the Blue Boar from the proceeds of the noble art.
Knocker was now, in nineteen forty seven, as much a part of Purton as the breakwater.
His feats of strength were legendary throughout the area.
He was five feet five inches tall and just as wide, with a face that resembled the rough end of an oak beam.
Knocker was also much loved in the area for his kindness and generosity.
Many locals had had good reason to be grateful to him when times had been hard.
Even now, a hard up local could be sure of a free pint just by telling Knocker he had watched him fight at Gloucester's annual Barton Fair, back in the old days.
Yes, Knocker was now much respected and financially secure backbone of society.
But he would be the first to admit he owed most of his success to his wife Renee.
She was a total contrast to her husband.
Four feet eleven inches of skin and bone, but a terrible sight to behold when roused.
Born in nearby Berkeley, Renee had been brought up the hard way.
Being the second born in a poor family with thirteen brothers and sisters, you had to be  tough to survive.
The number of times she had had to go to school with no knickers on was nobody's business, she often told her husband.
And tough she was.
The most popular story told by the regulars to casual strangers, concerned a very large Swedish seaman who had visited the Blue Boar with a couple of shipmates one evening before the war.
Knocker had been out that particular night which had been very fortunate for the seaman.
Even so, after several pints of the local brew, the big Swede had leaned over the bar, grabbed Renee's skinny little shoulders, and planted a big cidery kiss smack on her lips.
Renee had replied with the most perfect right cross to the seaman's jaw ever seen in the pub, or outside for that matter.
The seaman had been knocked out cold, helped considerably by the cider no doubt.
Albeit, Renee's fame throughout the locality had been assured that night.
She had also been the saviour to many local drinkers who were about to get the bums rush from an irate Knocker, always a painful experience because Knocker rarely bothered to open the door first.
Brought running from the living room by the yells of the unfortunate wretch, she would subdue her husband with dockers language and a series of smacks across his massive crewcut head.
Then, after watching Knocker slink back behind the bar, she would throw the drunk out herself.
Between them, the Nelmes's were a formidable pair.
Pay day in this area was generally Thursday, so on Wednesday nights the Boar was usually quiet.
If a man was lucky it was a case of pop in for a quick half, then home to a meal of bubble and squeak with the Missus.
It was nine o'clock on this Wednesday night when Yanto walked into the Blue Boar's yard.
He stopped and surveyed the river bank.
It was high water time and, in spite of the fading light, the flat mile of water stood out bright and menacing.
Some stretches of the river seemed to be racing downstream while the adjoining stretch, maybe fifty yard wide, raced in the opposite direction causing silent eddies and whirlpools.
It created a picture of calm silent menace.
Yanto shivered slightly as he turned towards the Blue Boar's front porch.
As he reached the porch the door opened and the tall skinny frame of Sammy Pockets came walking out.
Had it been any night other than Wednesday, he would have staggered out.
Sammy was a retired bargee and local character.
The inevitable long loose mackintosh and knitted scarf were in evidence, which along with his totally bald head had long made Sammy the victim of local humour.
‘Hello my babee,’ he chirped, as he almost walked into Yanto.
‘Quiet in there tonight,’ and jerked his bald head in the direction of the bar.
‘That's what I need tonight Sam,’ Yanto replied, ‘and mind how you go on that bike.
We don't want to get the grappling irons out tonight.’
He smiled as he watched Sammy cycle a little unsteady out of the yard.
Sammy lived in a small cottage on the bank of the Berkeley to Gloucester canal.
It was only necessary for him to cycle three hundred yards down the canal towpath to get home, but three times to Yanto's knowledge he had ridden his bike into the canal.
Some said his wife didn't turn a hair any more when Sammy was carried in like a drowned rat.
Yanto walked through the front porch of the pub and on into the flagstoned lobby.
Up two steps on the right of the lobby was the lounge, with  its ancient piano.
This room was rarely used except by posher locals, who were very thin on the ground, or on really big occasions when people overflowed from the public bar and snug.
The last such occasion had been V.E. night, two years before.
Knocker's bored looking battered features brightened as Yanto walked in and leaned on the well used but polished bar.
‘Ow bist goin on then?’ he beamed.
‘I'm O.K. How's yourself?’ came the reply.
‘Well it's Wednesday, 'en it?’
Knocker shrugged his massive shoulders with look of resignation on his face.
‘Still, never mind,’ he continued ‘pay day tomorrow, then look out.’
He picked up a pint mug and leaned towards the cider barrel.
‘No.
I think I'll have a beer tonight Knock, give the jake a rest,’ said Yanto ‘Suit yourself,’Knocker replied, and drew off a pint of bitter, which he held up to the light.
‘Not bad for a cider house, eh?’ he said proudly.
Yanto took a deep swig.
‘Beautiful mate, just beautiful,’ he confirmed.
and lit a Woodbine.
A cackling laugh from the snug doorway made Yanto turn.
The laugh came from Sooty Hill, the Blue Boars famous wit and practical joker.
‘I hear you tried to swim the Severn last night’ he chortled.
‘Christ,’ grumbled Yanto, ‘that didn't take long to get around.
Who did you hear that off?
I haven't even told Knocker yet.’
‘I've been in the snug,’ came the reply, ‘your mate's in there with his new girlfriend.
He told me all about it.
Another pint of God's liquor please mine host,’ said Sooty, mockingly, holding out his empty mug to Knocker.
Knocker re-filled Sooty's mug with rough cider and gave him a disapproving look at the same time.
He didn't approve of people abusing their bodies the way in which Sooty did.
‘This scrumpy will be the death of you, Sooty,’ he said seriously, ‘they'll find you in a ditch one night all blue in the face.’
‘Look mate,’ replied Sooty, ‘when you sweep chinmeys for a living, you need plenty of liquor to swill out your guts.’
‘What guts?’ countered Knocker, ‘this stuff must have burned out your guts years ago.’
‘Bollocks,’ Sooty replied, and walked unsteadily to the far comer of the bar to talk to Maisy Miller.
Maisy was a spinster, and appreciated cider almost as much as Sooty ‘Silly old bugger,’ muttered Knocker, ‘but he never makes any trouble, so what can I do?’
‘I shouldn't worry about it,’ Yanto replied, ‘there's nothing wrong with his head.
Remember a couple of weeks ago when you were taking the piss out of him for being scruffy, you told him not to come in again unless he was wearing a tie.
What did he do?
Came in the following Sunday morning with a tie on, no shirt or coat, just a tie.
No.
There's nothing wrong with him, mate.’
They were both still laughing at the memory when the off sales bell rang.
As Knocker went to the slide window to serve, Yanto picked up his pint and walked through into the snug.
A large framed photograph of Joe Louis in fighting stance looked menacingly down at him from a supporting beam  as he walked through the saloon bar doorway.
The snug looked very snug tonight.
A small open fire burned in the grate even with the April weather getting warmer daily.
In here the wooden benches had padding on them, and the firelight flickered on the horse brasses and old muskets that festooned the walls.
The gas lights were kept dim in the snug to compliment the cosy room.
The tall lanky figure of Billy Tolboys was slouched in the comer seat by the fire.
Sat primly by his side was a slim little blonde that Yanto remembered from somewhere.
‘Where ya bin?’ demanded Billy, ‘I thought you was never comin'.
You met Mary?’ he continued, without waiting for an answer to his original question.
‘I've seen you somewhere, haven't I?’
Yanto replied, his wide set eyes scrutinising the girl.
‘I work in Sharpness Co-op,’ the girl replied, and looked away shyly.
‘I've seen you come in for cigarettes.’
‘That's it,’ said Yanto, ‘I was watching you cut up that damn great lump of cheese with that wire contraption.’
The girl laughed behind her hand.
‘Anyway, where have you bin?’
Billy repeated his original question.
‘I went for a stroll down the river bank,’ replied Yanto, with a wink.
‘I had to pick up my boots and rabbits, but I found somebody had nicked the bloody things.’
‘They weren't nicked mate,’ Billy said earnestly, ‘Herbie Connors found 'em so look out.’
‘Oh Christ,’ groaned Yanto, ‘those boots were nearly bloody new.
Who told you it was Herbie?’
‘Sammy Pockets,’ replied Billy, ‘he said he saw Herbie walking along the bank behind his cottage.
He saw him pull a couple of rabbits out from under a bush so he must have had the boots too.’
‘The old basket,’ growled Yanto.
‘Still, he cant prove they're my boots.
He must have eyes like a bloody owl.’
‘Anyway, what you drinking?’ he said, dismissing the subject by the tone of his voice.
‘I'll have a pineapple juice, please,’ said Mary, in a weak voice.
Billy wanted cider.
Yanto took the empty glasses back through to the main bar.
The bar was empty now except for a couple of old boys playing dominoes.
A bored looking Knocker  was face in hands, looking into space.
‘Roll on to-bloodymorra night,’ he moaned, as Yanto banged the empties on the counter.
As he re-filled the glasses, Knocker leaned over to Yanto.
‘Hey,’ he said, in a low voice, ‘who's the little wench with Billy?
E's getting as bad as thee.’
‘Oh, just a little piece from Sharpness.
Seems a nice kid.’
As Yanto spoke the bar door was thrust purposefully open and there, framed in the doorway, was the tall moustached figure of Herbie Connors.
Straight as a ramrod, Herbie marched to the bar.
Herbie had been in Kitchener's army.
With his highly polished boots and gaiters, corduroy trousers and tweed jacket, he looked the  epitome of authority.
Every inch a bailiff of the old school.
He dumped a bag of empty bottles on the bar.
‘Evening Landlord, Master Gates,’ he spoke in a loud voice and exercised his usual habit of momentarily standing on tip toes as he addressed them.
‘Evening Mr Connors,’ replied Knocker respectfully.
Yanto nodded in return.
‘Three bottles of cider to take away, if you please,’ he boomed.
Herbie never drank at the pub.
He regarded the locals as a bunch of peasants generally.
He did have a sneaking respect for Yanto however.
His war record and the fact that he had never been able to catch him redhanded whilst poaching appealed to his old world code of honour.
He often wondered what he would do if he did manage to catch him.
He had heard many stories about Yanto, and knew he was a rough handful.
As Knocker busied himself filling the bottles, Herbie turned to his main adversary.
‘Master Gates,’ he said, again in a loud voice, ‘were you by any chance on the river bank last night?’
The two old boys looked up from their dominoes.
Herbie diverted his gaze to them, whereby they both took a sudden renewed interest in their game.
‘Not me,’ Yanto replied, looking hurt, ‘I spent the evening at Selwyn Hopkins' place, with his daughter Molly.’
‘I see,’ Herbie continued.
‘Only I found a couple of freshly killed rabbits and a nice pair of boots under a bush on the bank early this morning.
I dropped them into Sharpness police station, if you know anyone who might  have lost them.
Of course, they might ask a few questions.’
He paid Knocker and picked up his bag of bottles.
As he turned to leave he smiled evily at Yanto.
‘I can see I shall have to pay more attention to the river now the fish are running,’ he said.
‘Goodnight all.’
He marched stiffly to the door and was gone.
‘He'll bloody have you one of these days,’ said Knocker, looking into Yanto's grim face.
‘Ahh, he couldn't catch a bloody cold,’ snapped Yanto and carried the drinks back into the snug.
Billy was still slouched in the corner with his left leg stretched across the seat and his right arm around Mary's neck.
As he had walked through the doorway, he just caught a glimpse of Mary snatching Billy's hand off her right breast.
‘Better leave the salmon alone for a couple of weeks, I reckon,’ said Billy, who had heard every word through the connecting hatch.
‘Forget it,’ said Yanto and they changed the subject.
They talked for ten minutes about their pending motorised pub crawl planned for Friday evening.
‘We must test the bike before we give the girls a ride, mustn't we,’ chirped Billy.
He looked at Yanto and laughed.
‘When will we get the chance of a trip on the bike?’
Mary interrupted.
‘Suit yourself,’ Yanto replied.
‘What about Sunday, we could have a picnic,’ Mary continued with a slight plea in her voice.
Yanto looked at them both.
‘O.K. by me,’ he said, ‘aint doing anything Sunday.
Where'd you like to go?’
‘Oh lovely,’ Mary giggled with delight ‘it's getting so hot already!
What about Ham Park?’
‘Good idea,’ said Billy.
‘There used to be a load of deer up there, but I expect they ate the buggers during the war.
Still,’ he continued, ‘it's nice and quiet with plenty of woods and mossy banks to lie on.’
He grinned  evilly at Mary, who coloured up instantly.
Yanto arranged to pick them up outside Sharpness Coop Sunday morning, after which Mary said it was time for her to go home.
They walked back into the main bar and found Knocker mopping up the bar.
After Billy and Mary had departed, Yanto walked over to the bar.
‘Quick half before I go, please Knock.’
Knocker grinned as he  handed Yanto his pint mug, two-thirds full.
He jerked his head towards the bar door.
‘He'll be in her pants before the nights out, I'll be bound.’
‘More than likely,’ grinned Yanto and took a long swig.
Knocker suddenly stopped mopping down the bar and looked at Yanto.
‘I knew there was something I wanted to tell you.
I was talking to Joe Asnett in Berkeley yesterday.
Nigger's coming home.’
The news caught Yanto unawares and caused a jolt in his stomach, but he showed no sign of concern as the dark skinned handsome spectre of Nigger Asnett his arch rival, appeared in his mind's eye.
‘Yeah,’ Knocker continued, ‘it seems he's done his time, and he's coming home.
Bad news that one, but you used to be pretty friendly, didn't you?’
‘Yeah, we knocked about a bit,’ Yanto replied and looked thoughtfully into his beer.
As children he and Nigger had ruled the roost.
They were both big, tough, good looking boys.
Yanto and his gang of faithful followers regarded Sharpness and dockland as their stamping ground, while Nigger and his crowd of reprobates guarded the juvenile world of Berkeley.
The gangs had clashed many times.
But the leaders, probably through mutual respect and fear, had never fought.
It had been the same after their school days.
Rivalry over girls had brought them almost to blows many times; but not quite.
It was then that Nigger started going bad.
Several assault and battery charges had brought him trouble with the police.
The last couple of times Yanto had seen him before joining the army, it had been touch and go.
Nigger's taunts and sarcasm, usually in front of girls, had pushed Yanto's self control to the limit.
The last time they had met was on V.E. night in Berkeley.
Nigger was on leave from the navy and had been impressed as he watched Yanto hit a drunken sailor who had tried to grope a young girl.
The sailor had gone straight through the casement window of the Red Hart, into the street.
The window had cost Yanto a lot of money, until the girl's father heard about it and reimbursed him.
Nigger had returned to his ship after that leave and almost killed a petty officer in a drunken rage.
The last they heard was that he had gone  over the wall for two years.
‘Let's hope the military nick knocked some sense into his head,’ grunted Knocker, as he wrung out his bar cloth.
‘I doubt it,’ replied Yanto.
‘I can see me and him having it to go one of these days.’
‘Well make sure it don't 'appen in my pub,’ said a concerned Knocker.
‘This place wouldn't be worth a twopenny fart after that little incident.’
Yanto smiled bid Knocker good night, and walked out into the cool night air.
As he walked through the yard he heard Renee's shrill voice.
‘Them buggers all gone yet?’
JULIE
Julie Murchison stood on the platform of Berkeley railway station and gazed around.
Absolutely nothing had changed.
The nine years that had elapsed since she last stood on this spot could have been a dream.
The little Victorian station house stood there mellow in the sun, with tubs of flowers adding to the colourful scene.
The neat pile of coal used to fuel the open fireplace in the waiting-room lay to one side, just as she remembered it.
Tom Cotter, the little fat station master who had gawked unashamedly at the beautiful girl on his platform, could still have had the same shirt on.
But it was the  tranquility she remembered most.
The only sound was the bird song and the breeze rustling the honeysuckle laden hedgerows.
It was all a total and welcome contrast to San Francisco, her home for the past nine years.
It was good to be home.
She had been the only passenger to alight from the two carriage train which she could still hear dimly in the distance, chuffing  its way over the Severn Bridge on  its way to Lydney.
She picked up her two large suitcases and walked through the small cool ticket office on to the station forecourt.
As she put down her cases a large shiny 1935 Armstrong Siddeley car came around a bend in the station drive and braked to a halt a short distance from her.
She smiled as she recognised her Father's car, and smiled even wider when she saw who was driving it.
Barney Summerville slid nervously from the driving seat of the Armstrong and stared with unbelieving eyes at the girl with the cool smile who stood before him.
Could this possibly be the same human being he had transported here in the pony and trap before the war?
The same little girl who he had loved like his own, who had waved wildly at him until the train had disappeared around the bend.
It must be so.
She came towards him, threw her arms around his neck and kissed him on his ruddy moustached face.
‘Barney darling,’ she whispered in a soft mid Atlantic accent, ‘how lovely to see you again.
How are  you?’
She stood back, still holding his hands and saw tears appear in the eyes of the old man who had been more of a Father to her than her own Father.
‘I'm well, Miss Julie, all the better for having seen you.
I would never have recognised you,’ he spluttered, ‘America must have agreed with you.’
‘Oh, it was wonderful Barney.
It would take a million years to tell you all the things I have done, and some of the things I wouldn't tell even you,’ she said mischievously, ‘but it's great to be home.
How's Father and Mother?
I must admit I am surprised Mother didn't come to meet me.’
‘She can hardly wait for you to get home,’ Barney assured her hurriedly, ‘but she is in bed with flu, nothing serious.’
‘And Father,’ Julie enquired, ‘is he O.K.?’
‘He's well, Miss Julie.
He would have come himself, but he is so busy at the estate office.’
Barney sounded almost apologetic.
Julie needed no explanations.
She knew her Father too well.
Colonel Joshua Murchison had always been a tough unyielding man who had made it quite clear to Julie that he would rather she had been a boy.
It was probably the reason that the young Julie had been such a complete tomboy.
As Barney began stowing her luggage into the boot, Julie slid behind the wheel of the Armstrong.
‘Do you mind if I drive Barney,’ she giggled.
‘Can you drive, Miss Julie?’
Barney showed surprise.
Most local girls were lucky to have ridden in a motor car, let alone learned to drive one.
‘Yes,’ Julie continued, ‘I have been driving Aunt Polly's Chevvy for absolutely ages in the States.’
Barney slammed the boot shut and slid nervously into the front passenger seat.
‘I don't know what your Father will say,’ he began.
Julie terminated his hesitancy with a curt ‘Don't worry!’
She turned the key on the shining walnut dashboard and pressed the starter button.
The big in line six cylinder engine boomed into life, then settled into a barely audible whisper.
Barney explained the intricacies of the pre-selector gearbox, after which Julie engaged first gear and, with a slight jolt, moved the big car slowly down the station  drive.
Turning left into Station Road, Julie gunned the Armstrong towards Berkeley.
As the car moved into top gear, Julie turned to the still tense Barney.
‘Tell me Barney,’ she said quietly, ‘are those boys I used to play with as a kid still around the locality?
Mother wrote me and told me about poor Simon's death, but what about Yanto and Nigger.
What happened to them?’
‘Well Miss,’ Barney stuttered, ‘the last I heard, Nigger was in a naval prison for beating up an officer.
As for Master Gates, he came home a war hero and has been enjoying the fruits of his fame ever since.’
Barney sniggered then continued, ‘Selwyn Hopkins told me he has just bought a motorbike.
Imagine that, at his age.
Dunno they're born nowadays.’
Julie laughed.
‘Would you say he was still adventurous then?’
‘They say he would beat up the devil himself for a shilling,’ replied Barney.
‘Why do you ask Miss?’
‘Well, I am going to need someone to help me ride over the Severn Bore at Stonebench.’
Barney stared at her aghast.
‘You are going to what Miss?’ he stammered.
‘I am going to ride over the Bore at Stonebench,’ she repeated.
‘I have always wanted to do it ever since the first time you took me to see it when I was young.’
The car slowed only slightly as Julie drove through a deserted Berkeley square.
She opened the throttle again as she reached the quarter mile straight of Castle Walk
She took a quick look at the castle, standing huge behind the emerald green foreground of Castle Meadow.
‘I see the castle is still standing,’ she quipped.
Barney, who had been deep in thought, spoke as the car thundered past the Berkeley Hunt kennels.
‘But just how do you intend to ride the Bore?’ he asked.
‘I've got a beautiful two-seater kayak canoe in the States, she replied.
‘It's coming over with the rest of my stuff, deep sea.
But, as I said, it's a two seater so I shall ask Yanto to come with me.’
Two minutes later the Armstrong entered the tiny village of Ham.
Barney smiled as Julie negotiated the drive gates leading to the family home.
He was trying to imagine Yanto's face when she asked him.
FRIDAY NIGHT OUT
The motorcycle thundered into life with Bert Midgeley's first kick.
Yanto, full of excited anticipation, had raced around to Bert's garage as soon as work finished on Friday.
He had found Bert giving the machine a final wipe over with an oily rag.
A feeling of total joy swept over him as he inspected the beautiful gold and silver machine.
Even the aluminium box which served as the sidecar, gleamed in the late afternoon sun.
‘Listen to that tick over Bert,’ he whispered, ‘What a beauty.’
‘Yep, makes me wish I was thirty years younger,’ quipped the old man.
As they spoke, Tiny and Joe Jacklin, two brothers who had worked in Yanto's gang on the ‘Marit’, cycled past on their way home.
‘If I ever catch our Jane on the back of that thing I'll give you both barrels,’ bawled Tiny over his shoulder.
‘One way to get some good blood in the family,’ Yanto shouted back with a grin, and gave them the well-known two fingered salute.
Yanto had paid over his hard earned money and the log book was in the pocket of his overalls.
At last he had his own wheels.
He straddled the bike and blipped the throttle.
‘Mind how you go now,’ said Bert with feeling, ‘she's a bit different to those military bikes.’
‘I will Bert, and thanks again,’ came the reply.
The late afternoon sun flashed again on red and chrome as he roared away.
Bert Midgeley watched him disappear over the hill towards Wanswell and wished for the millionth time that Simon was still with him.
Yanto was in heaven.
Savouring the surge of power each time he twisted the throttle.
He took to it like a natural.
The memories came flooding back.
The despatch work in France before Dunkirk.
There was no danger now, he could enjoy it to the full.
No danger of ambush or sudden death, no creeping around on filtered headlights.
This was ultimate freedom.
He turned left in the village of Wanswell and blasted the bike over the slight pitch and on into the twisty overgrown lanes that led to the village of  Purton.
The alternating sunlight and shade caused by the overhanging trees started his eye twitching.
As he raced around one sharp corner he almost ran into the back of a slow moving lorry.
The sight of the familiar two-wheeled hopper which the lorry was towing, plus the overpowering stench emitted by it, made him realise he was about to overtake Terry Gafferty's toilet bucket collection cart.
As the next straight stretch of lane came into view, Yanto took a deep breath, held it, and with a quick twist of the throttle raced past the obnoxious but very necessary vehicle.
As he passed, Terry Gafferty turned his thin pock-marked face to his mate, Solly Newport.
‘Look at that, mate, the prince of Purton is mobile.
No woman in the bloody county will be safe now.’
Yanto parked the bike in the small alley which separated his Mother's cottage from the Post Office and stood back to admire the machine again.
Mary Gates came out of the house wiping her hands on her apron and looked at her son's purchase.
‘Well, I hope you are happy now,’ she said with a grin.
‘Fancy a quick trip down the road?’ he grinned back His Mother's look was sufficient.
‘Come on in,’ she commanded, ‘your tea is ready.’
He obediently followed her into the back kitchen, and gave a delighted whoop when he saw the big pot of homemade faggots and mushy peas simmering on the polished black range.
As he ate, he became aware of his Mother watching him.
He looked up into her wide blue eyes which were scrutinising him intently over the mug of tea which she was holding with two hands.
He sensed that something was bothering her.
‘What's up, Ma?’ he asked, and carried on eating.
She hesitated for a moment, then said, ‘I met Sid Watkins in Berkeley today and he asked me if I would like to go to the Licensed Victuallers Dinner at the Princes Hotel with him tonight.
I said I would let him know this afternoon,’ she continued a little too quickly.
‘He apologised for the short notice.
I think he was a bit scared to ask.
What do you think son?’
She looked at him intently.
‘Well, do you want to go?’ he answered  with a smile.
‘It would make a nice change,’ she replied guardedly.
Yanto knew this was a big decision for his Mother.
Mary Gates had never been out in the company of a man since the death of his Father.
He decided to make light of it.
‘Then go,’ he rose from the table with a grin, ‘it will do you good.
Sid Watkins is a good bloke, who knows, we might even get a better deal with the fish.’
They both laughed.
Mary was obviously relieved.
‘Well, if you think it will be all right, I will go,’ she beamed.
‘You are still a good looking woman Ma,’ Yanto teased.
‘you should get more out of life.
Anyway, Bill and I are going to test the bike tonight.’
‘I suppose that means more wenching and drinking does it?’ she said with mock  sterness reg=sternness .
‘You know me better than that Ma,’ he laughed.
She smacked him playfully on the bottom with her tea towel.
‘You had better get yourself into the washhouse and clean yourself up,’ she said, ‘I am going round to the Post Office and let Sid Watkins know.’
She slipped off her apron and tripped out of the back door like an eighteen year old.
‘Get me a packet of Woodbines while you're round there Ma,’ he bawled from the washhouse.
Billy Tolboys pulled up the collar of his ancient leather overcoat and hunched down even deeper into the motorcycle sidecar.
The rectangular piece of perspex which acted as a windscreen, provided little if any protection from the cold wind which was currently hitting him at sixty miles an hour.
Even so, he was feeling very happy and full of anticipation.
Yanto had picked him up from his home ten minutes before, and they were now racing down the A38 towards Bristol on their first outing on the bike.
‘Where are we goin' first?’ he yelled over the wind noise.
Yanto looked down at him momentarily, his blue eyes watering from the wind.
‘I thought we might try the ‘Barge’ at Thombury,’he shouted, ‘what do you think?’
Billy didn't bother to  answer, he just raised his thumb in agreement and snuggled even deeper into his coat.
‘What the hell did it matter where they were going,’ mused Billy, ‘this was living.’
To his generation it had always been war, ration books, belt tightening and general hardship.
Now, suddenly, it seemed all had changed, reasonably frequent work at the docks, money in their pockets, a great mate to share it with, and their own transport.
Man, this was heaven.
Before starting out, Yanto suggested taking the A38 towards Bristol and then turning off to the right towards the river when they felt like it.
It would, he said, give them the chance to see how the bike performed on a bit of decent road.
The wind velocity gave evidence that the bike was performing very well.
As they reached the bottom of the long straight pitch over Milbury Heath, Yanto turned right towards the small town of Thornbury.
Thornbury was fast becoming a dormitory town for nearby Bristol, but there were a couple of decent pubs there.
They parked the bike in the small yard at the rear of the ‘Barge’ public house.
Neither of them were familiar with the ‘Barge’.
It had been renovated just before the war and was now regarded as quite modem for the area.
The public bar was a large L shaped room, one half of the L obviously having been a separate snug before the modernisation.
It had also robbed the pub of its cosiness as modernisation invariably does.
The old open fireplace had been boarded in and a single gas fire now burned in the hearth.
Billy looked around at the considerable number of pictures on the walls portraying various old sailing ships.
‘Don't go much on this place,’ he grumbled.
‘It will do for starters,’ Yanto replied, and ordered two pints of half and half cider from the young pleasant-faced landlord.
‘Cold wind getting up,’ commented the landlord, as he placed he mugs of amber liquid on the bar.
‘Yeah, we noticed,’ replied Billy, his eyes still watering.
It was still only eight thirty and, apart from themselves  and a man and woman sitting in the far corner, the bar was empty.
‘Well, I hope we are going to find a bit more life than this,’ grunted Billy, as they sat down at a table near the gas fire.
‘Stop moaning,’ snapped Yanto, ‘it's early yet.
We can always finish up at the Boar if things don't improve.’
As he spoke, the bar door flew open and a noisy party of four burst in.
Two men in their early twenties and two girls about the same age.
It was obvious they had already had plenty to drink.
Both girls were pretty, but one, a blonde, was extremely so.
Yanto and Billy heard the blonde tell the landlord that it was her birthday as she ordered the drinks.
Billy turned to his friend.
‘Things are looking up already,’ he murmured with an evil leer.
Yanto did not answer.
He was staring intently at the blonde.
The more he looked at her, the more he knew he had seen her before.
‘What's up mate?’
Billy leaned forward, ‘d'you know her?’
Then it clicked.
‘Yeah,’ came the reply.
‘If I'm not mistaken, I pulled a pissed up matelot off that blonde piece on V.E. night.
Remember that bit of bother I had in the Red Hart in Berkeley?’ he continued, ‘the sailor went through the window.’
‘Christ,’ muttered Billy, ‘I remember the talk about that.’
His face suddenly lit up, ‘you're in then, mate.
She owes you.’
The two of them continued to stare at the group.
One of the boys in the group was in the process of telling the landlord a joke.
This was obviously their local.
After the punchline had been delivered and the ensuing laughter had died away, the blonde swayed away from the bar and looked in their direction for the first time.
As their eyes met, Yanto sensed a spart of recognition and gave her a broad smile to help her recollect.
It worked.
She remembered him.
The three other members of her party looked around in surprise as the blonde gave a squeal of delight and walked unsteadily across to Yanto.
Billy's eyes popped out as she kissed Yanto on the cheek and flopped into a chair beside him.
‘My hero,’ she laughed, and looked at Billy.
‘He saved me from a fate worse than death, and it was all over so quick I never did get the chance to thank him properly.’
‘Well you got the chance now,’ grinned Billy, ‘What ya drinkin?’
‘Call your friends over,’ Yanto interrupted, ‘let's have a party.’
The blonde did as she was bid.
The other girl came over immediately.
‘This is my friend Janet,’ said the blonde.
Billy offered a fourth chair next to him, which the girl accepted.
As the two boys walked over, the blonde introduced them as Vic and Benny Travers.
After introductory nods between the four men, Billy went to the bar to get a round in.
The blonde, who had introduced herself as Sheila Stevens, then, much to Yanto's embarrassment, began to relate to the other three the incident at the Red Hart on V.E. night.
Vic and Benny were suitably impressed by the fate of the sailor.
As Billy returned with the drinks, the conversation returned to the antics performed in Berkeley on V.E. night.
‘That was some sort of night,’ continued Sheila ‘they actually turned the market place into a dance hall.’
This was true.
All family rivalries were forgotten.
Everybody danced with anybody and as almost every other building was a public house, there was plenty of material spilling out to keep the action going.
During the festivities a hastily built bonfire was set alight in the middle of the market place, and an equally hastily assembled replica of the Japanese Emperor was burnt to a cinder on top of it.
It was not until the next morning that the local council realised they had to repair a large hole in the middle of the square.
After several more rounds, things began to warm up in the ‘Barge’ public bar.
The lovely happy hour was approaching.
The time when the body begins to warm from the drink and the mind mellows.
Tongues loosen and caution takes second place to bravado.
The two girls were now paying much more attention to their new found friends than to their original escorts.
At one point, when Janet had kissed Billy's ear, the elder of the two brothers, Vic, had looked as though he was about to protest.
One of Billy's evil looks however, plus the recollection of the  sailor's fate on V.E. night, caused him to relax again.
Even so, both Yanto and Billy found difficulty in hiding their pleasure when, shortly after, the brothers had taken their leave.
Sheila's remark of ‘see you around,’ made it painfully obvious they intended to stay.
The public bar had filled considerably and the general clatter of laughter and bustle all added to the good feeling of anticipation which was beginning to invade Yanto.
His senses told him he was on to a good thing and his senses were rarely wrong.
He leaned back with a sign of contentment and, over his fifth pint of cider, observed Billy whispering in Janet's ear.
The girl giggled and kissed Billy's ear again.
‘He's not doing so bad either.’
Yanto mused to himself.
As he sipped his cider, Yanto's attention was drawn to a group standing a few feet from their table.
A small bearded old man, obviously a local character, was in hilarious conversation with three young men.
As Yanto watched, the old man inclined his head to the right and began jabbing his right index finger into his right ear.
As he did so, a fine trickle of sawdust appeared to fall from his ear to the floor.
Yanto laughed when he realised the old joker had palmed the sawdust and was allowing it to trickle in such a way as to give the impression that it was trickling from his ear.
The old man's next remark explained the charade.
‘My old man always reckoned I was a blockhead,’ he explained, and brayed with laughter at his own joke.
Yanto laughed again as did Sheila, who had also been watching the old man's antics.
‘We've got one or two like him in our local,’ he said to her with a grin.
‘What made you come all the way out here just for a drink anyway?’ enquired Sheila.
‘How did you get out here, push-bike?’
While Billy was at the bar ordering another round, Yanto told the girls about the motorbike and explained that it was their first outing on the machine.
Sheila sat bolt upright.
‘You mean to say we have been sitting here for an hour with a motorbike and sidecar parked outside?’
She squealed in mock amazement.
‘So what,’ snorted Billy, who returned with a tray of  drinks in time to catch the remark, ‘we're enjoying ourselves, ain't we?’
‘Well, for Pete's sake, let's go somewhere,’ Sheila countered.
‘Where?’
‘I dunno.’
Sheila puckered her brow with concentration, then looked up with a grin.
‘I know, let's go over to the Windy Ridge, at Shepperdine.
They do lovely Severn salmon sandwiches there.
It won't take long around the lanes.’
She stopped and looked at the other three who were scrutinising her in amused silence.
Sheila's full lips pouted slightly, ‘anyway,’ she said, ‘it is my birthday.’
Yanto winked at Billy, who grabbed his mug and said, ‘Okay, drink up, anything for a quiet life.’
As they left the ‘Barge’, Yanto experienced that old feeling in his loins.
He had decided what to give Sheila for her birthday.
Billy enjoyed the short trip from the ‘Barge’ to the ‘Windy Ridge’.
He had squeezed himself back into the side-car with his long legs stretched flat along the floor of the rectangular alloy box.
Janet had little option but to sit on his lap with her legs stretched over his.
That's when his enjoyment began.
With a mischievous grin on his face, he gyrated his lean anatomy under Janet's neat little posterior in perfect time with the bucking machine.
She didn't object.
Yanto looked to neither right nor left as he struggled to keep the bike in the centre of the narrow lane.
He was aware of two things.
The rough elder laden hedgerows rushing past, six feet each side of his face, and Sheila clinging to his back like a koala bear clinging to  its Mother.
Suddenly they were there.
The narrow lane ended abruptly in the yard of the ‘Windy Ridge’ public house.
Yanto brought the overloaded bike to a skidding halt just short of the sharply rising earth bank, the other side of which lay the muddy banks of the river.
Squeaky Sutton, the landlord of the ‘Windy Ridge’ for the past thirty years, looked up as the noisy party clattered down the four steps into his cosy cellar bar.
His large round face split into a welcoming grin at the sight of them.
‘Evening all.’
he squeaked.
The ridiculously high pitched voice seemed even more ridiculous coming from such a big man and Sheila almost burst out laughing.
but caught Yanto's stern glance and managed to stifle it.
‘How ya doin then, Squeak?’
Yanto enquired, ‘long time no see.’
‘Could be better,’ came the reply, ‘you know what my regular trade is like, always had to rely on the trippers out here in the sticks, and who wants to come out here during a Winter like we've just had.’
‘Yeah, reckon so,’ agreed Yanto.
‘Still, looks like we're going to get a good Summer.’
‘Can't come too soon for me,’ squeaked the landlord.
‘What can I get you?’
While Yanto ordered the drinks, Billy and the girls went over to the big open fireplace.
The girls sat down on a large pew-looking bench in the alcove and laughed at Billy who was standing with his back to the blazing logs doing his knee bending policeman act.
‘Now this is what a pub should be like,’ he said to them with a grin.
Squeaky re-appeared behind the bar with a large enamel jug of cider, and poured out two pints of the golden liquid for Yanto's inspection.
‘Looks as good as ever,’ smiled Yanto.
‘But, isn't it time you got some pumps in here, Squeak?’
‘Don't hold with 'em, came the reply.
‘That's the way I've always done it, and until they carry me out here, that's the way it stays.’
‘Suits me, mate,’ Yanto laughed.
‘By the way, how are the salmon running up here?’
‘Not as thick as they used to be,’ snorted Squeaky, ‘not many big uns either.’
Squeaky whistled in amazement when Yanto told him about his recent monster catch.
‘Ant sin one like that in years,’ he breathed, ‘talk is, the bloody Danes are catching too many of 'em as babees.’
‘We're dying of bloody thirst over ere,’ Billy's voice growled from the fireplace.
Yanto grinned at Squeaky, picked up the tray with the two pints and two whisky and oranges, and walked slightly unsteadily over to the fire.
‘Thought you'd never stop gassing,’ growled Billy and downed a third of his pint in one swallow.
‘What's the matter with his voice?’ asked Sheila, as Yanto sat down, ‘that can't be normal surely?’
‘Yeah, I  was wondering about that,’ interrupted Billy, ‘sounds like he ain't got no balls.’
He held his hand to his mouth in mock apology as both girls gave him a straight look.
‘Well,’ Yanto began hastily, ‘I was told he got pinned down for a week in no-man's land during the battle of the Somme in 1916.
Every time he tried to move he got a burst of machine gun fire.
Yelling for help for a week must be enough to knacker anybody's vocal cords.
Anyway, that's what I was told.’
A delicious tray of fresh Severn salmon sandwiches had come and gone as had several more rounds of drinks, and Yanto was getting restless.
He became aware of the disapproving looks his noisy party were receiving from some of the older locals who had drifted in over the last hour.
The two girls had reached the stage where they were hanging round the boys necks and roaring with laughter at virtually every word they uttered.
Billy was the type that, had he noticed, would have returned the disapproving looks with the two fingered salute and carried on.
Yanto, on the other hand, had always been acutely aware and sensitive about what other people thought of him.
With this in mind, plus the fact that the evening's finale was yet to come, he decided it was time to leave.
He caught Billy's eye with a wink and jerked his head towards the door.
Billy's wide mouth stretched into a grin as he winked back.
Yanto realised that Billy's instant agreement to leave had nothing to do with embarrassment.
‘Time for some fresh air girls,’ Billy spoke and rose from the table at the same time.
Yanto did the same.
Sheila looked up at Yanto, ‘Your word is my command, o master,’ she said in mock seriousness, then giggled and downed the remains of her drink in one go.
Yanto did his best to make a dignified exit, but with the drink he had put away, and Sheila hanging on his arm, it was very difficult.
After loud good nights and thanks to Squeaky, the four of them finally staggered out into the cool air of late evening.
Standing together in the back yard of the ‘Windy Ridge’, all four of them momentarily experienced that  eerie silence that always prevailed on the banks of the River Severn at high water during the hours of darkness.
It was as though the wind and tide had decided to have a good rest having expended all  its fury achieving the high water mark.
Yanto curled his arm around Sheila's waist and guided her towards the river bank.
‘Let's have a look at the river and get some air,’ he murmured in her ear.
She said nothing, but allowed him to assist her up the steeply rising earth bank.
From the top of the bank Yanto noticed Billy and Janet wandering off in the opposite direction.
A slight smile curled the edges of his wide mouth as he watched them disappear behind a large veteran hay wagon parked on the far side of the pub yard.
Sheila giggled quietly as they ran down the other side of the bank on to the shore.
She rested her head on his shoulder as his arm again curled around her slim waist.
‘Lovely ain't it,’ he murmured, ‘this river is like a drug to me.
Can't keep away from it.’
She looked up at his handsome profile silhouetted against the dark sky.
There was certainly something different about this one, she thought dreamily, and dropped her head on his shoulder again.
The only sound now was their feet rustling through the shore grass, coarse and hard from countless tides of salt water.
Even now, the  extremities of the grass, where it dipped to meet the mudline, were slowly and silently being invaded by the dark water as the tide reached its zenith.
The old blackthorn tree, twisted and stunted by  its choice of birthplace, made a convenient leaning post.
Sheila's head tilted back against the rough bark to receive his first kiss.
Slowly and sensually he traced the outline of her lips with the tip of his tongue.
As the kiss lingered, she was made aware of his hardness as he pressed himself against her.
Her excitement mounted as his hands explored the outside of her thighs.
‘So far, so good,’ Yanto thought to himself.
Sheila became aware of the hem of her dress slowly rising.
Yanto was using his fingers to gather the fine silky material.
He carried on bunching the material in his fist, expecting to be stopped any second, until he had the hem of the dress in each hand.
Then with a groan, he buried his face in her neck and began stroking her thighs.
Encouraged by her lack of resistance, he very slowly began to inch down the waist band of her panties.
At this, Sheila showed her first sign of resistance.
A gentle twohanded push on his shoulders caused him to sway back on his heels.
It was a very gentle push, which Yanto did not believe was a serious attempt to stop him, so, as he swayed back against her, he tugged them down another inch.
She pushed him again and he did the same again.
This continued until Sheila's pants were halfway down her thighs.
As his eager hands began to explore her nakedness she suddenly clamped her arms around him like a drowning man.
At that point Yanto knew he was there.
As he prepared to take full advantage of the situation he suddenly recalled a horrible memory.
He had never enjoyed the thought of making love in a standing position since the embarrassment he had suffered on the last occasion, about a year before.
The incident had taken place around the back of the Berkeley cinema, with a very busty but willing land army girl.
When they had left the cinema, they found it had been raining so Yanto decided the standing position would be favourite.
Unfortunately, as he reached the critical moment when the knees start to tremble, his war wounded leg had collapsed under him, causing a premature withdrawal and an immediate loss of ardour as his bare bottom came into contact with the mud and water of the cinema bike park.
He had never forgotten the outraged eloquence of the frustrated lady as she had hitched up her pants and departed towards the town.
With this ghastly thought in mind, he gently suggested to Sheila that they walk over to a nice patch of grass at the base of the earth bank.
She nodded in agreement and with Yanto's assisting arm around her waist, tottered towards the grassy patch with a series of short restricted steps.
The restriction was caused by her knickers, which were  still just above her knees.
As Yanto hurriedly lay his coat out on the grass Sheila turned towards him with a start.
‘I hope you've got some things.
Have you?’
‘Things,’ he echoed, looking up with a sinking feeling in his heart.
‘You know, those things,’ she continued hurriedly.
‘My sister had a baby a year ago and her boyfriend wouldn't marry her.
My Dad would murder me if it happened to me.’
‘You don't have to worry about that,’ he gushed desperately, very conscious of the fact that he didn't have any ‘things’.
‘I promise I'll be careful.’
But it was no good.
She made it very plain, no things, no joy.
‘Oh Christ,’ he moaned under his breath.
Then he remembered Billy always carried a packet of three.
Yanto recalled him boasting in the pub that ‘be prepared’ had been his motto ever since leaving the boy scouts.
‘He'll probably cuss like hell,’ Yanto thought to himself, but when the Devil drives….
‘You sit here quiet and watch the river, my love,’ he muttered, as he wrapped the edges of his coat around her knees.
‘I'll be back before you can say Jack Robinson.’
With that he went off down the bank as though all the hounds of hell were after him.
As he reached the top of the earth bank where it overlooked the ‘Windy Ridge’ car park, he stopped for a breather.
He could see the old hay wagon by the light of the yard lamp, but there was no sign of Billy and Janet.
‘Silly cow,’ he breathed, as he ran down the bank into the yard, ‘she'll probably go cold on me while I'm buggering about over here.’
He stood by one of the huge wooden spoked wheels of the hay wagon and looked around.
‘Ooze that?’
Billy's voice was a mixture of apprehension and indignation, and it came from under the hay wagon.
Yanto crouched down and peered under the wagon.
Two golden shafts of light from the yard lamp crossed their bodies and he could see that they were lying on a mixture of old sacks and loose hay.
All he could make out were two white faces and Billy's white behind.
‘It's me Bill,’ Yanto whispered urgently.
‘I need a  johnny fast, got one?’
‘Christ mate, of all the bloody times,’ Billy's angry voice left the rest unsaid.
‘My jacket, hanging on the wagon.
They're in the side pocket.
Now bugger off will yah.’
Yanto found the coat and grabbed the little rectangular packet.
Before he took off, he couldn't resist another quick peep under the wagon.
All he could see now was Billy's bare behind doing an impression of a fiddler's elbow.
By the time he got back to Sheila his chest was heaving.
‘Must cut down on the bloody fags,’ he told himself.
Nothing was said as he sat down beside her.
Hoping desperately that she had not changed her mind, he leaned over and kissed her on the mouth.
As she responded, he increased the pressure of his lips on hers until she realised what he was trying to do, and slowly allowed herself to be pushed back into a lying position.
Gently, but still breathlessly, only now with excitement, he removed her flimsy pants which were still around her knees.
Then, with the minimum of movement, he removed his own  encumbrances and fitted the necessary protection.
As he moved upon her, the mutual warmth as their thighs made contact caused them to groan in ecstasy.
Then there was just their sounds, mingled with the swish of the coarse grass as it moved in unison with the dark water.
‘See yah around,’ Billy bawled over his shoulder and waved as the bike took off towards the main Bristol road.
The fast disappearing figures of the two girls waved back then disappeared as the bike took a left hand bend.
The ride back from the ‘Windy Ridge’ pub had been quiet and subdued compared to the ride out.
But there was nothing strange about that.
As with most young men who had succeeded in sowing casual wild oats, it was a case of get away as fast as you can before they start getting ideas.
They had promised to see the girls, same time, same place, next week, but both knew that was very unlikely.
Billy, who was now contentedly stretched out in the  sidecar with his eyes closed, was suddenly thrown hard against the right hand side of the aluminium box.
Yanto had hardly bothered to reduce speed as he had turned sharp left by Stone school into the narrow lane which would take them back to Berkeley.
His cider sodden mind was causing him to treat his beloved motorcycle in a way he would never have dreamed of a few hours before.
‘Watch it for Christ sake,’ Billy bawled into the wind, ‘can't you see I've had a hard night.’
Yanto raised his head and laughed ‘we ain't finished yet mate,’ he yelled back, ‘we're having a night cap at the Salvation in Ham.’
‘It's nearly twelve o'bloody clock,’ Billy slurred back from a now almost horizontal position, ‘ain't you never had enough?
Anyway, they'll be closed.’
‘We'll see,’ came the reply.
After another couple of hair-raising bends, they entered the tiny village of Ham, where there was not a light to be seen.
Yanto brought the machine to a screeching halt outside the ‘Salvation’ inn.
‘See, I told you,’ grunted Billy, pointing at the pub's unlit portals, ‘they're closed.’
‘Bullshit,’ snapped Yanto, ‘it's Friday night mate.
Joe Asnett never shuts at weekends till the last bugger drops.
They'll be in the back room.
Even the local cops won't go in there, short of a murder.’
Billy resignedly followed his friend up the gently rising slope of the car park situated on the left hand side of the building.
The old pub looked slightly sinister standing dark against the night sky and Billy shivered as he followed Yanto through the open five barred gateway into the back garden of the ‘Sally’, as it was called locally.
To Billy's relief, the large back area of the ‘Sally’ was partly illuminated by a shaft of golden gaslight showing through the half open back door.
The floor of the back area was partly grass and partly well trodden cinders.
A high hedge separated the garden from the adjoining apple orchard, and a massive horse chestnut tree completely umbrellad the whole area, giving it an aura of serenity even in the dark.
The old round bench which circled the circumference of the horse  chestnut's trunk, was solid oak, but  its slats were polished and worn by generations of local backsides.
On hot summer evenings this was one of the most popular watering holes for miles around.
Joe always made sure there were a couple of swings rigged up to the spreaded branches for the children to enjoy.
Thus, with the kids occupied, the local Mums and Dads could enjoy the local brew in the shade of the old tree and listen to the singer.
In these lovely days, still unspoilt by materialism and television, there was always a singer.
Usually it was a fed faced, moustached elder, who spent his working days milking and dung spreading, but secretly dreamed of the Albert Hall.
Probably, in his youth, some tone deaf colleague had told him that he possessed a good voice, ever since when, he would arise at every opportunity, usually by reluctant request, and then po-faced with hand on heart, would bellow ‘Come into the garden Maude’, watched by a captive audience and a proud, watery-eyed wife.
The two boys walked through the now dark and deserted stage, and pushed the half open heavy plank door.
Joe Asnett looked up as they walked unsteadily into the small flagstone floored back room.
A stranger could have been excused had he mistaken Joe for a gentleman of middle eastern origin.
His heavily lined mahogany coloured face was unsmiling as he looked at them.
His long bushy eyebrows, mingling with his coarse black hairline, made him appear to have no forehead at all.
The fierce face spoke.
‘Waddya want?’
‘A drink mine host, if it's not too much trouble.’
Yanto's honeyed words were accompanied by a silly grin.
The fierce face was still unsmiling as it spoke again.
‘you come in ere half pissed once a month, usually around midnight, and expect me to jump around for you, now you're bringing you mates as well.’
Two of the three remaining customers in the room cackled with delight.
This unexpected bit of colour materialising just before they were due to fall down, came as a bonus.
There was a pregnant pause.
Yanto was a bit unsure how to take him as he stood there swaying and Billy's befuddled mind was getting angrier by the second.
Suddenly Joe's face split into a grin.
‘That had you worried didn't it?’ he growled.
‘You've made Knocker a rich man, so how about starting on me, regular like?’
Yanto smiled and relaxed.
‘I knew you were all heart really Joe.
Pint of mild, please.’
Billy also decided to have a beer.
‘I've had enough of that bloody scrump for one night,’ he growled.
Joe handed the foaming mugs over the bar, and they both collapsed into the little wooden dining chairs set each side of the dying open fire.
They had a conversation of sorts with the two inebriates who had laughed at Joe's opening remarks to them.
They were a couple of travelling hedgers and ditchers who were currently working at Bakers Farm down by the river.
Both wore the standard dress.
Rough tweed jackets and corduroy trousers, complete with wide leather belt and string tied above the knees to stop the mice running up their trouser legs.
And their boots!!
Those huge hobnailed boots could have kicked a hole in Berkeley Castle.
It was the other solitary customer in the room who now held the boys' attention.
It suddenly occurred to them that he had not moved a muscle since they came in.
He stood bolt upright facing the bar, a half pint of rough cider on the bar in front of him.
The more the boys looked at him the more they realised the man was totally oblivious of his surroundings.
Both hands clutched the edge of the plank bar as though his life depended on it, the knuckles showing white against his work-weathered hands.
Joe noticed their interest.
‘That's Runner Rowles,’ he grinned nodding towards the man, ‘a living example, if you call it that, of what a lifetime of too much cider and not enough grub can do to a man!’
Joe's discussion of the man as though he were not there, embarrassed Yanto, and Joe noticed.
‘Oh, don't worry about him,’ he continued, ‘he can't hear a word we're saying, in a world of his own  he is.’
‘Why'd they call him Runner?’
Billy asked.
‘He used to be a very useful runner in his younger days,’ Joe explained, ‘used to run for the Gloucester Harriers so they say.
Only running he does now is when he leaves here with a load on,’ said Joe in conclusion.
‘Don't look as though he could do much running to me,’ Billy butted in.
‘Well he lives in that little cottage at the bottom of the steep pitch just past the green,’ Joe continued with a grin, ‘as he staggers down the hill his legs have to go faster and faster to stop him falling on his face.’
‘What happens then?’ said Yanto, fascinated.
‘Well, he's usually doing thirty mile an hour by the time he hits the blackberry hedge at the bottom of the pitch, never even gets a scratch as a rule.
Sad really.’
Runner still stood motionless, eyes staring straight ahead, the blue veins in his bulbous red nose standing out like lines on a map.
‘How come you let him have so much scrump?’
Yanto's voice was almost accusing.
‘Well if I didn't some bugger else would,’ said Joe defensively.
Yanto's words must have cut Joe a little.
‘Better get him on his way I s'pose,’ he grunted, as he ducked under the bar flap.
Runner jumped violently as Joe slapped him on his shoulder, but moved passively as the landlord helped him to the door.
‘Mind how you go mate,’ Joe called after him, ‘make sure you miss the signpost at the bottom of the hill.’
Joe laughed resignedly as he slammed the door.
‘Will he be alright?’ enquired Yanto, ‘don't look too good to me.’
‘Course he will,’ Joe snapped, ‘bin doin it for twenty year.
His long suffering.
marvellous Missus will wash him off and put him to bed.
Yes,’ said Joe, as he poured Runner's unfinished cider into a bottle ready for him the next night, ‘he's blessed with a good woman.
The quickest way to get a smack in the chops around here, is to bad mouth Runner in front of Cissy Rowles.’
Joe poured himself a half of beer and pulled a chair up to the fire with the two boys.
The two hedgers and  ditchers were flat out and snoring in the corner pew.
‘S'pose you've heard Nigger's coming home.’
he said, as he settled down.
‘Yeah,’ said Yanto, without enthusiasm.
‘You two won't have it all your own way with the girls when he gets home.’
‘You reckon eh?’ growled Billy.
Yanto just gazed into the fire.
‘Yes, he was a wild one, though I say it myself,’ muttered Joe.
‘I just hope he's quietened down.’
They sipped their beer moodily.
The night's events were beginning to catch up on them.
Joe suddenly sat up.
‘Hey, that might interest you,’ he said.
‘I had Barney Summerville in tonight, you know, he works at the big house.
It seems young Julie's back from America, you remember the Colonel's daughter?’
The news slowly penetrated Yanto's brain, then registered.
He stared at Joe.
‘Yes,’ Joe continued, ‘he said she looks like one of them bloody film stars.’
Yanto didn't hear him.
His mind was back to those warm childhood days before the war.
His first feelings of love had been for that gloriously liberated and beautiful tomboy.
He found himself aching to see her.
‘Come on Bill.
Time for bed I reckon,’ he found himself saying.
He had suddenly lost interest in the proceedings.
‘Bout bloody time.’
said Billy, and heaved himself out of the chair with difficulty.
They bade goodnight to Joe and left him struggling with the two inebriates.
As they mounted the motorcycle, Yanto stood upright on the footrests and looked over the hedge across the road towards the big house.
All was in darkness.
‘Roll on,’ he thought, and kicked viciously at the kickstart.
THE MEETING
Yanto's head throbbed abominably as he cycled slowly to work the following morning, but at least it was Saturday, he told himself thankfully.
He had decided not to make a habit of using the motorcycle for work.
He did not want to appear flash in front of his workmates.
Anyway, his push-bike would help to keep him for and conserve the precious petrol for more exciting excursions.
The sight of his motorcycle first thing that morning had made it necessary for his Mother to speak sharply to him about his language.
As he quickly washed off Friday night's mud, he made a mental note not to take it out on the machine next time he got drunk.
He began to think of Julie Murchison again as he negotiated the narrow viaduct which linked the docks to Station Road.
Below him, dockland was beginning to stir in its entirety, like some vast creature emerging from hibernation.
‘I wonder what she looks like now,’ he mused.
He smiled as he thought about the previous night.
According to Barney Summerville's report, she was like a film star.
‘I'll bet she is to,’ he told himself, as he tried to picture her as she was when he last saw her.
They were due to finish unloading the ‘Marit’ by about eleven o'clock and that would be it until Monday morning.
By the time he reached the low bridge on to the wharfs, he had decided to try and see Julie that afternoon.
After carefully avoiding the mooring ropes of several foreign steamers moored along the dock side, he reached the berth of the ‘Marit’ and ditched the bike.
The Norwegian coaster was high in the water, almost stripped of her cargo of Finnish deal.
Billy Tolboys was sitting on a crane bogie with his head buried in his hands.
He looked up slowly at Yanto's greeting.
At the first sight of Billy's face, Yanto's headache felt better.
Billy looked terrible.
His face was yellow, and in contrast his eyes were as red as rubies.
His  mouth sagged open and uttered a pitiful croak as Yanto sat down beside him.
‘Christ mate, you look like death.
Waddya come in for?’ quipped Yanto with an un sympathetic grin.
‘Bloody scrump,’ he croaked.
‘Spewed me ring up all night, then I went and rode me bike into that mooring rope over there,’ he indicated further up the dock.
‘Went ass over 'ead.
Never again.’
‘Not till the next time anyway,’ came the laughing reply.
‘Come on mate,’ Yanto urged as he stood up, ‘we had better get aboard.
We can get away early this morning with a bit of effort.’
Work commenced.
The crane jib dipped and raised over the deep hold of the ‘Marit’, each time raising out a neat sling of timber like some massive lucky dip.
The grey clouds that had prevailed that morning began to break up, promising a fine afternoon.
It was eleven thirty as Yanto watched the last sling of timber disappear through the hatch opening high above his head and swing out of sight towards the wharf.
He turned to Billy whose long empty stomach had ceased to heave an hour before and who now looked almost human after three hours of hard work.
‘That's it then mate.
See you on the Co-op comer half past ten Sunday morning, okay?’
‘Oh ah,’ replied Billy, with a grimace.
‘I forgot all about that bloody picnic.
Hope I feel a bit better by then.’
They discussed the coming Sunday excursion as they climbed out of the empty hold and trotted down the ship's gangway on to the wharf.
After another short chat they joined the exodus of dockers leaving the ship.
Shouldering their empty bait bags they jumped on their bikes and after a cheerful ‘Watch out for mooring ropes,’ from Yanto, they cycled off in opposite directions.
Yanto's mind was busy as he meandered slowly through the leafy lanes towards Purton.
How could he arrange an accidental meeting with Julie that afternoon, that was the question.
His fierce pride demanded that she must assume their meeting had been coincidental.
But how?
He suddenly had an idea.
If he popped into the Blue Boar for a quick one that lunchtime, he would probably find Selwyn Hopkins in there.
Saturday lunchtime was the only time Selwyn visited the pub, owing to the fact that he kept a fifteen gallon cask of cider in his garden shed.
Although retired, Selwyn Hopkins was a regular beaver where gardening was concerned.
As well as keeping his own large beloved patch looking like the Garden of Eden, he still found time to tend Colonel Murchison's land at weekends.
‘Let's see,’ he pondered to himself.
‘If Selwyn intends to go to the Colonel's this afternoon, I could say I had to go that way myself and offer him a lift on the motorbike.’
Another thought struck him which would add credence to his story.
The day before, his Mother had asked him to change the wireless accumulator because the reception was beginning to fade.
The accumulator was very heavy and had to be charged about once a month.
This was one of the unwelcome chores, but it would come in handy this time because the wireless agent had his business in the village of Stone which was a couple of miles beyond Ham where Julie lived.
‘Yes, that was it,’ he told himself, ‘if Julie is there I am bound to see her when I drop Selwyn off.’
He made a mental note not to be too enthusiastic in front of Selwyn.
It wouldn't do to upset Molly.
The problem solved, he smiled and congratulated himself on his devious ingenuity.
He began to whistle, and taking his hands of the handlebars he negotiated the last half mile home without touching them again.
As he dumped his cycle in the alley his high spirits were raised yet again by the glorious aroma of fried onions wafting through the back kitchen window.
The recent spell of warm weather was holding and Julie Murchison was feeling good in spite of the fact that  she had spent the last hour in her Mother's sick room.
Joanna Murchison, always a frail woman, was currently suffering a bout of unseasonal influenza.a However, Julie was gratified to see the remarkable change in her Mother's general health since she had arrived home.
She knew it had been hard for her Mother when her Father had shipped her off to the United States to escape the war.
At first Joanna would not hear of it, but had changed her mind after her husband's graphic account of what poison gas could do to people.
Colonel Joshua Murchison was a hard, unyielding man and Joanna had drawn great comfort from her beautiful high spirited daughter.
She had promised Julie that she would be well enough to get up the following day and they would take a trip in the pony and trap to visit friends in the area who Julie had not seen for years.
Joanna had insisted on keeping the pony and trap when her husband had bought the Armstrong.
She was born of noble stock and loved the old genteel way of life, and the people of the village loved her.
During the dark early days of the war, the local people had felt a strange sense of security just to see her pass by.
Sitting bolt upright in the trap, she would nod at everyone she passed with her proud unsmiling face.
Her long dark tailored suits, with ridiculously feathered matching hats pinned to silvery hair, gave her the respect of all and an air of authority few would dream of challenging.
The villagers often joked that if she met a German tank on the road to Berkeley, she would order it off the road and pass on as if nothing had happened.
It was that inborn sense of duty that motivated people like Joanna They would automatically take the helm.
Whether it was running the Woman's Institute or assembling and distributing gas masks, it was all the same to them.
Julie ambled happily down the long immaculate front lawn, bordered on each side by  miniature fruit trees.
Where the lawn narrowed as it skirted the side of the elegant house, it was traversed by a high lattice fence complete with ornate archway.
The lattice work was  interwoven by a rambling rose, so beautiful and so English, thought Julie, causing her spirits to soar.
Luxuriating in the warm midmorning sun on her shoulders, she walked under the lattice archway and on to the bottom end of the garden.
Here the ground was laid to vegetables on one side with a small orchard off to the left.
Under a pear tree in the far comer of the orchard was a picturesque timber built shed.
It had that rustic look which only many years of weathering can attain.
Julie smiled, remembering the times she and her friends had hidden in the old shed during hilarious games of hide and seek and sardines.
‘Strange how much bigger it seemed then,’ she mused, as she stepped through the door.
The smell, still familiar after her years away, hit her immediately.
The mixture of oil, rusty tools, creosote and vegetable seeds, mingled into a unique scent.
Impossible to duplicate or forget.
An old faded deck chair hung from a six inch nail which had probably been hammered into the shed wall twenty years before.
She unhooked the chair, dusted it off and carried it back to the front lawn.
The last trace of cloud had disappeared from the sky.
Julie decided to top up her Californian suntan until Kitty Summerville called lunch, after which she would take a casual stroll to another of her favourite haunts as a child, the old summer house on the river bank.
She lay back in the musty smelling chair, at peace with the world, and allowed the late April sun to  envelop her.
Fortified by a beautiful lunch of belly pork and fried onions, Yanto wandered contentedly in the general direction of the Blue Boar.
He stopped in the middle of the swing bridge over the canal and watched a couple of local boys fishing from the bank.
He returned their wave and gazed down the sun dappled ribbon of bright water as it meandered  its way towards Sharpness docks a couple of miles distant.
It was a beautiful scene.
From the left bank of the canal, the green fields of Gloucestershire swept up in a gentle rise for half a mile, there to be a terminated by a line of stately elms.
A farmer working a pair of shire-horses, and probably ably praying that the weather would hold, moved into his line of vision giving a touch of life to a scene that might have been painted in oils.
On the right hand bank, there was first the well used tow path.
Beyond that lay a few hundred yards of rough, occasionally wooded farmland.
There were small pig sties dotted here and there, as many villagers liked to keep a single pig to supplement the still meagre meat ration.
This strip of land was terminated by the estuary.
F rom his spot on the bridge, Yanto could gaze down the seemingly endless reaches of the Severn's mouth.
The tide had ebbed, and vast stretches and humps of sand shimmered away into a yellow infinity.
Sand which shifted constantly with the tides making the river virtually unnavigable above sharpness and necessitating the construction of the canal to Gloucester.
As a youth, Yanto had felt hard done by living ‘out in the sticks’, as he called it.
Now, as he grew older and more mature, especially after his hectic and sometimes horrifying war experiences, he realised how lucky he was to be born and live in such a place.
As he strolled on towards the pub he was surprised at the number of people that were about.
Everyone was feeling good in the fine weather.
After the war years and the terrible Winter they had all endured they had every right to be.
There was a feeling of confidence in the air.
Some staple foods had come off ration with the promise of more to follow, all adding up to a gradual end to austerity.
Yanto's spirits became even more buoyant as he walked through the always open five barred gateway into the yard cum lawn frontage of the Blue Boar.
The familiar figure of Selwyn Hopkins sat on the bench under the horse chestnut tree, gazing out over the estuary.
His personal earthenware pint pot was on the ramshackle table in front of him, almost empty.
’ Penny for 'em Selwyn.’
The weatherbeaten old  man squinted up at the handsome young giant who stood grinning down at him.
‘Ello young 'un,’ he grunted, ‘I was just watchin 'em lave-nettin' on the river there.’
He pointed out into the estuary.
Yanto could see several small figures out on the sands.
They were local lave-net fisherman, a familiar sight in this part of the county.
The tide was now ebbing fast.
The ideal time to pursue the sport which many considered to be the purest form of hunting.
The lave net was a simple but very effective contraption for catching salmon.
It consisted of connecting poles constructed in the shape of the letter ‘Y’, the tail of the ‘Y’ being the handle.
A loose net was fixed between the prongs of the ‘Y’ and thus, with the open prongs held firmly in the bed of the river, the fishermen would wait quietly for the fish to run into his net.
As soon as the salmon had passed between the prongs and into the net, he would scoop the net up triumphantly to inspect the size of the catch.
It sounds simple, but is not.
When the river is nearing low ebb, vast stretches of sand are laid bare, but channels of grey brown water of varying widths and depths continue to rush out between the sand formations until it meets the next tide coming in, twelve hours later.
It is down these channels that the salmon run, making for the sea whilst trying to avoid becoming stranded.
It is also in these channels that the lave fishermen will stand.
The man must rely on his instincts to tell him which is the best spot.
Full length waders are essential as it is generally accepted that the best depth to work is knee to waist deep.
Leaning hard on his net to counteract the force of the current, he will scrutinise the oncoming water intensely.
He is searching for the salmon's loom.
This is the mark in the water caused by the fish's dorsal fin.
It is essential that he spots the oncoming fish while it is still far away from him.
Indeed, even in the fast choppy water the practised eye can spot his prey a hundred yards away.
This is where the pure hunting comes in.
Having spotted his prey in a channel which could be fifty yards wide or more, the fisherman must literally read the fish's  mind.
Which run would the fish take?
Almost blind in the shallow muddy water, it is swimming by instinct, following the deepest sand channels.
The prongs of the lave net are probably three to four feet apart, and side stepping in fast waist deep water is a slow business.
He will only get one chance.
If he fails to judge the correct line of the fish's swim, it can pass either side of him; sometimes a frustrating arms length away.
‘They had any luck d'you know?’
Yanto returned his gaze to the top of Selwyn's bald pate, weathered almost black by his long outdoor life.
‘Ant' heard no shouting,’ came the reply, ‘they usually shout to one another when they ketch summat.’,
Yanto picked up the old man's mug and walked into the cool bar.
The warm weather was certainly bringing people out.
Knocker and Renee were both busy serving at the bar.
After a brief wait and an exchange of pleasantries with Renee, Yanto carried the two brimming mugs back out into the sun and joined Selwyn on the bench.
No words were exchanged as he placed Selwyn's refill in front of him.
Buying each other drinks in this village was so natural and taken for granted that words of thanks were rarely uttered.
But woe betide the tight-fisted villager who tries to take advantage.
Yanto took a long swig of cider, then closed his eyes and leaned back against the tree trunk with a sign of contentment.
No-one spoke for five minutes as they both glorified in the sun and the light fresh breeze.
Yanto finally broke the silence.
‘I suppose you'll be off to Colonel Murchison's this afternoon with this weather and all?’ he said, with tongue in cheek.
‘I thought.’
Selwyn's reply was interrupted by Renee Nelmes's shrill voice as she yelled out of the bar room window at two boys who were playing on the roof of the concrete pillbox built in the far comer of the pub's front lawn.
Built at the start of hostilities, facing the estuary, it was now used by playing children, courting couples, and the odd customers who, thanks to Knocker's cider, had been taken short and decided not to risk trying to get home in time.
The grim-faced Renee slammed the window and Selwyn continued.
‘I thought about it — might, might not.’
‘I am going over to Stone later on to change our Mother's accumulator.
Give you a lift in the side-car if you like.’
Yanto waited for a reply to his offer with bated breath.
Selwyn's eyes lit up with pleasure.
‘I ant bin on a motorbike since the Great War.
I'll take you up on that.
Can you bring me back too?’
‘I 'spect so,’ came a cautious reply.
Yanto realised he might well have to make a special journey to pick up the old man if Julie happened to be out.
‘That'll be lovely,’ grinned the old man as he drained his mug and rose to leave.
‘You can pick me up about half past two.’
At that moment Yanto notices Herbie Connors cycle into the yard with his bag of empties.
He glared at Yanto with genuine dislike as he stomped through the front porch of the pub.
Yanto gave him a beautiful smile in return.
‘Better get off,’ grunted Selwyn, ‘our Molly will 'ave me dinner on.’
As he turned to leave, they became aware of a lot of shouting from the river.
‘Sounds like they caught summat,’ said the old man, and cocked his head.
As they stood looking and listening, the two boys who Renee had chased off the pillbox earlier, came running back towards the pub from the riverbank.
‘What's up Jackie,’ Yanto shouted as the first boy jumped the fence into the pub yard.
The boy approached him wide eyed and breathless.
‘One of the fishermen just caught a whale or summat.
It's a 'ell of a size, t'ent a salmon.’
‘Silly little bugger,’ Yanto laughed.
‘You don't get whales in the Severn.
Not often anyway.
Where is it?’
‘Other side of the breakwater,’ gasped the boy, ‘t'ent aff big.’
Selwyn decided his dinner was more important, reminded Yanto to pick up at half past two, and wandered off.
 Curiosity got the better of Yanto however, and having vaulted the fence, he made his way over the one hundred and fifty yards of re-claimed field that separated  the pub from the riverbank.
‘I bet it's a porpoise,’ he told himself, as he walked hands in pockets, trying to avoid the now hard ruts caused by the grazing cows during the recent floods.
He remembered an occasion about two months before.
He had been walking on the riverbank observing a high tide.
The water had reached  its mark and was lapping the grass that he stood on.
It had been a very cold but bright morning, without a breath of wind.
The mile of shining water between him and the Forest of Dean had been devoid of a single ripple.
As he had watched the silent peaceful seascape, he had been amazed to see a large black dorsal fin lazily break the surface of the water.
It couldn't have been more than fifty yards from the bank.
After a few seconds a second fin appeared.
Both dorsals must have been a good twelve inches clear of the water.
At first he had thought he must be dreaming.
They didn't get sharks in the Severn did they?
He had been born and bred on the river, but had never seen anything like it before.
After circling and playing together for probably a minute, the fins had lazily disappeared and Yanto had gone home a mystified man.
Josh Cornock, the old retired river pilot, had provided the answer the following morning.
Josh was an authority on the Severn from the Bristol Channel to Gloucester.
‘They were porpoise, my boy,’ he had boomed good naturedly.
‘It's not unusual for the big equinox tides to bring 'em in.
Doubt whether they would go up any further than Sharpness though,’ he had explained.
‘They'd probably get stranded on the ebb tide.’
‘Yes, and I bet that's precisely what's happened here,’ he told himself, as he reached the riverbank.
The breakwater jutted straight out into the estuary in front of him.
A finger of grey granite boulders defiantly standing there in the mud and sand, surrounded permanently by a large lake during low water, much to the delight of the local children during the Summer.
It was one of man's more successful attempts at curbing the forces of nature.
Indeed, had it not been  constructed when it was, Peter Scott's Wildfowl Trust situated further up river at Slimbridge would probably have lost much of  its new grounds to erosion by now.
He spotted the fishermen immediately.
He saw several lave nets lying in an untidy heap on the sand where the fishermen had obviously dumped them in their haste to inspect their colleagues find.
Four of them were now standing in the mud trough between the sand and the bank, about fifty yards upstream of the breakwater.
A six inch deep channel of water still flowed over their wader clad feet as they stood in a rough circle looking down at something in the mud.
From where Yanto stood it looked like just another heap of mud.
He was not wearing wellingtons, just his working boots, but he decided he must have a look.
The four men looked up as he came scrambling down the steep bank.
‘What you got there then, boys?’ he shouted as he tight rope walked over a strip of rock strata showing just above the mud of the trough.
‘Dunno, big bastard whatever tis, never sin one before.’
The speaker was Lofty Waters, all five feet of him.
Yanto jumped on to a large flat rock, still trying to keep his boots dry, and looked down at the huge mud covered object.
His eyes opened wide with amazement.
Lofty was right, it was big.
‘Must be nine foot long.’
he gasped.
One glance also breached his initial prediction.
It was definitely not a porpoise.
‘I thought it was a heap of mud and weed,’ Lofty continued.
‘I went to climb over it and the bloody thing twitched, nearly shit meself.’
‘Chuck a couple of buckets of water over him, we might be able to recognise what it is,’ Yanto suggested.
Whatever it was, was well and truly stranded.
It had obviously taken the wrong channel and become wedged on a rising shelf of rock strata which traversed the trough about fifty yards before it reached the lake surrounding the breakwater.
‘Ten minutes earlier and he would have made it over them rocks into the pool,’ concluded Lofty.
One of the group appeared with a battered bucket and commenced throwing water over the mud covered beast.
The mud, caused by the fish's dying struggles, began to wash away to reveal the bulk of  its body.
‘Not a native of these waters, that's for sure,’ growled another member of the group, ‘look at that mouth, reminds me of the Missus.’
‘Dead as a tick now,’ said another.
‘Let's roll the bugger over,’ Yanto suggested.
Three of them heaved the bulk over on to the high rocks and after a few more buckets of water, they stood back to inspect it further.
Long tendril-like whiskers sprouted each side of the large mouth.
What appeared to be a continuous row of sea shells ran down each silvery flank, almost reaching the great crescent tail.
‘I remember seeing pictures of a fish like that at school, but I'm damned if I can remember what it was,’ said Yanto, thoughtfully.
‘Well if it eats half as well as a salmon, I shall be 'appy,’ grinned Lofty, subtly reminding the others that it was he who had found the fish.
The sound of heavy boots sliding down he crumbling bank made them all glance up.
‘Here comes happy guts,’ someone groaned, recognising the tall figure of Herbie Connors.
He had obviously heard about the strange fish from the two boys at the pub, and anything concerning the river was Herbie's concern.
‘Afternoon Mr Connors,’ somebody grunted.
‘What have we got here,’ Herbie demanded, ignoring the greeting.
‘I hope all your licenses are up to date.’
He splashed over the shallow channel and looked down at the monster.
‘Any idea what it is Mr Connors?’ ventured Lofty.
‘I haven't been a river man all these years for nothing.’
The statement was accompanied by a contemptuous downward glance at Lofty.
The man's arrogance caused Yanto's nostrils to flare with annoyance.
‘However,’ Herbie continued, ‘I will concede that I have never seen one as far upstream as this before.’
‘What the hell is it then?’ demanded Yanto impatiently.
‘For your information sir, the fish is a sturgeon,’ came the reply.
‘Can't be,’ gasped Lofty, ‘they never come  out of the Baltic.
A sturgeon's a Russian fish.’
Yanto closed his eyes and waited for the inevitable.
Herbie was incensed.
‘Are you contradicting my professional knowledge, you ignorant little reptile,’ he yelled, ‘I tell you its a bloody sturgeon.’
‘Well, it's my bloody sturgeon,’ said Lofty, surprised at his own courage.
‘If you touch that fish I'll have you up the steps before you can say Jack Robinson,’ hissed Herbie, going blue in the face ‘Whaddya mean,’argued Lofty, ‘I found im and I gotta licence.’
‘Makes no difference in this case Lofty,’ interrupted Yanto, quietly trying to defuse the situation; a sturgeon is a royal fish, and all of 'em caught in this country must be offered to the King, that's the law.’
Herbie turned his attention to Yanto.
‘Who asked you,’ he said sourly, ‘keep your nose out of it.
I'm dealing with this!’
Yanto's fuse ignited.
‘Bollocks,’ he shouted straight into Herbie's face.
‘Who d'you think you're bloody talking to.
You come down here and treat everybody like shit.’
Yanto was beginning to enjoy himself.
‘You're only a poxy water bailiff.
Anybody would think you were the King.’
Herbie stepped back from the outraged young giant.
‘I'm not going to argue with you,’ he spluttered, visibly shaken.
‘I am going to arrange a van to transport that fish to Berkeley so get it up on the bank.’
As he turned to leave he looked again at Lofty.
‘If you think you are going to get any caviar out of the fish, forget it.
If his Majesty declines the offer, it will come in handy for some civic dinner I expect.’
With a final glare at Yanto, he scrambled back up the bank.
‘Bastard,’ growled Lofty, ‘they'll find him face down in the river one of these days, the way he's goin on.’
Yanto grinned.
‘Well, I'm off home to change,’ he chirped, ‘got an important date this afternoon.’
He left the four fishermen struggling up the bank with their slippery burden.
Julia smiled with delight.
she was enjoying her walk down the quiet country lane towards the riverbank.
As she approached the old mill, where the lane was bordered by the mill stream, she noticed a cyclist approaching her.
Young Dan Tennant, a farm labourer from Bakers Farm was on his way home for lunch.
Dan had never seen anything like her outside of Berkeley picture house.
She looked like a dream to Dan.
A beautiful willowy blonde, sun tanned and blue-eyed.
‘Where had she got a tan like that after the Winter they had just endured?’
A flared cream pleated skirt that complimented those long perfect brown legs, and a powder blue tee shirt that matched her eyes a treat.
And those breasts Dan ogled her innocently and unashamedly as he approached her, and continued to gawk over his shoulder after passing.
That is until his bike left the road.
The ensuing crash caused Julie to turn.
Dan lay on his back in the grass with his bike alongside him, wheels still spinning.
Another foot and he would have been in the brook.
As she started back to check if he was hurt, Dan scrambled back on his bike and cycled off with a final red faced look over his shoulder.
She smiled again.
She was enjoying the effect she was obviously having on the local population.
She had stood out in the crowd even amongst the beautiful beach children of San Francisco.
But here in rural Gloucestershire, with the war only two years over, well!
She paused by the old flour mill, another landmark of her childhood.
As a child, the mill had frightened her.
A great grey Victorian workhouse looking place, with men hanging out of third storey doorways, pulling up sacks of cereal on pulleys.
One day she had plucked up enough courage to look through the doorway, and had almost choked on the clouds of swirling dust.
It looked so different to her now.
Smaller certainly.
It never ceased to amaze her how much smaller everything seemed to her now adult eyes.
The building.
although still basically ugly, looked nicer with the late April sun glinting on the old stonework.
The water scene on each side of the mill could not have  been more in contrast.
The little Avon river, upstream of the mill, was a poets dream.
A ribbon of fresh clear water meandering through beautiful unspoilt countryside, providing sport for the local anglers along its willow lined banks.
Generations of Berkeley children, including Julie herself, had learned to swim in the brook, as it was called locally.
The swimming hole, being situated as it was in the castle meadow, was backclothed by the magnificent walls of the castle.
This picturesque beauty however, was terminated by the walls and sluice gates of the old mill.
On the other side of the mill, in contrast, was a deep high banked muddy trough meandering the last half mile into the Severn estuary.
Had the mill not been built, acting as it was, a barrier across the tidal tributary, the idyllic scene on the other side would have been vastly different.
The sparkling fresh water and grassy banks being sullied twice daily by the flotsam and jetsam of the Severn.
Taking care to keep to the well trodden dirt path between the growing vegetables, she crossed the last field on to the riverbank.
Part of the bank here was in the shape of a sea wall, with a miniature promenade running along the top.
Probably being the reason why the locals regarded this particular spot as their own private seaside.
Julie stood on the sea wall and moved her head from side to side allowing the fresh wind from the estuary to blow through her hair.
She loved this spot.
The memories of her pre-war childhood came flooding back.
How could she find this scene so enchanting after her years on the golden beaches of California?
It mystified her.
She gazed across the mile of grey water.
The trees of the Dean on the distant bank were taking on a blue haze in the glorious afternoon sun.
The blue grey mud banks glittered where wet from the tide, but lay dry and cracked like acres of crazy paving above the high water mark.
What was the appeal?
Maybe it was the wild untamedness of the river, its banks populated by real people, proud and self sufficient, who cared for their neighbours as well as their own.
These Severnsiders: a breed apart, that mixture of ancient races  mingled over the centuries to form a perfection of self sufficiency and social harmony.
What she did know was that she never wanted to go away again.
Feeling completely happy, she made her way towards the summer house set on high ground a little further down the bank.
‘Yippee, go on son, give 'er the gun,’ Selwyn Hopkins was enjoying himself.
Gripping the sides of the sidecar, he urged Yanto to increase the already rapid pace.
Yanto grinned and twisted the throttle again.
The combination roared along Castle Walk, echoing into the empty courtyard of the Berkeley Hunt kennels as it careered up the last hill into the tiny village.
His heart began to thump with apprehension as he brought the bike to a halt outside the drive gates to the big house.
Selwyn jumped out of the sidecar like a five year old.
‘Ant enjoyed meself so much fer years,’ he chirped, a wide grin cracking his brown leathery features.
‘Pick me up about half past five, eh?’
Yanto looked at him.
‘Yeah, I suppose so,’ he said.
Selwyn began to walk up the short drive.
‘Do you mind if I have a look over the garden,’ Yanto called after him, unable to think of a better excuse.
‘I didn't know you was interested in gardens.’
The old man's surprised reply was tinged with pleasure.
‘Well I reckon I shall have to start some time,’ Yanto grinned, as he trotted up alongside him.
They walked together through the trellis arch into the back garden.
As Selwyn rummaged around the shed for his tools, Barney Summerville came out of the garage wiping his hands on an oily rag.
He spotted them and walked over.
‘I wondered how long it would be before you young buggers came sniffing around,’ he said, with a belly laugh, and looked at Yanto.
‘What d'you mean?’ asked Yanto, trying to look puzzled.
‘Don't tell me you haven't heard Miss Julie is back from America.’
‘First I've heard of it,’ came the seemingly uninterested reply, ‘anyway, I'm going steady with  Molly, ain't that right Selwyn?’
‘Thought I raised a wench with a bit o' sense,’ sniffed the old man as he trundled down the garden path with his wheelbarrow full of tools.
‘My Missus if making some tea Selwyn,’ Barney called after him, ‘You want some?’
‘Aah,’ came the reply.
Barney took it for granted Yanto would have a cup, and made a signal to his wife through the kitchen window.
While they were alone Yanto decided to pump Barny.
‘So Julie is back you say?’
Barney nodded.
‘Pushed off up to London already has she?’ he said enquiringly.
‘Must be finding it pretty dull around here after the States.’
‘No,’ countered Barney, ‘she seems as happy as a pig in poop.
She told me she is looking forward to seeing you again.’
Yanto found it hard to conceal his pleasure.
‘I don't suppose she even remembers me,’ he grinned, going slightly pink.
‘Not so,’ laughed Barney.
‘When I picked her up from the station, she had asked me about you and Nigger before we got into Berkeley.
She insisted on driving back herself too,’ he continued, ‘what do you think about that?
Drove that bloody great car back like a good 'un.’
The fact that she had mentioned Nigger defused his excitement somewhat, but the more he heard about her, the more he ached to see her.
Barney pushed his battered trilby to the back of his head.
‘She also told me she is going to ask you to help her in a little project,’ he said, grinning mischievously.
He wouldn't be drawn by Yanto's urgent appeal.
‘You'll find out,’ he laughed, and left it at that as Kitty, his wife, arrived with the tea.
She was a small, plump, pleasant faced woman, full of bounce and good intentions, but she could never stop talking.
After pouring the tea and talking to Yanto for five minutes about nothing in particular, she turned to her husband.
‘I hope that girl doesn't catch cold,’ she said.
Yanto's ears pricked up.
‘Whaddy mean?’ growled Barney, ‘it's as 'ot as 'ell,’and pushed the rim of his trilby back over his eyes to emphasise the point.
‘Well,’ Kitty continued, ‘all those years in that heat then she walks off to see the summer-house and wouldn't take a cardigan.
There's always a chill wind blowing off that river.’
she said in conclusion.
‘Would it make you feel any better if I took the cardigan down to her,’ said Yanto.
He decided to throw caution to the wind before Selwyn came over for his tea.
‘I've got my motorbike outside and I've got all afternoon to pop over to Stone.’
‘Oh, would you?’ gushed Kitty.
‘I would feel much happier, I don't want her ill as well as her poor Mother.’
She trotted off and returned two minutes later with a pure white cashmere cardigan.
‘You will find her somewhere near the summerhouse,’ she said, as he rose to leave.
Barney gave him a knowing wink, ‘we shall be coming to watch this project of yours and Julie's mind,’ he called after him.
When Kitty said ‘Oh, she won't really do that,’ in an exasperated voice, it only added to his mystification.
Arthur Jaffe was not a benevolent man at the best of times.
Now he was becoming definitely nasty.
Arthur was the ticket clerk at Portsmouth railway station and the heat and been getting to him before the man arrived.
‘Get a move on will you,’ he snapped, ‘I haven't got all day.’
The man on the other side of the glass was obviously the worse for drink and having difficulty finding his money.
Arthur's agitation increased as the woman next in line in the small queue began to fidget.
‘Do you mind getting out of the way while I serve the lady,’ he stormed.
‘What a time of the day to be drunk.’
Suddenly, the man's arm shot through the tunnel shaped aperture in the glass screen of the cash desk like a striking cobra.
The hand grabbed Arthur's shirt front and tie in a vice like grip, and yanked him forward almost banging his head on the glass.
For the first time Arthur had a good look at the man's face.
It was a dark swarthy face, almost Asian in colour, and very handsome.
But it was the eyes which  caused Arthur's bowels to move slightly.
They were cruel, dark, pupiless eyes, like looking down a bottomless pit.
The face spoke.
‘Just give me a one way ticket to Gloucester before I break your fat necK!’
Arthur did just that, and the man walked out on to the platform without waiting for his change.
‘Wouldn't want to meet him on a dark night,’ breathed Arthur, trying to make light of the incident.
The slightly shocked woman agreed with him.
Nigger Asnett boarded the two fifteen for Gloucester, threw his suitcase on to the rack and slumped down in the comer seat.
He was on his way home at last.
Keeping the noisy engine as muted as possible, Yanto negotiated the dirt path until it terminated suddenly at the base of the sea wall.
His heart thumping with anticipation, he climbed to the top and gazed around.
How would she greet him, he wondered?
Then chided himself for getting so excited about one woman, after all the women he had known.
Just another wench, he told himself angrily, but deep down he knew different.
There was no sign of the girl on the shore.
He gazed downstream.
The conical roof of the summer-house showed above a high hedge about fifty yards down the bank, so forcing himself to act casually, he began to stroll towards it.
He skirted the hedgerow and silently approached the unique little building from the rear.
His heart lurched as he saw her for the first time for nine years, now in her new role as a woman.
Unaware of his presence, she was sitting on the soft springy turf, leaning back against the ancient wall of the summer-house and gazing dreamily across the blue haze of the estuary.
He just stood and looked at her.
The afternoon sun highlighted her blonde hair which hung around her shoulders in reckless abandon, giving her a wild untamed loveliness which took his breath away.
His instincts told him she was still the same mad tomboy he had known before the war.
He also decided at that moment, to his own amazement, that somehow, some  time, he would have her as his wife.
Having made this decision after a minute's observation, not only amazed him, it also caused him to relax completely.
Yanto Gates was not given to quick decisions or mad impulses, but the girl in reality matched his dreams of her so perfectly that he had to take it as a sign.
She jumped visibly at his wolf whistle.
She turned to see a very large handsome man holding out a cardigan and grinning like a Cheshire cat.
She squealed with delight as she recognised him instantly.
Her beauty made him gasp anew as she moved towards him smiling.
He stood there like an idiot as she clasped him by the arms and kissed him on the cheek.
God, the smell of her.
Her fresh expensive perfume, another victim of the recent austere years, invaded his senses, making him fight the temptation to grab her and kiss those delicious lips to a pulp.
She thanked him as he gallantly placed the cardigan around her shoulders, and explained his reason for being there.
‘There is so much talk about,’ said Julie excitedly.
‘Let's sit and talk.’
They sat down against the summerhouse wall and talked of each others activities over the last nine years.
Yanto felt he could have sat there for ever.
He began to feel his old confidence returning.
‘Do you realise,’ he said with a grin, ‘that this is not a very appropriate place for us to be sitting.’
She looked quizzical.
‘Why not?’ she asked.
‘Well,’ he continued, ‘I know we all call this place the summer-house, and it is only used to keep salmon nets and baskets in nowadays, but it is really a gazebo, where the local gentry used to meet their ladies of ill repute in the old days.’
She giggled.
‘Well, this is nineteen forty seven, and it's all different now, isn't it?’ she said with seeming innocence.
‘Yeah,’ he replied, feeling a sudden strong affinity with the gentry of yesteryear.
There was a lull in the conversation as both rested their heads against the smooth warm wall of the old summer-house and allowed the afternoon sun to bathe their faces.
A gull screeched overhead breaking the  dreamy silence, and Julie's eyes flicked open.
She gazed again at the peaceful scene in front of her until her eyes rested on an old Severn Punt lying high and dry on the foreshore.
It lay there on the dry cracked mud below the high water mark, waiting for the next tide to wet  its bottom.
The sight of the small craft sparked her memory.
‘Yanto,’ she said.
He opened his eyes and looked at her.
‘Yeah,’ he grunted.
‘That little boat over there has reminded me, I need your help in fulfilling a little ambition of mine.’
She looked at him with the confidence of a beautiful woman who was used to getting her own way.
‘Yeah,’ he said again, only this time it was tinged with wariness.
He had an idea she was about to explain Barney Summerville's mystery.
‘I want to ride over the next big bore at Stonebench.’
‘Oh is that all,’ he replied, and relaxed again.
‘I'll have a word with Jimmy Myers, he's a skipper on the Sharpness barges.
Meets the bore regular, he does.
Can't guarantee we'll meet it at Stonebench though.’
‘No, you don't understand,’ she said irritably, ‘I want you to come with me in my two seater kayak.’
He sat bolt upright.
‘You what?’ he said incredulously.
‘I want you to help me ride over the next big bore in my two seater kayak,’ she replied defiantly.
‘Are you sure that Yankee sun hasn't turned your head.’
There was a hint of anger in his voice.
‘That bore nearly killed me recently, and that was in the estuary at Purton.
It's a damn site more dangerous at Stonebench.
The river's only a hundred yards wide there.’
‘You aren't afraid are you?’ she grinned mischievously, ‘and you a war hero too.’
Yanto felt annoyance and a little hurt.
‘I don't mind putting my neck on the line when I have to, or when there's a percentage in it, but anybody who fools with the Severn in these parts just for the hell of it, is an idiot.’
Now it was Julie's turn to feel hurt.
‘Well, if you won't come with me I shall ask Nigger when he comes home.
I gather that won't be long.’
Then to twist the knife, she added, ‘he was in the Navy, after all.’
He groaned.
She had him.
It had now become a direct challenge to his manhood.
Where Yanto was concerned that was paramount.
‘I didn't say I wouldn't help you.
I just said it was stupid.
Just make sure you tell your parents that it's your idea.
I don't want your old man gunning for me when you get drowned or brained by a tree trunk doing ten knots.’
She smiled as she leaned over then kissed him on the cheek.
‘I knew I could count on you,’ she cooed.
She went on excitedly to explain how her canoe would be arriving in a week or two and she would then telephone the harbour master at Sharpness to find out when the next big bore was due.
She insisted that it would have to be a high predicted major tide.
This last remark strangely made him brighten up, although he said nothing,
He knew the spectacular bores only  occurred during the equinox periods, February, March, April, and August, September, October.
During these periods, the great tides sweeping in from the Atlantic would first feel the initial restriction of the Bristol Channel.
As the mass of water raced upstream, the restriction increased as it reached the ever narrowing upper reaches.
This strangulation of the water continued as the river relentlessly narrowed and the river bed rose.
Finally, this great natural funnel gave the maelstrom no alternative but to rear up into that great familiar wave.
And thus, it would roar through the upper reaches of the Severn, twisting and turning through the green fields of Gloucestershire.
Crowds of people would line the banks through the little villages, never tiring at the sight of their own local natural phenomenon, until the great waves finally smashed themselves to extinction against the weirs of Gloucester City.
Yanto lay back and reflected with satisfaction that they were now at the end of April, and there would be no big tides worth talking about until August at the earliest.
By then, anything could happen.
At least it gave him time to try and talk some sense into her.
But deep down he had the feeling that sooner or later, he would have to face the big wave with her.
Then she jumped up.
‘Come on,’ she chirped, ‘give me a lift home on the famous motorbike.
I must see how Mummy is.’
She chatted into his ear all the way back to the big house, but he stayed silent.
He was imagining himself sitting in a tiny Kayak in the middle of the Severn looking up at a wall of water, anything from six to nine feet high depending on conditions, bearing down on him at twelve miles an hour and making more noise than a fast approaching train.
‘I must be bloody mad,’ he groaned to himself.
He dropped Julie off at the house, then continued on to Stone to change the accumulator.
Selwyn would be ready by the time he returned.
THE PICNIC
The brilliant spell of weather was still holding good the following morning.
It was Sunday, and Yanto had enjoyed the casual breakfast with his Mother, something he rarely had time for during the working week Their chat during breakfast had revealed to him that his Mother had enjoyed the previous Friday evening out with Sid Watkins and would probably see him again.
Yanto did not like Sundays as a rule.
In these rural parts it was usually a case of potter in the garden, or off to church or chapel.
This would be followed by a massive Sunday lunch, and then sleep all afternoon.
No good for a man like Yanto, who loved the thrust and challenge of life.
But today there was the picnic, and who could tell what would happen once the four of them got in amongst the pine coverts of Ham Park.
He felt good as he negotiated the narrow lanes between Purton and Sharpness.
His legs, which straddled the powerful motorcycle, were clad in his best grey slacks and his tartan shirt was open to the waist
He began thinking about Julie Murchison.
He had to admit he could hardly wait to see her again.
And then — there was Molly.
Sweet Molly, who he was about to take out for the day and seduce if he got the chance.
He grinned to himself, ‘Oh Gatesy, you are a bastard’
He opened the throttle as he turned left into Station Road The burble of the exhaust turned to a bellow as he raced down the long gentle slope towards Newtown.
His black curly hair was blown flat across his skull and his ice blue eyes began to water with the force of the wind He was enjoying himself.
To his right he could see the panorama of the docks spread out below him.
Several foreign ships had arrived within the last twenty four hours.
The ‘Marit’ had sailed and the big Russian timber boat now occupied her mooring.
He could also see another large steamer flying the Swedish flag further up the dock.
The powerful bike between his thighs, the beautiful  morning and the prospect of a full week's work ahead, all made him want to burst with joy.
It was sure great to be alive.
He braked hard to a halt outside the Co-op in Newtown, just as Billy and Mary turned the comer.
Mary was carrying what was obviously a large bag of food while Billy nursed a stone jar of cider, and a blanket
‘Thought we would let the girls have the tea,’ he laughed as he held the jar aloft.
‘I'm glad you brought a blanket,’ Yanto said with a grin, ‘there's no seats in the side-car.’
Mary eyed the side-car with trepidation.
It was just a rectangular alloy box Mary climbed into the side-car laughing, and trying to cover her knees from Billy's leering gaze as she sat down.
A thought suddenly struck Mary.
‘Where's your girlfriend?’ she demanded ‘Oh she's always late,’came the reply, ‘she'll be still cutting sandwiches, so I decided to pick you two up first’
Billy jumped on to the pillion seat behind Yanto.
He handed the precious jar to Mary.
‘Hold that tight between your legs,’ he said with a laugh.
Yanto kicked the bike into life, did a quick turn and, exhaust roaring and rear tyre screeching, departed towards Purton.
It took ten minutes to reach Honey Cottage, with Yanto trying his best to scare the pants off Mary.
Every turn he threw the combination around, was followed by screams and giggles from Mary and wild rebel yells from Billy.
‘Hold on to that bloody cider,’ Billy yelled Yanto twisted around on his seat and looked at Billy.
‘What was that you were saying yesterday morning when you looked like death warmed up?’ he yelled, ‘never a bloody 'gain, you said Tommy Handley couldn't best that for a joke.’
On arrival at Honey Cottage, Yanto introduced the two girls.
They knew one another vaguely.
‘Where's Selwyn?’
Yanto asked ‘Where do you think?’
Molly answered with resignation, ‘out in the garden somewhere.’
Leaving the happily chatting girls to pack the food, the two boys wandered out into the garden.
Selwyn Hopkins' garden was a sight to behold ‘The Garden of Eden must have been something like this,’ Billy remarked in awe.
The beautiful half acre contained every species of vegetable, fruit herbs and flowers that could possibly be grown in England A small orchard dominated the lower reach of the garden.
All varieties of plum, apple, and pear trees, grew in unison.
The garden was terminated by an immaculate row of sloe trees.
Everything was fruitful.
The numerous fruit beds were criss-crossed by a network of carefully trimmed and edged grass paths.
‘See that Bill,’ Yanto remarked, ‘he can get to any part of his garden without stepping on dirt once.’
The two of them stood silent for a while, gazing at the pleasant scene.
‘Well, the old bugger ain't out here,’ Yanto said suddenly.
He walked back around the side of the cottage to the open kitchen window, where the two girls were putting the packed food into a basket.
‘No sign of your Dad,’ he said.
Molly stuck her head out through the kitchen window, and looked around.
‘I gave him a jam sandwich just before you arrived.
If it's on the tank he must be in the lav, he never takes food in there with him.’
Yanto went around to the back of the cottage where the ‘lean to’ lavatory was situated, it's door almost inaccessible because of a loganberry bush.
Yanto smiled ‘Look at that’ he mused to himself, ‘you could have a crap and eat fresh loganberries at the same time.’
Standing by the lavatory wall was a large steel tank, full of rain water.
It had started out as a ship's boiler but Selwyn had acquired it some years before to ensure a plentiful supply of soft water for his garden.
There was a six inch wide rim around the top of the tank, and sure enough, lying on the rim was a half eaten jam sandwich.
Yanto grinned and pointed it out to Billy as he came around to join him ‘I've found him,’ he said quietly, ‘and you must admit he is very  hygienic .’
Billy giggled and pointed to a three foot square door at the base of the outside wall of the ‘lean to’.
‘What's that door for?’ he enquired ‘That's the bucket door,’came the reply, ‘pull out the full 'uns, empty 'em and replace.
All mod cons here mind.’
‘Oh so that's Terry Gafferty's  department is it?’ laughed Billy.
He was referring to the well known local character whose unenviable job as council dustman, included emptying the local toilet buckets, as there was no running water in the area The local joke was that Terry had no problem getting a drink.
When he walked into a crowded bar he always found he had at least half the bar to himself.
‘Terry never gets his hands on these buckets mate,’ Yanto laughed ‘Selwyn sees to his own buckets, buries it in his own garden.
Nothing gets wasted here.’
Yanto went on to tell Billy about his experience the last time he had used Selwyn's lavatory.
‘A couple of months ago it was, on a Sunday afternoon.
Must have had some bad cider on the lunchtime.
Anyway, I got took short Just managed to get into Selwyn's crapper in time.
I was sat there minding my own business, when all of a sudden that side door opened and sunlight comes flooding in under my ass.’
Billy started to double up with laughter.
‘Anyway,’ Yanto continued, ‘Selwyn starts pulling out the bucket from under me.
I had to yell out for him to hang on a minute.’
Billy was still laughing when the lavatory door creaked open and Selwyn pushed aside the loganberry bush and stepped out
‘What d'you two young buggers want?’ he grinned, as he fastened the buckle of his wide leather belt ‘We're taking Molly and her mate for a picnic Selwyn,’Yanto replied Selwyn's nut brown, weathered face split into another grin.
‘I thought I raised a wench with a bit of sense, ain't she sin through you yet?
Where you takin 'em?’
‘Ham Park,’ came the reply.
‘Be nice up there today,’ Selwyn said as he scanned the cloudless sky, ‘but watch out for them bloody stags.
They can be nasty when them fawns are getting born.’
He retrieved his jam sandwich from the rim of the tank.
‘Have a nice time, and behave yourselves,’ he concluded, and walked off in the direction of the garden.
‘Christ 'ent it bloody 'ot,’ Billy Tolboys breathed the  words as he took his arm from around Mary's waist and expertly swung the heavy stone jar on to his shoulder and took a deep swig.
Five minutes before, the roar of their motorcycle exhaust had broken the Sunday afternoon slumber of the village of Ham.
Old Harry James had straightened up from his gardening as they passed, and called to his wife, standing in the window.
‘Listen to that Amy, that Jerry plane that crashed in the park didn't make as much bloody row as 'im.’
They rode over Ham Green and parked the bike on the grass verge by a five barred gate.
After climbing the gate, they shared out the picnic load and began sweating their way up the five hundred yards of steeply rising ground towards the Park wall.
That was when Billy paused to take liquid refreshment
Yanto, who was twenty yards ahead with Molly, had turned on hearing the unmistakable sound of cork leaving bottle.
‘Steady on mate,’ he shouted, ‘that's got to last all day, and there's only a gallon in that jar.’
The game park at Ham consisted of three hundred and twenty three acres of prime Gloucestershire hunting country.
Being completely enclosed by a wall, ten foot high in places, gave it an air of complete timelessness.
In fact once inside the Park, one had the definite impression of having stepped back into the past.
‘Coo, ain't it high,’ Mary squeaked, as the party reached the towering wall by the crossing style.’
‘Yeah,’ replied Billy, ‘the Great Wall of China must be something like this.’
The style cum ladder was a beautiful piece of woodwork.
It had been assisting people over the wall longer than anyone could remember.
Built of solid oak, with steps on either side and a neat little turn style on the top, it was a typical piece of old world craftsmanship.
The girls declined their gentlemanly offer to allow them over first, realising that once at the top, the boys would have a beautiful view of their unmentionables.
‘Spoil sport,’ Yanto grunted and climbed over.
On the other side of the wall they all experienced a  different atmosphere.
In the shade of the huge pines it was relatively dark and cool.
On their left was the old gate house guarding the main entrance to the Park from the road Many was the carriage and pair that had galloped through that archway.
‘Bit spooky 'en it,’ Mary whispered as they prepared to climb the short steep bank in front of them.
Once at the top of the rise, they found themselves on a flat plateau, of which most of the park area consisted
Dotted here and there were the various sized pine coverts.
These woods gave cover to the herds of wild deer which for centuries had provided sport for the kings and nobility, guests of the Berkeley family at the nearby castle.
The deer were now safe apart from the occasional culling, their role having now been taken in modem times by the unfortunate fox.
The walking was now easy on the flat springy turf.
‘Let's have a blow,’ Billy suggested, ‘it's getting hotter by the minute.
Christ knows what it's going to be like in July if this weather keeps up.’
‘What a lovely view,’ breathed Mary, as they all stretched out on the grass.
The panorama of the estuary was spread out below them like a landscape masterpiece.
The river was at high water and with the green tree-clad Severn grounds sweeping down to the high water mark, it was a sight to behold ‘Best county in the country,’ said Billy in a matter of fact way.
What they did not know was that in ten years time, that beautiful picture was to be blighted by Britain's first commercial nuclear power station.
‘Just think,’ Yanto remarked, ‘only a month ago that whole area you can see there was under water.
In fact the whole of the Berkeley vale.’
‘Yeah,’ Billy interrupted, ‘the great flood they called it.
They reckon that half of Gloucester City was under water.’
‘Looks like it's going to be a year of extremes,’ Yanto grunted
After a brief rest they walked on across the plateau.
Billy suggested they look for a shady spot for the picnic in the covert they were approaching.
‘Good idea,’ Yanto replied, ‘then we can dump all this stuff and have a mooch around’
As they entered the covert they found it cool and gloomy after the brilliant sun outside.
Even their footsteps were silent on the thick carpet of pine needles built up over countless years.
‘It's spookier than ever in here,’ Mary whispered ‘It's even worse if you see the headless horseman,’Billy replied, with a mischievous grin.
‘The what?’ shrilled Mary, stopping dead in her tracks.
‘The headless horseman,’ continued Billy, keeping his face away from her to hide the grin.
‘A few years ago one of the old boys from Ham was doing a bit of rabbit poaching up here and a headless horseman went riding by as cool as you please.
All glowing and white 'e was.
By the time the old boy got home, his hair had gone snow white.
That's what I was told anyway.’
‘For Christ's sake Bill, don't be so bloody daft,’ said Yanto angrily.
He had noticed Mary's shocked face.
‘He's having you on Mary.
Don't take any notice of him.’
‘You sod,’ shouted Mary, with obvious relief, and threw a large pine cone at Billy, narrowly missing his head.
Shortly afterwards they found the ideal spot.
A small glade ablaze with sunbeams.
They placed the baskets in a convenient hollow by a large pine and covered them with the blanket.
The cider jar was placed in the cool shade.
‘Come on then you lot,’ shouted Yanto, ‘Let's have a wander and get ourselves an appetite.’
As they wandered happily through the sun dappled splendour of the woods, Yanto turned suddenly to the girls.
‘Would you like to see the fairy princess's castle?,’ he said with a grin.
‘You're kidding,’ Mary laughed ‘Come on,’came the reply, ‘you'll see.’
They wandered on, aimlessly kicking at the pine cones.
‘What's that?’
Molly remarked suddenly.
She was pointing at a recess scraped in the soft earth and pine needles.
Scattered around the lip of the hole were several clumps of brown fur.
Obviously from an animal.
‘Looks like something has been killed there doesn't it,’ she exclaimed Then she noticed the boys grinning.
‘What is it?’ she said again suspiciously.
‘Well, put it like this,’ replied Billy guardedly, ‘it means they didn't eat all the deer during the war.’
‘What do you mean,’ insisted Molly.
‘It's a rutting hole,’ explained Yanto.
‘A what?’ interrupted Molly naively.
Yanto tried to be serious as he explained to the girls, which wasn't easy with Billy's skinny six foot frame shaking with mirth alongside him.
‘Well, when a stag mates with a hind, he first scrapes a hole in the ground Then he gets her head and shoulders down the hole, leaving her rear end sticking up in the air so he can sort of get at her easier like.’
Both the girls had started to turn pink.
‘But what's all that hair?’
Molly insisted again, ‘there's enough venison around that hole to make a good stew.’
The boys burst out laughing at her remark, then Yanto controlled himself and went on.
‘Well, during the action the stag tends to get a bit excited, and starts ripping chunks out of her neck!’
Billy looked at the girls perplexed faces.
‘I bet you 'ent half glad you're not a couple of female deer,’ he laughed
As they broke out of the covert on to the open parkland the bright sun made them squint.
‘There you are Mary, the fairy castle.’
Yanto was pointing across the valley to the next hill, on top of which stood a tall ancient tower with turreted ramparts.
‘Ooh, I see what you mean,’, Mary shrilled excitedly.
‘It looks like something out of a story book.’
‘Yeah.’
Yanto continued, ‘it was built same time as the castle.
From the top of the tower you can see the castle ramparts.
They used to signal to each other when there was trouble about.’
‘Can we get to the top,’ Mary enquired eagerly.
‘You can,’ came the reply, ‘there's a spiral staircase inside, I gather, but the gamekeeper lives there now and I don't  particularly want to meet him.’
‘What about a cool off,’ Billy suggested ‘Where?’the two girls replied in unison.
Billy pointed down into the valley.
At the base of the slope immediately below the tower was a small lake.
A miniature thorn-clad island dominated  its centre, standing out darkly against the surrounding bright water.
‘We spent some time in there when we were kids, didn't we Yant?’
Billy shouted, ‘fancy a trip down  memory lane?’
‘Why not,’ came the reply.
The two of them galloped off down the steep grass bank.
With squeals of joy the girls hitched up their skirts and charged after them.
Five minutes later they stood on the grassy bank looking down at the brown water.
There was a wooden sluice gate situated in the bank close to where they stood ‘What's that?’ came the inevitable female enquiry.
‘The pond is fed by an underground stream,’ Yanto explained ‘The estate just tops it up when necessary.’
‘I wonder if those mirror carp are still here Yant?’
Billy asked with shining eyes.
‘Remember, we used to stick 'em with spears.
Two buggers used to fill a bucket.’
Yanto cast a cautious look towards the gamekeeper's tower, but it appeared to be deserted ‘Well, there's one way to find out.
You fancy a paddle?’
Yanto looked at the two girls as he spoke.
‘How deep is it?’ they asked.
‘About three foot.’
‘We'll get our skirts wet.’
‘Hang 'em out to dry when we have the grub,’ said Billy, with his usual grin.
The girls looked at each other, then agreed ‘Right,’ said Yanto, ‘then this is what we'll do.’
Ten minutes later they all met together again on the bank.
At Yanto's suggestion they had each gone off and found themselves a long thin stick apiece.
Billy used his penknife to fashion a needle sharp point on each of the sticks.
While he was thus engaged, Yanto began to explain his plan of action to the girls.
The lake was roughly circular in shape.
The island in the middle was also more or less round.
Thus the distance from the bank to the nearest point of the island was about the same all the way around It resembled a moat, about thirty yards wide.
Yanto looked at Mary.
‘You and Bill go in, spread yourselves out and wade around the island in that direction,’ he indicated to the left.
‘Me and Moll will do the same in that direction.’
He pointed to the right.
‘Make as much of a splash as you can and the fish will run in front of you, if there is any fish left in here that is.
So your fish will be dashing towards us and our fish will be dashing towards you.
By the time the four of us meet up  we should have all the fish in the pool between us.’
‘And that's when they start to panic,’ Billy interrupted, ‘then they start flapping around on the surface and we start sticking 'em; dead easy.’
The girls listened in fascination then began to tuck their skirts into their knicker legs.
‘They don't bite do they?’
Mary asked as they gingerly entered the water.
‘Course not,’ came the snorted reply.
The girls squealed as their feet sank into six inches of mud, but they persevered after encouragement from the boys and found the bottom much firmer as they waded out a few more feet.
Then they found that their skirts were getting wet.
By the time they reached a point half-way to the island the water had reached their hips so they gave it up as a bad job and began to enjoy themselves.
‘Right, let's spread out a bit and get back to back,’ said Yanto with a grin, ‘you ready Bill?’
The two boys stood back to back, the girls did the same.
With a final tally-ho, they began wading forward, thrashing the water in front of them with their sticks.
By the time they were half way around, Yanto noticed slight disturbances on the surface of the water ahead of them, He began to get excited ‘They're still here Bill,’ he shouted
billy and Mary were out of sight behind the island ‘Yeah,’ Billy's reply drifted over.
The disturbances became more and more apparent as they continued.
‘It's like walking in slow motion, isn't it?’ laughed Molly alongside him.
They saw Billy and Mary appear from behind the island still thrashing the water as they moved towards them.
‘Keep bashing the water Moll,’ urged Yanto.
As the gap between the four of them narrowed, fin marks began cutting the surface of the shining water, this way and that.
Yanto cast an excited glance towards the tower.
It still appeared deserted Their excitement was such that he doubted if they could stop now even if the gamekeeper did appear.
Suddenly, as Billy and Mary got within twenty yards of them, the water erupted The girls screamed and cowered away as large, panic stricken fish  surfaced and flapped around in confusion.
‘There must be bloody 'undreds of 'em,’ yelled Billy, as he lunged his spear at one flapping monster.
Yanto wasn't listening.
He was getting a bead on a fish literally trying to run across the surface of the water to his left.
 Coolly , he thrust the point of his spear into the centre of the foaming maelstrom, and felt the resistance as it struck home.
With a whoop of triumph he lifted his spear into the air with the skewered mirror carp struggling on the shaft.
The sun glinted on the silver scales as it struggled in vain.
‘Must be five pounds at least,’ Billy yelled, as he desperately tried to keep the shoal penned between the four of them.
Things had now degenerated into a blood lust.
The girls had got over their initial shock, and shrieked with excitement as they thrust at everything that moved.
Another large fish came flapping across the gap.
In  its blind haste to escape, it came straight towards Molly.
‘Stick the bugger,’ yelled Billy.
In a mad impulsive movement, which Molly later insisted was self defence, she jabbed desperately at the oncoming fish.
Through sheer good luck, or bad luck, depending on whether you were Molly or the fish, the spear struck home.
As she lifted her stick in the air she stared in dumb amazement at the big carp jerking in  its death throes.
‘I didn't mean to do that,’ she yelped Yanto thought she was going to cry.
‘Selwyn will be pleased that you did,’ he quipped
Suddenly the fish were gone.
The only disturbance on the water now was of their own making.
‘Sod it,’ shouted Billy, ‘I ain't got one.’
The madness had probably lasted no more than thirty seconds, but they were all breathless from their efforts.
Yanto cast another apprehensive look towards the tower.
‘Better get back into the woods I reckon.
If old Jess Purvis is home he must have heard that row.’
‘Yeah,’ Billy agreed, ‘Jess would shag us if he caught us in here with his fish.’
Molly turned on him angrily.
She was still upset from her reluctant kill.
‘I wish you would show us a little more respect,’ she snapped, ‘your  language is dreadful.’
They made their way back to the bank with Billy following, a little more subdued than usual.
The picnic food was excellent.
The episode in the lake, plus the walking, had put an edge to their appetites.
For the last hour they had done justice to Molly's superb cooking.
There was cold faggot with apple chutney, home made of course.
Superb apple pie with sultanas and cloves, interspersed with crusty bread sandwiches of every description.
It was a feast, swilled down in the boys' case at least.
with pints of good cider.
Not for the first time, Yanto realised what an excellent cook Molly was.
I wonder how Julie stacks up in the grub stakes, he mused to himself.
After filling his cracked white china mug for the third time, Yanto lay back against the mossy bank and gloried in his contentment.
He ran his hand up and down  Molly's spine as she sat beside him sipping her tea ‘Have a drop of scrump,’ he said quietly, and offered her the jar.
To his surprise, Molly threw away the dregs of tea in her beaker and held it out for him to fill with the frothing liquor.
She took a couple of mansized swigs, screwed her face up slightly then leaned back beside him.
‘This is the life, ain't it Moll,’ he murmured and began to stroke her back again.
‘It's lovely,’ she breathed.
‘I didn't know I could have such a good time so close to home.
It's like being on holiday.’
‘It's the company, Moll,’ he whispered mischievously, ‘with the right bloke life is a holiday.’
‘I know,’ she replied and looked at him without smiling.
There was no mistaking that look.
His chemistry began to work overtime.
Billy and Mary were fooling and rolling about in the sunbeams on the edge of the clearing.
The sun and cider were also having their effects on them.
Yanto silently caught Billy's eye and flicked his own eyes to the right.
Billy got the message.
‘Come on gal,’ he shouted, laughing as he stood up, ‘let's see if I can find a deer to show you.’
Yanto and Molly followed them with their eyes until they were lost from view among the trees.
Then they  looked at one another for a second and kissed passionately.
As they kissed Yanto slid his hand under her still damp skirt, and very gently massaged the soft mound of her femininity.
She began to moan aloud with uncontrolled excitement.
As he took his hand away and began to unbuckle his belt, Molly suddenly sat up.
‘What's up Moll?’ he asked breathlessly.
‘Oh Yanto,’ she moaned softly, if we do this every time we see one another, you are bound to get me into trouble, and that would kill our Dad.
‘It won't kill your Dad at all,’ he said, as he fished in his pocket, ‘because I have no intention of getting you into trouble.’
He had learned his lesson regarding being prepared from the previous Friday night.
He pulled out the little packet of contraceptives and showed them to her.
‘What's that?’
He explained their function to her and she relaxed a little.
‘This is nineteen forty seven Moll, not the dark ages,’ he urged.
‘Go on, put it on for me.’
She looked at him quizzically.
‘How?’ she asked.
Yanto took her hand, and with his help she began to undo his fly buttons.
She gazed in dumb fascination as his erect manhood sprang into view.
He ripped open one of the little silver foil packets and handed her the lubricated ring of rubber.
Again with his help, she reverently rolled the condom down the shaft of his erect member.
They looked at each other again.
It was obvious that she was now completely under his spell.
He took her gently by the waist and pulled her on top of him.
Even in her naivety she realised what was required of her.
She pulled up her skirt, opened her legs and straddled him.
As he kissed her again he slowly felt for the gusset of her panties, pulled them to one side and entered her expertly.
There followed a mad five minutes when they were oblivious to everything, even the possibility of the other two returning.
Molly had secretly enjoyed her initiation to sex on the night of Yanto's near drowning, but then she had had to curtail her natural emotions for fear of waking her Father.
But this was something else.
She was lost in her own delirium and clawed him unmercifully as she rode the mad race.
He gasped with  the effect of keeping with her.
He felt he was going to climax early and desperately tried to think of other things to take his mind off it in order to last until she was ready.
The sweat was pouring from him when the ultimate moment arrived.
They peaked together and rolled on to their sides exhausted.
‘Christ Moll, what happened?’ he gasped in awe, and rubbed his scored shoulders.
Her pretty perspiring face split into a sheepish grin, then became serious again on reflection of being taken over by her baser instincts so completely.
‘I don't know,’ she muttered, ‘I don't know what came over me.
That's what you do to me, see.’
He looked at her perturbed face.
‘Well please don't worry about it love, that's how it should be.
I've said it before and I'll say it again, you're sure some sort of woman.’
He lit a cigarette and lay back.
He beckoned her to do the same.
With a big sign she lay her head in the crook of his arm and closed her eyes.
Nigger Asnett trudged along the deserted castle walk, lost in his own thoughts.
Twenty minutes earlier he had alighted from the Gloucester train at Berkeley station.
He had spent a couple of minutes chatting to a slightly wary Tom Cotter, the Station Master, before starting the two mile walk home to Ham.
Tom had reason to be wary.
He knew Nigger's reputation.
He had only ever had one bit of trouble with him personally, but he remembered it well, He had caught Nigger, then fourteen years old, putting a sleeper across the rails, just to see what would happen to the train.
There had been an aura of menace about the boy even at that age, and Tom had often pondered his real reason for not reporting the incident to the police.
Was it benevolence, or fear of reprisal?
As he walked on, Nigger pondered on his future.
He still smarted from his treatment at the military prison, but realised that he must try to control his violent nature if he was to amount to anything.
He was suddenly shaken from his thoughts by a car which slid silently to a halt beside him.
It was a large green Armstrong Siddeley.
But it was the driver that made him halt abruptly.
It was a girl, and she was indeed beautiful.
‘Want a lift,’ she said and smiled.
There was something vaguely familiar about her.
He got in.
Julie Murchison pulled expertly away.
Yanto watched the smoke from his cigarette drift lazily up the shaft of the sunbeam which bathed Molly and himself through a gap in the greenery above.
He felt a complete peace.
His body had now completely relaxed after his frantic efforts with Molly a few minutes before.
This, combined with the after effects of good food and strong cider, gave him a feeling of total well being, seldom experienced in this life.
His languid mind began comparing this moment to the noise and confusion of Arnhem, the battle that had ended his war.
It seemed like only yesterday that he had presented himself at Manchester's Ringway Airport for training with the newly formed Parachute Regiment.
He was a raw young bull, itching for more action and glamour in his life.
He wanted to cover himself with glory, and what better way than getting accepted by this new elite.
The talk was that those good enough to pass the special high standards required by the regiment, would receive wings and special regalia, which was sure to appeal to the ladies.
After two weeks he had begun to wonder if he had done the right thing.
Hard was not the word.
But his confidence had grown as he watched some of his comrades fail the requirements and return to their units.
He was still here and he would succeed.
Then, after a couple more weeks, that strange phenomenon appeared, just as it had appeared after his first two weeks of basic training with the Royal Army Service Corp.
It was as though the British Forces were able to instil a form of masochism into their people.
The harder it became, the more he and his remaining  comrades enjoyed it.
Whether it was the competitive spirit, the determination to beat the next man, or platoon, or just being super fit.
Anyway, having experienced these things made him able to appreciate times like the present.
A thistledown floated into the bright phallus of the sunbeam and hovered over his face.
He watched it, his eyelids growing heavier.
‘Looks like a ‘chute’,’ he thought dreamily.
‘Up eight hundred, four men jumping.’
The little Royal Air Force instructor's barked command rang through the still morning air, sending a chill through the four men standing to attention by the cage.
It was the first suitable wind free morning since they had reached first jump status, and this was it.
Yanto, the last of the four as they marched into the cage, was desperately trying to control his fear.
He kept repeating to himself what his Mother had drummed into him as a child.
‘Remember son, you are as good as anyone you will ever meet.’
The instructor smiled as he went to each man in turn and pulled out two full arm lengths of cord from their parachutes before attaching it to the static line.
After making each man check that his own line was securely attached, he moved them to the far end of the cage and sat them down on the wooden bench.
A sudden jerk brought Yanto out of his stupor.
The winch man was running out the cable, allowing the barrage balloon to rise.
Already they were fifty feet above the ground, and rising.
The steel bars of the cage were enclosed by tarpaulin sheets to protect them from the elements, except for one side, which was open with just a simple lift bar to move before exit.
Yanto took a quick look between the bars and felt his bowels sag.
He resolved not to look at the ground again until he felt his 'chute open.
He had taken some comfort from the fact that he had been the last man to board the cage, so at least he could watch Yorky and the others exit, before his turn came.
But would he?
He looked around.
As they filed aboard, the instructor had moved each man as far as possible up the cage before sitting them down.
Yanto realised to his horror he was now the nearest man to the exit bar.
The instructor's next words confirmed it.
‘Last man in, first man out, lads.’
The tough wiry little man said the words in a cheerful manner, still with the big smile on his face.
He was a warm hearted man, who realised the trauma experienced by the men on their first jump.
Parachuting was still in  its infancy, and not without accidents.
The new regiment was the Army's first experiment in sending men into battle by this novel method.
But the Germans had paratroopers so the British had no alternative.
The Royal Air Force were the only experts; hence the little RAF instructor.
As the balloon reached the eight hundred foot marker, he began chatting lightheartedly while at the same time watching the flag man on the ground.
The blue flag was showing, which indicated they were still manoeuvring the balloon into position.
He carried on his lighthearted banter to the rigidly tense men.
Yanto wasn't listening.
He was remembering some of the talk during training.
Some men insisted that it was not possible to make your first jump without voiding your bowels.
He had laughed at the time, but the way his stomach was behaving now, he began to fear they had not been jesting.
‘Please God,’ he prayed, ‘don't let me shit myself, I would rather die,’The flag showed yellow.
‘Stand up lads,’ the instructor smiled, ‘first man step forward.’
Yanto stood by the bar looking rigidly into space.
The Corporal instructor spoke quietly in his ear, reminding him of a few basics, and unobtrusively removed the lift bar at the same time.
Yanto was aware of the wind in his face as the instructor glanced down at the flag man again.
‘For God's sake, let's go,’ he groaned to himself.
He thought he was going to faint.
Suddenly a hand slapped his shoulder.
‘Go!’
Yanto stepped into space.
He fell with eyes clenched shut.
He was aware of the  wind roaring in his ears and tearing at his clothes.
The tug when it came was much gentler than he had imagined it would be.
He decided to open his eyes, and immediately knew how God must have felt when he first observed his new creation.
The early morning sun made even the dark distant mass of Manchester look beautiful.
As he slowly revolved he observed all points of the compass with eyes wide in wonder.
Woods, fields, brooks, materialised through the morning mist to be dappled into perfection by an early, creamy sunlight.
No great master could have done this scene justice.
He looked up at that big beautiful canopy of silk billowing above him, the brilliant white contrasting with the blue of the sky.
He was bursting with joy.
He had done it.
Any horrors waiting for him in the future were compensated by this moment in time.
How could a human being experience such total contrast of feelings in a matter of seconds.
From deadly trauma to exotic delirium.
He noticed three other parachutes away above him, and couldn't resist yelling and screaming his ecstasy towards them.
To cap it all, there would be no need to change his underpants.
Suddenly the ground was racing up to meet him.
‘Christ, should he be coming in that fast?’
His mind raced over the landing instructions.
Legs together, knees bent, mustn't cap this beautiful experience with broken ankles.
He hit the ground hard, but felt no pain.
Following instructions to the letter, he rolled his body, but banged his helmeted head hard against the firm turf of the airfield.
He lay there, slightly dazed, but happy.
Then he saw the fire.
‘A fire!’
What fool would build a fire in a dropping zone?
To his horror he realised his hand was lying in the embers.
He desperately tried to drag his hand away, but it wouldn't budge.
His hand started to burn.
He screamed.
Then, with a desperate effort threw himself bodily away.
There was another scream as Molly was thrown away from his frantic struggles.
‘What the hell!’
He came to, and knocked the burning cigarette end from between his fingers.
He felt foolish as he looked at Molly who was on all fours amongst the pine needles looking at him in open mouthed amazement.
‘Sorry love,’ he mumbled, ‘I've been bloody dreaming.’
Yanto drained the last dregs of cider from the stone jar and watched Molly clear up the remains of the picnic.
It had been great fun, much more so than he had anticipated.
He watched as Molly flapped the blanket free of crumbs and folded it neatly.
She was certainly a terrific girl, he told himself ruefully.
His common sense told him that this was a girl for him, but that sophisticated vision of Julie Murchison kept blurring the scene.
‘Where do you think the other two have got to?’ she said, and looked around, ‘no sign of them.’
Yanto grinned to himself.
‘We'll wander back,’ he said as he picked up the blanket and baskets, ‘expect we'll meet 'em coming back.’
After checking that the two mirror carp were well packed in newspaper, he curled his arm around Molly's waist and they began to stroll back up the track.
As they chatted and laughed about the events of the day they almost fell over Billy who was stretched out in the undergrowth snoozing with a contented grin on his face.
‘Where's Mary?’
Molly demanded.
‘She wandered off to find some pine cones,’ Billy replied, and stretched his tall skinny frame.
‘She said she varnished 'em or summat.’
Billy took one of the baskets from Molly, and the three of them wandered on through the wood.
Suddenly they heard Mary calling for Billy in a shrill excited voice.
‘Wo's up?’
Billy yelled back.
‘Come and see, quick,’ Mary shrieked.
They broke into a trot and found Mary standing in the middle of a thicket.
She was holding something.
All Molly's motherly instincts erupted when she saw what it was.
Mary was holding a tiny fawn, and it couldn't have been more than a few days old.
‘Isn't she beautiful,’ gushed Molly, ‘let me hold her please?’
‘It's a boy,’ grunted Billy, after careful observation.
Molly ignored him, and cuddled the beautiful creature.
The baby deer nestled in her arms and looked at them with enormous brown unconcerned eyes.
The only sign of fear was a nervous tremble in the long spindly legs.
‘I saw that bush move as I passed,’ Mary jabbered excitedly, ‘I was scared for a sec, but I moved the bush and there it was.’
Yanto looked around.
‘ Its Mum and Dad can't be far away,’ he said, then continued, ‘stags are normally nervous, but they get dead vicious when they think their young are threatened.’
Almost as he spoke they heard a crashing in the bushes at the top of the ridge above them.
The head and antlers of the magnificent full grown male appeared on the skyline not fifty yards away.
It was a dirty grey white in colour.
‘Christ, it's one them white buggers,’ yelped Billy.
‘Put the fawn down and move back,’ Yanto commanded.
Molly hurriedly put the little animal back in the bush, but the damage was done.
With a shake of its magnificent antlers the stag charged down the slope towards them.
‘You three run for it,’ yelled Yanto.
Billy hesitated.
‘You look after the girls,’ Yanto yelled again.
With that the three of them made off as best they could.
Yanto had an idea The stag had stopped momentarily, its spread antlers had tangled in the thick brambles.
Yanto shouted at the beast to attract its attention away from the fleeing threesome, while at the same time squeezing himself into a tight batch of young saplings.
He prayed that this idea would work.
It was either that or tackle the beast with his bare hands.
He knew that in this berserk state those horns could open him up like a ripe melon.
The enraged animal freed  its antlers from the brambles and with a springing bound, crashed into Yanto's protective cage of saplings.
He shrank back fearfully as the horns scythed back and forth among the fragile trees, only a foot  or so from his vulnerable body.
He couldn't believe that this normally timid creature could be capable of such aggression.
As the stag bored in again, Yanto took his chance.
Gripping the edge of the blanket he moved as close to the fearsome head as he dared.
Then coolly and carefully he tossed the rough cloth over the lowered horns.
As the surprised beast lifted  its head, the rest of the blanket dropped over  its snout and eyes, effectively blinding it.
His plan had worked.
The stag stood back again snorting and shaking  its head, but the rough material was well tangled in the antlers and stayed put.
Yanto broke out of his protective screen and ran as he had never ran before.
As he raced up the narrow track he took a quick look over his shoulder.
The stag was thrusting this way and that, but was still blinded by the blanket.
As he reached the edge of the wood, he found the others waiting for him fearfully.
Billy had armed himself with a stout stick.
‘Oh thank God you're safe,’ gasped Molly.
As they ran on together across the flat open plateau, Yanto explained breathlessly what he had done.
They were congratulating him when Mary screamed and pointed to the rear.
They looked back and saw the stag bound out of the wood.
‘Christ, he got rid of the blanket,’ yelped Billy.
They were now running alongside the wall, but still a long way from the crossing stile.
They looked back again.
The stag was now at full gallop on the springy turf.
‘We'll never get to the stile,’ gasped Billy and prepared to turn and face the animal.
‘We can get through that hound flap,’ screamed Molly, and pointed ahead.
At intervals, all around the park wall, wooden flaps are built into the base of the wall to allow the Berkeley Hunt hounds access into the park during the fox hunting season.
During a hunt the wooden flaps were always raised.
The flag which they were rapidly approaching was closed.
‘It'll be locked,’ groaned Yanto, ‘we'll have to tackle the bastard between us Bill.’
‘Try it for Christ sake,’ yelled Billy.
Molly pushed desperately against the eighteen inch high wooden flap.
It swung up and open.
The drumming of hoofs was loud in their ears as Molly wriggled through on her stomach.
An almost demented Mary followed her.
As Yanto went through, Billy turned and hurled his stick at the oncoming stag, which hesitated slightly.
As Billy reached the other side, there was a sickening crash as antler met wall.
‘Christ, that was close,’ Yanto gasped, as all four lay on the grass gulping air.
‘Yeah,’ grinned Billy, ‘but what do I say to our Mam, that was her blanket.’
They all laughed their relief.
The motorcycle started with the first kick.
They sat there for a while feeling drained and empty.
‘What time is it?’
Billy asked.
‘Quarter to six,’ came the reply.
‘Stupid bloody licensing laws,’ spat Billy, ‘I could do with a drink.
Joe Asnett's place is just a hundred yards up the road, and don't open 'til seven.’
They moved off.
As they passed the silent Salvation Inn, Yanto glanced to the left at the Murchison house.
No sign of Julie, but someone was walking up the drive towards the house.
Yanto stiffened.
He would know that profile anywhere.
It was Nigger Asnett.
THE CONFRONTATION
Yanto was deep in thought as he walked over the canal bridge that evening.
What the hell was Nigger Asnett doing walking up Julie's drive?
He felt a pang of jealousy.
Nigger could only have arrived home that same day and already he seemed to be queering Yanto's pitch.
He pushed it out of his mind as he approached the Blue Boar.
Molly and Mary both had things to do that evening, so Yanto had arranged to meet Billy in the Boar to round off a good weekend.
A good weekend it had certainly been.
He had enjoyed the picnic much more than he had thought possible.
Yes, he and Molly certainly seemed to hit it off well.
He felt good.
He had put on his best button down shirt and striped tie, which together with the tailored worsted slacks had annihilated his clothing coupons.
A drop of precious Old Spice aftershave had added the final touch, and now he wanted a drink.
The bar room was warm and inviting as always, and just enough people to be comfortable were enjoying the cosy environment.
He spotted Billy lounging against the far corner of the bar talking to Sooty Hill the joker.
Billy brayed with laughter at something Sooty had said as Yanto joined them.
‘Tell Yant that 'un Sooty,’ Billy commanded between hoots of laughter.
Sooty turned to Yanto, who was already grinning with anticipation.
‘Well,’ said Sooty, with his usual poker face, ‘there was this squadron of French Foreign Legionnaires, see?’
Yanto had already begun to laugh at Sooty's serious face.
‘Ang on a minute,’ Sooty snorted, ‘I ant bloody told you yet.’
Yanto regained his composure and Sooty continued.
‘Well, they had been besieged by these hostile Arabs in their desert fort for months, see, and they was bloody starving.’
Yanto couldn't help it, he began to hoot with laughter.
Sooty was famous for his jokes and it was said he could make a cat laugh just by looking at it.
Sooty waited with patient resignation as the two boys regained  control.
Yanto had to suck in his cheeks as Sooty continued.
‘Well, they had eaten all their K rations see, then they started on the camels and the mules, then the cats and dogs, until finally there was nothing edible left in the fort.
Anyway, one morning the Commandant called them all together on the parade ground.
‘Well gentlemen,’ he said, ‘we are faced with a very grave situation.
I've got some bad news for you, but I've also got good news.’
‘Tell us the bad news first Sir,’ they all chorused.
‘Very well,’ said the Commandant, ‘I am afraid all the food is gone and we are now reduced to eating camel dung.’
Great groans and gnashing of teeth emitted from the ranks.
‘Quick Sir,’ shouted a trooper, ‘what's the good news?’
‘Well,’ said the Commandant, ‘we've got three hundred and fifty tons of it.’
Yanto had just taken a swig of cider, and instantly sprayed a dozen regulars as the uncontrollable spasm of laughter erupted.
He and Billy were literally on their knees with mirth as Sooty looked on impassively.
‘Somebody take the pratt away,’ groaned Yanto, holding his aching stomach.
The unconcerned Sooty ambled away to join another group.
The next hour passed amiably, by which time the two of them began to feel the effects of the day.
The gallon of cider at the picnic plus the four pints of the last hour was giving them that lovely sleepy lethargic feeling.
It was just after ten o'clock, and Yanto began to think of his bed.
‘With a bit of luck we should get picked for the Russian ship tomorrow Bill.’
‘Yeah,’ Billy yawned back, ‘should keep us going for a week at least.’
At that moment the babble of voices in the bar ceased, and a hush descended.
Yanto saw Billy's mouth drop open as he looked over his shoulder towards the door.
‘Christ,’ he breathed.
Yanto turned and saw Julie Murchison and Nigger Asnett enter the bar.
Julie spotted him and walked towards him, smiling.
She looked stunning in a beautifully cut peach coloured suit and matching shoes.
The navy blouse contrasted perfectly.
She looked the  epitome of elegance and good taste, with the confidence of a woman who knows she is  beautiful.
‘Hello again,’ she bubbled, ‘guess what?’
‘I was driving home from Berkeley today and I stopped to give a chap a lift, and look who it was.’
She turned and looked towards Nigger, who was standing in the doorway talking to one of the locals he knew.
‘Isn't it great,’ she continued, ‘all together again, just like when we were kids.’
Yanto grunted some inaudible remark and was introducing her to a goggle-eyed Billy as Nigger joined them.
Yanto grudgingly admitted to himself that Nigger was a fine looking fellow.
The tastefully cut dark blue suit, obviously bought abroad, complimented his dark good looks, giving him a Cary Grant image in the austere setting.
Billy must have been reading his thoughts.
‘Christ,’ he breathed, ‘you two look as though you come straight from Hollywood.’
Julie smiled at him but Nigger ignored him completely as he stuck his hand out to Yanto.
‘Hiya Gatesey,’ he said softly.
He still had that same cruel grin which tended to twist the right side of his mouth.
‘Hello Nig,’ Yanto replied straight faced, ‘home at last, eh?’
‘How did they treat you?’
‘Nothing I couldn't take,’ he replied, with the same arrogant grin.
Julie stood there looking at one then the other.
She sensed a strained explosive atmosphere between them as they exchanged small talk.
Knocker came over to serve them with a slightly worried look on his face.
‘What Ho, Nigger, nice to see you home,’ he lied.
‘What can I get you and the young lady?’
‘Hiya Knock,’ Nigger replied, ‘nice to see you too.
I'll have a double scotch with water,’ he turned to Julie, ‘what's your poison, my love?’
Yanto felt his gut tighten at the term of affection.
‘Could you possibly prepare me a John Collins Mr Nelmes,’ she said with a smile.
‘I acquired quite a taste for them in the States.’
‘I couldn't,’ Knocker grunted, ‘don't get much call for 'em around here, but I expect the Missus can.’
With an irritated raise of the eyebrows, he called to Renee who was observing the group from the other end of the bar, and  made the request.
Renee shot a disapproving glance at Knocker and began preparing her drink.
Nigger turned his attention to Yanto and Billy.
‘What about you two.’
They both ordered cider, which Knocker was drawing as Renee came over and placed the colourful concoction in front of Julie.
‘Christ,’ said Billy, ‘you supposed to drink that or eat it,’and gave his usual raucous laugh.
‘That is a civilised drink, you peasant,’ growled Nigger.
Billy looked annoyed and was about to say something when Knocker came back with their two pints of cider, looking more like tea cups in his massive fists.
‘That will be five and tenpence please,’ he boomed, sensing the discord among them.
Nigger pulled out a wad of notes large enough to choke a horse, gave Knocker a pound note, and told him to keep the change.
Billy's eyes stared at the wad in disbelief.
It must have represented at least three weeks wages for the average man in the village.
Yanto felt a surge of cold anger course through him at this blatant piece of exhibitionism.
‘I didn't know they paid that well in the nick,’ he heard himself say loudly.
Several people in the bar looked around and Knocker moved closer to the bar flap.
Now it was Nigger's turn to be annoyed.
‘Watch your lip Gatesey,’ he said in a quiet voice, which held more menace then a shout ‘You of all people should know there is always an angle for a bit of profit, like salmon poaching for instance.’
Yanto, flushing with rage, moved towards him.
With a loud thud the barn flap flew up and Knocker, with a speed contrary to his barn door dimensions, stood between them.
‘I want to go home now Nathan.’
Julie used Nigger's real name in a voice shrill with alarm as several customers in the vicinity moved to the far end of the bar in one fluid movement.
‘I think the lady wants to go home,’ said Knocker quietly, ‘and I think that is an excellent idea, don't you?’
He looked at them both in turn.
Nigger picked up his scotch and tossed it back in one easy movement.
He was thinking about his earlier resolve to keep out of trouble, especially with all these witnesses.
Yanto was also having second thoughts about getting into a fight over such a silly incident, and realised it was caused as much by jealousy as anything else.
Plus the fact that Nigger would be no pushover.
‘Well?’ said Knocker, eyeing them both again.
‘I'll let it go this time Gatesey, but one of these days I shall have to give you what I should have given you when we were kids.’
‘Any time you're ready,’ Yanto growled, his anger beginning to rise again.
Nigger grinned as he turned, ‘evening all,’ he said, and walked out into the night.
Julie looked at Yanto.
‘Really,’ she snapped haughtily, and stalked out.
Seconds later they heard the Armstrong start and move away with a screech of tyres.
Knocker mopped his brow.
‘I ain't bloody having that every time you two buggers get together mind,’ he said, and went back through the bar flap.
The two boys picked up their pints and moved over to a couple of chairs by the fire, just vacated by an elderly couple.
‘Christ Yant,’ Billy whispered, ‘I can see trouble coming with that bastard.’
‘Yeah, as sure as God made little apples,’ came the reply.
They both took a deep swig.
Yanto's mind was in a turmoil when he reached home that night.
An hour before, he had begun to feel sleepy.
Now, the last thing he needed was sleep.
The incident with Nigger had honed his mind to a razor edge.
He remembered his mother telling him about Sid Watkins' request for another salmon.
He grinned to himself.
It hadn't taken Sid long to dispose of the monster.
Then, of course, there was Bert Midgeley.
He still owed Bert a fish over the bike deal.
He looked at his watch.
It was eleven thirty.
The evening tide had been a modest eighteen footer and had ebbed to low water an hour ago.
There was a bank of salmon traps over at Clapton which he hadn't visited for ages.
These traps were known as putchers, a small basket with a large weave designed  specifically for salmon, as opposed to the Kipes at Purton, huge baskets with a five foot diameter mouth and a small weave, designed to catch anything.
Clapton was also an isolated spot where the traps were usually left for a couple of days before being checked.
His mind made up, he pushed his bike out of the shed.
It started with his first kick, and keeping the machine as quiet as possible until clear of the village, he set off for Berkeley.
Two hours later, a tired but elated Yanto had climbed into bed and nestled into his mother's clean Sunday night linen.
His luck had held.
The night had been mild with a blustery wind.
As always, he had revelled in the wild isolation of the estuary shoreline.
Standing by the old timber ponds at Clapton, another of his childhood swimming holes, he had felt his tension being blown away by the eternal winds of the Severn.
There was some moon which would illuminate the scene suddenly, then be gone as though switched off by the scudding cloud.
This had made it easy for him to reach the traps as there were no banks here as such, just fiats of mud and rock.
To his absolute delight the first trap had held what must have been a seven pound salmon, plus a couple of mullet which he had ignored.
To cap it off, the last but one trap contained a ten pounder.
Later, as he rode home in the cool night air, a vision of old Bert's delighted face as he presented him with the larger fish invaded his mind's eye, and filled him with contentment.
‘Belt up now and listen for your names.’
The agent for the shipping line was standing on an upturned milk crate outside the pool hut which was situated close to the entrance to the wharfs.
Forty to fifty lean tough dockers who were milling around the hut chatting and laughing, came to an expectant hush at his command.
‘These are the men who will work on the…!’
The agent hesitated as he tried to read out the name of the Russian ship from the bill of laden in his hand.
He gave up.
‘On that bloody  Russian rust bucket over there,’ He waved his hand towards the ship's superstructure which could be seen towering over the dock offices.
Some raucous laughter followed the ribald remark.
There was another hush.
Yanto, who was standing alongside Billy, kept his fingers crossed.
This was important.
The gangs had already been selected to work on the other three small coasters which had arrived over the past weekend.
Out of the fifty odd men left, only about thirty would be required to unload the Russian ship, big as she was.
The rest faced a week on pool money, no good to man nor beast.
‘Turl-Browning-Goulding — Watkins.’
The familiar local names droned from the agent's lips and Yanto began to feel apprehensive.
‘Gates.’
Yanto relaxed, then became concerned for Billy.
The married men did, after all, tend to get more consideration.
The list ended with no mention of Billy Tolboys.
‘Oh, bollocks,’ groaned Billy.
‘No sweat mate,’ Yanto tried to console his mate.
‘There's a ship in the basin waiting to come in.
You'll probably be picked for her mid-week.’
‘I s'pose,’ Billy spoke with resignation, ‘our Mam bin dropping hints about wallpapering the front room.
Looks like she'll get her wish.’,
They arranged to meet at the Blue Boar on the following Wednesday night, then Billy jumped on his bike to ride home.
‘Don't forget mind Yant, any fags or booze going on that ship….’
He left the rest unsaid.
Yanto nodded, picked up his bait bag and joined the other lucky ones.
As he walked towards the towering ship, he mused over his good fortune.
During his first week as a raw stevedore, Cliff Barrett the dock foreman, had come aboard the ship he was working on and said something insulting and disrespectful to him.
He couldn't remember now what it was, but it had made his blazing mad.
Yanto, who would do anything for anybody who asked him nicely, also had a very short fuse when it came to insults, especially in front of witnesses.
He had grabbed hold of Cliff and had him halfway over  the ship's side and would have dumped him into the dock had he not been restrained by a couple of his workmates.
He had expected the sack at the time, but strangely enough he had had more than his share of work from that day on.
‘Must be a moral there somewhere,’ he mused, as he ran up the gangplank.
By the middle of May, the already warm weather was beginning to turn into an exceptionally hot Summer.
Nigger Asnett, who had been taking it very easy since his homecoming, decided it was time to start work.
Between leaving school and going off to war with the Navy, he had worked on the Sharpness tugs for British Waterways.
In this tight community, he had been guaranteed his job back, and was due to start on the coming Monday.
So this being his last free Wednesday for a while, he had decided to give himself a treat.
One of his old associates he had chatted to in the bar a couple of nights previously, had mentioned how much he enjoyed his regular visits to the Turkish baths in Gloucester.
This had interested Nigger.
His ship had been in Japan just after the surrender and he had enjoyed a couple of visits to the bath houses in Yokohama A part of the treatment there had included an exhilarating massage carried out by a young girl who, by standing on his inert naked body, and by using her body weight as a substitute for arm muscle, had given him an unforgettable massage with her bare feet.
He didn't for one minute expect that sort of treatment in Gloucester, but that was how he would spend this afternoon.
It was while in Japan that he had beaten the Petty Officer half to death in a drunken rage.
They had sent him home to do two years in a military prison and his dark oily skin had suffered while inside.
He was still suffering from blackheads and other rash problems which jolted his vanity every time he looked in the mirror.
A good Turkish bath, his friend had told him, would open his pores and  flush out all the impurities.
So, with this in mind, he borrowed his Father's van and drove towards Gloucester looking forward to a relaxing afternoon in the steam.
That same day, Julie Murchison was sun bathing on the front lawn when the L.M.S.
Railways van drew up outside the big house.
Her beloved two-seater Kayak had arrived from America at last.
Barney gave in to her pleas, and agreed to transport the canoe down to the Little Avon river on the roof-rack of the Armstrong after lunch.
The thought of drifting along in the sunbeams, under the willow of the brook with only the frogs and water-rats to keep her company, filled her with glee.
Barney Summerville gave a grunt as he lifted the lightweight canoe off the car's roof-rack.
Keeping it raised above his head, he staggered to the edge of the grassy bank and dropped the craft on to the surface of the clear water.
He cursed under his breath as the flat bottom caused the water to cascade over his brown boots.
Two minutes before, he had driven over the humpback bridge by the Berkeley Hunt kennels, then turned immediately left into Mill Lane, alongside the brook, where there was a convenient little spot by the bridge, ideal for launching small craft.
‘You really are a darling Barney,’ Julie laughed, as she lowered herself into the rear of the two individual cockpits and pulled the waterproof liner around her waist.
He handed her the double bladed paddle as she continued, ‘I shall go down as far as Browns Mill, so could you possibly pick me up here about five thirty?’
Barney nodded resignedly as he gave the canoe a push with his foot, and watched it drift out into midstream.
The underside of the road bridge was of fiat construction, with about three feet of clearance above normal  water level.
He watched as Julie lay back in the canoe and moved under the bridge by pushing against the fiat underside with her hands.
Being quite a wide road bridge, she had a fair distance to travel in this fashion.
With the underside of the bridge only inches above her face, it was as well she was not troubled with claustrophobia.
As she disappeared from view, Barney turned and walked back to the car.
‘Should 'ave bin a boy,’ he grinned as he slammed the door.
‘Ahhaa!!’
Nigger's anguished cry rang through the Turkish suite, temporarily disturbing the therapeutic calm.
As it was his first visit, the attendant had suggested that he get a good sweat on in the steam room first, then move on to one of the dry heat rooms to continue sweating in comfort on one of the beds provided.
He had stepped into the steam room to be met by a blast of hissing scalding fog which caused him to breath in sharply, thereby promptly burning his nose.
‘Breathe through yer mouth,’ the gruff voice came through the steam.
Nigger could vaguely see a figure sitting on the stone slab on the left hand side of the small room.
In spite of the steam, he could see that the stone bench, which was a fixture, continued all around the steam room.
So, as the other person already occupied part of the left hand bench, he quite naturally went over to the right hand bench and promptly sat down.
That was when his cry had rent the calm.
The bench he had chosen to sit on was part of the inlet system which housed the vents from which the hot steam was emitted.
It was blistering hot and definitely not for sitting on.
It had also long been a great source of amusement to the more belligerent regulars as they watched the uninitiated stumble in and sit down.
Such a regular was Fred Coe.
Nigger had gone about three feet in the air.
Then Fred's voice came through the steam again, this time accompanied by a cackle of laughter.
‘You ent supposed to sit over there, gets too hot and  burns your ass.’
‘Thanks a bloody bundle for telling me.’
Nigger barked in annoyance, and moved out into the more bearable climate of the dry heat rooms.
After half an hour on the bed in the dry heat he was really enjoying himself and was perspiring profusely.
He watched the globules of sweat as they oozed from his pores then ran in countless little rivers down his brown skin.
He became aware of the excessive beating of his heart, and remembered the attendant's advice not to overdo it on his first visit.
The cold plunge was in the adjoining massage room, and on surprisingly weak legs he made his way there and gratefully dived into the plunge.
The ice cold water made him gasp, but after swimming a couple of lengths of the plunge, he got out feeling an  exhilaration beyond belief.
Now he could understand why the Finns came running out of their saunas and rolled themselves in the snow.
Earlier, he had been amazed by the amount of sludge being discharged by his pores, so before going back to the hot-rooms, he went to the wash handbasin and scrubbed his face with a will, and imagined all his blackheads disappearing down the drain along with the waste water.
‘Hello, it's Nigger Asnett, isn't it?’
Nigger awoke from a slumber and sat up.
As he did so, the large puddle of perspiration which had accumulated around his body on the rubber sheet of the bed, slopped on to the floor.
There was a tall muscular man of about his own age standing naked before him, grinning from ear to ear.
‘Don't you remember me?’ the craggy features grinned again.
Nigger remembered.
‘Terry Littlejohn,’ he grunted and stuck his hand out.
Nigger had first started running around with Terry and his twin brother Joe, in his mid-teens, and it was then that his many brushes with the law began.
He had felt an affinity with the brothers because they were a couple of hard nuts, but he had also found they had definite criminal  tendencies.
‘I didn't know you were home,’ said Terry, as he sat down on the adjacent bed.
‘Last I heard you were in detention quarters in Portsmouth.’
Nigger flushed, ‘I was,’ he replied and explained to Terry the reason for his incarceration.
‘How's your Dad?’
Nigger enquired.
He had always like Reg Littlejohn, who was a widely respected river pilot.
He and his wife Rita, had been model parents to the twins and had never understood why their sons were basically bad.
‘He's okay!’
Terry replied, ‘he's retiring next year, fit as a fiddle, but still as soft as shit.’
‘He's a good old boy,’ Nigger growled, ‘I'm surprised he's still fit having to worry about you two buggers all the time.’
Terry laughed again.
‘Well, you have to make a quid somehow and there ain't much money in firewood.’
The brothers had a wood business, buying old trees from the various farmers, cutting them into logs and selling them around the locality.
Everyone knew it was a front for less savoury operations.
‘Talking about work,’ said Terry, ‘when are you going to start doin' summat?’
Nigger told him he was due to start back on the tugs on the following Monday.
Terry sat up and showed great interest.
‘Back on the tugs, eh?’ he said quietly, tugging on his moustache, ‘we might be able to make a bob or two between us there mate, what with the old man on the pilot boat as well.’
Nigger asked him what he meant, but Terry wouldn't be drawn, he just tapped the side of his nose and winked.
They continued chatting for a while, in which time Nigger got the definite impression that the six months in jail that Terry told him he had recently endured for receiving stolen property, had taught him nothing at all.
Fred Coe padded by as they talked, with his huge beer belly hanging and flapping in front of him, like a charwoman shaking the door mat.
He winked at Nigger as he passed.
‘How's your ass?’ he quipped, and disappeared into the small dry heat  room, laughing his head off.
‘Did you see that guts?’
Terry grunted in disgust.
‘The state some of these old boys let their bodies get into, old Fred there ain't seen his dick for ten years.’
Nigger laughed, and told Terry about his burnt posterior episode.
‘Yeah, old Fred's a real card, but I'll get him for you tonight.’
Terry replied with a grin.
‘I always pop into the Prince of Wales for a few bevvies when I leave here, so does Fred.
He thinks he can play spoof, but I usually come out of the pub legless with as much money as I went in with.
He'll never learn.
‘By the way,’ Terry continued, ‘you like a drink, fancy coming with me?’
‘No thanks mate,’ came the reply, ‘I'm on the other side of the bar tonight.
Promised the old man.
Got to do something to earn my keep.’
Terry shrugged and stood up, ‘Please yourself, I need some more steam,’ and walked over to the steam room.
He tugged open the warped door and was immediately engulfed by the steam from the cauldron within.
Before entering, he turned to Nigger, ‘Don't forget,’ he said, tapping his nose, ‘I shall be in touch.’
Shortly afterwards Nigger decided he had had enough heat for one day.
He swam around in the cold plunge for five minutes to close his pores, then towelled himself vigorously before jumping on the scales in the rest room.
He was surprised, there was not an ounce of fat on him, but he had shed five pounds.
Once outside in the fresh air he felt marvellous and made a mental note to attend the Turkish baths regularly.
As he made his way back to the van, the thought did occur to him that it might be prudent to stay clear of the likes of Terry Littlejohn.
But there again, Nigger Asnett had never been accused of being a prudent man.