

KEEPING A HEALTHY BODY
The Things People Say
‘Middle life is a time for making all sorts of adjustments and adaptations.
It is also a time for reviewing your attitude to your health and well-being .’
Dr Jean Coope,The Menopause 
‘There's plenty of evidence to show that getting a little puffed and increasing your heart rate is good for you.
Doctors agree that there are no risks in regular exercise, as long as you start gently and gradually build up to the more strenuous activities .’
The Sports Council
‘Eating for the benefit of your health doesn't mean chewing your way through mounds of bran and raw carrots.
Healthy food can and should be delicious.’
Living Today leaflet
‘Obesity is one of the most common, important and avoidable causes of ill-health in the middle-aged and older in the civilized world .’
A doctor
‘Glandular changes can make some people gain weight at the menopause but the commonest cause is eating and drinking more than you need .’
Dr Jean Coope,The Menopause 
‘I've always had a battle with my weight.
When I had the children I put on lots of weight which I never really lost.
It's not the quantity I eat — sweet things are my downfall .’
Working wife and mother
‘The big question is: do you really want to stop smoking?
Because this is the key to success.
Make up your mind you are going to stop, and you will .’
Health Education Council booklet
‘Once you think you've got it licked, you're in trouble.
Alcoholism is a chronic, progressive and sometimes fatal disease .’
Former US First Lady, Betty Ford
The modern trend in medicine — like the ancient biblical view — is to see human beings as whole people, recognizing that it is bad practice to treat separate parts of a person without looking at the total man or woman.
The mind and emotions are involved as well as the body and any physical symptoms of illness that may be present.
In practice, many doctors are too busy to take a long hard look at every patient.
Too often it's still a matter of exit patient, clutching a prescription for aches, pains and infections.
In this book, spiritual, mental and emotional well-being come first in this section on health and beauty, because caring for the needs of the inner person is not only of primary importance in itself but is also a great step towards achieving physical well-being.
Of course we also have to recognize that in the kind of world in which we live, it is possible to have inward peace and security and yet to suffer from various problems with our bodies.
In fact the process may work in reverse.
Physical pain may affect our tranquillity and peace of mind, so that the mind reacts to the body as well as the body to the mind.
Our job is to keep every part of us as healthy as possible, for the good of the whole person.
When we reach midlife, our bodies need a bit more care than when we were younger.
Someone, rather unkindly, has used the analogy of a car that needs more servicing when it is no longer fresh from the showroom.
Well-person clinics, where men and women around the forty mark can have tests to check their physical fitness, already exist.
But until preventive medicine becomes cheaper and more readily available, most of us must rely on our own common sense and on the reliable information which is available in order to keep ourselves running smoothly.
When we feel good we look good, so much that is said about health might equally well come under the heading of beauty.
Health of body, health of mind and beauty are divided into separate chapters here only for the sake of giving information in a readily accessible way.
In order to feel well and look our best and most beautiful, all the chapters in this section need to be considered as part of a whole.
Eating to keep fit
‘You are what you eat’is a favourite maxim, and eating the right things is important in order to be healthy at every stage of life.
The problem is, what is good to eat and what is harmful?
Fashions change at an alarming rate and at any given time experts hold differing views.
One honest booklet on food and health explains, ‘The main reason why there are conflicting views about the effect of food on health is that we simply don't know all the answers yet.
Research over the past years has begun to answer lots of questions, but much still remains to be sorted out.
And until that time, it is inevitable that experts and commentators will interpret the interim results in different ways.’
At the end of 1986 a group of professors, doctors and nutritionists in Britain produced a book repudiating ‘crude and simplistic propaganda’ about foods alleged to be healthy and unhealthy.
Those concerned were anxious that instead of recommending or condemning whole ranges of foods outright, balanced, moderate eating patterns should be encouraged.
The message seems to be that the best diet is one where as many different foods as possible are included and where meals are planned to include:
bread — at least half should be wholemeal
pulses, such as peas and kidney beans
rice and pasta, especially brown or wholemeal
oatmeal or high fibre breakfast cereal
skimmed or semi-skimmed milk
fish — both white and oily
very lean meat
poultry — but without the skin
eggs
lots of different vegetables (including potatoes) and fruit
Another way of putting across the same kind of message is:
eat plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables.
eat plenty of fibre-rich foods.
cut down on fat, sugar and salt.
get plenty of variety in what you eat.
This kind of eating is easy, whether cooking for a family, for two or for one.
Leaving potatoes unpeeled and providing fresh fruit instead of fat- and sugar-rich puddings is a great time-saver.
It's good to know that the easiest snack in the world — baked beans on (wholemeal) toast is also doing you good and not costing much in money or preparation time.
Most doctors and nutritionists would agree that cutting down on fat, especially animal fat, and sugar are two good rules for eating in midlife, even though not all agree that positive proof of their harmful effects is conclusive.
Eating to lose weight
When we are fat, losing weight is important for our health but it is also a great boost to morale to feel more attractive because we have managed to shed surplus pounds.
In this chapter the emphasis is on the importance to health of keeping within certain weight limits.
Guides to ideal weight often seem arbitrary and inflexible.
It helps to know whether you have a small, medium or large frame.
For women, the average circumference of the wrist is eight inches/20cm and of the ankle nine-and-a-half inches/24cm.
The pelvis, measured across the front of the stomach between the two bony hip points you can feel with your fingers, is on average nine inches.
If you are below or above these measurements, your build tends towards one end or other of the average frame size.
It isn't fair!
People who don't put on weight take it for granted that the rest of us are greedy and lacking in will power.
While it is a fact that we often eat much more than we imagine we do (try writing down everything you eat over a period of a week and prove the point), it is a fact that some people put on weight far more quickly than others.
Research has shown what most of us have always known, that people can be divided into two groups, ‘easy weight gainers’ and ‘hard weight gainers ‘.
When it comes to achieving the right weight for health, and maintaining it, some of us are going to have a far harder task than others.
Being overweight is dangerous.
Overall it lowers life expectancy and among other things increases the risk of high blood pressure, diabetes, heart disease, gallstones and gout.
And, as if that is not enough, it causes extra problems for joints of knees, hips and lower back, causing osteoarthritis and aggravating the condition where it already exists.
Breathing is affected and bronchitis is more likely to occur in overweight people.
By midlife our bodies become less efficient at burning up calories.
Women — rather unfairly I feel — tend to burn up calories less efficiently than men.
A little bit of excess weight — say five or ten pounds — is not considered harmful, but for those who are seriously overweight or who need to lose some pounds because of their medical condition, the problem is knowing what diet to follow.
Doctors generally agree in warning us against:
crash diets
cranky diets
low-carbohydrate diets
low-calorie diets
high-fat diets
low-fluid diets
In many cases, the long-term effect of such diets is to replace all the pounds lost and some of the diets may be positively dangerous.
Far better to change eating habits so that a sensible pattern is established, easing up when a satisfactory weight is reached, but still keeping to the same ‘right’ kind of foods.
It is better to lose a steady two or three pounds a week than to achieve a drastic weight loss more dramatically, only to replace the lost pounds a few months later.
There are any number of sensible diets set out in paperbacks or reputable magazine supplements, many of them suggesting specimen meals for a week or a month.
Some menus are expensive or not realistic for those also cooking for a hungry family, so it is a matter of choosing a programme that suits your lifestyle and purse.
All aim to restrict calorie intake but most allow for one small treat a day, such as a small glass of dry wine or a chocolate biscuit.
Here are some medically recommended guidelines from which you can plan your own menus:
Every day eat at least:
one helping of one of the following: lean meat, white fish, poultry, cheese, nuts
one helping of: brown cereals, wholemeal bread, potatoes
two helpings of one of the following: green vegetables, a large mixed salad, fruit
one pint of fluid such as: water, soup, low calorie drink, lemon tea
Remember that how you cook food is also important.
Cut out frying or use minimal fat in a non-stick pan.
Steam or microwave vegetables to retain vitamins and flavour.
Women may have problems keeping weight down at the time of the menopause and after, and men and businesswomen have their own difficulties if their work involves a good deal of sitting at a desk or car wheel, and giving or receiving hospitality lunches.
They will need to find ways of shedding the accumulated pounds.
Exercise
Some pessimists have calculated that enormous exercise workouts would be needed in order to achieve even modest weight loss, but it is now recognized that exercise does effectively help to burn up calories by speeding up the body's metabolic rate for some time afterwards.
This is especially true of vigorous games of squash or fast running.
In general, the gentler the exercise, the less it is an aid to slimming.
But exercise is an important part of keeping fit for many other reasons.
It lessens the risk of coronary heart disease, is good for lungs as well as heart, keeps muscles and bones healthy and in women helps to prevent osteoporosis (thinning of the bones).
It also neutralizes the ill effects of sitting at a desk all day and eating large lunches.
A bout of exercise of any kind is a wonderful outlet for the frustrations that build up during the day and it helps to release tension and enable us to relax.
The golden rule is to begin gently and not to plunge into a sudden regime of vigorous exercise.
Those over forty should build up slowly over several months before arriving at a suggested target of half an hour three times a week of vigorous exercise, which can include dancing, squash, tennis, running, or energetic swimming.
Gentle exercise is valuable too but needs to be taken most days in order to do us real good.
Those of us who feel we are too busy or not dedicated enough to set aside time for exercise periods can utilize our daily routine to provide at least some opportunities to keep fit.
Walking or cycling to work or to the station instead of using the car, and exercising the dog regularly (breathing deeply and keeping a good posture as we walk), are ways of incorporating exercise into the normal schedule.
Household duties provide plenty of bending and stretching, which can be consciously made the most of.
A group of American housewives discussed how they combined an exercise routine with everyday living and one recommended her method of keeping a pan which she constantly used on a high shelf, so that she did plenty of stretching every day.
For almost everyone, whatever their age, circumstances or disability, some kind of exercise is appropriate and healthy.
Exercise tones you up all over and as well as making you feel fresher and fitter, it helps you to sleep better.
People who work in an office may have their own particular problems.
Midlife is a time when the results of bad posture can cause trouble.
Check that the desk is the right height and that you can use the equipment on it without straining.
‘Sit tall’ instead of slouching.
Get fresh air and some exercise whenever possible.
Sleep
Most of us need less sleep as we get older — perhaps five or six hours a night instead of eight.
It is reassuring to remember that fact when we lie awake worrying about how we are going to feel next day.
Sleeping tablets are not recommended, partly because the kind of sleep that they induce is not thought to include the dream sleep that our bodies and minds urgently need.
A very occasional half tablet might be prescribed by the doctor to restore a habit of good sleep that has been broken.
Normally, for those in good health, it is better to rely on one or more of the commonsense aids to a good night's sleep.
Unwind before going to bed — TV, radio, crossword, light reading, taking the dog for a walk, listening to music, etc. can all help.
Don't go to bed hungry — a warm milky drink may help.
Take a warm, not hot, bath.
Sort out any matters that are bothering you, or make a list of people to phone or write to, shopping to be done, etc. next day.
Get enough exercise during the day to be physically as well as mentally tired.
Make sure that you are the right temperature; that you have enough air; that mattress and pillows are comfortable.
Put right any relationships that need sorting out; be at peace with God, yourself and others.
Commit yourself to God's care — reading a Bible verse helps many people.
Lying awake in the small hours, after falling asleep quickly, can become another maddening habit.
Worrying about your problems, which seem larger than life at that time of night, is hard to resist.
So too is worrying about being awake for so long.
Some people who sleep alone read, do a crossword, or listen to the radio for a while.
Others get up, without disturbing their sweetly sleeping partner, and do jobs — anything from planting out seedlings to preparing books for the auditors!
The least productive thing to do is to keep trying to go to sleep.
Accept the wakefulness, finding your own alternative to being asleep, and sleep, in its own contrary way, is more likely to come.
And at least you will not have worn yourself out with unavailing efforts.
Some women suffer from sleeplessness during the menopause and return to more regular sleep patterns later on.
Disturbed sleep patterns may also be one symptom of depression, which requires medical help.
When the depression is cured, sleep will return to normal too.
Smoking
An Australian visitor was surprised at the number of people still smoking in Britain and the areas where smoking is allowed.
In the large university where he teaches in Australia smoking is banned in all rooms, including common-rooms and refectories.
And no one complains.
Those who champion smokers' rights should surely recognize that non-smokers, including babies and children, may be harmfully affected by other people being free to smoke in public places.
The arguments against smoking range from unpleasant effects — breath, skin, hair and clothes that smell of stale smoke, stained teeth, irritable cough — to health danger: lung cancer, heart disease and chronic bronchitis.
The financial as well as the health cost is high.
In order to give up smoking successfully a person must genuinely want to do so.
Parents may be motivated by the fact that a child whose father or mother smokes is far more likely to smoke too.
They may also feel that they have no right to put  their children at risk by making them passive smokers.
They will also consider the risks of a habit that could lead to their own early illness or death.
There are various clinics and self-help groups to support and encourage those wanting to kick the habit; but a lot of determination will be needed to get through the first difficult weeks or months.
Advisers say:
Don't try to give up at a time when you are already stressed.
Be realistic about how difficult it is going to be.
Stop altogether — don't try cutting down gradually.
Resist friends' invitations to ‘try just one’— even six months later.
Don't despair if you've tried before and failed.
It often takes more than one attempt.
Try again!
A sympathetic doctor may help and so will friends and family ready to give support and put up with unreasonable behaviour for the first few weeks or more.
Alcohol dependence
Medical opinion is still divided on whether alcoholism is a disease, possibly inherited, or whether an alcoholic only lacks will-power in order to stop drinking.
The World Health Organization has recognized alcoholism as a disease since 1951, and the American Medical Association for nearly as long, but in a recent court case the US Government argued that alcoholism results from excessive drinking ‘chosen freely’.
It states that ‘even those medical authorities who label alcoholism a ‘disease’ concede that it is a disease that can and does involve significant elements of volition’.
A drink problem is less to do with enjoying alcohol than with using it as a means of coping with pressures of various kinds.
It is suggested that men become addicted to alcohol as a result of two quite different situations at work.
Those who are climbing the career ladder fast may use alcohol as a booster to help them to achieve, and those who recognize that they have failed to reach the top may also turn to alcohol, in an attempt to bolster their failing self-image.
Women are becoming more prone to alcohol dependence, either through similar career demands or because of loneliness, boredom or the heavy demands made by family and older relatives.
The fact that alcohol can be bought in every supermarket has made it far easier to come by, especially for housewives and young people.
Alcohol can be a source of enjoyment but it is a drug with extremely serious side effects.
Excessive drinking can affect:
liver — death rates due to cirrhosis of the liver are steadily rising
stomach — inflammation leading to peptic ulcers, and a slowed rate of healing
heart — can become fatty and heart muscles may be weakened, causing heart failure
The effects of too much alcohol are not limited to the person who drinks.
Efficiency at work is decreased and judgment impaired, with possible serious results.
The terrible toll of road deaths is heavily weighted by the number of drivers who have been drinking.
Drunken pedestrians can cause accidents too.
Drinking affects personal relationships, causing marriage breakdown and harming the children in the family.
Alcoholism is an illness that needs urgent treatment.
There are groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous who are able to help, and a limited number of hospitals and clinics where treatment can be given.
But it is essential for the man or woman to be prepared to admit that they have a drink problem and be ready to receive help, if there is to be any cure.
What's the limit?
Most people make the change from occasional social drinking to alcohol dependence gradually.
Because of the added pressures that often occur at work and in the family at midlife, people are particularly at risk of increasing their drinking at this stage.
The only reliable way to calculate how much you are actually having is to keep a diary for a week, noting how much you drink, where you drink it and with whom.
A ‘standard’ drink is calculated as one of the following:
half a pint of beer
glass of wine
small glass of sherry
single measure of spirits
quarter pint of strong cider
A suggested sensible limit is:
for men two or three pints, or their equivalent, two or three times a week 
for women two or three standard drinks, two or three times a week
There are many occasions when no drink at all should be the rule, particularly when driving, operating machinery or taking certain medicines.
It is also important to remember that upper safety limits depend on the person concerned.
Women are more affected by alcohol than men.
Their lower body water content means that the alcohol is less diluted.
A woman's liver is also more readily damaged by alcohol than a man's.
Individuals also differ in their alcohol tolerance.
The choice to go without alcohol altogether is a real and valid one.
More people are providing non-alcoholic drinks in their homes and at parties for the sake of those driving, and it is possible to invent a whole range of interesting and appetizing non-alcoholic drinks that are absolutely free from lethal side effects.
When to see the doctor
Certain diseases are particularly associated with middle life.
When men and women reach forty, they may fear increased possibility of suffering strokes, heart attacks, or high blood pressure.
Some doctors advise check-ups at this age but most of us wait to visit the surgery until we suspect something is actually wrong.
If you are anxious about your blood pressure, go to the doctor rather than a department store where the service may be offered.
There are also machines on sale for measuring blood pressure, to be used at home.
The best medical advice is that only a qualified medical person should make the check.
Apart from anything else, readings can be misleading to the uninitiated.
Physical exercise or anxiety can cause inaccurate readings.
The medical name for high blood pressure is hypertension.
It is not a disease in itself, but a condition which may give rise to problems if not controlled.
Anyone with chest pains should also go to the doctor, especially if the pain goes down the arm.
No one can guarantee a way of avoiding heart disease but the risks can be greatly reduced.
Doctors advise:
don't smoke
eat healthily
take regular exercise 
go easy on alcohol
avoid stress when possible
To avoid hypertension the single most important action is probably to lose weight.
There is some evidence that salt is bad and many people have cut salt intake in recent years.
Smoking is out and so is too much alcohol.
In fact, the healthy eating rules that apply to everyone, stand us in good stead for preventing high blood pressure and heart disease.
Osteoarthritis (sometimes called osteoarthrosis by doctors) is another common complaint of midlife, often more troublesome for women at the menopause and afterwards.
It is one of many forms of rheumatism and is thought to be the result of wear and tear on joint surfaces, particularly hips, knees and spine.
Research indicates that there may be other causes which could explain why younger women also suffer from what should be an elderly person's complaint.
Although there is no known cure for osteoarthritis, there are some ways of making it less of a problem to ordinary living.
It is very important to keep weight down so that there is no extra strain on joints.
Doctors may prescribe anti-inflammatory drugs to control both inflammation and pain.
Gentle exercise, heat, warm baths and pain killers may all help to keep the pain within manageable bounds.
Physiotherapy may help, and various forms of alternative medicine, particularly acupuncture, can give pain relief.
It is always important to consult a practitioner who has qualifications recognized by your doctor.
Learning to live with pain
Aches and pains sometimes ease up when the menopause is over but many of us will have to settle for a certain amount of back pain, headaches and limited movement from now on.
We may not be able to digest foods as easily as we once could.
We may find that provided we are not too tired or hard pressed we can manage nicely, but particular weak spots flare up when we overdo things.
Coping with minor ills is very much a matter of learning how to live with them, making small but helpful adjustments to our way of life without letting the complaint loom too large or take over our lifestyle.
A rheumatologist told me that his aim was to enable his patients to go on living their particular chosen lifestyle with the least possible hindrance and pain.
Normality should be our aim too, but spartan endurance in the face of pain is not the answer.
When back pain and arthritis are the problems it can help to take short rests or breaks from a long stint in one position — say sitting at a desk or standing at an ironing-table.
Find the right balance between enough exercise and enough rest.
Make sure that your mattress is firm enough and your pillow comfortable.
If you have to carry a heavy load, divide the weight between two bags.
Learn the right way to get out of bed, and to pick up a heavy object.
Find out what gives you pain relief — hot baths and heated pads or cold packs (a bag of peas from the freezer will do nicely).
No one is going to want to hear about your aches and pains, but that is no reason why you should suffer more than is necessary.
Don't make a fuss but don't be a martyr.
Get any medical help available, then set about finding your own way to manage your disabilities.
Plenty of other people, unknown to you, are doing exactly the same.
ACTION CHECKPOINTS
If necessary (be honest)—
Eat less.
Drink less alcohol.
Cut out smoking.
Check your diet against healthy food recommendations and adjust where necessary.
Adjust cooking methods for healthier eating.
Get more exercise.
Go for a medical check if necessary.
Check if mattress and pillows need renewing — for better sleep and relief of aches and stiffness.
Come to terms with minor health problems and take time to learn how to manage them.
KEEPING A HEALTHY MIND
The Things People Say
‘I was forty-five.
We had been on holiday in Scotland and I was doing the washing on the Monday when suddenly a huge black cloud seemed to descend — a mass of fear, anxiety and utter depression .’
A housewife
‘Smoking tobacco, drinking excess alcohol and taking drugs of dependence…should be stopped or severely curtailed.
They are false friends because they provide the illusion of temporary relief from stress, while in reality making the processes of defence and successful adaptation much more difficult .’
Coping with Stress 
‘Stress, in my opinion, is the most significant negative factor at work in modern society .’
D Richard Ecker,The Stress Myth 
‘What is stress?
Anything that makes you tense, angry, frustrated or miserable .’
D G. Wilkinson,Coping with Stress 
‘Midlife is a time when suppressed emotions tend to come to the surface.
They have been there over years and many of the established patterns of reaction are demanding to be looked at .
Doctor and therapist
‘Depression is as universal as the common cold.
It can be so slight as to be hardly worth the name…or at the other extreme, it can almost totally  paralyse  action .’
Myra Chave-Jones,Coping with Depression 
‘To simplify,…the development of a depressive illness depends on two main factors, stress and susceptibility .’
Dr Brice Pitt,Making the Most of Middle Age 
One of the important lessons that doctors and lay people have been relearning in recent years is that physical health and mental well-being belong together.
They cannot be separated.
At one time only a few selected diseases were thought to have links with the sufferer's state of mind, but now it is recognized that a whole range — from cancer to heart attack — may be brought on by worry and strain.
For that reason alone it is important to come to terms with the factors that are causing anxiety and lack of peace within our minds.
It is also important for its own sake.
Nothing is worse than feeling screwed up inside or suffering from a sense of utter emptiness and loss of interest or emotion.
Two of the main villains of the piece in midlife are tension and depression.
Tension
In her book,The Prime of Your Life , Dr Miriam Stoppard writes, ‘Living in the twentieth century means that we feel more stress than any members of the human race have ever felt.’
But a contemporary writer described life in 1883 as ‘this age of stress and transition’.
No doubt stress and change have always characterized human society and psychiatrists point out that these two factors are closely linked.
Any change in situation can produce stress and that includes happy events, such as getting married or winning the pools.
You may have seen a table of life-events which indicates the relative effects of change on stress level.
The death of a spouse and loss of job merit the highest stress rating, and the low end of the scale includes holidays and Christmas!
When several of these life-events closely follow one another, the level of stress is increased enormously.
Considering the number of changes associated with midlife, it is not surprising that stress is especially high at this period.
It is important to recognize that stress is not bad in itself.
The physical reactions that stress triggers help us to jump out of the way of a passing bus, or win the egg and spoon race at the village sports day.
We all need stress in order to achieve and do our best work.
Without it we should not have the motive or stimulus to reach our goals or survive some of the situations in which we find ourselves.
Stress also relieves the tedium of everyday life.
Many people doing boring or repetitive jobs deliberately introduce a certain amount of stress to make the routine more exciting.
I used to set myself time targets for ironing a certain number of shirts and try to beat previous records in order to give zest to an otherwise monotonous job.
Stress becomes harmful only when it exceeds our ability to cope with the situation, or when it continues unrelieved over a prolonged period.
An engineering expert in stress told me that it has recently been discovered that two pieces of metal, indistinguishable unless subjected to sophisticated tests, react differently to precisely the same amount of stress.
One piece remains undamaged but the other breaks.
In the same way, human beings differ from one another in their ability to handle stress and the level at which they can cope comfortably.
Even the same person reacts differently on different occasions, depending on how fit they are and on other circumstances at that time.
Stress may result from a sudden dramatic turn of affairs or a so-called ‘life-event’, but it is more often largely the result of long-term overwork or anxiety.
Years of caring for a sick, disabled or elderly relative, or months of waiting to hear whether a job is to end, cause stress to accumulate in our lives.
It is easy to be unaware of the pressures we are under until they have built up to a head.
We sometimes surprise ourselves as well as our near and dear ones by suddenly exploding into unreasonable anger over a trifling offence which just happens to be the last straw that breaks the camel's back.
When we feel unwell in some way or another we do not always recognize stress as the culprit.
A doctor spoke recently of the many patients who came to him — mostly men — complaining of stiff neck, poor sleep, loss of appetite and failing sexual desire.
None spoke of stress but all were suffering from it, and their physical symptoms were the direct result.
It can be a relief to discover that some of the worrying physical symptoms are not the first indications of some dreaded disease but are stress-related and represent perfectly normal ways of reacting to stress.
But, since too much stress plays a part in causing a number of more serious physical disorders — including heart, breathing, digestive, muscle and mental troubles — it is doubly important to come to grips and control it.
Unwanted and harmful stress should not be accepted as an unwelcome but inevitable ingredient of midlife.
Coming to terms with stress
A first step in dealing with unwanted stress could be to write down all the factors which you think may be causing undue stress in your life at present.
These may include some major events, such as divorce, moving house, suffering the loss of a loved person, or starting a new job.
Over and above such  dramatic ingredients of change and stress you probably have a long-term commitment which is stressful too.
This may involve carrying for someone elderly, or just trying to keep relationships smooth in a house full of teenage sons and daughters.
You may suffer from having more to do in twenty-four hours than is humanly possible, or, at the other extreme, find yourself with too little interesting activity to make each day worthwhile.
When you have made your list, try to decide — with the help of someone close and understanding if need be — how you can cut down on the pressures, or alter the circumstances, in order to relieve excess stress.
Get your priorities right and whittle away the non-essentials.
(For example, the fact that you have always hoovered and polished every week need not mean you must continue to do so.)
Plan ahead to relieve periods of special busyness or tension.
If there is one day in the week on which you visit your mother-in-law and work an evening shift, don't be tempted to do the week's shopping in a crowded supermarket en route.
Try to reserve a small oasis of quietness and time to relax instead.
Emotional well-being is even more precious than time.
Wherever possible, share your worries with someone else.
At this very busy period of life, get all the help you can.
Going it alone is often a matter of pride and does no one a service.
If you are working outside as well as inside the home, try to use some of your earnings to ease household jobs — for example, substitute duvets for sheets and blankets to save laundry and bed-making, or buy a food processor to do in seconds what takes hours by hand.
If you are looking after an elderly relative, make use of any help groups and agencies that exist to relieve you.
See that other members of the family, if you have one, stop depending on you to do everything for them, as they did when they were younger.
If there is still more to fit into a week than is humanly possible, do what a doctor advised me to do.
Sort out your priorities by making a list of all your activities and marking those which you — and only you — can do.
They may include being a wife to your husband, a mother to your children, or a daughter to your parents.
They may also include specific commitments you have taken on, or skills which only you possess.
But you may find that some of these skills could be taught to others, so that you are not always responsible for cooking meals, or washing and ironing clothes.
There is no reason why the ability to use a washing-machine or a pressure cooker should be limited to one person per household!
Men too may need to learn to delegate duties both at work and at home.
Fear of losing our grip may make us hang on to jobs for longer than we should, in an attempt to reassure ourselves.
Give enough time to yourself and your own physical, mental, emotional and spiritual needs.
When you are tense it is hard to relax but that is just what you need to do.
You may be able to make time to join relaxation classes.
If not, there are simple relaxation routines which you can follow for yourself and fit into your daily routine.
Deep breathing is a good method of relaxation and so are the ‘tense and let go’ exercises, in which the muscles of various parts of the body in turn — face, shoulders, hands and so on— are deliberately screwed up tight and then released to achieve complete relaxation.
Walking and swimming are also excellent for releasing tension.
Some activity that will relax your mind is important too, especially just before bed.
Dr Richard Ecker takes a very different view of stress from most practitioners.
In his book,The Stress Myth , he contradicts the usual assumption that unwanted stress is an inevitable part of life and teaches that instead of looking for ways of dealing with it after it has occurred, we ourselves should take action to prevent it happening at all.
It is not other people or outward events that cause harmful stress, but the way we perceive such external factors and our fears of what they will do to us.
Since we cannot control the events of life we must control our responses.
Much of the time we are reacting with unwanted stress because we are afraid of doing damage to our own self-concept.
For example, as parents we may react with undue stress to a teenager who flouts our authority, because we are afraid of losing our self-esteem which is dependent on being able to control our family.
Dr Ecker concludes that ‘the ultimate step in the process of stress prevention is changing the way we view ourselves and our place in the world.
If I can make these changes, I can be freed from my captivity to unwanted stress.
No longer will I hold on to my lifelong belief that events in the world around me threaten my personal identity.
I will understand that my identity in the image of God is secure and that my life has special value…
I can be certain of who I am, no matter what happens in the world around me.’
The stress and tension that result from anxiety are unnecessary burdens.
Jesus taught his followers that life was meant to be lived a day at a time.
It would be foolish as well as useless, he said, to worry about how to cope with tomorrow when there is quite enough to cope with today.
Anyway, we have in God a loving Father who is both aware of our needs and perfectly able and ready to provide for them.
St Paul gave the same excellent advice —‘Don't worry!’
But unlike many well-meaning friends, he followed it up with a practical alternative: ‘Tell God every detail of your needs in earnest and thankful prayer, and the peace of God, which transcends human understanding, will keep constant guard over your hearts and minds as they rest in Christ Jesus.’
(From Philippians chapter 4, J.B. Phillips' translation.)
Depression
It is a great pity that the same word — depression — is used to describe both the common human experience of Monday morning blues and also a clinically diagnosable illness.
Too often, friends and colleagues react to the information that someone is suffering from depression either by agreeing that they often feel a bit down themselves but manage to cope, or else by treating the person as if he or she were suffering from mental disease.
The factors that cause stress can also cause clinical depression and, surprisingly perhaps, as with stress, changes in life which are happy and positive may bring on depression as well as those associated with sadness and loss.
The illness may also be connected with hormone imbalance as in post-natal and menopausal depression.
Genes seem to enter into it too.
Some people have a greater inherited tendency to depression than others.
Depression may result from an upbringing which induced feelings of insecurity, inadequacy or false guilt which have dogged the young adult's steps until they finally come to a head during the crisis of midlife.
Feelings of anger and bitterness towards another person, as well as guilt, which have been pushed down and never dealt with, may also cause depression.
Chronic overwork can bring about depression too.
Only a qualified person can unravel the causes.
Depression may be accompanied by feelings of sadness but more typical symptoms are fear and panic attacks, loss of energy, a general slowing down, even of speech, lack of appetite for food, sex or normal interests, inability to concentrate or make decisions, and disturbed sleep patterns.
The experience of depression is almost impossible to describe to those who have not suffered from it.
It is painful and distressing in the extreme.
But there is a way through and in spite of how the sufferer may feel at the time, there will be a return to normality.
Most of us, men especially, do not readily admit to depression.
It seems to be an admission of failure and weakness, especially when others are coping perfectly well with what appear to be even greater strains.
Sadly, too, psychiatric disorders are still viewed by many people with suspicion and prejudice.
But it is very important to get medical help in the early stages.
Trying to carry on with the normal routine while suffering from depression has been likened to driving a car in top gear with the brakes full on.
Myra Chave-Jones, a psychotherapist, in her book Coping with Depression says, ‘The successful and lasting treatment of depression involves openly acknowledging its existence.
If it is denied or suppressed in some way, it will become a recurring experience, or it will convert itself into some other disorder of the body, emotion or behaviour.
Successful treatment includes resolving the conflicts that produce depression — conflicts from within our inner life, or outer circumstances.
Then it is likely that when we recover we will not slip back again into that same pit.’
Medical help may take a number of different forms.
Antidepressants may be prescribed.
These are not tranquillizers and are non-habit-forming.
Psychiatrists themselves are not certain exactly how they work but they replace certain amines which appear to be low in those suffering depression.
Psychotherapy and group therapy — as an out-patient or in-patient — may also be prescribed.
Many people emerge from therapy far better adjusted and able to cope with life than others who have not been compelled by illness to work through loss and learn to know themselves.
Therapy often helps people to appraise themselves honestly.
They learn their strengths and weaknesses and are sufficiently confident and free to shed the masks that most of us wear in order to hide our inadequacies both from ourselves and from others.
In coping with their depression they will also have gained insights that will help them to understand other people better and be more able to offer acceptable sympathy and help.
Those who have a commitment to the Christian faith are not thereby immune from depression.
In fact they may bear an added burden of guilt.
The Christian life should be one of joy and peace, they feel, so either they have failed God or he has let them down — though they feel guilty for thinking so.
One characteristic of depression is to feel utterly alone and bereft of help or hope and it is therefore almost impossible to feel  God's love and nearness at such a time.
One Christian therapist believes that much depression can be helped if the patient can separate out the love of God from the love of his or her own father.
Parental love may have been conditional, and acceptance dependent on behaving in the ‘right’ ways.
God's love is utterly unconditional and never failing.
One man described his experience of depression in this way: ‘Early in the crisis I became deeply aware that God was my ally.
I could tell him anything, even share with him the contradictory motives within my personality, and he would still love and accept me.
As the crisis deepened and I came into the depression and withdrawal stages, I knew intellectually that God was still my friend, even though I did not feel it emotionally.’
Dr Leslie Weatherhead wrote, in Prescription for Anxiety , ‘Deadness of feeling, even if we think we do not love anybody, not even God, must not make us worry.
Love and trust still exist, but because the emotional machinery that registers them has gone wrong, we do not feel as we used to.
But the machinery can, and will, be mended.
Moreover, the truth that matters is not what we feel, but the fact that God loves us whatever we feel, and his energies are always tending towards our health and well-being.’
Recognizing what God is really like, and knowing that he is our ally, can point the way back to health and wholeness.
ACTION CHECKPOINTS
Examine sources of stress — reduce causes where possible.
Exercise to reduce tension.
Take early signs of depression seriously — get help.
Make opportunities to relax.
Check your personal basis for self-worth.
THE BODY BEAUTIFUL
The Things People Say
‘There is no reason to think your looks will fade just because you have reached the menopause.
You can go on feeling lively and young and be as sexually attractive as you want, so long as you take care of your health .’
Dr Jean Coope,The Menopause 
‘One should not complain that people are keeping their looks…longer than they ever have before.
But what worries me is that, since middle age has been put to fright, will old age descend overnight like a sudden frost on the dew ?’
Penny Perrick, journalist
‘Our outward appearance undoubtedly alters as we get older and for most people the condition of the skin and hair is the final arbiter of age .’
Dr Miriam Stoppard,The Prime of Your Life 
‘The most significant factor about the baby-boomers has been their reluctance to give up their youthfulness.
They've introduced diet consciousness and the whole ‘looking good’ thing.
They've been responsible for making Joan Collins a sex symbol at fifty-three.
A forty-year-old today looks a lot better than a forty-year-old of twenty years ago.’.
John Perris of Saatchi and Saatchi, quoted by Steve Turner in The Times 
‘When taking a fresh look at your wardrobe, editing it to suit your lifestyle, don't neglect to amass a good accessory selection .’
Fashion editor, advising older women
‘Growing older may mean you have to work harder to stay in shape, but it can be done — think of all the glamorous film stars who are in their fifties!’
Living with the Menopause 
‘The more readily someone agrees to grow old, the younger they seem to be .’
Ronald Eyre, television presenter
Most of us would pay lip service to the message of chapter 3, that the clue to true beauty is to be found in personality and character.
A beauty that springs from inward tranquillity and an unselfconscious concern for others contributes to the kind of beauty that will outlast youth.
Good nature and a sense of humour, as well as an alert and well-stocked mind are also reflected in the face.
We recognize, too, that a healthy lifestyle contributes more to looking good than skilfully used cosmetics.
Keeping weight down, getting exercise and eating the right foods are important to beauty as well as health.
Many of the health tips in chapters 4 and 5 are beauty tips too.
Eating the right kind of food and having a balanced diet is important not only for weight control but for the well-being of skin, hair and every other part of us that we tend to treat in terms of beauty rather than health care.
In spite of acknowledging all these factors, most of us still spend an inordinate amount of time prettifying and refurbishing the outside of ourselves.
After all, that is the first thing about us that others see and a well-groomed, well-dressed image reflected back at us from the mirror goes a long way to bolstering our private and public confidence.
Magazine articles, in an attempt to help us improve that image, advise us to stand sideways on, without our clothes, before a long mirror, and check up honestly on our general shape.
That's fine, for those with the courage to do it, but most of us have enough shocks in midlife when we catch sight of ourselves fully clothed.
An accidental glimpse in a shop window or mirror may bring us up with a jolt.
For a split second, I have sometimes failed to recognize that it is my own face that is being reflected back at me.
I had not realized that I looked so old and tired.
How are we going to come to terms with the ageing process, once we notice it?
Are we going to hide the ravages of time as cleverly as we can for a few more years, or gradually make the necessary adaptations in order to create a new image that is not a faded version of the old but corresponds in an attractive and lively way to the new stage in life which we have reached?
Our response to this question probably reflects our overall reaction to reaching midlife.
We all gladly agree that today most people of forty — or even fifty for that matter — look as if they are still in their thirties.
The Joan Collins syndrome is one way of summing up the present attempt to take ten to fifteen years off the way women look.
Perhaps, instead of seeing the whole operation as a put-up job, we ought to accept a changed concept  of what a fifty-year-old looks like.
Such shifts in perception keep recurring.
In Victorian and post-Victorian times, a woman of forty might settle down to wearing black and being an old lady.
Queen Victoria, in her widow's weeds, provided that kind of model.
But at that time, too, women who reached their mid-forties were frequently exhausted by constant child-bearing and hard physical work.
Even forty or fifty years ago, middle age arrived in the forties, at which time it was normal to develop a comfortable middle-aged spread and to withdraw from the sex and beauty stakes.
Women today have the chance to stay looking young for longer.
Their general health is better and they do not suffer repeated or unwanted pregnancies as a matter of course.
Easy-to-run homes and a host of electrical aids mean that heavy housework does not take the toll it once did.
Looking young is important to many women today in order to hold their own with confidence in the world outside the home, whether they are married or single.
Sad to say, in some fields of work looking middle-aged can be a definite disadvantage.
The media confirm that impression.
Very few middle-aged women, if any, present television news or programmes.
Jobs apart, looking young and sexy may still seem important and desirable to many of those who have grown up in a society which lays such emphasis on youth and sex.
There is another reason for retaining a younger image at forty and fifty than our mothers or grandmothers did.
After all, now that women in particular live longer, middle age might be assumed to begin a few years later too.
The difficulty lies in the fact that the edges are blurred and no one is sure just when youth may be said to be past and the second stage of adult life begun.
The important thing to sort when we pass the forty mark is the motive that lies behind the wish to stay looking young.
If we believe that it is right to push back the boundaries of middle age a few years, we can happily keep our young tastes and looks for a bit longer.
But if we go on refusing to accept our true age and try instead to remain at a stage of life to which we no longer properly belong, then looking younger than our years is a false statement.
Refusing to come to terms with reality harms us and, incidentally, deceives no one else for long.
One test of our response to the change made by age is what we decide to do about grey hair.
Many women who go grey early maintain the looks that belong to their real age by having their  hair colour-rinsed.
But if we go grey within the normal range of time our reaction may be an indicator of our overall attitude to the whole effect of ageing on our looks.
Sophisticated dyes and colourings make it possible to hide this sign of age for as long as we wish and those in public life may, unfortunately, believe that only by covering the tell-tale grey will they maintain their credibility as energetic and creative top people.
For the rest of us, coming to terms with our grey hair and living with it may be a practical way of encouraging us to come to terms with our chronological age and of easing ourselves into a new age group.
Midlife is an important and exciting time which has no need to borrow the outgrown trappings of youth.
‘Be your age’ is not advice to look dowdy, dull and unattractive, but a directive to discover the good looks and beauty that are proper to the new stage of life.
There is all the difference between keeping slim, well-groomed and well-dressed in order to look good at forty-five or fifty, and putting the same amount of effort into an attempt to put back the clock and have another crack at being twenty-five.
All the same, in order to look good as well as feel good, men and women over forty need to take extra care to overcome the outward effects of wear and tear on most parts of the body.
Looking tired
Many years ago there was an advertisement which showed a couple dressed for an evening out, with the caption, ‘You look tired,’ he said, and spoilt her evening.’
My mother used to say that if anyone told her she was looking tired, she knew it meant that she was not looking very attractive either.
Many people at midlife find it incredibly hard to get time to sit down, let alone spend an extra hour in bed.
But ten minutes spent relaxing flat on the floor, or comfortably seated in a darkened room, can do wonders to replenish energies as well as looks.
Keeping on the go can become a habit and there are very many people who could manage to let up for ten minutes or more in the course of most days, with a bit of careful planning.
Skin
Skin becomes drier as we grow older.
Those with oily or normal complexions may need to change the kind of face creams used and those whose skins have always been dry will need to take even more care and possibly change to a heavier cream.
It is important to use moisturizing cream day and night so that the skin should feel soft as well as looking good.
Manufacturers are happy to exploit what is often a more affluent age-group, in order to launch anti-wrinkle preparations and other seemingly magic preparations for the ‘mature’ skin.
But there is probably no substance that will make wrinkles disappear permanently and by midlife many of the lines on our faces have been etched there by laughter or frowns over the years.
It is possible to pay the earth for beauty products.
The packaging and product name usually make up a hefty part of that cost.
Some people find it does them good psychologically to use an expensive preparation but it is possible to keep the skin soft and free from unpleasant dryness without spending a fortune.
Inexpensive, non-perfumed creams will relieve dry skin on hands and feet as well as face.
Men as well as women may need to use such a cream.
Geoffrey Aquilina Ross, in How to Survive the Male Menopause , recommends a quick night-time routine for face and neck, which even tired and busy people can manage.
It should include:
Cleansing (with cleansing cream or good, unperfumed soap, such as oatmeal, and warm, not hot, water)
Toning with an astringent
Moisturizing with your chosen cream
Make-up requirements may change, as skin tones and hair colour change too.
Most people prefer the total look to be soft and natural without some of the extravagances and hard colours of younger-style make-up, but that is partly a matter of personal taste and overall style.
Hands and feet as well as face and neck may suffer from dryness and need a similar moisturizing cream at night.
Keep some hand cream near the kitchen sink as well as the bathroom basin, so that a dab is put on whenever hands have been in water.
Some hand creams care for nails at the same time.
For most busy people a bath is not a long-drawn-out luxury (even getting into the bathroom may be a problem when there are teenagers around).
But the occasional bath with bath oil and a relaxed soak, followed by body lotion lovingly applied, can do great things for the morale and help the appearance too.
Feet
By midlife more than a nightly application of cream may be needed to keep feet happy and comfortable.
Women tend to have more foot problems than men from years of wearing fashion shoes.
When the feet are hurting it shows in the face, as well as making you thoroughly miserable, so go to see a qualified chiropodist.
When it's a do-it-yourself job, remember always to cut nails straight across.
Make sure that stockings or tights as well as shoes are not too tight.
Frequent washing and thorough drying of feet makes them feel comfortable and keeps them healthy.
Eyes
Vision changes at around forty, so a visit to an ophthalmic optician is important.
They are qualified not only to check whether you need glasses but also to spot early signs of any serious eye troubles, as well as some other kinds of disease, and to recommend referral to a specialist when necessary.
Many people wear contact lenses.
If you wear glasses full-time, you should take trouble over selecting frames.
You will wear them more frequently than any single outfit of clothes and it is worth paying as much as you can afford to get a pair that make you feel and look good.
Don't be persuaded to be safe and sensible when you would rather be dashing and adventurous in your choice.
Teeth
Dental health is an important ingredient of total physical fitness.
It also has a good deal to do with how we look.
After teenage years, the most common cause of tooth loss is gum disease, so regular brushing should include gums as well as teeth.
Sweet things should be an after-meal treat only.
Regular visits to the dentist are still important.
Those who have lost their teeth and wear dentures should still visit their dentist every six months.
Ideally, dentures should be renewed every three or four years.
Clean dentures with a soft brush and soap and water after every meal and leave them in water overnight.
Hair
What you do about grey hairs has already been discussed.
Apart from that, in midlife as at every age, a good cut — about once every six weeks — is the single most important way to keep hair looking good, with an occasional soft perm or demi wave, when required.
Cleanliness is very important for hair as for every other part of the body.
Hair sometimes changes from being dry to becoming greasy at this age but as likely as not will revert later to its usual condition.
Baby shampoo is excellent — and cheap — for fine or out of condition hair.
Massage the scalp gently before washing.
Use tepid water.
Make one application of shampoo only.
Rinse thoroughly.
Towel dry gently.
Avoid using hot dryer whenever possible.
Geoffrey Ross comments ‘It has been noticed that many men wash their hair in water that is too hot (which over-stimulates the sebaceous glands and so makes the scalp greasier than it should be) and are rough-actioned with the towel when drying the hair.
This may seem a macho way to treat the hair but it is also a sure way for pulling the hair out.
So too is brushing.
Never use a brush.
For tidying the hair use a wide-toothed comb.’
The total look
Getting your act together successfully also depends on the clothes you wear.
A man's advice to men at midlife is neither to try dressing like younger men nor to neglect the way they dress.
In brief: take time and shop around for clothes that are adventurous but classic.
Buy less but spend more — not on expensive designer clothes intended for the young, but on well-cut quality clothes.
Avoid strong primaries as well as dull colours like lovat.
Keep clothes scrupulously clean and well-cared for.
In spite of a wardrobe bulging with clothes, most women complain that they haven't a thing to wear when any invitation arrives in the post.
A leading fashion editor suggests that in fact we have too many, rather than too few, clothes.
Her first bit of advice, especially to older women, is to go through the wardrobe, ruthlessly discarding anything that no longer fits, no longer looks good on us, or has long since seen better days.
Anyone who has had the courage to do that is ready for the next stage.
Resist the temptation to buy on impulse, just because an outfit catches the eye.
That, it seems, is what most of us tend to do.
Instead, wardrobes should be planned seriously and with proper care.
First decide on your own lifestyle and the kind of clothes that you need.
Be prepared to buy fewer but better clothes.
Choose one or two basic colours for major items and introduce other shades for smaller items, such as knitwear and accessories.
This plan of campaign gives scope for far more variety and  flexibility.
The right fashionable scarf, belt, necklace, etc. can be used simply and quickly to update outfits and add variety to simple clothes.
These days there is a wide price range available in co-ordinated outfits, both in chain stores and in the well-known brand-name clothes to be found in department stores, so nearly everyone can afford to look and feel good.
Clothes that suit teenagers may no longer suit the forty-five-year-old, but she, in turn, is able to carry off fashions that youngsters would not have the poise or elegance to wear.
Every age has its own beauty.
The skill in midlife is to discover the beauty that belongs to that stage in life and to accept it willingly.
Those who make the most of their new image in a positive and welcoming way will feel good and look good too.
ACTION CHECKPOINTS
Visit the dentist/optician/chiropodist.
Begin new skin care routine if necessary.
Rethink hair care and styling.
Eat to look good.
Watch weight.
Get enough exercise.
Get enough rest and sleep.
Check present wardrobe and rethink approach to dress.
THE OLDER GENERATION
TENDER LOVING CARE
The Things People Say
‘A grandmother is a lady who has no children of her own, so she likes other people's little girls and boys.
A grandfather is a man grandmother.
He goes for walks with the boys and they talk about fishing and tractors .’
Eight-year-old girl
‘A harmonious intimacy between grandparents and grandchildren can very often be an incomparably precious blessing to both .’
Dr Paul Tournier, Psychiatrist and author
‘Both grannies are very different.
I suppose they get on reasonably well, but they do tend to rub each other up.
And I'm pig in the middle .’
Forty-five-year-old housewife
‘I do not think that a single relative should ever have the sole care of senile dependent.
Two people are needed to share the load .’
Daughter who cared for her father
‘Carers tend to feel guilty and often have too little compassion for themselves, They need support .’
Spokesperson from the National Council for Carers
‘The caring situation can prove very frustrating both from the social and the job opportunity points of view.
And some carers and dependents find it difficult to adapt to a role reversal — the old person of course not wanting to relinquish her dominant role and the carer finding it difficult to cope with becoming the decision maker .’
Report by the National Council for Carers
Many adults survive the stormy family period of adolescence and go on to form happy and close relationships with their  parents.
There seems to be far more scope at the present time for the two generations to become friends.
The authoritarian parent or dutiful child attitudes that so often characterized these relationships in previous generations are thankfully on the way out.
Today's senior citizens may complain that they do not receive the respect or consideration that was expected from them by their parents, but most of them welcome the far more open and equal relationship which exist between them and their adult children.
The new relationship combines the pleasure of intimate friendship with the added benefits of a close and shared past.
Wise parents are still able to give support and advice, when it is asked for, even after their children have set up their own homes or married and had a family.
Frequent visits, long telephone calls and letters, all keep the links strong.
And the parents often benefit as much from the acquired wisdom and expertise of their children as the children do from theirs.
There is mutual respect and affection.
Not all who reach midlife have parents still living, and those who do may not be on such happy terms with them.
But plenty are, and both parents and children find great strength and satisfaction from the relationship.
Those with children of their own can also gain enormously from the part that their parents play as grandparents.
Some live too far away to be closely involved in the day-to-day happenings of the younger generation, but visits to Granny and Grandpa, accompanied by the family or as special guests on their own, can be important highlights in a child's life.
At the other extreme, some grandparents are forced by circumstances, or by their children's choices, to behave as substitute mothers and fathers.
Ideally — emergencies apart — grandparents should not be fretted and concerned with the day-in and day-out duties of child-rearing.
They have already done their turn at this.
As grandparents they should be free to be detached, and to give time and care of a different and special kind, which harassed and busy parents are often not able to provide.
As an eight-year-old explained:
‘Grandmothers don't have to do anything but be there.
They are old so they shouldn't play hard or run.
They should never say, ‘Hurry up'’.
Usually they are fat, but not too fat to tie children's shoes…
They don't have to be smart, only answer questions, like why dogs hate cats and why God isn't married…
When they read to us they don't skip bits, or mind if it is the same story over again.
Everybody should have one, especially if you don't have television, because grandmothers are the only grown-ups who have the time!’
Grandparents don't only give their grandchildren time.
They are also able to give them individual understanding, recognizing the uniqueness and importance of each grandchild.
Every human being feels the need to receive this kind of attention from someone close and caring.
Grandparents can be of special help to a child who feels — mistakenly or not — that he or she is the odd one out or a failure compared to the others in the family.
They may invite one child at a time to come to visit or stay, and give each the luxury of being an ‘only’ for a little while.
Dr Paul Tournier, the Swiss psychiatrist, wrote about a grandmother's influence on his own wife.
When they became engaged, his future mother-in-law said about her daughter, ‘I hope you will understand her.
I never have.’
But her grandmother had.
When she was a child, she had invited her to stay.
She had encouraged her and taken an interest in her special aptitudes and gifts.
Dr Tournier comments: ‘It is true that grandparents can often understand their children better than the parents do, and give them the acceptance they need in order to grow up.’
The bond between grandparents and grandchildren can remain strong during the difficult years of adolescence.
My own mother died when our daughter was eighteen.
I had not realized how close they had been but she grieved for a long while for the grandmother to whom she had felt close and in whom she had found it easy to confide.
Obviously, not all families live in such close and happy relationships, with each generation fulfilling its distinctive role.
Family breakdown is common and there are a large number of single parent families, with the result that many grandparents share in or take over the upbringing of their grandchildren and behave as parents to them.
At the other extreme, there are many who have lost contact almost completely with their grandchildren following the death, or divorce and remarriage, of one of the parents.
Role change
Sadly, the time comes when fit, able-bodied older people begin to lose their health and strength.
The decline may sometimes be very gradual but in other cases a heart attack or stroke makes an immediate change in lifestyle necessary.
The decline may be mental, as with the onset of  Alzheimer's disease (senile dementia), or a progressive disease of the central nervous system which may or may not involve mental deterioration.
Some  people's behaviour changes after they have suffered a stroke.
Quite apart from the practical problems of care, the family is faced with the sadness of coming to terms with change in a person they have known and probably loved all their life.
As well as feeling a sense of sadness and loss, the son or daughter begins to realize that the parent is now depending on them for strength and care.
One middle-aged daughter put it this way: ‘I suddenly realized that my mother and I had changed roles.
I had relied on her for support of every kind, long after I was grown-up.
Now she was relying on me.’
It is hard, after a lifetime of sharing disappointments and problems with a parent, to find that they are no longer capable of sustaining conversation, that their memory is failing or that they have little interest in things outside their own immediate situation.
Instead of sharing burdens they must be protected from anxiety, and their worries and fears allayed.
Coming to terms mentally and emotionally with such change in an elderly relative is as much part of coping with the situation as providing the practical care that they need.
At the receiving end
Elderly parents also have to grapple with a change in role.
Those who are mentally alert may not find it easy or pleasant to take help from the very ones they have supported and cared for over the years.
Many parents dread the thought of having to depend on their children.
It is extremely painful for them to add to their burdens at a time when they are most hard pressed at work or with their own families.
Busy carers may make good provision for the physical needs of the parent without considering how they must be feeling.
Older people who have lived full and interesting lives will feel the loss of stimulus once they are housebound.
One woman, who took up a new career in midlife, described how her mother, who had always had a great appetite for life, now seemed.to live through her.
She took such an avid interest in all that her daughter was doing that it became stressful.
But such intense interest can work to the carer's advantage too.
Another older woman, who had lived alone with her mother since her father died, recalled the satisfaction of coming home to someone with all the time in the world to listen to what she had to tell about her day in the office or an evening at choir practice.
Now that her mother has died, she sadly misses the interest and advice that was always forthcoming.
Many of us  have valued the interest focussed on our needs and problems by a parent who was physically disabled but mentally alert and concerned.
Others overlook this opportunity to share their interests with parents and don't even seem aware of their parents' need for mental and emotional stimulus.
Someone described seeing a couple having tea in a restaurant with an elderly parent.
Husband and wife kept up their own conversation, turning to the elderly lady from time to time only to offer her another cup of tea or a cake.
They no doubt thought that they were fulfilling their filial duty by providing her with an outing and ‘treat’.
What kind of care?
Sooner or later it may become impossible for an elderly person or couple to continue living in their own home without support.
There are various pointers that help us to decide when that time has come.
They include:
badly failing sight
frequent falls
loss of memory
disablement through arthritis, Parkinson's disease, etc.
severe heart problems
stroke and disabling after-effects
senile dementia
When the doctor confirms that it is important to provide care, or when too much anxiety is felt in leaving an elderly person alone, the time has come to consider alternative options.
It is important to weigh up all possible courses of action, and the factors for and against, before making a decision that cannot easily be reversed.
Here are some of the choices on offer:
A home with one or other of the ‘children ’.
In ideal circumstances a son or daughter may be able to provide a granny flat or at least a bedsitting-room which the older person can call their own and where they can have some personal furniture and possessions as well as privacy.
Often it is not possible to provide any separate accommodation at all and even the bedroom may have to be shared.
One friend of mine had her mother-in-law living with them from their wedding day.
When I knew her, some years ago, their teenage daughter was having to share a bedroom with her granny.
Such an arrangement would probably be considered out of the question today, and rightly so.
Whatever the arrangements, it is very important to get ground rules agreed before the move takes place, so that some of the possible snags for all concerned are foreseen and nipped in the bud.
When an extended family is living together at close quarters, even minor irritations can grow out of all proportion.
One friend, whose widowed father has come to share their home, told me how hard it is to put up with his constant smoking.
Theirs had always been a smoke-free household.
Yet she hadn't the heart to forbid him to smoke when he had so few comforts left.
In many cases, it may be a matter of giving ground, out of kindness and consideration for the older person, who has been stripped of so much already.
Someone else told me of a friend who brought her ninety-year-old mother to visit her.
The elderly lady found a private moment in which to invite her hostess to come to see her in the room she occupied in her daughter's house.
She explained that she was often lonely, living in a new district, but did not want to interfere with the family, who had their own lives to lead.
An easily run home of their own, near to one of the family .
One hindrance to this arrangement may be the old person's unwillingness to move away from their own circle of friends and familiar places.
The fact that many people of working age face constant moves to other areas may also complicate the decision.
But where the scheme is feasible it can relieve the pressures for all concerned.
There is still likely to be a considerable extra work load for the daughter or daughter-in-law who is likely to bear the brunt of extra shopping, washing and keeping an eye on the elderly people.
One friend, who has a job as well as a family of five, has her widowed mother living round one corner and her mother-in-law round the other.
Her mother is fairly fit but still finding it difficult to come to terms with her husband's death.
Her mother-in-law is blind and becoming very forgetful, but is still unwilling to come to live with them.
Somehow, both mothers have to be visited, cared for and made to feel wanted.
If the grandchildren visit one granny, they must make sure to visit the other one too.
The strains are emotional as much as physical, as the carer tries to keep everyone happy as well as trying to make sure, as far as possible, that no  harm befalls the elderly mothers during the hours that they spend on their own.
Another friend, whose husband is a farmer, shares the care of her parents, who live in a neighbouring village, with a married sister, who also lives nearby.
Between them they give their mother the support she needs since their father has had a stroke.
But her mother is always distressed when she leaves, and dismayed that she has to go before doing just one more job to help.
Fortunately, a brother and his wife take responsibility at nights, when the mother will often ring for reassurance about her husband.
Many people are in this situation of trying to find time to care adequately for parents in their own home, while running their own jobs and family.
It is hard to offer solutions.
Perhaps it helps to explain to parents beforehand what time is available for visits and to stick to those limits as a general rule.
The quality of care given during the visits matters more than the actual time spent with them.
To be able to give parents all our attention while we are with them, and to shed other responsibilities during that period, may be more help than longer visits undertaken in a hurried and half-attentive way.
Sheltered accommodation .
This is probably one of the most attractive solutions on offer for those still able to manage without full-time care.
There are many housing schemes which provide small apartments or flats — both ‘single’ and ‘double’size — under the care of a warden, who checks regularly that the residents are safe and well.
There is a communicating alarm system from the flats to the warden's office.
The residents have their own furniture and are self-sufficient, although there is often a meals' scheme as well as a communal laundry.
Sometimes an additional flat is vacant for visiting family or friends from a distance who wish to stay overnight.
In many cases such housing provides the best combination of privacy and adequate care.
People in their sixties who are on their own are also beginning to move into such accommodation, giving a good mix of younger, able-bodied and older residents.
Residential care .
State-provided homes are suitable for those not able to care for themselves.
They are usually purpose-built, with facilities to help disabled people and are staffed by qualified people.
They are usually of a high standard.
For some alert inmates, there may be too little stimulus in mixing only with others who are extremely old or senile.
Standards vary enormously in privately run old people's homes and nursing homes.
There are guide-lines on standards of care but these are not always adhered to even when charges are high.
Some are excellent but it is very important to check thoroughly and to be completely satisfied about patient care and the right kind of atmosphere before making definite arrangements.
Hospital geriatric ward .
It is not the aim to keep elderly people long-term in such wards.
Beds are usually occupied by psycho-geriatrics.
Remaining in their own home with carer living in .
Many daughters, and even sons, who are unmarried, or who have returned to their parents' home after a marriage breakdown, may find themselves, in process of time, caring for their elderly parents.
Sometimes a single son or daughter will give up their own home to come back and care for parents.
Sometimes the carer will not move in completely.
I knew a family of five devoted daughters — all married — who took it in turns, when their father died, to stay with their widowed mother night and day, on a rota basis, for the years until she died, because they knew that she would not want to leave her own home.
Making the choice
Everyone in the family should be involved in reaching a decision about.the care of an elderly relative, and that includes the elderly person concerned.
It is important that no decision is taken without thorough investigation of all the possibilities, and that everyone is satisfied that the decision taken is the best all-round solution.
Sometimes members of a family look for something that is convenient to them or that will solve their own feelings of guilt, rather than giving weight to the elderly person's own strong preferences.
It can be more difficult when an elderly couple differ themselves as to what they wish to do, or if members of the family disagree.
So many mixed feelings of guilt and anxiety, love and hate can blur the issue that it may be important to adopt the suggestion of one therapist and discuss all the issues with a wise counsellor, perhaps a minister or some other friend of the family, who knows most of the people concerned but has none of the strong emotional involvement of a family member.
Such a person is detached enough to think clearly and to advise without bias.
Sociologists and doctors agree that to uproot an old person may cause severe trauma.
One doctor concluded, ‘Compulsory and unprepared transplantation of an aged person is harmful, often fatal.’
For this reason, many recommend care at home, if local nursing and social services can give enough back-up help to make it possible.
All too often, the facilities are not available.
But it is well worth exploring the possibility as provision of care varies, depending on local resources.
Who will do the caring?
The dilemma of who will care for the elderly is greater today than in previous generations.
There are now far more people surviving into old age and, since families are smaller, they have fewer children to care for them.
Hardly any have unmarried daughters, who in the past were most often expected to do the caring.
It is still nearly always a daughter or daughter-in-law who becomes the carer.
Statistics show that three out of four carers are women — and most of the remaining twenty-five per cent who are men are caring for a wife rather than a parent.
Some single men do care for parents and their lot can be very difficult.
The majority of carers are between the ages of forty and sixty, with some eight per cent under forty.
In Britain it is estimated that eighty-three per cent of these carers have no outside help whatsoever.
Yet caring for a parent coincides with some of the busiest years of life.
Even twenty or thirty years ago single daughters normally cared for elderly parents.
The majority of present-day carers are married, although many in this bracket are living alone and supporting themselves and possibly a family too.
If there is a single sister, there is no reason why it should be taken for granted that she should shoulder the caring.
A married sister may plead that she has a husband and family to look after but that very fact also means that caring-will restrict her less.
At least she has her family for support and company, and losing some of her friends and social outlets might be less damaging to her than to her single sister.
Even when one member of the family takes on the lion's share of caring, there is no reason why brothers and sisters should not make some contribution.
It is far better to work out what help each can provide from the start than for one member of the family to be seriously overburdened or feel permanently aggrieved.
It is also wiser that the elderly person should grow used to receiving care from several different people before it becomes hard for a sole carer ever to have time off.
Why care?
Taking on the care of an elderly relative is likely to have far-reaching and sometimes long-term effects on the lives of the carer and their family and friends.
At the most it may mean giving up a job.
At the least it will impose new responsibilities and personal restrictions as well as further demands on time and physical energy.
So it is important not to drift into caring or be hustled into it but to think through personal motives tor taking it on.
There are three main reasons for taking care of an elderly person.
The first and best is because you want to.
A great many people love their elderly Parent or aunt sufficiently to want to look after them.
Others, who may not have had such a happy relationship with their parents in the past, take on care out of a sense of duty.
If this is your motive it is important to recognize it, and to make sure that does not impose too great a burden on the person cared for as well as on yourself.
When we feel resentment or act out of a sense of duty it can sometimes be seen and felt by the person concerned.
A third group of carers take on the job because they feel that they have to.
Either there is no one else to step in, or doctors and social workers — themselves at their wits' end to find facilities — conspire to bring it about by assuming that such care will be given, for example when a patient is discharged from hospital following a stroke.
The professionals concerned do not always ask the carer if she is willing to cope, because they are afraid that she will refuse.
They know that there are no alternatives they can suggest because of the lack of local resources.
It is difficult but very important to resist pressure of this kind.
In some cases it may be necessary to refuse outright.
There are some situations where the relationship between parent and daughter would make intimate care impossible to give, for example where a daughter had been abused by her father as a child.
Those who feel able to give a certain amount of care should sort out with doctors and social workers the conditions on which they feel able to offer it, and the extent of care they can give, before they accept responsibility.
If you find yourself in this situation it is important to decide realistically how much you can do and to mark out these easy between a parent and child, it is not likely to improve at this stage.
You may have physical limitations yourself which would make lifting and other care of a disabled person difficult  or impossible.
If local services can promise relief of one kind or another, you may be able to undertake the care, make a better job of it and still save local services some money.
There are various ways in which the burden of care can be relieved.
You may say, ‘Yes.
I will take on the caring but I must have a break every six months,’ or ‘I can only do so if I can be sure that the incontinence service will be reliable.’
It is important, too, to set clear limits to how long you can continue caring if the health of the elderly person is likely to deteriorate seriously.
It is in the interests of the local services that elderly people should be cared for at home, so the professionals concerned should be asked to give home carers all the help to which they are entitled.
These are some of the questions carers should ask the doctor and social worker:
How long will I have to care?
Will I have enough money?
Will I get any training?
What about transport?
No one is likely to offer answers unless the questions are directly asked, but there are people who can give the information you need.
Taking the strain
It is important to know what help is forthcoming for you or for the elderly person for whom you are caring.
Help may come in many forms, from the provision of a hand rail for the bath to time at a day centre.
However strong and loving the bond between carer and dependant may be, constant long-term caring is likely to bring some frustrations and difficulties.
No one knows how long the situation will continue.
Caring for an elderly person is an open-ended project.
Both single people and married couples may feel a sense of frustration as the years in which they had planned to be more free to go out and about, and less restricted financially, are circumscribed by the demands of caring.
There may be sadness as well as frustration in watching an older person deteriorate mentally.
Compassion does not guarantee unlimited patience.
Having to repeat things constantly, as well as to listen to the same comments over and over again, can tax the patience of all but a saint.
When irritation does spill over, there is a feeling of guilt.
It is important that love and forgiveness are still shared, that tenderness is shown and that constant healing follows understandable outbursts on both sides.
Those with experience stress how important it is that the carer and the dependant should not become indispensable to each other or never spend time apart.
This is especially important in the case of a carer living alone with the elderly person.
Each can become unhealthily dependent on the other.
If you are in this situation and have a friend who will come in for an evening so that you can go out, accept their offer for both your sakes.
There may be complaints and accusations of neglect to be endured at first, but it is stimulating for the old person to have new company and most important for you, the carer, to maintain some friends and some life outside the home, both for present needs and for the future when you will be alone.
Rewards and satisfactions
Growing old seems to bring a person's true character into stronger relief.
Old people as a group are neither sweet nor cross-grained, but each is the sum of the years that lie behind them.
We reap what we sow, and others close to us reap the results too.
Many adult children gain great happiness from caring for a much-loved parent in the closing years of their life.
They learn much from their wisdom and their example.
Teenagers can gain, too, as they help care for their grandparents.
There are ways of turning the restrictions and limitations that caring involves into assets.
A few months ago a newspaper carried the story of a couple who had created a garden — now to be opened to the public — during the years that they were housebound, caring for sick relatives.
They had made this ‘botanical extravaganza’, with sunken gardens and rhododendrons, out of a plot forty-five by seventy-six feet, in a London suburb, to provide a place of rest.
There must be many other ways of capitalizing in a creative way on the restrictions of being housebound.
Men and women at midlife are the generation in the middle.
They are concerned with giving both to the younger ones coming up behind them and the older ones ahead, who are nearing the end of life.
A man in his forties commented: ‘Those in their forties and fifties are the bridge generation, looked to by both younger and older people for mature guidance and help.
This is the generation who can hold society together.
This is where leadership comes from.’
The scope for bringing influence to bear and exerting power, in the best sense of the word, is probably greater at midlife than at any other time.
Most of the time the ‘vocation’ will be seen as a matter of washing, cleaning, feeding and earning.
But to provide security, comfort and a sense of worth to the parents and relatives who belong to us is a job worth doing and worth doing with all the compassion and love that we can give.
ACTION CHECKPOINTS
Foster good relationships with parents.
Where possible, encourage opportunities for grandparents and grandchildren to be together.
When parents need care:
Think through choices carefully.
Consult with all the family.
Seek the advice of a trusted friend if necessary.
Think through the commitment of being a full-time carer beforehand.
Find out about all the help available.
THE END OF THE ROAD
The Things People Say
 ‘I went through a period of seeing myself dead, seeing myself in a coffin and the people at my funeral.
 I imagined it as clearly as one could, to the point where I was ready to go out and buy my burial outfit .’
Thirty-eight-year-old American woman, after the death of her father (in Passages by Gail Sheehy)
‘The elderly parent reflects the very fear which the midlife person feels.
They present an image of the loss of power, the nearness of old age and, behind it all, the fear of death .’
Bishop Jim Thompson,Half Way 
Extracts from conversations and letters:
‘It was a lovely way for her to go, and we do feel thankful that she didn't linger on and suffer .’
‘I suppose my feelings about my father's death were charged with guilt.
He ought not to have died, and if I had gone with my mother to the doctor and done my part as a son, I feel as if he need not have done .’
‘I suppose all the sorting out at the flat will take up the spare time for quite a while.
I'm rather dreading that, but everyone has the problem some time, don't they ?’
‘I still do miss her so much, but when I'm down I think of the way she kept so cheerful after losing Dad, although she missed him terribly…so I try to keep cheerful for her .’
‘I cannot express in words the love and care which has been show to me by all my Christian friends since Mam died .’
‘It's a relief to wake up in the middle of the night and to know that Dad is not suffering any longer .’
Both men and women live longer nowadays but, even so, quite a large number of people are going to experience the death of one or both parents when they themselves are reaching midlife.
The loss of parents brings with it a whole range of mixed emotions.
At the time, these can be difficult to cope with and almost impossible to sort out.
Later, it is important to try to understand and work through the different strands of feeling which go to make up the total experience of loss.
Those who have been living near to parents or who have remained in very close touch with them, are going to feel the immediate absence of the parent they loved more keenly than those who have broken away from close family ties and kept up only a dutiful contact with father or mother.
But even where there may seem to have been little affection shown and where few apparent links remain, emotional ties that go back to earliest days are strong, and feelings about the death of a parent are bound to go deep.
Immediate reactions
Not everyone reacts to the death of someone close by bursting into tears and behaving in the kind of way that we expect from people experiencing grief.
They are more likely to be unable to register any emotion.
They may be unable to take in the reality of what has happened.
One man, who appeared to have understood and accepted the fact of his mother's death, still got ready to visit her in hospital that evening.
The human mind possesses a special mechanism to shut off feelings of overpowering grief, leaving the bereaved person in a state of numbness and shock, until they are ready to cope with what has happened.
During this period of numbness, people are perfectly able to carry on with the practicalities of living.
Quite often, a son or daughter will be responsible for the formalities and requirements that follow a death.
It may be their first experience of death at close quarters and they will be surprised at how much there is to do.
The death certificate may need to be collected from the hospital, the death must be registered, friends and relatives must be informed and the funeral arranged.
The right authorities must be informed about pensions and allowances.
If the other parent is still living, they must be cared for too.
They may want you to help to sort out the personal belongings of the dead partner, which is always a painful job.
Above all, they will need your loving understanding and support for some time to come.
Experiencing grief
Grief at the death of parents can take many forms.
One woman described how differently she reacted to her father's death, when she was thirty-four, and her mother's death, ten years later:
‘When my father died, after a long illness, I was devastated.
I managed to leave the children and travel straight to my mother's to help her make all the arrangements.
I remember sorting through all his clothes.
It was seeing his glasses that tore me apart.
I went straight out to the bin to get rid of them before my mother could see them.
I felt physically sick all the time and unable to eat but I was able to keep going.
Then, when the funeral was over and I was on my way home, I felt really ill.
All that summer I was ill — they said they thought it was glandular fever — but I know it was my way of reacting to my father's death.
I couldn't even manage the children — friends took them for odd days.
I remember not being able to face certain people for months afterwards.
I was at a concert with the children a month or so later and saw one rather pushy friend, who I could normally handle.
But I just fled rather than talk to her.
I had adored my father and I took ages to get over it.
‘I reacted quite differently when my mother died.
I couldn't understand it.
I had loved her dearly and I felt worried that I wasn't feeling the way I had when my father died.
I can remember having a really happy time with other relatives after her funeral.
But I still have a cry, sometimes, when I realize that my mother is dead — and that's years after.
I almost feel as if I have gone on getting to know and understand her after she died, and have done my mourning as I go, whereas with my father the relationship was perfect and complete and ended with his death.'
Sometimes a parent has suffered an illness that has caused mental change or changes in personality, and the family has already gone through much of the bereavement process beforehand.
A lot of the pain and loss is felt when the parent they have known and loved becomes so altered.
When a single person has lived with a parent for most of their lives and cared for them devotedly, the effect of the bereavement is likely to be felt in many different ways.
For years, perhaps, their life has revolved round the needs of the elderly or sick parent, and care has been constant, night and day.
Disturbed sleep has become a habit that will not be broken at once.
If they have been used to rushing home from work or  watching the clock during any stolen time with friends, they may find it hard to adapt to the fact that there is no longer any need to hurry back.
Sometimes changing to a normal lifestyle may make them feel guilty.
Guilt is a common ingredient of loss, and the ‘if only’ syndrome is familiar to those who counsel the bereaved.
It is only too easy to remember those occasions when resentful words or cold behaviour spoilt the relationship.
Now, the bereaved person may feel, ‘Why didn't I hold my tongue?
How could I have been so heartless?’
A couple who had looked after an elderly father in their home for many years, were persuaded at last to take one week's holiday.
While they were away, he died.
It was natural, but unreasonable, to feel guilt for what seemed like a failure in duty, rather than feel thankful for the years of unremitting and unselfish care that they had been able to give.
It is important to try not to let the negative memories predominate but to remember instead the many good and happy times together.
One friend in her mid-forties, who had cared for her demanding mother for a number of years, said, after her death, ‘I don't feel any regrets at all.
I did everything I could while Mother was alive.
Now I ‘m free to make my own choices and to live my own life..’
Where social life has been jettisoned altogether in order to give adequate care, life without the dependent parent may seem empty and lonely.
People vary in their ability to revert to being outgoing, social creatures after a long time of semi-confinement to the house.
The kind of limitations imposed by restrictions of full-time caring are not normal to someone in midlife but it takes courage to change the pattern once the need to be restricted has passed.
Even if it is not easy to make changes, it is important to begin widening horizons as soon as possible.
Those who go to a church may find comfort and understanding there, as well as opportunities for wider social contact, in a sympathetic context.
The end of a chapter
When parents die, it seems as if part of your life has gone too.
As one person put it, ‘The only ones who knew me from the time I was born have gone, and it's almost as if that period in my life is less real now that there is no one left alive who shared it with me.’
When both parents are dead there is no one to talk with about those uncertain, early memories of people and places, or to confirm when it was we had measles, or where we stayed on holiday.
This absence of certainty seems to threaten our own identity.
I still sometimes think —‘I'll ask  Mum about that,’ only to realize that she is dead and no one remains who could possibly know or take interest in such small family details.
Because I am a Christian, I have found the break less frightening, since I believe that my parents are now in the presence of the same God who is with me.
The gulf between this life and the next is bridged by God's oneness and by his love and care over the living and the dead.
Unsafe
Death, particularly of someone close, brings a sense of insecurity.
Although we know intellectually that the status quo cannot be maintained for ever, we feel profoundly disturbed when irreversible change actually happens.
Nothing seems safe.
Sometimes a person may experience several deaths in the family close together.
One woman told me of a particular year in which seven close relatives died.
I remember two aunts and an uncle, all very dear to me, dying within a few months.
This kind of experience can reinforce our sense of insecurity, as well as making the burden of sadness unbearably heavy.
At some stage it will be possible again to enjoy memories and to laugh at the fun we shared.
But that is still in the future.
The older generation?
All the time that our parents are alive, we are the younger generation, at least to them.
Once our parents are dead, we are catapulted into becoming the older generation ourselves.
Most of us don't like it.
We do not want to carry the image of middle age in other people's eyes, nor do we wish to think of ourselves as getting old.
A glimpse in the mirror, or the well-meant comments of an old family friend, may remind us that we are growing to look like our parents.
We may recognize their mannerisms in ourselves or find that we are talking to our children in just the tones that they talked to us.
We have not only taken on the status of the older generation, we are beginning to look and behave that way too.
Above all, experiencing our parents' death forces us to face the fact of our own mortality.
The inevitability of death becomes real for the first time.
A universal truth has to be digested and made part of our thinking and understanding.
For a while, thoughts of death can seem to dominate the whole of our everyday lives.
In every newspaper at which we glance, the obituaries stare out at us.
In every television news programme we hear of death, and in every letter or phone call from friends, someone's death is mentioned.
Whether or not we have firmly  held beliefs about what happens after death, we can still be terribly afraid.
If our beliefs have never been challenged or put to the test we may doubt their validity now.
All this may sound negative but it is more important to prepare for death than for any other event of life however much current thinking may sweep the subject under the carpet.
If the death of our parents helps us to think about death in a constructive way and to prepare for our own, the experience is neither negative nor morbid but of positive value and importance.
If we have not done so before, now is the time to examine religious views and the firm hope of eternal life which is an integral part of the Christian faith and teaching.
When Jesus was warning his followers about his own forthcoming death he told them not to be worried or upset but to put all their trust and confidence in him and in God.
He told them that he was going to prepare a permanent home for them in God, the Father's, house.
The apostle Paul, answering the anxious questions of Christians whose loved ones had died, reminded them that Jesus' own victory over death makes it certain that those who have come into a close relationship with him will share his new, full life which goes beyond the grave.
What shall we tell the children?
Small children who see grandparents frequently are likely to be distressed and puzzled by their death.
The immediate problem for parents is what to tell them.
Some fudge the issue by saying that the grandparent has gone away for a little while.
Such a lie is unkind because it keeps false hope alive, as well as preventing the child from coming to terms with the parting and the inevitable grief.
This kind of cop-out is also likely to undermine the parents' credibility and the trust put in them.
It is always important to tell children the truth, in a way and at a level that they can accept.
Many parents back off from telling children about death because they have no clear belief about it themselves.
If that is so, they must explain something about that uncertainty to the child, and include the fact that others have a positive belief in life after death.
In Victorian times children were always taken to funerals but nowadays most people would not feel it was appropriate.
A lot depends on what kind of occasion it is.
I was recently at the funeral of a friend, who had died after a prolonged illness from cancer.
Her six or seven grandchildren — none older than about nine or ten — were all there with their parents.
Towards the end of the service, which had been full of praise  and thanksgiving to God, the minister talked to them particularly.
He told them a story about his own children, when they were very young.
‘If we had been away and had a long night-time car journey ahead of us,’ he said, ‘we used to put the children in their pyjamas and wrap them in blankets before we started.
They would soon go to sleep in the back of the car.
When at last we got home, I would gently carry them indoors and put them into their beds, still asleep.
Next morning they would wake up and find that they were at home.
That is what has happened to your grandma.
She was very tired, so while she was asleep, God, our Father, who she knew and loved dearly, took her to heaven.
When she woke up, she found she was at home with him at last.’
Teenagers and older children also need to talk over their feelings about a grandparent's death, and perhaps examine beliefs about life after death.
Whether they talk to you or to someone else may depend on the kind of relationship you have with them, as well as the stage which they are at.
Many teenage children feel unable to talk to parents about intimate or emotional issues but it is important to be ready to talk, if they show that they want to.
The family estate
When the second parent dies, the family has to share out any money and possessions.
This matter is made ten times easier if there is a will.
It is important to encourage a remaining parent to make a new will.
Even when there is a will, it will be six months or more before the beneficiaries have what is due to them.
As well as any money to be shared out, there are the bits and pieces, often not valuable in themselves, but relics of the family home which are closely associated with everyone's memories of early years.
It is sad when sisters and brothers who have been on good terms quarrel about who gets what, whether the reasons for wanting a particular item are commercial or sentimental.
‘Mother always wanted me to have…’ is not good enough.
Legal advisers suggest that anyone wishing a piece of jewellery or other valuable to go to a particular person, should list such unofficial bequests on a piece of paper and keep it with the official will.
When the family is all together, it is wise to suggest a fair method whereby family members (in-laws stand aside!) take turns to choose items great and small.
It is important not to risk giving cause for life-long resentments and recriminations.
It is surprising how long this kind of grudge can be remembered, perhaps because the occasion is inextricably mixed with feelings of loss and deprivation caused by the parent's death.
It is very important to keep on happy and good terms with the family that are living and it is extremely sad when the death of a parent who loved all the children should be an unwitting source of family rifts.
ACTION CHECKPOINTS
Encourage parents to make a will, or a new one when necessary.
Recognize that grief takes many forms.
Take time to adjust to parents' death.
Be honest in what you tell children about a grandparent's death.
Begin to accept the responsibilities — and privileges — of being the ‘older generation’.
Don't duck the issues that death raises.
THE YOUNGER GENERATION
COPING WITH TEENAGERS
The Things People Say
‘I feel guilty, but I dislike my children intensely at times .’
Mother of teenagers
‘I dread mine reaching their teens.
Other mothers are always saying, ‘I wish mine were still the age yours are .
''’ Mother of small children
‘Everyone says how awful the teenage years are, and we had our share of rows and problems, but I enjoyed those years with my children — far better than the baby or toddler stages .’
Older mother
‘A stormy passage through the Pulling Up Roots years will probably facilitate the normal progression of the adult life cycle .’
Gail Sheehy,Passages 
‘How shall we pray for our children?…
To pray is to collaborate with God.
It is to share his concern for our children .’
Dr John White,Parents in Pain 
‘Disciplining teenagers calls for discussion, reason, explanation and an agreed way of dealing with the troubled situation for the benefit of all.’
Bringing Up a Family 
‘There is no ritual that provides children with a clear sign that they have left infancy behind…
So, unfortunately, parents and children (or young adults) may disagree about what stage has been reached and, consequently, what rights, privileges and responsibilities are now appropriate .’
Martin Herbert, Professor of Psychology,Living with Teenagers 
At midlife many people are not only facing the death of parents but also coping with difficult teenagers.
‘Did you ever really dislike your children?’ a mother of two teenage daughters asked me recently.
She went on to admit, ‘I feel guilty, but I dislike them intensely at times.
I dread the mornings — wondering how they will come down — either sweet and reasonable or downright objectionable.’
A good many parents know exactly how she felt and could echo the same sentiments.
But the adolescent years are not wholly fraught with stormy scenes, misery and rebellion.
Many parents find themselves pleasantly surprised when the difficult stage passes with the minimum number of crises and heartbreaks.
The worst part of having children nearing their teens may be the fear of what is in store.
Other parents do their best to frighten the life out of those who have not arrived at this stage, with doom-laden tales of trouble and strife.
‘It gets much worse as they get older,’ they warn darkly.
As well as being a tactless comment, it is an exaggerated and often untrue one.
I found the early years far harder to cope with than the teens and others often agree with me.
Certainly, parents who have had easy babies and amenable children may be unprepared for the changed behaviour that can characterize adolescence.
There are also some people who ‘specialize’ in babies and young children and they may find it less easy to empathize with teenagers and handle them wisely.
But many parents will welcome the arrival of the time when it is possible to share interests and to talk together in a more adult way.
There are so many compensations for everyone in the family during the teenage years that it is a grave mistake to look on the black side.
To fear the worst may be to have those fears come true.
No rites of passage?
In most tribal societies the transition from childhood to adulthood is clearly defined by ‘rites of passage’.
Initiation ceremonies of one kind or another mark the end of childhood and the acceptance of the boy or girl as an adult into the tribe.
In our own society there is no such clear transition from childhood to adult life.
The onset of puberty may occur as early as eleven or twelve and cannot be reckoned as the sign of having reached adult status.
A young person officially comes of age at eighteen but, when so many go on to higher education and training after leaving school, even that does not mark the end of  dependence on parents or state.
To add to the uncertainty, the age at which a person is considered old enough to vote may be different from that at which they are allowed to marry or fight for their country.
If society is so confused about the age at which a person becomes an adult, it is not surprising if there are differences of opinion within the family too.
Many of the rows and heartaches in the home crop up because adolescents think they are grown-up but the parents don't agree.
Young people are keen to be granted the privileges of being adult, while parents major on the responsibilities involved.
Sooner or later parents must let go, but the key issue is how much and how soon.
Handling the whole process of letting go in a wise and loving way is probably the most important factor in negotiating the teenage years.
Change and change about
In our society, children often reach adolescence at just the time that their mothers are going through the menopause.
The general sense of not being quite yourself, as well as the mood fluctuations and depression which often occur through hormonal imbalance are therefore going to hit both generations at the same time.
In theory, this should make for greater understanding between the two, but teenagers are usually deeply absorbed in their own body and mood changes and have every excuse for not realizing that their mothers are suffering similarly and need some consideration too.
Both parents may also be coping with the doubts and identity crises which are common to midlife as well as to adolescence.
Some parents have unhappy or embarrassing memories of their own teenage years.
They may have tried to forget that period in their lives without coming to terms with some of the pain and guilt related to it.
Seeing their own children in their teens may bring their own adolescence forcibly to mind, along with its unfinished business.
Unless they come to terms with their own past adolescence, they will be unready to deal in a mature way with their children's.
Rivals?
Fathers and mothers may feel challenged by the looks, physical strength and sexual attractiveness of their sons and daughters.
They do not want to be reminded of their own ageing by the evident blooming of youth at such close quarters.
Parents who grew up in the sixties, when the cult of the teenager first took hold, may still look and feel young and  be unready to acknowledge that their children are growing up.
Many feel reluctant to take a back seat and allow their children to enjoy the special attractiveness of the teens and twenties.
Previous generations may also have felt a passing pang of regret as they allowed the younger generation to take their place, but they were not subjected to the pressure to stay young which affects men and women of forty or fifty today.
On the credit side, there is probably a smaller gap between the two generations in outlook and interests.
Provided that parents are able to come to terms with the possible jealousy and envy of their children, there is more scope for the two generations to enjoy easy friendship and to accept one another.
Understanding teenagers
Adolescence is the process of growing up.
It is the period during which a boy or girl also grows from a child to an adult in body, mind and personality — a considerable transformation.
The process usually coincides with the teen years but timing varies from one person to another.
Growing out of childhood involves a great many major changes, so it is not surprising if teenagers seem totally self-absorbed and may sit for hours apparently doing nothing but day-dreaming.
The adult who will finally emerge is different from the child, but still recognizably the same person you once knew and understood.
Puberty
Puberty marks the biological beginning of adult life.
Until puberty, both boys and girls produce roughly similar quantities of both sex hormones, but at puberty there is a sharp increase in the secretion of sex-related hormones.
It is these hormones which are responsible for the physical changes which occur.
Girls are approximately two years ahead of boys in their development but there is a wide range in what is a normal age for a girl to reach puberty.
Twelve is the present average age for the menarche — or start of menstrual periods, which marks puberty.
But any time between eleven and fourteen is ‘normal’, although some girls may start as early as nine or ten or as late as fifteen or sixteen.
Other physical changes which take place in the girl's body include development of the breasts, which may begin between eight and thirteen, and of the rounded feminine shape, as well as the growth of pubic hair.
Boys develop within  a a similar age range of about five years, but most have reached puberty by the time they are sixteen.
The  clearest sign of puberty is ejaculation or emission, and glandular secretions also account for growth of the penis, growth of hair on the face and body, and the deepening of the voice.
The growth spurt in boys and girls often begins with the hands and feet, which is why they sometimes look a bit clumsy and act rather awkwardly, until the rest of the body catches up.
Reassurance
Both boys and girls need plenty of reassurance during this by fears that they are not normal, especially if they are early or late developers.
A girl who is very tall for her age may fear that she will go on growing at the same rate indefinitely, while a boy who is shorter than his mates of the same age may be afraid that he will be permanently undersized.
Time usually sorts out the discrepancies, but an explanatory book for them to read, or a reassuring chat, if you can talk things over with them, may save them a great deal of unnecessary anxiety.
Some adolescents may need reassuring that there is nothing to be afraid of or ashamed about in night emissions or monthly periods.
Many teenagers worry, too, about whether they are attractive.
They feel unsure about the way their bodies have changed and they need lots of encouraging comments and none of the wrong kind of remarks.
Teasing a son or daughter about size or appearance is especially unkind at this stage.
They are likely to get plenty of ribbing at school and need to feel accepted and approved at home.
Spots, and in some cases acne, can result from testosterone excess and it may help them to know that it is a passing affliction.
Positive suggestions about diet and a cleansing routine may improve the condition and boost morale while the spots last.
It is not surprising if boys and girls at this age spend hours in the bathroom, or in front of the mirror, adjusting to their new self.
Help them to like what they see and to accept it with as much encouragement as you can give.
If you feel worried yourself that growth or development may not be normal, consult the doctor to set your mind at rest.
Who am I?
The change from being a child to an adult involves a great deal more than physical and biological change.
Some psychiatrists define mature adults as those who:
think for themselves
have their own goals
have their own ideals
can make and keep relationships
can accept reality
have respect for others' views and feelings.
In the light of such a definition some of us would admit that we still have some growing up to do ourselves.
So it is not surprising that adolescents sometimes make heavy weather of the whole process.
As they try to find out who they are they may experiment with a number of different modes.
They may adopt clothes and hairstyles that belong to one group of contemporaries or another, and change their political or religious views several times.
Some make their parents anxious by the kind of friends they choose and the models they copy.
In order to find their own identity and to become persons in their own right, many young people feel it necessary to rebel against the attitudes and beliefs of their parents.
They may reject what they regard as middle-class or old-fashioned values and delight in looking as dirty and scruffy as possible, championing people and causes that most of the people their parents mix with would not consider acceptable.
Those with a particular political or religious upbringing may react strongly against that.
In these ways, they force their parents to recognise that they are no longer a mere extension of them or the family, but independent human beings with views and ambitions of their own.
The ways in which teenagers make their point may differ, but that is the message they are trying to get across.
Boys in particular need to cut the umbilical cord.
Instinctively they fear the strength of the emotional ties with their mother, which could prevent them from becoming mature and independent men.
The way in which they try to break those ties may often be brutal and very painful for the mother, but the instinct is right.
The more she can stop herself ‘mothering’ her son in the old familiar way, the sooner he will feel that it is ‘safe’to be close to her, without risk to his own manhood.
The new relationship which can then develop between mother and son can be rich and rewarding for them both.
Minor scuffles may also break out between father and sons.
Teenage boys, like young bulls in a herd, often jockey for position and want to try out their own strength.
A wise father  will recognize the reason for his sons' aggressive or needling behaviour and remain firm but cool himself without feeling threatened or provoked.
Letting go
All wise parents eventually recognize the need to let go.
The burning question is — how soon?
Disagreement about the rate at which parents let go is usually the root of the trouble.
For example, a girl of fourteen may reckon that she is old enough to go camping abroad or inter-state with an assorted group of friends of her own age.
When parents refuse, there is either an almighty bust-up or a continuing groundswell of discontent that lasts for weeks.
If you are unlucky, you may get both.
While the girl sees the trip as a reasonable privilege for a fourteen-year-old, you recognize that she and a group of young teenagers are not ready to handle the responsibilities and possible risks involved.
Both parties are looking at the project from different angles, so it is not surprising if each fails to see the other's viewpoint.
If parents keep cool and explain fully why they are saying no, they make it easier for their daughter to back down without losing face.
They may also be able to build in some safeguards which would make it possible for them to give permission.
For example, there might be one or two parents, or some older, responsible young people, who could accompany the younger ones.
Learning to be responsible
Teenagers have to learn that privilege and responsibility go hand in hand.
Sometimes, as in the case of a foreign or inter-state trip, the youngster may just not be old enough or experienced enough to cope, but at other times they may not be showing enough sense of responsibility to be safely granted privileges.
Teenagers who consistently fail to let parents know when they will be home, or where they are likely to be, cannot expect to be allowed to stay out to all hours.
Once young people recognize the perfectly reasonable link between being responsible and having privileges granted, they may be more inclined to cooperate.
Parents who themselves behave in a responsible way towards their children, making it a habit to keep them informed of their whereabouts and accounting for their own actions, are more likely to receive the same consideration in return.
Human beings do not usually shoulder responsibility by choice.
They have to be taught and encouraged to do so.
Some  parents fail to give their teenagers the opportunity or incentive to be responsible, yet complain that they still behave like children.
If a teenager decides to earn money doing a paper round, or a Saturday job, there is no reason why their mother should set her alarm in order to wake them at an unearthly hour.
Getting up and being at the shop on time is the teenager's own responsibility and part of the cost to be reckoned with.
What kind of parent?
Psychologists describe parental attitudes to teenagers as ranging from:
warm and loving, to hostile and rejecting
restrictive and controlling, to permissive (encouraging autonomy)
These two sets of attitudes may be combined in various ways.
A loving parent may also be controlling, that is, unwilling to allow the teenager to make decisions or be responsible in any way.
Similarly, a rejecting parent may allow the child to behave as he or she likes.
It is also possible to combine a rejecting and an authoritarian attitude, or a loving and a permissive one.
All parents fit in somewhere along the scale, differing from one another in their handling of the young adults in the family.
There is no one right way to behave, but it is clear that teenagers suffer when parents overprotect, as well as when they leave them to their own devices and appear not to care.
When parents are so concerned for the children's safety that they prevent them from exercising choice and making decisions, they are depriving them of the experience they need in order to cope with life as mature adults.
On the other hand, parents who show no sign of caring where their youngsters are, or what they are doing, not only leave them free to get into all kinds of trouble but make it harder for them to take responsibility by depriving them too soon of parental care.
Your teenager may insist that no one else's parents are as strict as you are, but adolescents need the security that reasonable and clearly defined parental limits provide.
A group of young teenage girls once admitted to me that although they frequently complained because their parents insisted that they should be home by a certain time, they recognized that the deadline gave them a useful excuse for not getting out of their depth.
It also reassured them  that their parents loved them and cared about their wellbeing.
Loving without conditions
It is very important that teenagers should never feel rejected by their parents, either because the parents really have given up on them or else because they treat them with coldness and apparent disapproval or dislike.
Whatever youngsters do, rejection can never be the right reaction.
Even when parents strongly disapprove of the way their teenager is behaving, it is still important to make it clear that it is the behaviour and not the person that is being rejected.
On paper this may sound like splitting hairs, but in practice it is perfectly possible to make the difference clear.
Unless parents are on their guard, they may often give the impression that they have withdrawn love and acceptance, just at the time when both are most needed.
Love must be seen to survive the worst rows and the most unlikeable or painful behaviour.
At a time when no one else may seem to approve of them, and they may not much like themselves, it is of the utmost importance that teenagers should feel wanted and loved by their parents.
Staying friends
Parents as well as their children need to be aware that the relationship between them is changing and developing into one that is more equal and reciprocal.
The old pattern of family life, where everyone existed and acted under the family umbrella, is fast disappearing.
It is possible for parents to go on behaving as they have always done towards their children, without making adjustments as they are needed.
They may put the blame entirely on the teenagers for failing to respond to their advice or orders as they once did, but the fault may be theirs for failing to treat them as the young adults they have now become.
Parents who enjoy a happy relationship with their own parents, may find it easier to adapt to a new kind of relationship with their own fast-maturing children.
Eventually, the children of the family will take their place as adults whose views and opinions carry as much weight as those of their parents.
The relationship should still be special and unique, but it will only survive as something good and precious if it is allowed to grow into a friendship between equals.
Keep talking
Some break in communications between parents and children often occurs during teenage years.
Usually no permanent damage is done and the confrontations of the stormy years are forgiven and forgotten.
But there is the sad possibility that parent and child stop communicating at this time and never rebuild the relationship on a new and satisfying footing.
There will probably be rows and outbursts on the part of both teenagers and parents, but if these are kept from degenerating into resentments, dislike and misunderstanding at a deep and continuing level, there will be little harm done.
Parents and children both desperately need each other 's love and respect and it is important to let it be seen that you still accept and value one another, even in the midst of the turbulent years of the teens.
It is the parents who must set an example of consideration and true courtesy to the teenagers, whether they seem to deserve it or not.
Parents and children need to keep talking to each other.
It may seem at times that there is little common ground between the two generations, but if a parent is patient and ready to take an interest, and to listen as well as to give advice or pass criticism, there is plenty to talk about and share together.
When the children were six months or six years old, it was a fairly straightforward matter recognizing their needs and being available at times that could also be fitted neatly into your own routine.
Now there is no knowing when you may be needed and not everyone finds it easy to be on hand to talk or listen when required.
It is important not only to give time but to be genuinely interested in your teenagers and in what interests them.
Caustic remarks about their latest pop or sports idol don't help.
Many teenagers are willing to listen, too, to what interests or worries you.
Quality matters more than quantity in the time you spend together.
It is worth sounding a warning to those who are part of a tightly-knit family unit.
Teenagers do not want parents too interested or involved in their world.
A teenager whose parent is her ‘best friend’ may be failing to find the friends that she should have among her peers and those outside the family group.
Parents should not try to monopolize their teenagers, with however good a motive.
It can hinder their proper development.
If you and your children have always talked together on all kinds of subjects, you may find it easier to sit down and talk reasonably and quietly about some of the hard decisions that have to be made.
Whether the issue is whether to buy a motor  motor bike, what college or university to apply for, or what job to look for, a calm discussion of all the factors involved is far more fruitful than teenage demand met by flat parental refusal, with no real thinking on either side.
Parents need to listen as well as to talk and to let it be seen that they recognize the teenager's viewpoint, even when they take an opposite view.
On the other hand, they also need to explain their own good reasons for a decision, and refuse to give in to teenage threats or tears, when they know that decision is right.
Every time a problem is solved by reasonable and rational discussion, the way is made easier for similar problem-solving in the future.
Right and wrong
Many parents who have given their children a clear understanding of right and wrong, and those who have laid the foundation of Christian faith, may feel at this stage that their children are rejecting their values once and for all.
Sometimes such a thing does happen.
It may happen when parents have indoctrinated their children, that is, laid down a set of beliefs without allowing the children freedom to think for themselves and to come up with their own reactions.
It is very important to give children room to think for themselves and not to impose on them a restricting interpretation of truth.
It is also important to practise what you preach.
Faith is better caught than taught and the example of a parent is a strong influence even while teenagers seem to be rejecting what you taught them.
A boy or girl who appears to be rejecting parental values may be developing in a more healthy and normal way than one who follows the parent's party line and gives no trouble.
Young people must discover faith for themselves and make it truly their own if they are to find a foundation for life.
Second-hand beliefs are not much help in the real world and adolescents who merely assent to what they are taught will find those beliefs of very little use when serious problems of life arise.
Parents need patience.
When to say no
Parents sometimes need to exercise their authority and say no.
It is important to keep reviewing the matter of what to allow and what to refuse.
It is also important to judge each case on its merits.
It is also important to decide whether the particular issue warrants bringing out all the big guns.
Rules and prohibitions are best accepted and obeyed when they are kept to a minimum and when good reasons are put forward for abiding by them.
All  good parents forbid what is dangerous to their child, whether the danger is physical or moral.
It may still be important to say no, on those grounds, even to older teenagers.
Parents may see danger when their children are too inexperienced to recognize it.
The teenager's own responsibleness — and that of their friends — will have a bearing on your decision.
Does the son who wants a motor bike show signs of being ready to handle a potentially lethal machine?
Does he respect the safety measures laid down?
Does the daughter who wants to go to a party where there will be unlimited alcohol have the confidence, sense and moral courage to take a different line, if necessary, from her friends?
No hard and fast rules can be laid down, but the sooner you can help teenagers acquire the confidence to act responsibly and not to be afraid of peer pressure, the more freedom you can allow them.
You are also preparing them well for the time when they will be outside your jurisdiction for ever.
Keeping the contract
Martin Herbert, a professor of clinical psychology, has written an excellent book,Living with Teenagers .
He outlines a plan for coping with the conflicts that often arise in the family during the teenage years.
He suggests that parents and child should draw up a contract between them, with both making promises which cannot be altered without joint agreement.
Usually, he suggests, it is better to put the agreement into writing, with a relative or family friend as witness.
The kind of promises each party to the contract makes will vary, but one fairly typical example is for the teenager to promise to tidy his bedroom once a week, to let parents know when he will be late home from school or where he is and who he is with when he goes out.
In return, parents might promise not to keep criticizing his friends, to give an increased allowance of pocket money and to be ready to admit when they are in the wrong.
As well as penalties laid down for breaking the contract (perhaps no evenings out for a given period?), there need to be rewards for keeping it, perhaps in the form of a family treat.
Professor Herbert argues that such an arrangement is neither cold-blooded nor out of keeping for a family.
After all, most relationships are based on contracts, whether written, spoken or just taken for granted.
Friendship as well as marriage is a two-way affair and it is only when both parties have the opportunity to share problems, experiences and ideas and to give as well as take, that the relationship is a success.
During the teen  years it is only too easy to misinterpret the role of both parent and child with a lot of consequent hot air and bad feeling.
Sitting down together to work out what are reasonable contributions to the relationship on both sides satisfies the teenager's sense of fairness and cuts out the constant nagging, pleading and resentment that so quickly sours the good relationship that parents and children need to enjoy together.
ACTION CHECKPOINTS
Prepare to enjoy the teen years.
Take time to talk to your teenagers.
Never stop loving and accepting your teenagers.
Adapt to their new needs — recognize that they are growing up.
Think before saying yes — or no,
Consider the value of a family contract.
Prepare to play the waiting game.
SPECIAL CASES
The Things People Say
‘Only roughly half adopted children wish to discover their birth parents.
They feel perfectly at home with their adoptive family, yet they are conscious that they also belong elsewhere .’
Senior social worker with adopted teenagers
‘Natural parents also have children at this stage who don't fit in .’
Social worker
‘Remember clashes are common in all families.
They just tend to be more intense in stepfamilies .’
Erica De'Ath,Teenagers Growing up in a Stepfamily 
‘Whether we like it or not, the stepfamily is the family of the future and society has a duty to accept this .’
Elizabeth Hodder, in The Times 
‘The day when I attached less importance to (my stepdaughter) liking me than to her respecting me, I began to treat her more as I would my own child .’
Elizabeth Hodder,The Step-parents Handbook 
‘Trying to make changes right away only results in rejected efforts, and sometimes creates other problems.
Children are influenced most by example and by the kind of person the step-parent is .’
Einstein and Albert
‘Many parents bring me rebellious teenagers with the plea, ‘Please change her, doctor!'’
But I can't change anyone who doesn't want to be changed .’
Dr John White,Parents in Pain 
Some parents recognize that their family or their particular teenagers are different in some way or another.
Often, the usual guidelines still apply, but it may be reassuring to highlight and comment on a few of the special situations in which some parents are placed.
Parents whose children have a handicap or disablement represent one such large group.
Adolescence will be a time for facing new situations and some burning issues about the need for independence, employment and ‘dating’.
The needs are so varied and require such specialist and informed help that it is not possible to deal with them here.
Many support groups have sprung up in recent years, at national and local level, to support and advise families of those suffering from specific diseases or forms of disablement.
Other group members in similar circumstances can understand and offer help from their own experience.
The adopted family
Couples who wish to adopt a child are likely to find that conditions of acceptance are strict, and preliminary preparation and training sessions prolonged and stringent.
This is especially the case when the boy or girl to be adopted has a disability or a disturbed background.
Parents who succeed in adopting a child are likely to take the whole matter of their upbringing even more seriously and conscientiously than many who have given birth to their children.
At adolescence, adopted children have the normal crop of teenage problems.
Parents may jump to the conclusion that the fact of being adopted is the root of the trouble when that has nothing to do with the case.
A senior social worker with an adoption society, who deals specifically with the needs of teenagers, confirms this fact.
She emphasizes the importance of parents coming to terms with the full implications of adoption from the very beginning.
Provided that they have done so, and that the child has been matched with them as carefully as possible so that they can best meet his or her needs, their situation is likely to be no different from that of any other family with teenagers.
Natural parents find it just as hard to understand and meet the needs of their adolescent children.
Unfortunately, a doctor or psychologist may sometimes reinforce parents' concern by remarking, ‘Well, of course, he's adopted,’ when this has nothing to do with the matter in question.
The problems are the normal ones of adolescence and will pass in their own good time.
Who am I?
Adolescents, like their midlife parents, are searching for their identity.
For adopted children that quest may include tracing their natural or birth parents.
Roughly half the children who are adopted feel an urgent need to discover their origins.
Since 1976, in Britain at least, anyone of eighteen or over has been allowed by law to go to the General Register Office, the local Social Services or the appropriate adoption agency to obtain their original birth certificate.
They are also required to see a counsellor.
After that they are free to carry out the search for their birth parents.
Some teenagers are deterred through fear of hurting the feelings of their adopted parents and others may have too many doubts as to how the encounter might work out.
Some make preliminary enquiries then wait a few years but many feel it is so desperately important to know where they came from and who they belonged to that they go ahead.
Their search in no way means that they are dissatisfied with their adopted home or love their adopted parents any the less.
But they feel that they belong to two families and, as one girl put it, ‘I was part of that woman's body for nine months’, so discovering her birth-mother's identity seemed, to her, an urgent necessity.
It is easy for adopted parents to feel hurt or rejected and it is only rarely that they and the child make the search together.
It may be hard for them to go on giving warmth and understanding love amidst the euphoria and excitement that can surround the search for the birth parents and their possible discovery.
But the teenager is likely to need the reassurance and loving security of the familiar home and parents more than ever during this traumatic time.
Midlife search
It is worth mentioning at this point that many people who were adopted as babies feel the need in midlife to search out their natural parents.
They were not legally entitled to do so as teenagers and various factors may trigger their desire to find their birth parents at this stage.
It may be that the death of their adopted parents leaves them free to make inquiries without giving them hurt.
It also reminds them that their natural parents must be growing old too, and that the time for finding them is limited.
They may have come upon documents relating to their early life when they cleared out the dead parents' papers.
Any of these factors, as well as the renewed need to know and understand themselves which  occurs at midlife, may lead to a belated search for their roots.
The reconstituted family
By the end of the century about half of all children in Britain will have acquired at least one stepfather — however temporarily — by the time they are sixteen.
Two out of five families are already full-time or part-time stepfamilies.
The reconstituted, or stepfamily, is formed when two partners marry, one or both bringing children from a previous relationship with them.
The new marriage may follow death, separation or (most usually) divorce of the previous partner.
Sometimes the new couple themselves are so much in love that they have unreasonably high expectations for the whole new family that will be formed.
But not all the people involved have made a conscious choice to create this unit.
The ending of one relationship and the beginning of another is a complex matter.
It will take time, self-awareness and unselfish giving on the part of the couple themselves, and of all the other parties concerned, if the new relationships are to succeed.
More second marriages break down because of the children of the partners than for any other single cause.
When teenage children are involved, as full-time or part-time members of the new family, there is considerable added pressure.
It is very important that their specific needs and difficulties are taken into account.
Remember:
They may still be mourning the loss of the parent who has died or left home.
They long above everything for their two parents to be reunited.
They may still have fantasies of such a reunion after one or both have remarried.
Their loyalties may be divided — they have a longer previous family history with both parents than young children and may feel torn between loyalty and love for both.
They may have had the unsettling experience of living in three different households — the original family, an interim family with only one parent — and the newly-formed stepfamily.
They have not chosen the new family and they may not feel love or even liking for the new partner.
They may fear to extend love and acceptance to the new partner as it seems a betrayal of the absent parent.
They may wonder where they belong.
Many are uprooted, having to leave home, school and friends.
Part-time stepchildren may have no room to themselves in their weekend or holiday family.
They may dislike or be jealous of new step-brothers or sisters.
Their status in the new family may be radically changed.
A previous eldest may now be youngest, or the other way round.
Sexual jealousy may play a part in their reactions, especially where a new partner is brought into the home before marriage.
Parent wisdom
The role of step-parents can be hard, especially if the problems have not been foreseen and the marriage has taken place on a powerful wave of emotion and little else.
The head-shakings and prognostications of family and friends may have been ignored completely.
It is vital to face up to some of the problems inherent in the situation and to be as honest as possible about all the relationships involved.
Many step-parents feel guilty for not loving their step-children in the way they do their own.
A younger person marrying and taking on a teenage family may know very little about adolescents.
She would do well to learn more, from books or from other parents, about the stage through which the step-children are passing.
It is very important that the two partners endeavour to:
Agree on discipline.
Perhaps the step-parent needs to work out his or her own approach to disciplining the teenager.
Talk together about any problems as honestly as possible.
Refuse to sweep difficulties under the carpet but sort things out even when it is painful.
Avoid money discussions in front of the teenagers.
Money is the second highest cause for breakdown of second marriages.
Teenagers are said to be especially sensitive to the financial implications and aware of their own lack of power in the matter.
Make ground rules for behaviour.
This is especially important when teenagers come for weekends or holidays only.
They may  stay in bed to all hours, slump in front of the television and expect to be waited on hand, foot and finger.
Firm but gentle provision and enforcement of basic rules is kinder to them and necessary for your survival.
Stop resentments building up.
Sort things out as you go — as every family needs to do.
Elizabeth Hodder, whose wisdom I have relied upon in this section, found from personal experience that there was no help available for stepfamilies in Britain.
So she founded The National Stepfamily Association.
She sums up the situation by saying that the reconstituted family is never the same as the biological family.
It can be satisfying and good, but it is different.
Her comment is: ‘High expectations spell disaster — low expectations and there may be a chance of survival.’
She recommends too that targets should be short-term ones.
That way, even a small success gives a sense of achievement and provides something positive for the new family to build upon.
All the qualities normally required for coping with adolescents are needed in the stepfamily — tolerance, reasonable guidelines and discipline, respect and good communication.
Above all, patience is needed to work out new situations and relationships, in a family which has no shared past.
When things go wrong
Many people today believe that children begin life with a clean slate.
Parents are largely responsible for providing the right environment so that their children grow up happy, balanced and free from hang-ups.
Later on, school, peer groups and society influence the child's development too.
The logical result of such thinking is that parents feel largely responsible when things go wrong.
They often suffer deep feelings of guilt if their children fail to succeed, to make good relationships or to turn into responsible and law-abiding members of society.
Psychiatrists and other advisers may reinforce this attitude.
The Christian belief about people, based on biblical teaching, is different.
Human beings have good and loving feelings, because God.is love and we were originally made in God's image.
But something went badly wrong.
Because people refused — and still do refuse — to live life as it was meant to be lived, in happy friendship and obedience to God, evil is present, not only in our world, but within us all.
Crimes against society, such as theft, murder and outright war, as well as bad actions against family and friends, spring from our inborn desire to get  our own way and do what we want, however much we normally keep those feelings under control.
The parent of a new-born child is not providing all the input for a mind blank of any social or moral bias, but is dealing with a personality that will display a bundle of mixed motives and behaviour.
Wise and loving training will help the growing child to foster tendencies and characteristics which are beneficial to society and helpful to the child's development.
But however good their upbringing, young people are still free to throw over the controls and act in a selfish and destructive way.
Everyone, however conditioned by family and society, still retains the dignity and freedom given by God, of exercising their own will and choosing good or evil.
Dr John White, a psychiatrist, comments: ‘There are general rules.
Good parents are less likely to produce problem children than bad parents.
Stable homes are more likely to produce stable children than unstable homes.
But that's as far as it seems to go.
There are no steel-reinforced rules which say: Good parenting always produces good children.
Bad parenting always produces bad children.
It simply isn't true.’
Positive encouragements
There are ways in which parents can encourage their growing children to make right choices in life.
Children and teenagers have a head start if they have:
a stable family unit
parents who love and care for each other and for them
clear teaching from early days about the difference between right and wrong
gradual encouragement to develop self-control and to practise consideration for others
the example of parents or others with a sincere and non-legalistic faith, which they live as well as teaching wisely
increasing freedom to make choices within a framework of secure guidelines
honesty and openness among family members and freedom to talk out problems
shared time, interests and enjoyments with their parents
Anorexia nervosa
Adolescent girls are the commonest victims of anorexia nervosa.
The real causes of the disease are still a mystery.
Although sufferers appear to have lost their appetite — which is what the word anorexia literally means — their chief worry is weight increase.
Anorexics have a false idea of their own appearance, seeing themselves as fat even when they have become painfully thin.
Most anorexics have a low opinion of themselves and see losing weight as their most important goal in order that others will value them and so that they can respect themselves.
Some anorexics combine fasting with occasional binges, followed by self-induced purging or vomiting.
Monthly periods often stop altogether.
It is very important for parents to get professional help as soon as they recognize any of these warning signs.
Smoking
It's an encouraging if surprising fact that children and young people are much less likely to smoke when parents tell them that they don't want them to.
It is better still when parents set them the right example by not smoking themselves.
Young people are unlikely to be affected by statistics showing the high incidence of disease and early death among smokers.
But parents, who know those facts, can use all their influence to discourage the habit.
The myths that link smoking with glamour, with being adult or having sex appeal need to be firmly exploded.
Fortunately, some well-known figures in the sports and pop world are helping to do this.
(See also chapter 4 on smoking.)
Alcohol
A recent medical report expressed concern about increased drinking among boys and girls, including those under the legal age.
According to its findings almost half the accidental deaths among teenagers over fifteen in Britain is caused by alcohol.
Forty-five per cent of fatal road accidents involving young people are alcohol-linked, and so are drowning and deaths from accidental overdose.
Government money is needed to educate young people about the dangers of alcohol, but unless there is back-up in the family, such a campaign is unlikely to succeed.
Many parents in midlife come to rely heavily on alcohol themselves, to help them cope with stresses and pressures at home or work.
Teenagers may imitate their example.
Young people are best able to withstand the danger of alcohol abuse if they have been taught:
the danger to health of too much alcohol — and how much is too much
how to say No without losing face with their peers
that drinking too much is not clever or a sign of being grown-up
that alcohol is not a problem-solver or a sexual stimulant — the opposite in both cases
that too much alcohol can kill
never to drink and drive
In all these cases, it is vitally important that parents should set an example.
(See chapter 4.)
Drugs
Parents who worry about their teenage children getting involved with drugs, are normally thinking of drugs other than tobacco and alcohol.
They are concerned about those drugs that are forbidden by law.
Teenagers may begin to take drugs to help them escape from adolescent problems they can't cope with.
Some of the illegal and dangerous drugs include the following:
Solvent abuse Sniffing glue — and other agents — is often more common among children and young teenagers.
Since the substances used are often freely on sale for legitimate purposes, it is hard to crack down on this form of abuse.
Many young people who carry on the habit on their own, after first experimenting with friends, are trying to escape from unhappiness at home, perhaps because their parents are quarrelling.
Cannabis Teenagers often insist that cannabis is harmless, but it has been shown to be a high risk for certain users.
It is also illegal.
There is some evidence that it can cause schizophrenia.
Cannabis users sometimes go on to use dangerous hard drugs.
Heroin and cocaine These are the best known of the hard drugs.
Cocaine smuggling has increased alarmingly.
Most parents are aware of the very severe risk to life in using such drugs and of the increased danger, to those who inject and share needles, of contracting AIDS or hepatitis B.
The most obvious sign of drug-taking in a young person is a change in personality.
A quiet teenager may become aggressive  or a normally outgoing cheerful one become unnaturally withdrawn.
They may be lethargic or irritable and lose interest in their usual hobbies, school work or sport.
Of course, all these symptoms can be part of the growing-up process, but if you are worried that your teenager might be taking drugs, or suspect drug-taking among their friends or school mates, it is very important for their own safety that you should get help.
They are also breaking the law and could be in serious trouble for that.
In most countries there are clinics and advice centres with a free phone line.
The doctor or a social worker could also advise.
Homosexuality
Attitudes to homosexuality and lesbianism in our society range from complete rejection to acceptance of it as a valid alternative to a heterosexual preference.
It is extremely difficult to make any statement, however carefully worded, without being accused of extremism by one side or the other.
Many Christians accept the fact that a proportion of people are homosexual through no fault or voluntary choice of their own.
But that fact does not make homosexual practice part of God's plan for the human race, which is based on the loving, permanent relationship of one man and one woman.
In this respect the ‘condition’ calls for the same personal discipline as a celibate single life.
At the same time, others need to offer the caring, understanding support which helps to make such a life possible.
It is important for parents:
to remember that teenagers normally go through the phase of being attracted to someone of the same sex.
This is part of growing up and has nothing to do with a deep-seated homosexual tendency.
to protect teenage children during this phase from contact with those who might exploit them and places where that might occur.
to be able to talk with their teenagers openly and without undue emotion on the subject, explaining their own beliefs.
to get skilled advice if they have reason to believe that their teenager may be genuinely homosexual.
to give love, understanding and acceptance to their son or daughter, whatever their tendency.
Teenage pregnancy
The attitude to unmarried mothers is very different now from a generation ago, but it is still a tragedy for most families if a schoolgirl daughter becomes pregnant.
The girl herself will probably be thoroughly frightened, however she may try to hide the fact.
It is important that:
parents and daughter should talk freely about the future
parents should still show love and acceptance as well as giving support
thorough counselling is asked for
that the girl's own wishes are considered
that decisions are made for the right reasons and do not run counter to deeply held attitudes or beliefs
parents aim to use the crisis to strengthen bonds with their daughter.
Depression
During adolescence, emotions are strong and teenagers often experience violent mood swings, including bouts of depression.
When depression is severe, it is an illness requiring medical attention.
Signs of clinical depression include: a marked change in patterns of eating and sleeping, inability to concentrate, extreme lethargy and deep unhappiness (see chapter 5).
Depression may sometimes lead to suicide threats or attempts.
Although attempted suicide has increased among older teenagers, the rate is still well below that for adults.
But such threats should never be treated lightly.
They are often a cry for help.
It is not true that those who threaten to kill themselves never do.
Consult your doctor in order to be referred for specialist help.
Professional help
Parents who recognize that they are out of their depth should always seek help.
They may talk first to someone wise and experienced — a person they know and can confide in.
They may also need professional help and their family doctor, church minister, head teacher or social worker, could refer them to a psychologist, psychotherapist, psychiatrist or counsellor from a specialist organization.
Many parents experience deep pain and despair about their teenage children.
Most will have discovered by this time that  love involves risk.
When we love we are vulnerable.
We fear the pain and hurt that may touch those we love but we lay ourselves open to hurt and pain from them.
Love also involves risk.
Having a child means taking an enormous risk in emotional terms, as well as in other ways.
We have been responsible for launching our children into life and are well aware that we have made the usual crop of mistakes, even though we have tried our hardest to do what is best for them.
Most of what follows, now that they are nearly grown up, is not within our power to decide.
We cannot be accountable for the choices that our children are going to make, even though we have contributed to those choices.
We have to leave them to be independent and responsible people in their own right.
But, not surprisingly, many parents continue to feel anxious, tense and sad about their children.
I have been through all these emotions myself.
I found comfort — although at times I had to struggle to do so — from knowing that God is the Father,par excellence , and he therefore knew exactly how I was feeling.
Better still, he loves my children even more than I do and wants what is best for them.
I prayed for them in their growing up years more than I had ever done before.
I prayed that God would protect them, now that I no longer could, and that he would bring them close to him too.
I have also learned to pray that God will do what he sees is best for them.
Now, a number of years later, I have seen some of God's plans for them come about and realize how much he has cared for them and kept them safe.
John White, who writes both as a psychiatrist and as a father, comments in Parents in Pain , ‘I do not know what destiny whether small or great God plans for the children who most concern you.
I do know that you will have more peace if you can grasp how crucial relinquishment is, how utterly safe it is to place your children in God's sure hands.’
ACTION CHECKPOINTS
Keep the idea of ‘special cases’ in proportion — many teenagers have problems.
Get help from specialist agencies when needed.
Give teenagers positive instruction on dangers of: smoking, alcohol, other drugs.
Get advice, if concerned, about: anorexia, drugs, depression.
Consider if faith in God and prayer may help you — and your teenagers.
NEW SITUATIONS
The Things People Say
‘The empty nest can lead to greater maturity.
We are free to give time to those who are like ourselves, or like we were once, or like we shall be one day .’
Speaker at conference on Midlife
‘Two out of the three are away at college — I haven't missed them much yet.
I don't want them to feel guilty about leaving home .'
‘One of our sons was with us for eight months before going away to the other end of the earth — I couldn't even phone him.
I had a tremendous sense of bereavement — it hurt inside — I had no idea it would be like that .’
Mother of four children
‘One daughter was married on the Saturday and our son went abroad on the Monday and our third child married eighteen months later.
I was not going to be one of those mothers who cried, and I didn't .'
‘The past exists in every stepfamily but a remarriage is a commitment to the future…
Don't feel depressed if movement is slow…the most important thing is to give yourself, the parents and the children time .’
Booklet for step-grandparents by The National Stepfamily Association
‘His grandchildren call me Auntie, and I love looking after them when they come.
But when Brian goes to see them he goes with his first wife, who they call Granny.
I ask you, how are the children going to understand that it's Brian and I who are married?
How will they see me ?’
Young step-grandmother
‘Grandchildren are wonderful.
They give so much joy and then you can always hand them back when you've had enough .’
‘It's amazing to see how differently the grandchildren in the various families are brought up.
One lot are as good as gold — we'll have them any day, but another lot are almost more than we can cope with!
But we say nothing !'
Mothers belong to a small group of people whose success is measured by how well they work themselves out of their job.
They recognize that their overall goal is to launch their child into the world, as an independent and responsible young adult.
But they may find themselves unprepared for the pain and the sense of loss that the achieving of that goal may bring in its wake.
Writers about midlife are fond of referring to the empty nest syndrome, much to the annoyance of feminists, who deplore the notion that women need children to bolster their sense of self-worth.
But however we label this stage, it is clear that many, if not most, women experience a quite severe sense of loss when their children leave home.
Fathers may miss their teenagers but are not likely to grieve in the same way.
When the marriage is good, a husband may be able to encourage his wife to see the many compensations in store, including the opportunities to explore their own interests and reinforce their commitment to each other.
It may seem ironic to onlookers that the very parents who have been complaining loud and long about the difficulty of sharing their home with impossible teenage children, should be lamenting the fact that they've left, only a few months later.
In some areas and in some social groups, children continue to live at home until they marry.
The difficult period of adolescence passes and the relationship between parents and children becomes workable and often happy.
But in many cases boys and girls leave home at around eighteen to get work, for further training, or to go to university.
In fact, just as the difficult teens are coming to an end, the young adults are off,
It is natural that parents, and mothers in particular, should feel sadness and a sense of bereavement, whether or not they have been full-time housewives and mothers.
One woman, who already had a job and a busy life of her own, was surprised to find how sad she felt when her children left home in quick succession.
‘I thought it would be good to be free to get on with my own affairs,’ she said, ‘but I suffered quite severe depression.
In  many ways I've had a fuller and more satisfying life since then, and I know that my children still need me in lots of ways.
But at the time I felt rejected and useless, because I wasn't needed in the way I had been for so long.,
Another mother, whose three children left home the same summer — the twins on the same day — described her sensation of being left in a vacuum.
‘It was a feeling of being suspended — it was not a negative feeling and not even a loss to be mourned, but I just could not see a way ahead.
That feeling of uncertainty did not last long, I found a new pathway and the bewilderment soon went.
But I do now sometimes wish that I had given them more time when I did have them.’
Single parents are likely to find the experience even more traumatic.
It may be the first time that they have had to live alone and that a whole new way of life has to be taken on board at a time when they are emotionally upset and feeling the sadness of being parted from their son or daughter.
A psychiatrist emphasized the importance of preparing for the emotion of loss and recognizing it when it comes.
He described one woman who kept saying, ‘I can't wait for my second one to leave home,’ but was actually denying the sadness she felt.
When genuine feelings are denied and pushed down, depression may follow.
Learning independence
On the credit side, there is much for the parents as well as the teenagers to gain when the time comes for them to leave home.
The children learn to take responsibility for themselves.
However hard parents try to inculcate a sense of responsibility in their children, the habits of childhood die hard.
Most mothers haven't the heart to deny their children the care and comfort they have given them all their lives and many continue to run round them long after they are old enough to look after themselves.
In order to become a responsible adult, a young man or woman must learn the cost of living, in terms of hard cash and hard work.
While they are living at home, so many things are thrown in free.
It can come as a shock to have to buy every stamp, tube of toothpaste or bar of soap as well as to wash and press favourite clothes before going out, and to change and launder their own bed linen.
Young people away from home for the first time also have to find the resources within themselves to create a pattern of living.
Up to now, they have conformed, perhaps unwillingly, to  the family's routine.
One student described her feelings in her first weeks at university.
She realized that if she chose she could go all day without food and go to bed at any hour she liked.
No one was likely to know or care.
She recognized that she had to make a sensible framework of her own.
For these reasons, and many more, no teenager returns home, even after a few months away, without having changed.
The family may look forward to the first visit home, assuming that everything can go on exactly where it left off.
The parents may not have changed but the teenager most certainly will have done.
There is likely to be a far greater appreciation of home comforts but there may also be a reluctance to answer the barrage of questions or to say much about the new life.
But, provided that parents are patient and do not ask too many questions too soon, they will usually hear something of what's going on.
And with that they must be content.
Setting them free
Adults have the right to make decisions for themselves.
Wise parents give their children increasing freedom to do so, in order that they may gain experience before the time comes for them to be fully responsible for the choices they make.
But some find it difficult to treat their grown-up children as people in their own right, entitled to plan their own lives.
Sometimes they continue to give unasked-for advice and exert emotional pressure to get them to do as they want.
It is also important to get the right balance between over concern and lack of care.
Older teenagers do not want a mother to be yearning over them day and night, even when several hundred miles lie between them.
It is damaging to a mother to go on living through her children's lives.
It is important, at the time when they leave home, that she has enough to occupy her of a useful, creative and absorbing kind (see chapter 16).
New relationships
In some societies parents do select the marriage partner for their children, but we have very little say in the partners our children choose, however strongly we may feel on the subject.
It is unwise to criticize their choices and can be counterproductive.
Just as they defended the school friends we disapproved of, so they are likely to stick to their own choice of girl or boyfriend.
If your opinion is asked, it may be gently given but, in nearly every case, it is neither right nor effective to try to end a relationship forcibly.
Parents have to trust that what  they have taught in earlier years and, ideally, been able to demonstrate in their own relationship together, will have provided patterns to be followed.
It is almost always best to welcome the person a son or daughter has chosen.
If you don't do so you are also likely to put at risk the closeness of your own relationship with them.
Dr Jean Coope, in Menopause , advises: ‘You may not think the stranger is the perfect son or daughter-in-law, but the chances are that your children know who will suit them better than you do, and the sooner you accept this fact, the happier your family will be.’
Living-in
Many young people take living with a current girl or boyfriend for granted.
Parents may feel embarrassed and unsure of how to treat these relationships.
There is no protocol to follow and how they decide to handle the matter is a personal decision.
It seems to me that parents as well as their children have rights, so if you do not feel comfortable about letting the couple share a bedroom in the family home, you should be free to say so.
How you do so is another matter.
It never hurts to be gentle and courteous as well as firm.
Most children respect genuine moral convictions.
They are only likely to be resentful if they suspect that their parents are acting from nothing better than outraged respectability.
When a son or daughter decides to settle down and live with a partner for the foreseeable future, rather than getting married, the situation is different.
Parents may have to come to terms with this, and accept the partner, in spite of the many problems such a relationship causes for others in the family.
There are no ground rules for knowing how to handle these semi-permanent relationships in the context of the larger family circle.
The couple themselves may find it no problem, but Grandpa or Auntie may see it differently.
Many of us feel uncomfortable when we do not have a pattern to follow.
Some parents will be very upset, in some cases because it cuts across their genuine convictions.
One mother, whose daughter has lived with her boyfriend for about eight years, constantly nags her daughter about getting married and feels deep personal pain and grief.
Other parents may be able to accept the situation philosophically.
The main point is that we can do nothing to change matters.
But it is important that we keep family ties strong.
It is possible for both parents and children to show mutual love and respect in spite of their very different views.
Most mothers imagine their children's wedding, but it is sad when a parent puts pressure on her son or daughter to marry.
It is important to accept our children, single or married, without making them feel that they are less valued if they remain single, or if they marry someone who is not our choice.
When young people remain single, they will be open to pressure from plenty of other people.
They need to be able to relax without hints or recriminations from their own parents.
‘I'm terrified I'll cry,’ a mother confessed before her daughter's wedding.
It is obviously an emotional occasion for parents and it is important that they recognize, right from the start, that another person now comes first in their child's love and loyalty.
In the trite words of many a wedding speech, they have gained a son or daughter.
Whether the family's love is really extended to include the new member, is affected by the parents' reaction.
If they have never let their son or daughter go but are still jealously holding on to them, they may resent the marriage partner and therefore look for every possible fault.
No one may seem perfect enough for your child but, given the will, it is easy to discover plenty that is good.
Since this is the partner chosen by your child, it is vital to be positive and optimistic.
When you act in a loving way, the other person is more likely to respond and to show the best side of their nature.
Second time round
Some parents may face disappointment when they find that their child is to marry someone who has been married before and already has children.
Mothers who dreamed fondly of a white wedding, a handsome bridegroom and grandchildren soon on the scene, may find that their daughter is planning to marry a man her father's age, who has an ex-wife and some teenage children of his own.
Similarly, a son may embark on a marriage with a wife who has her own children.
Some children may be willing and glad to talk over beforehand the implications of forming a reconstituted family.
Although they can gently put their point of view, parents must then accept the situation.
It is worth, asking if all our sadness and anxiety is in fact for our child.
We should not underestimate the effect of our own disappointment.
It is important to recognize and come to terms with these feelings in order to be positive- and constructive about the manage.
Becoming grandparents
Some women scarcely feel the loss of their children, because by the time their youngest is launched, their eldest has a child of his or her own.
One mother of six told me that she moved happily from motherhood to grandmotherhood with no time between for mourning the empty nest.
Her children all live near, and the house is still full with visiting grandchildren.
Other parents long for grandchildren but find that their children delay marriage, or else their career-minded daughters or daughters-in-law have no intention of starting a family for a good few years.
I can remember at one time being the only one in a group of women my age who was not able to produce photos and tell anecdotes about grandchildren.
Other women would gladly put off becoming a grandmother, because it makes them feel old.
The fact of the matter is that you have no choice either way, and rightly so.
It seems inappropriate even to mention your feelings on the subject to your children.
They could feel angry, embarrassed and even guilty because of the comments of over-anxious parents who keep hinting about their longing for grandchildren, or make it clear that they think there should be no more.
The couple alone have the right to choose what they do and should not be expected to discuss the matter with their parents unless they wish to.
When children do arrive, it is their parents, not their grandparents, who should decide how they are to be brought up.
It may be hard to stand by and see your grandchild subjected to what you believe to be wrong methods of mixed feeding, potty training or general discipline, but you have already had your chance to bring up children.
There are more ways of showing disapproval than by speaking your mind.
Even unspoken criticism can be felt.
It is important to support parents and to co-operate as far as you possibly can.
A grandparent who tries to counteract parents' own methods by being over-indulgent or strict will only create further problems.
What matters most to the child is that he should be treated consistently.
The role of grandparents is to give time and unconditional love.
Substitute parents
Grandparents are sometimes left to do much of the childminding while parents are out at work.
There are some situations where this may be necessary and other times when grandparents take over during a crisis.
Although every family must make its own plans, it is only fair for grandparents to have  freedom of choice in this matter.
One or both of them may not wish to cope with parenting a second time round, having not long been released from the exhaustion and limitations of childcare on their own account.
I overheard a conversation between two women, one of whom was talking about her new grandchild.
‘I wouldn't mind,’ she explained, ‘but they just took it for granted that she would go back to work and I would look after the baby, without even asking me.’
Even so, she had meekly done as they wished and taken on a responsibility that was clearly a bit of a burden.
Naturally, all grandparents will be ready to help in emergencies or in special situations.
Step-grandparents
More and more people these days take on step-grandchildren when their children marry.
All new family relationships are delicate and need loving and thoughtful handling.
Stepfamilies call for additional sensitivity and unselfish caring on everyone's part.
The older generation have greater maturity and insights which they can usefully contribute, even though the situation is not of their making.
It is not always easy to accept the children of your child's marriage partner, especially if their existence may mean that you are unlikely to have grandchildren of your own.
These children may already have grandparents belonging to both their parents, so your role will be a delicate one.
One grandmother in this position wrote, ‘I thought they were lucky to have me, but they were not grateful at all.
They treated me as an intruder.’
Where there is a mix of your own grandchildren and stepgrandchildren, it can be hard to be even-handed and learn to accept the new arrivals.
In a handbook for step-grandparents the writers advise: ‘Try to be fair in all your dealings with the grandchildren, including natural and step-grandchildren together whenever possible.
Look for the good in your stepgrandchildren and try not to compare them unfavourably with your natural grandchildren.
Always let the parents know any suggestions or arrangements you have made with any of the grandchildren.’
Some grandparents have the sadness of losing rather than gaining grandchildren.
There are many different ways in which death or divorce can alter the family pattern and there are no ground rules to help us know how to behave, as there are in the case of the traditional nuclear family.
Many grandparents in these situations speak of their sense of powerlessness as well as their confusion as they try to sort out their sadness and loss and learn to accept their new families.
All the children involved are likely to have suffered too, and with patience and tact it may be possible to extend love and acceptance to them.
Your son or daughter and their new partner will also need your loving acceptance and support.
It is pointless.and harmful to hark back to how things used to be, although the conflict of loyalties may be hard to handle.
You may be able to continue giving care and support to the abandoned partner but it is still necessary to accept both the loss and the change and to look for a positive way forward.
Acceptance
When our children grow up, we no longer make the decisions for them, but accept the decisions they make for themselves and their own families, and we must do it as constructively and cheerfully as we can.
This is the biggest change we need to negotiate.
The happiest families are those where parents and children have succeeded in making the transition from a relationship of dependence to one of mutual friendship and sharing.
It is no longer our job to criticize or bring pressure to bear.
They have as much right to their lives as we have to ours.
Once we accept that fact, we can relax and enjoy the relationship, knowing that, because we are not tying them down, they are all the more likely to remain our friends and even to continue to come to us for support and for advice.
We may also gain — but not as a right — valued sons and daughters-in-law and grandchildren to love and enjoy.
ACTION CHECKPOINTS
Set your children free.
Make friends with your children.
Live your own life — not your child's.
Look for the best in your child's partner.
Accept your children's decisions.
Enjoy having grandchildren as a privilege — not a right.
SEX, SINGLENESS AND MARRIAGE
SEX IN TODAY'S WORLD
The Things People Say
‘A person who is not healthy sexually is not a healthy person .’
American sex therapist
‘The other destructive myth in our lives is that sexual activity is natural, while sexual inactivity is not .’
Celia Haddon, author of The Limits of Sex 
‘A man's sexuality is an incredibly fragile thing .’
Koo Stark, Photographer
‘Sex is important to everybody but I think it's been blown up into a thing that you must have and do .’
Barbara Cartland, novelist
‘I've had a very long and happy life without sex.
I know many women can live without it .’
Rosemary Anne Sisson, writer
‘I think we do exaggerate the importance of sex…
Long periods of chastity are perfectly OK, particularly when you are working hard.
I also think a promiscuous woman is very unlikely to be a happy woman .’
Tina Brown, editor of Vanity Fair 
‘It seems that not only are you supposed to enjoy sex, but you're supposed to talk about how much you enjoy it.
That I find tiresome, I must say .’
Doris Saatchi, art collector
‘One of the effects of media exploitation is that sexual intercourse has lost its moral mystique.
The moment of penetration no longer has the aura of an earth-shaking moral event in a person's life.
Technique has replaced morality as the crucial question to ask about sex .’
Lewis Smedes,Sex in the Real World 
Men and women who are now in their forties and fifties grew up in a society that had been first shocked, then revolutionized by the ‘revelations’ of American sex researcher Alfred Kinsey.
Masters and Johnson followed in his steps, conducting laboratory experiments into human sexual behaviour.
The achievements of their monitored sexual athletes led them to prescribe standards of sexual behaviour which were quite unrealistic in terms of ordinary people living normal lives.
So it became necessary to provide therapy for those unable to achieve the same kind of performance.
Sex manuals and sex therapists soon flooded the market to help people make the grade.
At around the same time the advent of the contraceptive pill gave women freedom from the fear of pregnancy.
So the age of unlimited and uninhibited sex was underway.
In her book,The Limits of Sex , Celia Haddon describes how claims for the value and importance of physical sex became ever more extravagant.
In 1970 one psychologist stated that ‘an active and rewarding sex life…is indispensable if one is to achieve his full potential as a member of the human race.’
Dr Alex Comfort lifted the argument to the realm of world peace when he maintained that sexual activity of every kind is necessary in order to free human beings from the instinct to fight and harm others.
He insisted that the world is run by powerful but sick people who control others because they have failed to eroticize their experience in a harmless way.
A wide range of so-called sexual sicknesses was diagnosed, Instead of masturbation being classified as wrong or harmful, as it had been in Victorian times, it became not only permissible but obligatory by the new standards.
In the US, women were treated for ‘masturbatory orgasmic inadequacy,’ which would be laughable if it were not both sad and harmfully misleading.
The sexual revolution, which was thought to free people from feelings of sexual guilt, gave reasons for experiencing a whole new kind of guilt.
The old standards were turned on their heads.
Teenagers began to feel ashamed, not of having sex, but of remaining virgins, while older women felt pressured by the necessity to have multiple orgasms of the right kind and frequency.
Celia Haddon comments, ‘There is something for everyone to worry about.’
One sad aspect of the sexual revolution is the fact that by and large the churches have had little to contribute that is positive and constructive.
Some churchmen have gone along with the new permissiveness by conceding that as long as two people love each other that is all that really matters.
Too few senior  church leaders have been prepared publicly to state that sex outside marriage, as well as homosexual practice, are viewed in biblical teaching as outside God's will and purpose for human good.
Christians have also failed to care sufficiently for the victims of the new morality, or to demonstrate a satisfying alternative in positive, healthy family life.
Now that help is urgently needed to stem the threatened spread of AIDS, some governments are looking to the churches to put forward a limiting view of sex.
This is ironic, but at least provides another chance to do some hard and honest thinking, in the light of Jesus, teaching, to provide positive Christian guidelines for sex and marriage.
At the same time Christians are committed to caring and compassionate action to help those who are homosexual, and all who suffer from AIDS or any sexually transmitted disease.
A Christian view of sex
Biblical Christian thinking does not isolate genital sex and its pleasurable effects from the human relationship involved.
Physical sex is one aspect of the total loving relationship between a man and woman.
Much secular thinking puts the same emphasis on the whole relationship, but the teaching of Jesus and the New Testament goes further.
It states that sex is not appropriate in every situation where a couple are mutually attracted, or even within a relationship that is expected to last for some months or even years.
The only valid context for physical sex is marriage, by which is meant a permanent relationship, publicly acknowledged and entered into with mutual promises.
Within marriage, sex is viewed as necessary, enjoyable and good.
Such narrow boundaries for the expression of physical sex may seem unrealistic and even crippling in a society which is obsessed with sex.
But in rescuing sex from unrestricted genital expression, this belief sets men and women free to enjoy their sexuality in a fuller and deeper way.
Much of the mutual enjoyment of the other sex is lost if the only end in view, for at least one of the two, is to get the other into bed at the first opportunity.
Instead of making sex a better and richer experience, current ‘freedoms’ have impoverished it.
In fact, men and women are often no longer free to explore and share the many aspects of maleness and femaleness which add texture, richness and depth to work and leisure life.
Women who find that homosexual men make wonderful friends, may be reflecting the fact that the freedom from preoccupation with physical  sex leaves the relationship wide open to a full range of shared experiences which should be enjoyed freely between heterosexual men and women too.
Celibacy
According to the Christian view, celibacy and marriage are equally valuable.
Chastity is the virtue either of keeping sex for marriage or of abstaining from sex altogether.
People who are celibate do not belong to a kind of neuter gender because they do not practise physical sex.
They are still open to appreciate and enjoy every aspect of sexuality and of the relationship between the sexes, other than a genital one.
Many celibate people who have not invested their love in one other human being, have a wealth of creative love and care to give to the world.
In return, they often experience a depth of love not known to the non-celibate.
Not all such people live within religious orders.
Jesus taught that some of his followers would willingly forego a life of sexual activity in order to fulfil their special work for him in the world.
As well as those who have deliberately given up all idea of marriage for the sake of their Christian calling, there are others who fail to find a marriage partner and accept that situation as part of God's plan for their life.
One religious who responded to God's calling to celibacy explained: ‘Chastity does not consist of deadening our heart but rather in giving it a liberty of love, a single aim, a transparency to God.
Our chastity, indeed our whole life, only makes sense in relation to our love to God…
I doubt whether I should ever have experienced such wealth and depth of love, from and for so many, had I not followed…my vocation.’
Sex and religion are not alternative outlets.
Married as well as celibate people are able to experience the love of God which can transform and enrich sexuality beyond the ecstasy of physical sex.
It is not easy to exercise sexual self-control in our society.
Celia Haddon suggests that the celibate and the single are the nonconformists of our day.
Even when their attitude to chastity is positive and enriching, they are still made to feel that they are less than normal and lacking what it takes to be fully developed human beings.
Christians believe not only in celibacy outside marriage, but chastity, or faithfulness, within it.
Sexual acts outside marriage are wrong, whether between those of opposite or the same sex.
In defining these limits, Christians are trying to carry out the pattern laid down by God, who created our sexuality.
The basis of this understanding of marriage is laid down in the very first  book of the Bible: ‘That is why a man leaves his father and mother and is united with his wife, and they become one.’
Jesus quoted these words in his own teaching about marriage.
The permanent, publicly acknowledged relationship of marriage is the only happy and safe environment for full sexual experience.
Within marriage there is room for sex to flourish in an atmosphere of mutual commitment, trust and security.
In following his guidelines Christians believe that they are in no way impoverishing human nature or divesting sex of its importance but are putting it into its proper sphere, where it can be enjoyed with mutual benefit and with no tragic side-effects.
Many of the deeply painful and depersonalizing situations in our society come about as the direct result of a broader but lower valuation of sex and sexual relationships.
Sex and midlife
At the menopause a woman reaches the end of her childbearing years.
But this does not signify the end of her sexual life.
Some women are worried that once they are past the age for having children, they will stop enjoying sex.
Some may even feel that perhaps sex is not quite right if it has nothing to do with procreation.
Women who have valued the sex act just because of its potential to create a child may find that it no longer gives them pleasure.
But that will be for psychological rather than physiological reasons.
Sex is important in marriage for more reasons than the begetting of children.
It expresses love and strengthens unity as well as being the supreme way of renewing commitment and of giving and receiving pleasure.
There is every reason why it should continue to be pleasurable and satisfying for both husband and wife for the rest of their married life.
Once the fear of unwanted pregnancy is past there is greater freedom to enjoy it.
Men in midlife
Although there is no reason why middle age should mean a lessening of sexual potency in men, some do complain of a decline in sexual ability in midlife.
Almost always the causes are psychological rather than physical or hormonal (see chapter 2).
Certain drugs given for some other disorder may cause temporary impotence, so that is something to check with the doctor.
Sometimes fear of a heart attack inhibits sexual performance.
More often the cause is loss of confidence or extreme pressure of work.
Discovering the reason for the  temporary loss of libido and keeping the whole problem in perspective will help.
An understanding and patient wife can do a great deal to help.
It is important for her to give her husband confidence in any area of his life, as well as on the sexual level.
When they make love, she can help by being patient and relaxed as well as responsive to any shared physical closeness, rather than increasing his anxiety to ‘perform’ satisfactorily.
Coping with problems
During the menopause a drop in hormone levels may account for a temporary loss of sexual desire in women, but this need not be more than a passing loss.
General feelings of being under the weather and slight depression can all combine to make sex seem uninteresting or just a necessary chore!
Frequent periods and heavy bleeding may be further non-inducements to regular sex.
It is important to realize that this state of affairs is only temporary and that sex may become even more exciting and rewarding once the menopause has passed.
After the menopause the vagina becomes drier and less elastic, so husbands may need to be a bit more gentle, especially at first, and a little more persevering.
When partners are more or less the same age, this slower response will be balanced by the older man's more delayed reactions.
But before the two adapt to a slightly changed but often more fully satisfying sex life, there can be temporary hitches.
The wife's reluctance or the husband's loss of libido may cause disappointment and frustration and a temporary lull in sex.
Sometimes the couple may allow the physical side of their relationship to fade out altogether.
For others it may become infrequent for a number of reasons, such as:
chronic tiredness
overfull lives
unresolved resentments
loss of confidence leading to loss of libido
inhibitions through teenagers or parents sharing the house
temporary hormone imbalance in wife
boredom
‘No sex, please?'’
When there is a low level of sexual drive in one or other partner, it is easy for the couple to drift into no sex.
This is probably not a planned strategy, but the result of constant tiredness, busy programmes or some of the physical discomforts or psychological problems already mentioned.
It is at this stage that a couple sometimes decide to change to separate beds or even separate rooms.
This may be a perfectly sensible decision based on the fact that one partner snores, or one sleeps poorly and wants to read or listen to the radio without disturbing the other.
But it does mean that there is little chance for physical closeness or the impulse cuddling that can say so much in its own right, as well as leading naturally and delightfully to full sexual enjoyment.
There is no reason why a couple should continue to have sex into old age if they decide together that they do not want to, but it is important that they make a decision rather than lapse into no sex as a result of neglect or unresolved problems.
The implications of such a decision need to be thought out.
First, it must be the right course for both of them.
Marriage is a loving, caring relationship where each thinks of the other's good and this is especially important in relation to sex.
If one partner still feels the desire for sex, then a way should be found to meet that need, with unselfish giving as well as restraint as each tries to satisfy the other.
Even when both decide that sex is no longer a necessary ingredient of the marriage, close physical contact should not cease.
Our bodies are part of our whole makeup and the intimate relationship of marriage needs expression in closeness of body as well as of mind and spirit.
Physical closeness brings comfort and reassurance and can ease some of the difficulties and pains of this stage of life as well as helping the couple to stay close in every other way.
It is important to make time for such intimacy, as it is an enduring part of marriage.
For couples finding full sexual orgasm or satisfying sex hard to achieve, loving physical closeness and touching are also important.
Sex therapy for such couples often consists of first learning to be close without trying to climax, so that trust and confidence can be re-established without the tension and pressure of having to achieve.
One of the distressing side-effects of the sexual revolution has been the emphasis on successful sexual performance.
Those who cannot measure up to text-book success may feel a sense of guilt or failure.
But within the security and time-scale of marriage, partners can be  free to express their love physically as they can and will, without pressure to meet required standards.
Technique is not the most important issue.
It is sad when boredom is the reason for married couples losing interest in sex.
Dr Brice Pitt comments in Making the Most of Middle Age : ‘So much publicity is now given to the art of making love, what men and women need from each other, and how to please your partner, that there is little excuse for a dull, unimaginative sex life even in the supposedly stolid middle-aged.’
Consulting sex manuals might help, but one of the benefits of having been married a number of years should be a deeper understanding of your partner and of what will give pleasure.
Variety is the spice of life even — or especially — where sex is concerned.
Try to break the mould of same-time, same-place, same-routine sex.
Sex cannot be switched on to order within a marriage.
Where there are deep resentments and unresolved areas of anger or plain misunderstanding, the sexual relationship — if it's an honest one — will suffer too.
Sex and the single person
Many people now reaching forty plus, have been enjoying a full sex life as a single person.
Some have expected to sleep with anyone they fancied who treated them to a night out — or, in the case of a man, expected bed for the night in return for dinner.
Others may have had a succession of live-in boy or girl friends, lasting as long as it suited them both.
Others may have maintained a long-term extra-marital affair.
This kind of no-strings-attached use of sex seems to combine the best of both worlds, leaving a woman free to pursue her career and a man unshackled by the commitments of a heavy mortgage and all the other responsibilities that go with a family.
But at midlife there are certain realities to be faced.
Many may have discovered that the trouble-free lifestyle they had planned has turned out to be a good bit less well-regulated and tidy than they had expected or intended it to be.
Human relationships cannot usually be kept within neat bounds by both partners, but tend to spill over in deep emotions of pain and anger.
The bond that accompanies sexual pairing is real and strong and when two people who have been bonded in this way break up, one at least may feel great grief and hurt.
One psychotherapist commented: ‘Sex for singles sounds good and I won't even say that it is not sometimes, but I hear the other side when people talk to me.
I pick up all the casualties.
Many start off with high hopes but there is a lot of hurt.
Many of them go on to wonder if they could ever make a marriage.
They begin to doubt their ability to stick at a relationship.’
Even the successful entrepreneurs in sex may have doubts at midlife.
Women in particular may realize that the kind of relationships they have enjoyed are less likely to come their way once they reach middle age.
That stage cannot be put off for ever.
They have no partner with whom to face middle or old age, or who will provide stability and companionship when they need it.
Even the least maternal may begin to regret having had no child.
Tina Brown, editor of Vanity Fair , says, ‘What no one really explained to women, as they went out on their feminist forays, was that they were giving up something.
What are tragic to behold are women…who suddenly do a volte face at fifty and say, ‘Why didn't I have children?'’…
And I think the regret comes because they wanted everything…but you can't expect to have everything at once.’
Some who are still young enough plan a baby without a husband, but the cost to the mother will be high and the cost to the child, who has no choice in the matter, may be even higher.
Single people who have remained celibate also face the fact that they will not now have children.
One counsellor described the feelings of some single women at midlife who come to her, unable to understand their renewed anguish.
Often they say, ‘I thought that I had been through all this and settled it in my mind ten years ago, yet here I am having to come to terms with the same issue all over again.’
Her reply is, ‘You are not going back on something you finished with.
You sorted it out and settled it ten years ago, but now you are facing it as a new problem at your present age.
There is no failure because you have to work it through in a new way at forty or fifty.’
Single people, whether celibate or not, may also be plagued by doubts as to whether they would have been capable of sustaining a relationship in marriage.
Added to that, they bear the burden of society's thumbs down.
Celia Haddon comments: ‘Those who are celibate, particularly those who have celibacy forced upon them, often feel outcast, anxious and ashamed.’
But those Who are courageous enough to face their singleness and their feelings honestly are free to discover, in the words of a Roman Catholic priest, that celibacy ‘is not a matter of uprooting sexuality but of becoming sexual in a different way.
Sexuality, for the celibate as well, remains a wonderful gift of God, given because he loves us so.,
Homosexuals may also fear loneliness in old age, whether they have had a physical relationship or not.
Bishop Jim Thompson, in Half Way , comments: ‘The homosexual who has never had a physical relationship, because of religious conviction, or fear, or lack of opportunity, can be subject to the same panic in midlife as the heterosexual spinster or bachelor.
There can be the desperate feeling that life has passed them by, and they stand on a precipice, wondering whether to jump into the arms of the first person who offers, or risk endless loneliness.,
He goes on to advise those still wrestling with uncertainty, ‘He or she ought to examine, with the help of others, what his or her own attitudes to sexuality really are.
If there is no one to talk it through with, then there is the real risk of hopeless adventure.
It is more helpful to meet real people who have come to terms with their lives, than to wander around lost and alone in a maze of fantasies.
Solutions will not be discovered in solitary confinement.’
The spread of AIDS may have signalled the end of the gigantic sex trip that has been going on since the sixties.
There is more chance that those who have an alternative and more satisfying philosophy of sex may now speak up and be heard.
There is also the chance to put an alternative belief into practice.
ACTION CHECKPOINT
Take a fresh look at your views of sex.
Do they need revising?
MARRIAGE IN MIDLIFE
The Things People Say
‘I think marriage can be a very good basis for developing your own personality, provided you feel that is something of value to do and not just selfish.
I think some people do think that is selfish and that marriage is about bringing up a family and looking after the house .’
Marriage counsellor
‘When you are in a relationship in which you ask each other 's advice, when you respect each other, then the outward image of success, who earns the money, doesn't matter .’
Esther Rantzen, television presenter
‘Many people who get divorced don't find anything better and really wish they hadn't…
I think this whole thing of racing off to get divorced at the first snag you hit seems pathetic .’
Tina Brown, editor,Vanity Fair 
‘Everything in this century has been put on the marital couple.
It's asked to sustain an enormous amount of emotional intensity, which it probably wasn't asked to do before, and that's hard.
I think that's partly the problem, and the prospect of sustaining this for forty or fifty years.
It's an awful lot to bear .’
Juliet Mitchell-Rossdale, psychoanalyst, author, feminist
‘Marriage gets better the longer you're married !’
One of my favourite aunts
‘Self-absorbed family life, and a self-absorbed marriage, sacrifice the true selves and potential of the people involved .’
Bishop Jim Thompson,Half Way 
‘The couple contract must be renegotiated in midlife .’
Gail Sheehy,Passages 
Now that men and women live longer, many people suggest that it is unrealistic to expect to sustain one marriage for a lifetime.
After all, they point out, that could involve living together for fifty or sixty years, compared to the twenty or thirty of previous generations.
They argue that since human beings change they are going to need a different kind of partner in order to find fulfilment and satisfaction for the whole of their lives.
By this definition, marriage is an arrangement that should be terminated once it no longer meets the needs of one or other of the partners.
Gail Sheehy defines the journey into midlife as a transition from accepting the authority and beliefs of others to defining and recognizing one's own values and judgement.
She sees the person who successfully survives the hazards of the middle years becoming someone in their own right who is not afraid to take responsibility and to admit to ‘what I really feel’.
She accepts that such a change may drastically affect relations with a marriage partner.
Her advice is, ‘Let it happen to you.
Let it happen to your partner.
Let the feelings.
Let the changes.’
But there are many people who would not find it fulfilling to be themselves at any cost and at the expense of another.
The Christian life-style, with its emphasis on the happiness and well-being of others, also brings fulfilment and can yield deeper satisfaction than the wholehearted pursuit of personal ends.
Walking out on your partner may not be the answer to midlife change and you may not want a divorce, but you are likely to find that you need to update your relationship if the marriage is to be sound and mutually satisfying for another twenty or thirty years.
Just as individuals need to take stock at this stage, in order to lay the ghosts of the past, grapple with the present and set new goals for the future, so a couple may need to reappraise their marriage in those same areas.
It's easy to be aware that things need sorting out but to be too preoccupied with the routine of living to do anything about it.
It is important to stop and talk.
Some couples make a habit of talking through whatever is bothering either of them whenever it crops up.
Others who put off the evil day may find it helps to book a weekend away together so that there is time to talk and listen to each other and sort matters out.
Failing that, plan a day out together or even spend an evening with the television off, and concentrate on each other and discuss your feelings and needs honestly.
This may all seem a bit of an unnecessary fuss, but it's a small price to pay in time and trouble and money in order to save the marriage and turn it into an asset rather than a liability.
Too often relationships go sour or become impoverished through lack of attention.
Individuals survive the shake-up of midlife change and often emerge from it stronger and invigorated.
A marriage can do the same, provided the couple are prepared to talk things through and really want to make a go of it.
They must also want to please each other and help each other to find fulfilment, as well as looking for personal satisfaction.
Total selfishness is a killer in any relationship.
Expectations in marriage
Many people who get married have unreal expectations of marriage in general.
Sometimes their concept is based on the kind of relationship their parents had.
A young wife may assume that her husband will come shopping with her and he may take it for granted that she will stay at home while he goes to the local football match, or plays golf with the boys.
Each may have a completely different attitude from the other on the subject of husband and wife roles, money, children and the family.
Because neither has examined or thought out their views, or the reasons why they hold them, there is serious misunderstanding when attitudes and behaviour clash.
As time goes on, there is unwilling acceptance of each other, which may be good-humoured, but which can also hide a great deal of anger and resentment.
Other couples have unreal expectations of their particular partner.
One marriage counsellor commented, ‘It is a common difficulty that couples want too much from each other.
You can't expect one person to satisfy all your needs.’
Older or maturer couples may face marriage more realistically and discuss their expectations before they marry, even laying down guidelines to be jointly agreed and accepted.
One wife, who has now returned part-time to her own career while she cares for their two small children, accepted before marrying that her high-powered executive husband would not give any help in the house.
She willingly agreed within the context of all the other benefits the marriage would bring.
Because her expectations were realistic, she accepts without rancour the fact that she must either do the work herself or employ someone to do it for her.
Obviously, no loving couple will present each other with a hard and fast ultimatum but will try to work through together what each can reasonably give to the partnership.
In midlife many areas need to be tackled afresh in this way.
For most couples, circumstances will differ radically from the early days of marriage.
The household may now consist of several teenagers or an elderly relative.
If one partner opts out of the physical caring, decision-making and adolescent crises at the expense of the other, a load of resentment and dissatisfaction soon builds up.
Honest discussion is needed about the new demands and problems to be faced.
It is not only the partner bearing the heavy end of the load who may feel aggrieved.
A husband who has a demanding job, and is used to returning home to find dinner ready to be put on the table, may be distinctly put out if his wife is upstairs helping his mother-in-law onto the commode instead.
He will probably feel even more hard done by if she is not yet back from her new job.
New situations call for a reassessment of roles within the marriage.
It is better to discuss realistically what each can expect from the other and how both can contribute to the good of the partnership, before major new changes are made.
Human beings are infinitely flexible and able to adjust when survival depends on it.
The new balance of power may not suit both partners ideally.
Few compromises are perfect.
But if each can be honest about themselves, try to understand the other, and be ready to give as well as take, they will be able to capitalize on all the benefits of facing life together as a stable and mature couple, for the second half of their journey.
Talking it through
Many of us have glanced across at a middle-aged couple sitting at a nearby table in a restaurant and noticed their complete lack of communication.
Of course, companionable silence can be one of the more pleasurable experiences of intimacy, but that kind of silence has a very different look to it.
Courtship is marked by a compulsive desire to share everything about yourself with the person you love, and marriage usually begins the same way.
Somewhere along the line, real communication can break down and talking together dwindle to basic exchanges about the practical commonplaces of daily life —‘Did you remember to post the letters?’—‘Will you pick up Auntie?’
The things that really matter — personal hopes, fears, ambitions, deep joys and sadnesses — are locked away out of sight.
Both partners may have tried to talk at a more intimate level but found that the other one was not listening.
This can happen in both directions.
A wife can be busy bunging up a family and so taken up with their affairs that she fails to give her husband real attention.
She cannot guess at his anxieties or burdens because she has never encouraged him to talk about them or found time to stop whatever she was doing and listen.
Husbands, in turn, may not listen to their wives.
One career wife spoke about her exasperation when her husband listened to her with half an ear as he watched television.
‘I know he's tired out and that's the way he relaxes, but I long to switch the television off and make him listen to me,’ she complained.
She needed more than a non-committal grunt in answer to her outpourings.
Listening involves hearing what is left unsaid as well as the words actually spoken and to hear in that way requires the sort of attention that, sadly, we may rarely offer to our own nearest and dearest.
Some couples who have failed to hear what the other has been saying over a number of years may need the help of a third person, probably a trained counsellor, to get them talking again.
Such a person acts as a catalyst, providing the right opportunity and atmosphere for each to express honestly what their feelings are about themselves and each other.
Counsellors find that husband and wife are often amazed to discover what the other is actually thinking.
Although they have been living together for years they have had no idea how the other really felt.
Some harbour resentments going back many years, which only come to the surface when a crisis causes the couple to come for counselling.
A good counsellor helps them to interpret the meaning behind the words each speaks.
Within the familiarity of marriage there are many subtle ways of showing anger, contempt or cruelty.
Because none of these emotions is overtly expressed it is always possible for the offending partner to act the innocent and deny any hidden meaning.
But tone of voice, studied indifference, or an apparently harmless question may carry a weight of meaning based on years of sniping and criticism.
Sometimes one partner suspects hidden meanings which were genuinely not intended.
The counsellors' job is to help the couple to sort out what really lies behind the words as well as the actions.
They may ask the husband to say how he feels, then question the wife about that answer, checking with him if she has understood his meaning in the right way.
Gradually they hope to strip away the disguises and help both partners to understand  themselves and each other better and recognize the ways in which they interact.
Failure to take account of the other's feelings can sometimes result from plain ignorance of the facts.
A man who is made redundant may feel unable to tell his wife what has happened and keep up the pretence of leaving for work every day.
She cannot show consideration when she doesn't know what's the matter.
Lack of imagination may also prevent one partner from recognizing what the other is coping with.
A husband who tells his wife about his redundancy does not always meet with the right kind of sympathy or support.
Because he cannot put into words the pain and loss of confidence he is suffering, she fails to recognize his distress.
It may be that one partner is so involved with their own painful feelings during the experiences of midlife, that there is no room for the other's needs.
One marriage counsellor described her occasional use of role reversal.
Halfway through a session she invites husband and wife to change chairs and pretend to be each other.
She then asks what kind of day each has had, telling them to answer as if they were the other.
It is surprising how little each knows, even about the other's daily routine or the regular demands and pressures involved.
Awareness and understanding can help but, unless both genuinely have the other's interests as well as their own at heart, it will not automatically improve the marriage.
If a marriage is to survive, self-sacrifice as well as self-fulfilment must be the keynote.
Many women have seen a new and demanding career at midlife as their way to satisfaction, only to find that it becomes a prime cause of problems for their husband.
While it is not right that either partner should always have to give way to the other, each may have to concede at times, for both their sakes and for the well-being of their marriage.
Changed patterns
Some of the changes and crises of midlife can easily become crises for the marriage too.
A marriage that is stable and good will survive some rocking of the boat but, if the relationship is not soundly based, any new factor can threaten to sink it.
It is likely that the roles of husband and wife were defined early on in marriage.
Now, if the children have grown up and the wife wishes to embark on a career, or return to her former one, or if an elderly relative needs to receive full-time care, the roles may need to be redefined.
It is no good for a wife to initiate changes that will affect both partners before talking things over thoroughly with her husband.
Provided both are prepared to give some ground it is possible to sort out roles afresh and to plan new patterns for the marriage.
A man who, through choice or redundancy, decides to work from home, may be willing to take on simple cooking and housework so that his wife can return to full-time employment.
He will usually benefit from knowing that there will still be one regular wage coming in.
Talking through the advantages and the snags, and deciding what each can reasonably expect from the other, should reduce the threat of future rows and recriminations.
If a wife is going to be out all day and her husband refuses to help in the home, she may have to consider arranging or paying for help if she can afford to — in order to do what she wants to do.
If she will be earning, that will eat into her profits, but she is likely to be more contented than if she had given up her job.
And the marriage is likely to be far happier than if she is working flat out while she is at home and blaming her husband for giving her no help.
When an elderly relative is to be cared for, it is important that having some time off together should be top priority for the couple.
The marriage is still of prime importance.
If a husband wishes to set up his own business, his wife should think through the implications of having her husband at home all day, if she is at home too.
Being together night and day can put a new kind of pressure on the relationship, particularly at first.
But, wisely handled and prepared for, it can enrich the marriage.
Talking to others whose judgement can be trusted, and who have weathered the same kind of changes, may be a help.
New beginnings
Midlife is a time to come to terms with the past so that the future can be faced with no unfinished business to block the way ahead.
Married couples need to work through their shared past disappointments and mistakes as much as individuals do.
‘I'll never forget the time you…’ can be an aggrieved refrain in real marriages as well as in music-hall jokes.
Many couples retain their sense of injury — or perceived injury — at the hands of the other, for many years.
They may refer to it or harbour it secretly and allow it to sour their trust and love.
If a marriage is to survive as a healthy and beneficial partnership for the second half of life, these remembered wrongs must be dealt with.
They must be forgiven  and not left in limbo, ready to be recalled if needed for attack or defence.
Accepting forgiveness can be hard too.
Serious wrongs — unfaithfulness, cruelty of one kind or another — are not easy to confess or to forgive, but any other way of dealing with the past will harm not only the marriage but the two individuals — whether they need to forgive or to be forgiven.
Affairs
Some manuals on sex and marriage recommend an affair as a means of refreshing a stale marriage.
Men and women who grew up during the swinging sixties may have a different view of sexual fidelity from those who are slightly older.
But, however much people may defend the extra-marital affair in theory, many still discover in practice that their partner's unfaithfulness leaves them feeling deeply betrayed.
A number of marriage counsellors I have spoken to all agree that they have never in fact come across a case where infidelity has improved a marriage.
Instead, they all found that adultery — alone among the changes within marriage — was perceived as the ultimate betrayal.
A wife whose husband had taken a girl out on a number of occasions would tell the counsellor, ‘This time it's different — they've slept together.’
Lewis Smedes, in his book Sex in the Real World , lists a number of reasons why adultery is so much more common now than in previous generations.
He also suggests why, nonetheless, it is still perceived as a serious betrayal of the marriage.
Not only is it a way of cheating on the partner, and likely to hurt at least one of the three people involved, but it causes damage that goes deep.
‘The wrongness of adultery,’ he writes, ‘is knit into the inner lining of sexuality.
Sexual intercourse has a mystique about it: there is something inescapably — if invisibly — special in this encounter.
Most people, I suspect, still sense this, even when they do not honour it in practice.
Most people who have sex outside marriage still find it necessary to invoke some powerful excuse for it — even to themselves…
Even if we can convince ourselves that nobody is getting hurt, even if we are sure we are not cheating, we have a suspicion that it is inappropriate.’
There seems to be some reaction against permissiveness within marriage even in sophisticated, secular circles.
In an article in the magazine Options , Rose Shepherd debunked the glamour surrounding extra-marital affairs and described the downward spiral of personal unhappiness, as well as the  destruction of the marriage.
Her friend, Miriam, had embarked on what she euphemistically described as ‘a wonderful adventure’— her first act of adultery, after a nine-year marriage rooted in mutual devotion and trust.
‘Here is the scenario as I envisage it,’ Rose Shepherd writes.
‘The time has come when she was ripe to take a lover — she had spent so long being, or playing, the devoted wife and mother.
John was taking her for granted, so were the children.
No one ever said they liked her hair that way, or that she looked lovely when she smiled…
She wasn't twenty-one any more, and for most of us that is a terrible hardship…
Miriam's self-confidence needed a boost…
Then there was the opportunity.
She had given up work to have the children and she'd seen them through to school age, when she'd gone out and found herself another job.
And it was at the office…that she met the man who said…
‘You're lovely when you smile.'’
It is that man who is now her lover.
‘Mr X, Mr Other, is predictably married.
He has no plans to leave his wife.
He finds Miriam appealing and she holds for him the added attraction of being married and committed herself.
She won't be making midnight phone calls, she won't be turning up on his doorstep in the small hours.
‘Miriam is merely taking her cue from him when she makes nothing of emotion.
She's playing at being the grown woman who knows the rules of the game…
She is in the grip of infatuation and…the odds are that it will lead precisely nowhere; that they — and more probably he — will call the whole thing off.
And for Miriam it will be…that particular type of hell reserved for faithless wives…
She will have to contain her emotion…otherwise John will guess the reason why.
So much, then, for their enriched marriage!’
Rose Shepherd goes on to argue that a first affair, usually based on attraction, leads to further affairs based on nothing more than boredom, loneliness, resentment, or the need for further boosting of confidence once the first extramarital partner has bowed out.
With the ‘lowering.
of personal standards’ that accompanied the first affair, the warning bells are beginning to sound.
There may be interludes of excitement or even ecstasy but, for the marriage, there is everything to lose.
What are the options?
Psychiatrist John White suggests that no marriage is problem-free but that there are three options open for dealing with a troubled marriage.
One is to stay together and live ‘to make each other miserable, a habit which sometimes becomes too strong to break.’
Such self-defeating relationships are less common now, he suggests, and probably restricted to older couples.
The second option is separation or divorce with the trauma and pain that inevitably follow.
The third and most positive option is to work together towards a firmer commitment to the marriage.
Dr White believes that the stresses that destroy marriages are as effective for construction as destruction.
There must be a willingness, he admits, by both partners to see and acknowledge their own faults and weaknesses and to accept the weaknesses and strengths of the other.
Help or counsel may be needed to reach these new insights.
His personal experience is that ‘God's ‘no divorce'’ rule is not harsh, but merciful, in that it has forced us to examine and resolve conflicts and enter a stronger, richer stage of marriage.
At the same time, we know that the same mercy can be shown by God to those who have known both divorce and remarriage.’
ACTION CHECKPOINTS
Start talking to each other— honestly.
Start listening to each other— with both ears.
Make time to take stock as a couple.
Sort out the past — forgive and be forgiven.
Get help if you can't sort yourselves out on your own.
Think through the possible effects of change on you both.
Revise your roles in marriage where necessary or helpful.
Let each other change and let your marriage change.