

Family burgled yet again
A GANG of professional thieves who staked out a house in Bentworth last week got away with a £20,000 caravan.
Now the angry owner, whose home has been burgled four times this year, is offering a £500 reward for information.
Twenty-three year-old Allen Taylor is ‘sick and tired’ of the continuing attacks on his parents' house and is appealing for help.
The latest raid at Ashley Road happened between 6 p.m. and 7.15 p.m. on Friday evening.
It is believed that the gang had been watching the property from a nearby field.
Two days before they struck, a sensor light set up outside the house was smashed.
The Swift Challenger 490 caravan had been parked in the driveway behind another vehicle, but the thieves were undeterred and made their move under the cover of darkness soon after two members of the family left the home.
They forced their way onto adjoining land and cut through chain-link fencing and large wooden posts cemented into the ground.
Gap in the fence
The gang manhandled the 18-foot caravan through the gap in the fence and began pushing it across the field towards the road.
When the villains were unable to get the caravan up a small incline, they hitched it to a stolen vehicle and wheel-spun their way onto the road.
Once they were outside the grounds, the thieves dumped one vehicle and used another to make their get-away, with the cream coloured caravan in tow.
The daring raid was executed in minutes, according to Mr. Taylor.
‘My mother had taken my little brother to tennis at Winchester,’ he said.
‘My 20-year-old sister was at home alone when they struck.
‘She heard the three dogs barking, but before she went to see what was up, the phone  rang .
She was only on the phone for a minute but that was all it took.’
A short while later his mother  and brother arrived home to discover the caravan gone.
They immediately phoned Allen, who has a car business at Lower Wield, and he set off in pursuit of the gang.
‘I drove home and then followed the road into Alton, but I could find no sign of them,’ he said.
‘I stopped a policeman in the High Street and he radioed in the information I gave him.
‘In the meantime, my dad had arrived at the house and spotted two men hanging around the ditched vehicle.
When they saw him they just sped off.’
Allen is certain that somebody must have seen the caravan at some point that evening.
With the narrow lanes around Bentworth, any approaching traffic would have had to give way and cars travelling in the same direction could have been held up.
If no-one saw the caravan being towed along any of the main roads in the area, then Allen believes the gang may have stored it somewhere in the vicinity.
He is appealing for anyone who saw the caravan or knows of its whereabouts to contact him.
‘Anyone who gives me the information that leads to these people will get the reward money,’ he said.
However, he is also keen to hear from residents who have also suffered at the hands of thieves.
‘Being burgled four times since the start of the year is something you'd associate with the inner-cities — but this is Bentworth.’
Anyone who has information about the gang or the caravan can contact Mr. Taylor at his work on 0256 389000.
‘We must stop this motoring madness’
RESIDENTS CALL FOR ACTION
SPEEDING motorists are putting lives in danger at Holybourne, and worried residents are certain that ‘an accident is waiting to happen’.
Their fears — which focus on a stretch of the old London Road — have led to calls for action and improvements.
Villagers are especially concerned for the safety of children and youngsters who play on a small triangle of grass underneath the bypass.
Despite continued campaigning for a playground or field — which seems to have hit a brick wall — they have still nowhere else in Holybourne for them to go, the Herald was told.
Residents also fear that people using the only regularly served bus stop in the village — up on the A31 bypass bridge — are being placed at risk.
Pedestrians going down the steps from the bus stop are hidden by trees and shrubs and have to either walk in the road or cross over to find a pavement.
One anxious mother, Jane Brooks, said: ‘As people drive through and then out of the centre of Holybourne they seem to forget that speed restrictions still apply.
‘Many seem to increase their speed so that by the time they take the left hand fork to Cuckoo's Corner pick your own farm, they are often doing speeds over 50mph.’
Mrs Brooks' dog was almost run over recently as she was putting her into the car.
‘She was lucky not to be hurt and so was the driver of the vehicle, considering the distance he skidded and the strength with which he had to apply his brakes,’ Mrs. Brooks added.
Residents say that the farm and shop, open seven days a week, attract a steady flow of traffic which increases greatly in the summer fruit season.
Mrs. Brooks continued: ‘Perhaps it is the re-routeing of the old A31 that has left some confusion as to the designation of this stretch of London Road.
‘It has no lampposts, roads or markings, maintenance of any highway controls at all.’
Villages are hoping that something can be done to stop traffic leaving Holybourne's main road at high speed.
Their proposals are for a traffic-calming ramp or similar device, or even just a sign reminding drivers of the speed limit.
A letter voicing the residents' fears and improvement suggestions was sent to the East Hampshire Road Safety Council earlier this month.
The matter was discussed and referred to the council's working party for investigation.
They will be meeting at the beginning of April.
Talking of politics…
PROSPECTIVE Parliamentary candidates for the Winchester constituency will share a platform at St. Laurence Church Hall, Alton on Wednesday.
The meeting, which starts at 8.15 p.m. has been  organised by the Alton and District Council of Churches.
The candidates will be asked to give their views on a variety of social and political issues including homelessness and poverty, the collapse of small businesses, the NHS and care of the elderly.
Other topics will be the level of aid to the third world, environmental issues, and the arms trade.
All are welcome and written questions may be sent to the chairman of the local Council of Churches, the Rev. Ian Bowley, at 14 Princess Drive, Alton.
•See Page 3 for a report and pictures of the election line-up.
Alton Rotaract challenged the Rotary Club to a game of skittles to raise funds for the Barnardos Century Makers Appeal.
The aim was to knock down 100 skittles, a feat achieved first by the hosts with just two points to spare.
Pictured getting the game under way at the Jolly Farmer, Blacknest, are Rotary president, John Butterfield (left) and Rotaract president, Richard Wyeth.
Company fined after river pollution
A POISONOUS cocktail of chemicals which found its way into the River Wey at Alton killed some 100 fish.
Last week, the company responsible for the pollution, Laleham Healthcare Plc, were fined £2,000 by the town's magistrates on Friday.
The court heard how the river turned a milky white colour as it was contaminated with toxic residue from shampoo, moisturiser, and hair lightener products.
An investigation was immediately launched by the National Rivers Authority following a tip-off from a member of the public.
An officer visited the Mill Lane Industrial Estate and found the company still carrying out their cleaning operation.
Laleham Healthcare Plc pleaded guilty to the charge of polluting the river on September 19th.
Magistrates heard that employees had been hosing out residue from used drums — using a high pressure jet — in a defined ‘washing area’.
But the surrounding drain designed to carry all the toxic effluent away in the foul sewer system had become blocked.
Instead, the poisonous waste was overflowing into a surface water drain, hidden underneath some pallets, and running out into the River Wey.
Surface water
The NRA officer blocked the outlet to prevent any further pollution leaving the site, and Laleham's called in a contractor later that day to clean out the surface water system.
Defending solicitor Bob Booker told the court: ‘If the grating which surrounds the washing area had been clear there shouldn't have been any problems.
‘And as soon as they realised it was an emergency, the offending drain was fitted with a plug.’
Mr. Booker said that the company had since fitted blocks on top of all their surface water drains and that a four foot wall has been built around the washing area.
In addition to the £2,000 fine, magistrates ordered Laleham Healthcare to pay £250 towards the prosecution costs.
THE LAST CHAPTER AT ALTON GENERAL
‘HERE we have no lasting city’— fitting words to mark the end of an era at Alton General Hospital.
The end of a chapter in Alton's history and of an institution which, the Rev. Robert Gussman said, was ‘more than just a hospital, more a family home.’
He was speaking during a special service on Tuesday to give thanks and blessing for the life of a hospital, whose hallmark has been the ‘quality of its service.’
A hospital which, said the chaplain, is ‘one of Alton's best kept secrets.’
When Mr. Gussman arrived in Alton some two and a half years ago, there was a question mark over whether or nor it was worth making him chaplain of the hospital.
There were plans to knock the building down and move patients elsewhere.
There followed a time of uncertainty but, it had been ‘business as usual’ at Alton General, with staff ‘making do’and ‘covering up the cracks’in their efforts to provide an atmosphere of peace and calm, however hard worked they were behind the scenes.
‘But now the move is happening’ said the vicar.
‘Patients and staff will be transferring on April 8th to the other end of Alton.’
‘You can all look forward to bright, fresh, new surroundings.
To up-to-date equipment and the particular blessing of knowing that the staff who have loved and cared for you here will be with you in the new hospital too.’
Reflecting on the past life of the hospital, the Rev. Gussman recalled the sense of ‘tremendous  commitment to care’ which he had felt the minute he went to Alton General.
He remembered the maternity unit — long closed, the day care centre and the wards, all with their characteristics.
He referred to Inwood, whose name was to be kept alive at the new hospital, and which had been  likened to a ‘five star hotel’, and where patients had particular cause to be grateful to the town's GP's who were so conveniently on hand at the Health Centre.
And Froyle, Kingsley and Selborne wards ‘where so many have spent their latter years in comfort with the warmth and care of the family of the hospital surrounding them.’
This hospital, said the chaplain, ‘is far more than just bricks, wood and plaster, we are talking about a family — a community of nurses, doctors, auxiliary staff, domestics and patients —‘a team’.
And not forgetting the voluntary support, ‘who come in and keep a live link with the wider world.’
He urged them to look to the future, to ‘carry the spirit of Alton  General on into Treloar and build on it.’
‘Realise all that was so good, so special about this place — the quality of love and nursing, community, confidence and safety felt here.
Remember all that has been, cherish the best and look forward to all that lies ahead.’
IT'S QUEEN SAM!
SAM Bentley was crowned as Alton's new Carnival Queen at the Alton House Hotel on Friday by her predecessor Samantha Jane Peacock.
The 22-year-old public relations officer, who has recently moved to Alton from London, was among seven contestants, twenty-year-old Kerry Campbell was the runner up and Vicky Wadhams, also 20, a nanny from Selborne, was third.
During the evening, which also included a fashion show by Splashout, of the High Street, the  organisers Alton Lions were presented with a £1,100 cheque by Ray Simmonds of Bass  Brewing as the company's sponsorship for this year's carnival.
All three girls — pictured here (from left — Vicky, Sam, Kerry) will appear in the Lions Spring Bank Holiday carnival procession on May 25th.
Youth pleads guilty to vandalism
A SEVENTEEN-year-old youth who used a stone flowerpot to smash front windows of three cars parked in Holybourne on the night of January 10th, woke nearby residents with the noise.
They shouted at him and he rode off on a bicycle, later to be stopped by the police who had been alerted to the incident.
On Tuesday, Stuart James Spicer of Bonhams Close, Holybourne, pleaded guilty at Alton magistrates court to the theft of a Sony Walkman personal stereo and four audio tapes, damage to a car window and a stone flowerpot, and an attempt to steal a motor vehicle.
The magistrates heard that he had seemed to be drunk when the police stopped him.
He had no lights on his bicycle.
They searched him and found fragments of car window glass in the turn-ups of his jeans.
At the scene of the offence they found a Renault, a Peugeot and a Toyota car, each with a smashed window.
The Toyota had been searched and its contents disturbed.
The Walkman was lying in the road beside the vehicles, and Spicer later returned four cassettes taken from the Peugeot.
He had lost his job because of the incident, but had later found a place on a youth training scheme, magistrates were told.
They adjourned the case until April 24th, pending a social inquiry report.
Theft of truck
A SUBARU pick-up truck, valued at £2,000, was stolen from a barn at a farm in Ropley on Saturday night.
The registration number is C219 XTR.
HERALD PRICE INCREASE
To all our readers and newsagents.
Please note that from April 1st, 1992, the price of your Herald will be 28p
Election Battle
AS we were going to press, a fifth candidate for the East Hampshire constituency was announced.
He is Stanley Leslie Hale of Buriton, and represents the Revolutionary Christian Communist Party.
The other four candidates for the April 9th poll are Michael Mates (Conservative), Jim Phillips (Labour), Sue Baring (Liberal Democrat) and Ian Foster (Green).
See page five.
Video recorder stolen
A VIDEO recorder, Panasonic hi-fi equipment and about 60 compact discs were stolen from a bungalow in Whitedown Lane, Alton between 11 a.m. on Saturday and 10 a.m. on Monday.
Jewellery taken
JEWELLERY and crystal glass, together valued at £2,500, have been stolen from a property at Beechwood Road, Alton.
The thief broke into the house between 2.30 and 9.30 p.m. on Saturday.
Car burgled
A PORTABLE phone, valued at £500, has been stolen from a Vauxhall car in Winchester Road, Four Marks.
Netball is number one…
SUCCESSFUL CONTEST
SOME 180 children from eleven schools took part in the annual large primary schools' netball rally at Eggar's School, Alton on Saturday.
Nineteen teams were entered — ten in the ‘A’ competition and nine in the ‘B’section — and 81 ten-minute matches ran continuously for nearly three hours.
The event, run by John Burgess formerly of Anstey County Junior School, was umpired by volunteers including members of the Alton Ants netball club.
Judy Talbot, captain of the Ants, presented the awards.
The ‘B’ competition was won by Ropley, with Anstey B runners-up and St. Michaels in third place.
Wootey B team enjoyed an unbeaten run to take the shield for the closely-contested ‘A’ tournament, with newcomers Holme School, Headley, in the runners-up slot, just beating Anstey County's A team on goal average.
The victorious Wootey Junior School ‘B’ squad with their hard-won shield.
Pictured here are Joanne Sheppard, Sarah Hall, Michelle Gregory, Lynsey Grace, Sara Jayne Page, Clair Sutherland, Sarah Jane Turk, Kelly Gilbert and Helen Pack.
Action from the annual large schools' netball tournament.
Triangle Project benefits from quality concert
CHILDREN of the Yehudi Menuhin School of Music delighted Alton Triangle Project supporters on Saturday with a concert designed to help other young people.
It was, said Alton Community Centre manager Jan Nicholas, ‘a truly magical evening’— and one which will have raised over £1,500 towards the third and final stage of Triangle — the teenager's coffee bar.
Held at the Newton Davis Hall, Froyle, courtesy of Lord Mayor Treloar College, the concert featured eight musicians from the world famous Yehudi Menuhin School, and the expertise of radio and television broadcaster Martin Muncaster as master of ceremonies.
Among the Triangle Project's guests was Lady Sainsbury, who had opened the first phase of Triangle — the day care centre for the elderly — Mr. Portman, representing the Worshipful Company of Ironmongers, who had donated £32,000 in the project through the Robert Geffery Trust and Alton Town Mayor, Mrs.  Jacqueling Martin.
During the evening, Triangle chairman Mike Kirby gave a brief update on the project.
The day care centre and the new playgroup room were up and running and work had begun to convert a room at Alton Community Centre to a coffee bar for the town's teenagers.
Fund raising for the £130,000 project had, said Mr. Kirby ‘been an up-hill struggle’ over the past two and a half years, but the end was now in sight.
Triangle still needed to raise £15,000 for the final building work, and a further £15,000 for the coffee bar's initial operational costs.
Proceeds from the Yehudi Menuhin School concert, combined with the Razzle Dazzle raffle have started the ball rolling, and Mrs. Nicholas would welcome any further ideas for fund-raising or offers of help — contact her at Alton community Centre on Alton 85057.
It's a four way battle
Ready for the contest
When nominations closed on Wednesday afternoon, four candidates had entered the contest for the Winchester parliamentary seat on April 9th, very much as expected.
John Browne, the sitting MP until parliament was dissolved, has nominated himself as ‘Conservative’, and the Tories, chosen alternative Gerald Malone has entered the fray as the ‘Conservative Party Candidate’.
Alton's Tony Barron will represent the Liberal Democrats; and trade unionist Peter Jenks is standing for Labour.
The Green Party failed in their efforts to find funding to back their candidate for the seat, and rumours that the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi's Natural Law Party had designs on the constituency came to nothing.
TONY BARRON (Liberal Democrat) has represented Alton on Hampshire County Council since 1985.
He is education spokesman for the Liberal Democrat county council group and chaired the Under 5's Committee during 1990–1991.
He has been chairman of the road safety committee since 1986.
He is 50, married with three daughters, Sally (24), Lara (22) and Emma (20).
His wife Paula is a member of East Hampshire District Council for the Alton South West and Beech Ward, and the couple live in the constituency.
Mr. Barron works as a quantity surveyor, having been educated at Sandbach School and on an RAF Flying Scholarship.
He is a member of a number of organisations, including the Green Democrats, Friends of the Earth, Charter 88 and Alton Chamber of Commerce.
The Liberal Democrat manifesto is a clear commitment to change Britain.
Said Mr. Barron: ‘It gives a choice between staying in the same old muddle or reviving our economy, business and system of government.
‘We are commitment to improving education by guaranteeing education from age three–19 with improved training post 16 and retraining post 19 once in each person's life.
‘We propose investment in infrastructure and public works to reduce unemployment, we want an independent Bank of England free from political control to provide stability for business.’
JOHN BROWNE, Conservative, was born in Hampshire and lives with his wife Elaine in the constituency.
He graduated from RMA Sandhurst and served in the Grenadier Guards as a regular, and in the TA.
Army duties included parachuting and piloting of light aircraft — he was a post graduate student at Cranfield (M.Sc) and Harvard (MBA).
Mr. Browne served on two select committees — treasury and social security and was elected secretary of a number of backbench committees, including defence and finance.
He was elected chairman of backbench smaller businesses committee, and was appointed as delegate to NATO, specialising in human rights.
He introduced an Act and a Bill to enhance animal protection, and introduced a Privacy Bill and Armed Forces Compensation Bill.
He says that he has never been afraid to put national and constituency issues ahead of the party when appropriate.
Mr. Browne says that he is standing as constituency candidate, free to speak and act for the area and with the strength to resist party orders that are against the interests of grass roots people.
PETER JENKS (LABOUR) is 32 years old and lives in Southampton, where he was born.
He is a city councillor for the Peartree ward.
He shares his life with Christine, who works in community development, children Stuart (15), Debora (12) and Pickles the cat.
Mr. Jenks is an active member of his Trade Union, the National Union of Public Employees (NUPE), and is secretary of the Southampton health branch.
He trained at Southampton General Hospital as a medical technical officer, working in anaesthetics, and has recently worked at Winchester Royal Hampshire County Hospital.
Educated at Northern College in Barnsley, he has a diploma in trade union and industrial studies.
Mr. Jenks' main political interests are health, housing and transport.
He appeared before the Public Inquiry about the M3 motorway in the mid seventies and supports calls for an environmental assessment of Twyford Down.
He chairs Hamwic Housing Co-op, who house single people in need.
Outside politics, he enjoys opera, cricket and real ale.
GERALD MALONE, official Conservative was appointed by the Winchester branch of the party as their prospective candidate some 18 months ago, since when he has lived in the area.
Aged 41, and a solicitor by profession, he was educated at St. Aloysius College, Glasgow, and Glasgow,and Glasgow University.
He first become an MP in 1983, on his fourth attempt, when he was elected by Aberdeen South.
He served until 1987, during which time he  was a member of the energy select and European affairs select committees from 1983 to 1985.
He was appointed Parliamentary Private Secretary at the Department of Energy in April 1985, and PPS to Leon Brittan, then Trade and Industry Secretary in September the same year.
He was appointed a government whip in February 1986.
Outside the House of Commons, he has been the Scottish editor for the Sunday Times since 1987.
Until 1989 he was director of European affairs at the environmental and energy policy centre of the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, and until 1990 a broadcaster on the BBC and commercial radio, a company director and public affairs advisor.
His wife Anne is a consultant anaesthetist, and they have two children — Jane, aged four and 18-month-old Andrew.
Politically, his interests are Europe, the economy, health and education, but away from work he enjoys music — especially opera, motoring and walking and other country pursuits.
POWER CLUB LIFT OFF!
Alton Powerlifting Club are probably the smallest sporting organisation in the town.
Andrew Kuttner, Pat Sutton and Eddie Welch have been training together on a regular basis at the Sports Centre for two years.
Forming a club enables them to enter competitions together, and this they did for the first time recently at the combined Hampshire and Berkshire county championships, held at Reading gaol.
It was a pretty impressive debut, with Eddie and Pat finishing second and third respectively in the 82-and-a-half kg class in their first competition.
Andrew, a more seasoned competitor, was runner-up in the 90kg class.
Although scoring well in competition is very gratifying, improving personal performance is the goal which spurs Andrew Kuttner to higher achievements.
‘It's about the satisfaction of achieving personal bests,’ he told the Herald.
He first took to powerlifting in 1979 and is now a qualified coach and referee.
Although small is beautiful to the Alton Powerlifting Club, they would welcome any other enthusiasts to join their training sessions.
Details are available from Andrew on Alton 86077.
They next compete in the South Midlands Divisional championships on April 18th.
For the record, Andrew Kuttner lifted a total of 550kg in the Hampshire championships — 180kg in the squat, 130kg bench and 240kg deadlift.
Pat Sutton lifted 462 and a half kg — 157 and a half kg squat, 110kg bench, 195kg deadlift.
Eddie Welch lifted 475kg — 165 squat, 105kg bench and 205kg deadlift.
Alton's successful power lifters, pictured at training…from the left, Pat Sutton, Eddie Welch and Andrew Kuttner.
Community service for cannabis youth
PATROLLING policemen noticed a pedestrian putting his hands over his mouth in an unusual way when they came close to him.
When questioned, 17-year-old James Graham, now of Allen Close, Alton, was found to be hiding a cannabis leaf in his mouth.
During interviews which followed the incident in November, Graham admitted to possessing seeds of the cannabis plant.
He later confessed to having taken part in the theft of a quantity of goods including hi-fi equipment, a television, a leather jacket and a carriage clock, totalling value of £1,222, from the bedsit  next door to the one which he then shared with a  fridge at Spitalhatch, Alton.
The  town's magistrates heard on Tuesday, in Graham's defence, that he had been supplied the cannabis by his room-mate, who is a juvenile, and had received no personal gain from his part in the theft.
He had helped the police recover all but £388 worth of the items, and had no idea where the remainder had gone.
He had been unemployed and depressed at the time of the theft, and had since started attending college and returned to live with his mother.
He still had three hours outstanding of a community service order for another offence.
The magistrates sentenced Graham to a total of 160 hours community service — 120 for the burglary and 40 for possession of cannabis.
‘If you don't carry it out you will be taken into custody,’ he was warned.
‘You very nearly got to that stage today.’
He was ordered to pay £100 compensation for the theft.
Council to contest the cost of churchyard maintenance
‘What a blessed cheek!’
Basil Smith learned on Monday that, although Blackmoor churchyard was in Selborne parish, it was Whitehill Town Council who gave grants towards upkeep.
The Whitehill finance committee agreed to suggest an arrangement with Selborne Parish Council to pay grants on alternate years.
Proposing this, Michael Watkinson added: ‘As we paid last year, possibly they could contribute this year.’
Members were told that the last grave space was dealt with in February, although there were still double depth family spaces.
Places reserved for the burial of cremated remains were not likely to be filled for many years — if ever.
Whitehill Town Council contributed £250 this year and £150 last year towards the upkeep of the grounds.
Council and committee chairman Don Mayes pointed out that a number of those buried at Blackmoor were from their parish.
It was unlikely that Selborne residents would want to be buried there.
Dr. Watkinson said there were far more former Selborne residents than Whitehill residents in the Blackmoor churchyard.
The council had a reputation for giving money.
Mr. Smith agreed: ‘I think we are overkind sometimes.’
Necklace stolen
A GOLD rope necklace, valued at £50, was stolen from a house in Wooteys Way, Alton on Saturday night.
Girl injured
A FOUR-YEAR-OLD Alton girl suffered a broken leg when she was involved in a collision with a car on Tuesday.
Little Rea Saint, who lives in Jenna Way, was taken to Basingstoke District Hospital for treatment.
The accident happened near her home at about 4 p.m.
The driver of the VW Golf was Patrick White.
Car stolen
A GOLD coloured Ford Escort, valued at £2,500, was stolen from Mount Pleasant car park, Alton on Wednesday last week.
The registration number of the 1.6 Ghia model is A438 FPJ.
Alton Town Mayor Jacqueline Martin (left) joins the Fire Brigade for an in-house training session which involves the use of cutting gear to remove the roof of a car.
The exercise was to get the victim out of the vehicle, and the tool used gave as little vibration as possible to minimise further distress.
New developments boost village infrastructure
THE start of the installation of the drainage system and the installation of the pelican crossing on the A31 were two of the major developments which had happened during the year.
Four Marks Parish Council chairman Peter Hobbs said in his report to the annual village meeting.
The policy of restraint upon development declared by county and district councils in their local plans was one of the best pieces of news he was able to report to the meeting.
‘The basic concept was that there should be a period of restraint to redress the balance of what has been a tremendous amount of development over the years,’ he said, referring to the support the parish council had given to county and district while they were drawing up their local plans.
The advent of the district plan as a firm guideline for planning decisions had caused developers to step up their efforts to ‘open up land, for example along Brislands Lane and Blackberry Lane’, and it would be halfway through the year before the outcome would be known.
Windmill Fields and the Lymington Bottom triangle had been definitely listed as open space, and once landscaping work has been done both these areas will be handed over to the parish council for maintenance.
Funds from the Benian Trust had been earmarked for renovating the car parking areas at the recreation ground and to reinstate the service road between the putting green and tennis courts.
A grant had been obtained for de-silting Swelling Hill Pond.
The parish council were not altogether happy with the road layout around the new pelican crossing, Mr. Hobbs reported.
There were various other complaints about this voiced during the open section of the meeting which followed.
Cars had been seen dodging through the lay-by to avoid red lights, it was said, and the pedestrian refuge between the road and lay-by was not wide enough to stand with a pram.
An information office is shortly to be set up by East Hampshire District Council to answer queries about the drainage work taking place in the village.
An application to set up a pharmacy in the village, which would threaten the services offered by GPs in Four Marks and Ropley, had been turned down, but was due to go to appeal.
After the formal business of the meeting had been concluded, the district council's community and leisure services manager Nigel Lockley gave a short talk on the work of his department, and how their remit has been reshaped by the introduction of the business concept to local council services.
‘Enabling and partnership are concepts we now live with day to day,’ he said —‘helping people help themselves.’
There are four main divisions of their work; sport and recreation, countryside management, arts and community development and tourism.
In the first category, the competitive tendering and subsequent running under five-yearly contract of Alton Sports Centre, gave an example of the new ideas at work.
Partnerships had enabled the use of community schools at Liphook and Bordon to be run so as to offer their facilities to the public throughout the year, and the new methods had reduced the inevitable deficit of the sports centre to well below the national average.
It had not been an easy concept to grasp at first, but ‘we're getting better at being businessmen,’ Mr. Lockley said.
They employ two rangers to look after the district's 1,200 footpaths, and work with farmers and landowners to make sure these well-used rights of way are kept in good condition.
Community services involve organisations of all kinds, from Citizens' Advice Bureaux to WIs, to badminton clubs and playgroups meeting in village halls.
The impact of their input to this kind of organisation was hard to assess, he commented.
‘The only way to know whether we are doing any good would be to take us away for a year!
We are trying to work closer with our customers and to tell people what we are doing.’
A first for the college
ALTON College student Kate Gordon will give the world premiere of American composer James Chaudoir's clarinet Sonatina at the college's Composers' Concert on Thursday, April 2nd.
Mr. Chaudoir has been in England to attend the contemporary music festival Tempo ‘92, at which he was the featured composer.
Kate, who is studying A Level music, and is a member of the Hampshire County Youth Orchestra, will be accompanied by the composer's wife, Marianne.
Other works to be performed in the concert include the first performance of Martin Read's soprano saxophone piece The Numbers Game, which will be performed by Alex Forsyth — the college saxophone teacher.
Student composers include Emily Byrde, Paul McCormick and Tom Noot.
Preparing for the annual concert — Alton College music students, from the left, Kate Gordon, Paul McCormick, Tom Noot and Emily Byrde.
Where care is first in the queue
If you have ever considering fostering a child in need of a little homely care and attention, now is the time to get involved.
Alton Social Services are hoping to attract a lot of new foster carers in the Alton and Bordon areas to coincide with National Foster Week, and a change in the whole concept of foster care.
Family placement team members will be manning stalls at Alton market on Tuesday and at the Forest Centre, Bordon, on Thursday, to reinforce information broadcast nationwide during a week-long television campaign.
The emphasis will be on a ‘more active type of short-term fostering,’ according to family placement social worker Jane Embling.
Since the recent introduction of the Children's Act, the aim has been to work more closely with the natural parents, with a view to returning youngsters to their own homes as quickly as possible.
This has meant a change in the role of carers and a move towards short-term placement.
‘When considering long-term placement we will be looking more at adoption,’ explained Jane.
Local authorities
There are currently 79,000 children and young people being cared for by the local authorities in the U.K. and half of them are looking for foster homes.
In the Alton and Bordon area, there is ‘a constant trickle of demand, mainly for short-term fostering,’ says the placement worker, who is convinced that, as the social services go out into the community and find out what is needed, ‘the demand for short-term fostering will grow.’
There will be a role for every age group within fostering, whether they are couples, single parents or single people without children of their own.
The only qualification will be experience of life, plus a motivation to want to help and to offer your own home to a young person,’ said Jane.
And your home doesn't have to be a palace.
When fostering out a child, placement workers will be looking for a home similar to their own.
‘Quality of care is far more important than the quality of the surroundings in which they live,’ added Jane.
‘What we are looking for is loving care and attention in the home.’
Potential carers will naturally expect to be thoroughly vetted and would be required to undertake an eight-week training course before being entrusted with the care of a child, which could take anything up to six months.
‘Fostering is not an instant thing,’ warned Jane, but it is well worth the wait.
It is a very rewarding job.’
Carers
This latest campaign to enrol more foster carers within the area will be followed by an open evening at the Elizabeth Dibben Clinic in Bordon on Wednesday, April 22nd, beginning at 7.30 p.m.
•For more information about becoming a foster parent, ring Alton Social Services or the Elizabeth Dibben Centre.
Boost for young skiers
A CHEQUE for £250 was handed over to a group of intrepid disabled skiers at Lord Mayor Treloar's College, Froyle, this week.
The money was presented by Kevin Fleet, depot manager of Corrals UK Petroleum Products Ltd., to student Angus Rymer and Phillip Dyke.
The skiers leave for their ten-day stay at Gstaad, Switzerland, next week.
THE LINE-UP FOR THE VITAL VOTE
The battleground for East Hampshire
THE politicians have now mounted the campaign trail in earnest with the days rapidly whittling down to April 9th.
To date four firm candidates have put their names forward to fight the traditionally safe Conservative East Hampshire seat.
Opposition parties face an uphill struggle in their battle to depose long-standing Tory member Michael Mates, who in the 1987 general election polled the largest Tory vote in the country.
However, his opponents are convinced that even in true-blue East Hampshire Tory popularity is on the wane.
And they believe that, if nothing else, Mr. Mates is in for shock.
With their hats already in the ring are Sue Baring (Liberal Democrat), Jim Phillips (Labour) and Ian Foster (Green Party).
The East Hampshire Independent Progressive Association ruled out fielding a candidate to allow them to concentrate their resources on local elections.
But voters could have another choice on their ballot papers.
In an extensive media publicity campaign last week the Natural Law Party announced they would be fielding candidates in each constituency.
At the time of writing they had not selected anyone to contest East Hampshire but a spokesman did not rule out the possibility before nominations closed.
MICHAEL MATES
Conservative
FOLLOWING a 20-year career in the Army, Michael Mates, now 57, was elected for the then Petersfield constituency in 1974, holding the seat in 1979 with an increased majority.
He won the new East Hampshire seat in 1983, retaining it in 1987 with a majority of 23,786.
Said Mr. Mates: ‘This is the most important election for a generation.
As we move into the single market, it is more important than ever we keep our inflation level at or below those of our competitors.
‘It is quite clear that opposition's spending plans will lead to higher inflation.
John Major is the only leader committed to striving for zero inflation.
‘The radical changes in the health service — long overdue — are bearing fruit.
Locally the signs are clear.
The new hospital and surgery in Petersfield, the health centre in Bordon and the closing of old, out-dated institutions have brought vast improvement to our people.
An extra £3 billion has been allotted to the NHS this year.
‘We have kept our pledge to protect pensions from inflation for 13 years.
On top of that, proportionately more has gone to those who have only their state pension by way of benefits.
We must do still more, and we shall.
‘The craziest policy of all is to increase taxes and inflation as recession starts to end.
To tax success is to stifle initiative.
The Liberal Democrats simply offer higher taxes.’
JIM PHILLIPS
Labour
is a lecturer in communication and media studies.
Previously he taught mathematics at the REME base in Bordon.
He qualified as an electronics engineer before going to teachers' training college after which he obtained a degree in art history.
For 14 years Mr. Phillips was a part-time youth leader for both Hampshire and West Sussex County Councils.
An active cricketer, Mr. Phillips has been a Havant councillor for the past 12 years, being chairman last year.
He served in the RAF for five years and stood as a candidate in the 1984 Euro elections and in the 1987 general election.
He says: ‘East Hampshire, with the rest of the country, is suffering the ravages of the recession.
Homelessness, repossessions and the misery of unemployment are as much a feature in this constituency as anywhere.
A council does not have the ability to help because of the spending limits set by the poll tax and the severe controls set by government.
Councils with money in the bank cannot use it to build homes and the economy is in such a mess that the private sector is not building either.’
Mr. Phillips, aged 51, concludes: ‘I would invite anyone who is uncertain to visit a school or hospital to see the chronic underfunding and low staff morale.
Until these problems are addressed there is no way to sustained growth and a future of stability and fairness.’
SUE BARING
Liberal Democrat
is the Liberal Democrat parliamentary candidate for the East Hampshire constituency.
Sue Baring, who lives in London, is chairman of the British Institute of Human Rights and the National Birthday Trust.
During her 29-year marriage Sue Baring brought up her four children near Winchester.
During this time she was involved in various local organisations.
She was president of Hampshire Association of Youth Clubs and chairman of the Hampshire Probation Committee.
She was awarded the OBE in 1984.
Commenting on her selection, Sue Baring said: ‘I'm delighted to have been chosen to stand in a part of the country that I have known and loved for many years.
The Liberal Democrats are in great shape locally.
They have toppled the Tories from control of East Hampshire District Council.
Membership is growing fast in the Hart area of the constituency.
So we are poised to fight a strong, united and hard-hitting campaign.’
Sue Baring continued: ‘The Liberal Democrats are the only credible alternative to the Conservatives in this constituency.
In 1987 the Labour Party came a poor third.
‘The choice for the people of East Hampshire will lie between the discredited policies of the Tory government and the positive programme put forward by the Liberal Democrats.
We will set out our agenda for changing Britain for good— our radical
IAN FOSTER
Green
a potter by trade, was brought up in Haslemere.
He has spent 10 years living in London and the last four in Liphook.
Mr. Foster offers electors the opportunity to vote Green —‘to make a real statement of their commitment to safeguard the future well-being of this planet and all its inhabitants.’
The main issues on which he will be campaigning are the economy and its links to the environment, transport, unemployment, social security and local government.
Mr. Foster believes that for many politics is something remote and complicated and wishes to change that.
He believes everyone has ideas worthy of attention and that earth-saving decisions are best made at local level.
He said: ‘In talking to people about the election I have become aware of two areas which concern me deeply and, I believe, compromise the democratic process.
‘There are a significant number who think their vote goes into a national pool and do not appreciate how voting by constituencies works.
‘And people do not understand how physically to vote.
This puts them off as they are afraid of making fools of themselves.’
He has no illusions about victory.
‘In East Hampshire the one thing for certain is that Michael Mates will be returned, although with a much reduced majority.
I would appeal to people to take this opportunity to vote with their conscience — to vote for the future and for life.’
Village school prepare for a new history lesson
BENTLEY Primary School are celebrating their 150th anniversary this year and preparations are well under way for a week under way for a week of special events in May.
Highlights will be an exhibition of photographs and artefacts depicting village life, a Victorian Day in school when everyone will be in costume, a drama production and a Victorian fete.
The exhibition will not only show life in Bentley during the past 150 years, but also that of Froyle, concentrating on the development of both village schools, culminating in their merger in 1986.
Head teacher of Bentley School, Philip Callaway, told the Herald that during the week, the children's topic work would also be looking at changes in everyday life over the 150 years.
‘Hopefully we will be able to make history come alive for the children,’ Mr. Callaway said, adding that the school would still be grateful for as many old photographs and bits and pieces of memorabilia as possible.
‘We would also like former pupils of the school, both locally and from more distant parts, to visit us during the celebrations, he said.
Bentley School was built 150 years ago on half an acre of land given by Bishop Sumner of Winchester but its history prior to 1882 is almost non-existent since the log books for the early years have long since been lost.
But from the log books of 100 years ago, there is a very vivid picture of school life in Bentley.
Main industry
Hop growing was the main industry in the village and the school's calendar was very much influenced by the farming calendar: ‘August 24th, 1883 — broke up for the harvest and hop tying today.
Very few children have  been present during this week, many with their parents in the field.
We should have broken up before but there is every prospect of a late and long hopping in which case we should have difficulty in making the necessary attendances.’
The building itself, today so warm and modern, left a lot to be desired: ‘March 3rd, 1890 — Temperature at school at 9.30 a.m. is 32F…
December 23rd, 1891 — It has been impossible to do much work this week, for the room has been so cold, we have been obliged to drill to keep ourselves warm.
It was no better in the summer: ‘July 10th, 1885 — The hot weather makes the work very difficult.
As the ditches smell so badly we are obliged to keep the north windows shut…‘
In 1892, the school managers’ book reveals that the infant classroom was enlarged and in 1893 the ‘excellent master's house’was built by public subscription at a total cost of £613.7.3d.
Then, in 1914, major renovation of the building was undertaken to give a new large room, some 5ft. wider and 7ft. higher, as well as a new infants' classroom and cloakrooms.
During these alterations the school moved into a nearby hop kiln, to the great delight of the children.
Walter Sherfield, who had started school the year before, remembers the time well, particularly during the long hot summer days when lessons were held out in the open, under the old oak trees.
He remembers that work on the new school building had to be completed by the end of August since the hop kilns were needed in September.
With the coming of the first world war, the children of Bentley School were soon busy with their own war efforts — they had a collection for the Blue Cross Fund for horses and a War Loan Savings Association was formed.
A war school garden was started in 1917 with some 20 boys planting potatoes…in October the records show that ‘Each of the 20 boys received about 56 lbs.
of potatoes.’
Acorns and horse chestnuts were collected to be used in the making of munitions and several old pupils, on leave from the front, visited the school.
In 1918 it's disclosed that: ‘The managers have arranged to supply those children, who remain, to dinner with a hot meal for a penny halfpenny per day per child.’
Each day, the meal was made up of baked potatoes and either rice pudding, soup, hashed beans and vegetables or oatmeal porridge.
Forefathers
Around the time of the renovations, there was some discussion on handing the school over to the state, but the management committee, headed by the rector, the Rev. Henry Moody, concluded: ‘The time has not yet come…for the surrender of these schools and the forfeiting thereby of the gifts and labours of our forefathers.’
Indeed, it wasn't until 1958 that the committee's successors decided that the increase in pupils needed better amenities than the dwindling funds could provide.
State aid was accepted for the school, although the Church still retained some control.
In recent years, the school has seen major changes with the enlargement and modernisation of the building to accommodate the extra children from nearby Froyle, following the closure of the school there in 1986.
An entry in the school log book after the earlier renovation in 1914 might have been written today.
It states: ‘I received a letter from the chief inspector, Mr. Wynne Williams, today saying that he wishes to congratulate the managers on the new buildings, ‘among the best in the county’.
He adds: ‘Educationally, the school seems to have a future’…‘.
If you can help the school with photos or exhibits or would like to get involved in some way, ‘phone 0420 23273.
Bentley School in 1913 before it was enlarged.
Wildlife in focus
ALTON Civil Service Retirement Fellowship's recent meeting featured an illustrated talk on wildlife by photographer Denis Bright.
He showed the intricacies and dangers of getting pictures at close range and explained that he used hides and scaffold towers, decoys, and foods for different types of birds and animals.
He said that badgers and foxes love Madeira cake.
Leisure Herald
Strong performances in sequel
MONDAY After the Miracle by William Gibson, which continues the wonderful Helen Keller story, was produced by the Horseshoe Theatre Company at the Central Studio, Basingstoke in 1990 and made such an impact that there were demands for a repeat.
Currently at the Haymarket Theatre, Basingstoke, the theatre company are doing just that.
The full stage production has the advantage of scenery — the exterior and interior of the home in the Boston area — but loses the intimacy of the in-the-round presentation at the Studio theatre.
But with both productions the intensity of the acting of Daryl Back as Helen Keller and Hildegard Neil as her teacher and companion Annie Sullivan was  undeniable .
Both, with Adrian Reynolds, the Horseshoe's artistic director, have been involved with the lives of these two remarkable people for 15 years or more.
Adrian Reynolds produced the actresses in The Miracle Worker when in Scotland in the ‘eighties.
This was the play which showed how Annie Sullivan taught Helen stricken deaf and blind when she was 19 months old,— the meaning of words, a finger tip alphabet, and to write.
Later she mastered Braille, learned to type and later took lessons from a teacher for the deaf so that she could go to school, then college and later spent her life lecturing all over the world.
Born in 1880 she died in 1968.
The sequel now to be seen at Basingstoke involves the period in Helen's life when Annie marries.
The introduction of a male into the wonderful relationship between the two women — hard though all three try to avoid a clash — does end in discord.
But there is a solution — otherwise Helen would not have gone on to experience a triumphant life.
You cannot fault the performances of the two main characters.
They have played the roles so often that the women must be part of their lives.
But there is no sign of staleness: the performances at the Haymarket are terrific in their strength.
These are two strong characters, often in opposition, but beneath the exterior conflict is the life giving bond between the two which created richness out of such a barren beginning.
To match their storming performances the actor playing the husband had to be forceful, too, and Peter Dayson is certainly that.
The tempo does not slacken with his appearance; if anything it increases.
There are moments of tenderness, too, beautifully expressed by the players.
Despite her handicaps Helen was an attractive, intelligent woman, and must have had many suitors.
One of the early ones a is in the play, refreshingly played by Simon Hewitt.
Providing moments of steadiness amid the upheavals of the lovers is Anthony Bailey giving a sound performance as the local doctor.
All very impressive and a reflection on the care taken by director Adrian Reynolds.
Final performances are today (Friday) and tomorrow.
R.F.H. 
Hildegard Neil, Daryl Back and Peter Dayson in Monday After The Miracle.
A comic hoard to treasure
THE Royal Exchange Theatre Company's production of a new translation of Moliere's The Miser is playing at the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford until tomorrow (Saturday).
On a set of Heath Robinson ingenuity with suspended buckets, antique plumbing and piles of dusty books and furniture — all part of the Miser's hoard of battered possessions — Tom Courtenay schemes, struts and raves as he seeks to protect his two million francs.
It is Tom Courtenay, the programme says so, but beneath a straggly white wig, black beret and tattered frock coat with trousers surely cast off by Cyril Smith and insecurely fastened by an army of safety pins, it is difficult to recognise him.
There's no difficulty, however, in recognising his mastery of the role.
He is wonderfully avaricious, devious and a genius at avoiding parting with even a sou, all to great comic effect.
But to his unfortunate son and daughter (William Armstrong and Margo Gunn) he seems to ‘make Shylock look like Dr. Barnardo’ as he keeps them in penury with each request for money causing him acute physical pain.
Polly James, as the matchmaker Frosine, is energetic and endlessly scheming as she attempts to marry off the daughter and her lover Valère, who is masquerading as the Miser's steward, and the son and Mariane, who is also the object of the father's desire.
The complications are endless and the resolution a hilarious bundle of coincidence and tortuous explanation worthy of the worst soap.
Colin Prockter is excellent as the downtrodden cook-  cum -coachman, with a particularly revolting bloodstained apron.
As the daughter, Margo Gunn is somewhat expressionless and William Armstrong as her brother at times inaudible so emotionally choked is his delivery.
As Valère, Alex Hardy exhibits a Basil Fawlty brand of obsequious contempt for his master.
But Tom Courtenay rivets the attention and elicits a certain sympathy as he bemoans the loss of his cash box — despite his paranoid security measures.
‘Oh my poor dear money…
I have lost my consolation, my joy, I can't live without you.’
No one is safe from suspicion — let alone the audience on whom he turns with an accusatory stare.
‘You all look highly suspicious to me.’
Loss of his money is like evisceration.
It is no matter to him that he loses his hold over his children and his erstwhile fiancée.
The morals and ethics are obvious, the comedy more subtle and highly entertaining.
Worth seeing for Courtenay alone.
Sandy Baker 
Tom Courtenay as The Miser, with his cook, Colin Prockter.
Jane Rossington, best known as Jill in Crossroads is appearing at the Redgrave Theatre, Farnham, from April 1st in Don't Rock the Boat .
A swingin' sixties Saturday night remembered
THERE can be few musicals that so vividly evoke the era they portray as A Slice of Saturday Night, a 60s skit on teenage passions set in Eric ‘Rubberlegs’ De Vene's Club A Go-Go.
There can also be few musicals infused with quite so many infectious tunes or sardonic lyrics which embody perfectly the angst and awakening libido of the seven teenagers at the club on a typical Saturday night.
Alvin Stardust, looking distinctly unlike Alvin Stardust, is well cast as Eric, the burly club owner and a father figure to the kids who treat his place like a home from home.
‘A microcosm of the teenage scene,’ as he describes it.
Every teenage fantasy, frustration and obsession is here as the naive youngsters exchange their drab  existences for an alcohol-induced escapism.
The boys aim only to get one over on the girls while the girls dream of being romantically swept off their feet.
Each song is a well crafted pastiche on the styles of the day and all are peppered with subtle and clever nuances to evoke memories of pubescent frustration.
It's cheap, cheerful and trashy but on another level it's a well focused snapshot of the time of social change, emancipation and free love.
Wide boy Gary chats up Sue but she doesn't want to be called a slut.
Rick fancies Sharon from afar but neither has the confidence to make a move.
The loutish Eddie meanwhile fancies his chances with ‘Frigid’ Bridgit and makes a bet with his pals that he can score by the end of the evening.
The moves, counter moves, rejections, romances and broken hearts are spun together effortlessly through the music and will strike a chord with any teenagers and ex-teenagers who have fallen in love on a Saturday night.
It was written four years ago by Neil, Lea, John and Charlie Heather and is based on their teenage experiences.
All four brothers were in a band together and began writing the musical while on the road in Africa and Europe.
‘We'd just sit around a table and write it together.
We never had any arguments and we could all contribute some experience that each of us had had,’ John told the Herald.
All the brothers are attending the opening nights of the show, which is seven weeks into a national tour.
The show ran for nearly two years at the Arts Theatre in the West End to rave reviews.
Despite all the publicity through word of mouth and a high profile national tour last year with Gary Glitter, the show remains relatively unknown.
All that could change, however, as another West End run, a film and possible TV series based on the play are all in the pipeline.
Successful productions are currently running in New Zealand, South Africa, Ireland, Germany — in both German and English — and Japan, in Japanese.
Others are set to open in Australia, Mexico, Israel, Russia, Canada and America.
Its main appeal to audiences everywhere is surely the sense of history.
Although a perfect antidote to those who yearn for a return of those days.
It is just as relevant to today's youngsters and the emotions are just the same.
The same characters can probably be found in any nightclub across the world.
The production compares well with the West End show and is thoroughly recommended.
A Slice of Saturday Night is at the Festival Theatre,, Chichester, until tomorrow (Saturday).
Paul Merrill 
Maltings Young Musicians' concert
THE last in this season's Young Musicians' lunchtime recitals at Farnham Maltings is on Friday, April 3rd at 1 p.m. and is to be given by winners of the recital classes from this year's Maltings Music Festival.
The three ‘Maltings Young Musicians’ are Clare McCutcheon — piano, Claire Weston — soprano, and Rosamund Cresswell — clarinet.
Clare McCutcheon is a pupil of Julia Freeman and a student at Farnborough Sixth Form College.
In the past year she has won classes at Aldershot and Farnborough, Basingstoke and Woking Festivals and has taken part in a week-long performers' workshop at the Edinburgh Festival.
She is a member of Canzonetta — a newly formed chamber choir directed by David Victor-Smith and has been awarded a place at the Royal Northern College of Music in September.
Her recital programme will consist of music by Beethoven, Chopin and Debussy.
Claire Weston lives in Wiltshire and attends a specialist music course at Cricklade College, Andover.
She studies singing with Pamela Lord and is also an accomplished pianist and violinist.
Claire, too, is to study at the Royal Northern College.
She is already gaining considerable performing experience and has recently been the soloist in both the Fauré and Brahms Requiems, Haydn's Nelson Mass and Mozart's Coronation Mass.
For her recital on Friday she will be singing music by Howells, Fauré, Richard Strauss and Mozart.
Rosamund Cresswell attends Farnborough Hill Convent College where she is studying for the GCSE examinations and in September she moves to the Sixth Form at Wellington College.
Rosamund learns the clarinet with Angela Fussell and is a member of the Hampshire County Youth Orchestra.
During this last year she was a finalist in the Woking Young Musician competition and won the Dr. Clifford Page Cup for the most outstanding instrumentalist at the Aldershot and Farnborough Festival.
Rosamund will be playing music by Krommer, Stanford and Lutoslawski.
Darlow Te Deum from Waverley Singers
THE next Waverley Singers' concert is on Saturday, April 4th at 7.30 p.m. at St. Andrew's Garrison Church of Scotland, Queens Avenue, Aldershot.
The choir will be performing Vaughan Williams' Five Mystical Songs, Denys Darlow's Te Deum and Fauré's Requiem.
The choir will be accompanied by the Tilford Bach Orchestra, with soloists Diana Vivian (soprano) and Jeremy White (baritone).
Diana Vivian recently sang with the Waverley Singers in their successful ‘Messiah from Scratch’ in Farnham Parish Church.
Denys Darlow is the founder of the Tilford Bach Festival and his Te Deum had its first performance at the Three Choirs Festival last year.
The work forms part of a triptych — combining also the Requiem and Stabat Mater.
Denys Darlow said: ‘Having been a church musician since the age of eight as a chorister and later as an organist and choirmaster, the words of the Te Deum became a constant recurrence in my life and grew in significance as I grew older.’
He has contributed much to music in the Farnham area during the last 20 years and the many supporters of the Tilford Bach Festival will no doubt want to hear what will be only the second performance of his work.
Tickets are available from Josephine Reader (Frensham 2563), the Nationwide Building Society in Farnham and Aldershot and all choir members.
Denys Darlow
Join in and sing
THE Hampshire County Youth Choir, formed in October for young people aged 15–20, have now several events planned including concerts in Southampton Guildhall and Winchester Cathedral.
Any young singers who would like to join this lively choir who meet on Friday evenings should contact Keith Smith, Hampshire County Music Centre, Gordon Road, Winchester SO23 7DD.
PETERSFIELD MUSICAL FESTIVAL
The youth concert
I MISSED the first performance of Peter Thompson's Chinese Lantern Music at last year's Summer Serenade, was so delighted to hear the complete work — the third in a series of commissions for local composers — played by the Petersfield Area Youth Orchestra on Wednesday.
The twelve cameos, each written to display the talents of individual instrumentalists, made an enchanting effect.
As well as heroic pieces for full orchestra, oboe, flutes, bassoon, euphonium and piano all had their moments, though only in one section, ‘Distant Hills’, did I detect any specific Chinese influence.
The conductor was David Thomas, whose In Nubibus, the second of the series, was a highlight of last year's festival.
The presence in the orchestra of the composer of the first, showed just what happy family occasions these youth concerts have become.
PAYO, themselves a revelation last year, have progressed well, and it is to the credit of the young string players that they were not outclassed by the wind.
Their thoroughly professional performance of Bizet's Overture Dr. Miracle, under Anne Claxton, reflected great credit on her training.
The orchestra also accompanied a rousing group of music hall songs, in arrangements by members of Petersfield School's 6th form, Victoria Scott, Annette Pearce and Laurence Evans.
The singing of the choirs was less assured here than it had been in the group of European folk songs, arranged and conducted by Duncan Hanner at the start of the concert.
The fresh toned singing of such favourites as Alouette, A-roving and the Skye Boat Song must have taken many of the audience back to their own school days.
The Festival Wind Band, emanating mainly from Churcher's College, gave a highly authentic rendering of Sousa's Liberty Bell; minus a piccolo perhaps, but splendid in every respect.
Their Music of the Beatles made an effective contrast.
Youth concerts always have to include a major work written in the current ‘Cantata’ fashion.
This year the choice fell on Richard Stilgoe's The Big Band, an updated version, for bass soloist, narrators, instrumentalists, chorus and audience of the creation story.
No disrespect to Philip Young, the conductor, or to any of the performers, but I have to agree with the member of the audience sitting behind me who commented that it seemed more of a damp squib than a big band!
One has to question  if these pieces justify the enormous amount of rehearsal they require.
Mention has to be made of Julia Chapman's singing of ‘Joshua’, of the trio called Full Swing, who entertained with modern jazz in the foyer as the audience arrived and, inevitably, the Petersfield School Dance Band (another happy family) who set out feet a-dancing in the Rose Room after the concert.
Ann Pinhey 
Petersfield Orchestra
AS festival chairman I was already very heartened, before a note had been played, to see a 60 strong orchestra assembling before an all-but capacity audience on Thursday.
The orchestra, consisting almost entirely of local musicians, included a satisfying mixture of professional players, teachers, amateurs and students and the audience included many faces familiar from the choirs which perform on the festival's choral evenings.
It is these cross-relations which put the festival at the heart of local music-making.
In Borodin's Overture to Prince Igor the orchestra established themselves convincingly with secure intonation and ensemble and some distinguished solo wind playing.
Trumpets and trombones provided bold splashes of colour, but some sections of the orchestra — notably horns and violins — were slow to warm up, and underplayed the romantic and exotic element in the music.
Judith Bailey's firm, clear beat led perhaps to an unduly deliberate tempo and heaviness of phrasing in the first movement of Beethoven's Emperor Concerto and narrowly missed coinciding with the soloist at a few important junctions.
In their accompaniments, the strings could have contributed greater warmth and colour — particularly by using more vibrato.
Soloist Annette Servadei played beautifully with an involvement entirely free from any kind of ostentation.
This suited the broad sweep of the first movement and the magical filigree of the second movement splendidly, but the finale perhaps asks for a degree of conscious showmanship.
Towards the end Miss Servadei suffered several stumbles and a memory lapse, which unsettled this listener.
Sibelius' Fifth Symphony was an ambitious choice but Judith Bailey's impressive grasp of the music carried both orchestra and audience through the technical difficulties to the final magnificent blaze of Nordic splendour.
Philip Young 
Versatility at their fingertips
‘ROMANZAS, Riffs and Rumbas’ was an apt title for a diverse programme played by the Segovia Trio on their return to Farnham Maltings on Saturday.
Fresh from their Purcell Rooms success and a new recording contract, this classical guitar trio performed with their usual professionalism as they demonstrated, with undeniable success, the versatility of their instrument.
Highlights of the first half were three specially adapted songs from Bizet's Carmen and the hauntingly beautiful Intermezzo by Granados.
Alexander MacDonald, Roland Gallery and Vincent Lindsey Clark chose a much lighter second half to this new programme.
Three South American folk songs were composed by Mr. Lindsey Clark who also arranged a rousing Flamenco Farrucca and Rumba.
The slow movement from Rodrigo's Concerto de Aranjuez was skilfully adapted for three guitars and was well suited to the resonant bass instrument of Mr. MacDonald.
Versatility was underlined by a well-received jazz/blues section and, as an encore, the trio played a gentle rendering of Mark Knopfler's Why Worry?
The concert was sponsored by Lindsey Clark Brothers of Churt.
Contributed 
Off the Record
THE day of the indie guitar band dominating local music appears to be on the wane, if recent developments are anything to go by.
Not that there's anything wrong with indie bands — we've got several very good acts locally — but the traditional pop group is definitely coming back in a big way.
One of those bands is the Cloudwatchers, whose latest cassette single provides two good blueprints for the perfect pop song.
On Day Like These is a sixties drenched track complete with distortion and waves of psychedelia, while Curious is an acoustic ballad of the highest quality.
This demo's not for sale at the moment but there's a chance to see the band at the Wheatsheaf, Farnham, on Wednesday night.
CONGRATULATIONS to Trousershock BC, who received a glowing review in NME last week.
Group manager Terry Burgess tells us that the group are  ecstatic over their ‘break’ into the national press, and will be surging ahead with the preparations for their forthcoming vinyl release.
See the group live at the West End Centre, Aldershot on April 25th, where they'll be supported by grunge rock specialists Slug.
EVER wondered what sounds influence our local bands, or what they think of the national and local music scenes?
We'll be finding out the answers to these and other topics in an exclusive series of in depth interviews with some of our top local bands.
NEWS bites: Four fifteen are back in the studio recording some more tracks, including one with a distinct indie/dance style.
Their upcoming single September Rain is due out next month…
Blue Velvet are doing two gigs in one night next weeks, one at Basingstoke and one at Lakeside, Frimley Green…
Former Phoenix duo Jon Bicknell and Nigel Higgs are preparing some more material for some live dates, this time with a more indie influence
THIS weeks Local Artists Chart, compiled exclusively for Off the Record: 1 (8) On the Eve of Tomorrow — Blue Velvet; 2 (3) Cornerlight — Beats Working; 3 (4) Cornerlight the Video — Beats Working; 4 (NEW) On Days Like These/Curious — the Cloudwatchers; 5 (13) Flavour; 6 (2) Block out the Sun — Slug; 7 (7) County Sound Jingles Package; 8 (6) Four Taste — No Excuses; 9 (NEW) R'n'b With a Touch of Soul — Boogiemen; 10 (re) Mature — Big Wednesday.
Extrovert finale
SATURDAY'S finale was a thoroughly extrovert affair, dominated by Bernstein's Chichester Psalms, Copland's Clarinet Concerto and Constant Lambert's The Rio Grande.
One had heard the ominous rumblings from the singers regarding the complexity of both choral and works, and the language of one of them (Hebrew), but in performance on Saturday evening they sounded tremendous.
Judged by the highest standards there may have some stiffness in the rhythm, some slack articulation of the words and some raucous tone from certain voices, yet, urged on by the dynamic playing of the Guildford Philharmonic Orchestra, and especially by the cohorts of percussion, the singing was exhilarating.
The conductor William Llewellyn may well have had a few sleepless nights but must have been proud of his singers.
These were much the best performances I have heard from him, and say a lot for the state of Horndean, Petersfield and Rogate Choral Societies, from whom the Festival Chorus were drawn.
The choice of a counter-tenor for the solos in both works was inspired, and, it seems, truly authentic.
The music often lies extremely high, but Nicholas Clapton had no difficulty with the tessitura, and displayed remarkable breath control.
The pianist was Roger Bluff, who seemed able to draw a singing tone from the Festival piano that I have not heard matched for some time.
He also accompanied three American Folk songs by Copland, which were sensitively sung, and joined Keir Rowe in the Clarinet concerto.
Mr. Rowe projected his highly contrasted part with the utmost clarity and assurance, though the violins of the Guildford Philharmonic Orchestra had, understandably, some difficulties at the start of the final section.
Samuel Barber's Adagio for Strings was well enough played but lacked the last ounce of passion, and suffered badly from the aurally obtrusive air conditioning system, Randall Thompson's Alleluya showed that the Festival Chorus on this occasion were equally as adept at unaccompanied singing as their counterparts had been last week.
Perhaps it is too much to hope that this concert finally dragged the Petersfield Musical Festival into the 20th century, but with a promised appearance by the acclaimed National Youth Jazz Orchestra next year, as well as The Dream of Gerontius, it remains only for the committee to do something about the slow start to the week for the festival to regain some of its former splendour.
Ann Pinhey 
Saturday's evening's soloists at the musical festival were Keir Rowe (clarinet) and Roger Bluff (piano).
With them is conductor William Llewellyn.
Young talent
SURREY'S county youth and wind orchestras are joining forces for a charity concert at Guildford Civic Hall on Saturday, April 4th.
The concert is in aid of the Paul O'Gorman Foundation for Children with leukaemia and the Association of Friends of Surrey County Youth Orchestra.
The Paul O'Gorman Foundation has raised £1.4 million for a specialist centre for childhood leukaemia at Great Ormond Street Hospital.
The Association of Friends raise finance for overseas tours and plans are made for an eight day visit to Hungary in July.
The wind orchestra perform works by Bernstein, Holst and Glenn Miller; the youth orchestra offer English music.
Students delight
WITH determined expressions and boundless energy, British Gas Ballet Central gave a programme of great variation delighting audiences at the Minerva Studio Theatre this week.
It was the third visit to Chichester for the company of final year students of the Northern Ballet's Central School of Ballet who both surprised and astounded their audiences with a fast moving and challenging selection of classical and contemporary works.
Featuring the Grand Pas de Deux from Don Quixote, performed superbly by Abigail Gowen and Omar Gordon, the programme included Michael Pink's Grand Central, which is a charmingly nostalgic view of New York's Central Station and its rush-hour traffic, populated by showgirls, matinée idols and reporters.
Among the students who are studying at the Central School, which was set up in 1982 by Christopher Gable and Ann Stannard, special mention must go to the male dancers for their outstanding elevation and strength.
At such close quarters, mistakes would have been more than evident but to the merit of all those involved, these were at a minimum and more than compensated for by sheer enthusiasm.
T.J.
Film and video
PAUL MERRILL REPORTS
VIDEO: A Rage in Harlem (18) **
MUCH touted as the definitive account of the black ghetto, A Rage in Harlem has an impressive cast list and an intriguing story but stops well short of expectations.
Robin Givens is the sexy femme fatale who, on the run from her former lover, lures unsuspecting undertaker Forest Whitaker into her deadly web before sucking his bank account dry.
The backdrop of 1950s Harlem is violent and sinister and the direction pulls few punches.
This is warts and all film making which, though done to good effect, is hardly uplifting.
Whitaker and Givens give the proceedings a much needed lift and the latter shows promise and the conniving seductress.
The supporting cast, especially Danny Glover and Gregory Hines, are also superb.
Why is it then that the film fails to deliver?
It has all the right ingredients but somewhere during preparation something went wrong producing an unsatisfying dish with a bitter aftertaste.
In truth it drags along far to slowly and is never quite interesting or gripping enough in the right places despite the considerable efforts of the players.
Film: 1992 Oscars
THIS year's Oscar race is the closest for years with few clear favourites in any category.
Bugsy leads the way with ten nominations followed by JFK (eight), Thelma and Louise, The Silence of the Lambs, Prince of Tides and Beauty and the Beast.
There are as always some glaring omissions like Barbra  Streisand for best director, The Fisher King and Thelma and Louise for best film, and the lack of nomination for Edward Scissorhands and The Commitments.
For really devoted film fans, Sky TV are screening the whole ceremony live, staring at 2.30 a.m. on Tuesday.
British hopes rest on Ridley Scott (director of Thelma and Louise), Anthony Hopkins (best actor), Ben Kingsley (supporting actor) and several of the technical awards.
None of the films nominated has any British backing.
For what it's worth, here are my predictions for the major categories: Best Film: Bugsy, Director: Barry Levinson, Best Actor: Nick Nolte, Best actress: Jodie Foster, Best supporting actor: Jack Palance, Best Supporting actress: Juliette Lewis, Best original screenplay: Bugsy.
Festival service
THE spacious surroundings of St. Mary's Church, Liss — currently enjoying its centenary year — proved the ideal setting for this year's festival service.
In music dating from the 11th century to the present day, each major festival in the church's calendar was celebrated by the singers and instrumentalists of Musica Sacra, directed by Ann Pinhey.
The address, an impassioned appraisal of music's spiritual and mystical powers, was given by the Rev. Brian Cook, and the organist was David Groves, the festival's hard-working and under-appreciated accompanist.
Peeps into the Past
Princess Anne rides to victory
ALL eyes were on Princess Anne when she competed in the Downlands Horse Trials at Woolmer Farm, Liphook, this week twenty years ago.
She delighted the crown by riding to a victory in her class, Princess Anne's popular win was on Columbus, owned by the Queen, in the intermediate Class A.
In the dressage she lost only 25 points, 13 fewer than the runner-up.
On her other horse, Collingwood, also owned by the Queen, she competed in the intermediate class ‘B’ but was less successful, being unplaced.
The Princess was to have ridden her famous Doublet, but her third entry was withdrawn.
While she was spectating other events, it was reported than Princess Anne looked relaxed and informal — wearing a blue yachting cap and blue and white jacket.
Some 200 people watched the showjumping, other took interest in the dressage, and the more adventurous found vantage points around the cross-country course.
The water jumps were a favourite spot.
Among the spectators was the High Commissioner for India.
60 YEARS AGO
FINAL LOSERS …
Farnham Town Football Club lost to Carshalton Athletic Reserves by five goals to one in the final of the Surrey Intermediate Cup competition played at Woking Sports Ground.
Farnham were without several of their leading players, including their captain G. Gooding, who was recovering from a broken leg.
50 YEARS AGO
WOMEN FIREFIGHTERS …
The Herald announced that Farnham people might soon see women tackling fires alongside their male comrades in the National Fire Service.
Firewomen Emerton, Simpson, Smart and Turner — telephonists from Farnham Fire Station — returned from a ten week course near Reading where they had won a cup after competitions with several other fire service teams.
30 YEARS AGO
MEADOW PLANS …
An ambitious £1.5 million plan to develop 22 acres of Tice's Meadow on the Farnham and Aldershot boundary at Badshot Lea was approved by Aldershot Borough Council housing committee.
It provided for 532  flats and maisonettes in eleven storey and four storey blocks.
ANY QUESTIONS …
The 600th edition of the BBC ‘Any Questions’ programme was broadcast from Liphook Village Hall, and was a special edition in honour of question master Freddie Grisewood, who lived in Hewshott Lane, Liphook.
Joining him on the panel were Jack Longland, Ralph Wightman, Lord Boothby and Mary Stocks.
SHOTS SHOOT UP …
How times change!
In the same year that Accrington Stanley became only the second team to leave the league through bankruptcy — Aldershot F.C.
were riding high.
After their winning match against Crewe Alexandra, the Shots polished performance improved their league position by four places, and left them with an outside  chance of going up into Division III.
20 YEARS AGO
RAT PROBLEM …
Crondall seemed to be in need of a Pied Piper to answer the problem of an increasing rat population in a rubbish dump near the recreation ground.
At the annual parish meeting it was heard that the rats were beginning to explore and were going out into Church Street.
Children playing in the recreation ground had reported seeing several ‘huge’ rats near the tennis courts.
Lord Roberts carrying out the inspection of the Officer Training Corps in Bordon.
At this time, the earl, must have been nearing the end of his distinguished career.
He had served for many years in India, where he was awarded the VC for action during the Mutiny and eventually ended up as Commander in Chief.
Promoted to Field Marshall in 1895 he died in 1914 of pneumonia at the Front in France where he was visiting Indian divisions.
In a bygone era the postmen and staff of Frensham Post Office lined up for this photo call.
Can any reader suggest just when or perhaps identify any of the group?
FRESH VEG AT THE KILN
Fred Tice's lorries at Runfold Kiln, Farnham around 1938 with a glimpse of the hop field in a photograph from Farnham Museum.
Tice's Meadow at nearby Badshot Lea was later to be subject to plans for housing development (see 30 years ago from out files).
Hiawatha from scratch
I WAS sitting on the other side of the fence with a vengeance on Friday evening, when I joined a large and motley chorus to sing Hiawatha's Wedding Feast by Samuel Coleridge-Taylor.
We were joined by an equally enthusiastic and highly competent orchestra, led by Ray Fullalove, and including members of the Petersfield Orchestra and students from Bedales, The Petersfield School and Churcher's College.
The authoritative, dedicated, and benign conductor was Williams Llewellyn, whose knowledge and love for the score was obvious.
An hour's rehearsal wasn't much but sufficient to ensure an almost trouble free, if distinctly unrefined performance.
The young tenor, James Oxley, sang the celebrated aria ‘Onaway, awake beloved’ in limpid tones, which may, however, have lacked a degree of ardour.
He was even more impressive in his short recital (with Roger Judd at the piano) of 20th century American songs by Samuel Barber, Jerome Kern, Cole Porter and Leonard Bernstein.
His approach to such standards as Miss Otis Regrets, All the things you are and Maria was serious, but at the same time conveyed the feeling of sophistication so essential to this genre.
And he is blessed with a beautiful, evenly produced, voice.
Ann Pinhey 
News from Alresford
Does the town want a new cemetery?
COUNCIL ASKS FOR RESIDENTS' VIEWS
THE limited powers of the parish council, which are in turn further limited by lack of resources cause much frustration, said chairman Roy Downham at Alresford Parish Council's annual meeting held in the Phair Hall of the Community Centre on Friday evening.
There is always, he said, more than needs doing, than can be afforded.
Mr. Downham asked the public their views on two subjects currently under discussion.
One is the need for a burial ground, as the town cemetery, in St. John's churchyard, is very nearly full, and there is no possibility of any extension.
A new ground will be costly and a suitable area will need to be found.
He asked if residents wanted a new cemetery in Alresford, rather than use the Winchester cemetery.
Water fears
The second subject was that two dry winters are inevitably leading towards a summer of water shortages.
The council are considering asking the Southern Water Authority to impose restrictions on use of water now rather than wait until matters become really serious.
Mr. Downham also presented the financial account, saying that it had been decided not to increase the parish council's share from the community charge, by more than five percent.
Reporting for the recreation grounds committee, Barbara Griffiths said that £25,688 had been spent on recreation in Alresford in the past year.
The major project, costing £20,698, had been the refurbishment of the play area at the Stratton Bates recreation ground, including new equipment and a safety surface.
It has been agreed that the changing rooms at the Stratton Bates playing field needs to be replaced and £10,000 has already be set aside in the current budget towards the cost, which is anticipated to be in the region of £55,000.
The Sun Hill recreation ground is in need of similar treatment to that of Stratton Bates.
A grant has been requested towards the cost of installing a safety surface and a number of residents have volunteered to form a family fund-raising group to help with providing equipment.
This has been welcomed by the council.
New lights
The shelter and the shed at the War Memorial gardens have been vandalised.
The tennis courts at Arlebury Park are to be resurfaced shortly, and the football pitches at both Arlebury and Stratton Bates continue to be well used and are an ongoing maintenance expense.
Bill Liddiard, chairman of the lighting committee, referred to new lighting in Station Road, additional lighting in The Avenue, and the proposed changes to lighting in Broad Street.
The lights in Broad Street are both corroded and obsolete.
Lighting columns now have to be to regulation safety standards, and it is hoped that the new lights chosen will be complementary to the street.
Two sample lights have been installed, and plans showing the changes are on view in Eddolls shop window in Broad Street.
Members of the public expressed some dismay that the new lighting would be yellow, pointing out that the white light gives a character and atmosphere to this conservation area which should not be altered.
Chris Webb reported a quiet year for the planning committee, with only 78 applications, most of them for extensions, alterations and change of use, although it had included plans for low cost housing.
A new amenities committee had been formed within the parish council during the year, and chairman Ken Yeldham explained that it had been formed to deal with the things that fell outside the scope of the present committees.
Six committees of the new committee had taken place, with a watchful eye being kept on environmental improvements, the need for bus shelters, involvement in finding a place for the youth of the town to meet, and consideration of the difficulties faced by the very elderly and disabled in the town centre.
The committee had also carried out a survey of parking problems in residential areas.
Currently they are seeking suitable permanent parking places for the local St. John Ambulance vehicles, and organising an official Spring Clean Day on April 4th.
Hampshire county councillor Peter Maxwell was at the meeting and he said that the community charge had been set at £237, which is £33 below the government guideline.
Winchester city councillor Major Dougie Covill requested that more pressure be put upon the county council to improve the footpaths and pavements which are in a very dangerous condition, and a Broad Street businessman wondered if residents were really aware of the changes going on in Broad Street, and the manner in which they were to be undertaken.
The meeting ended with a talk with slides presented by Rod Murchie of the National Rivers Authority.
Broad Street changes on show
OUTLINES to the proposed changes in Alresford's Broad Street are on display in Eddoll's shop window in the street until the end of March.
The scheme was brought about by the need to replace dying trees and a desire for a comprehensive improvement scheme.
Princes Street limes have been especially selected as replacement trees, paid for by the town trustees.
The first phase will begin at the Horse and Groom end of the street in the coming financial year and later works will proceed when finance and opportunities permit.
Key aspects of the scheme will be widening and repaving footways, replanting trees, retaining car parking and private accesses and improving lighting.
The town trustees say they would welcome any comments on the scheme.
Manuscript evening reveals ‘things not generally known’
FROM memories of a journey through Alresford in the 1920s to a paper on Rasputin, the stories told by members at Alresford Historical and Literary Society's annual manuscript evening held the large audience's attention with their detail and variety.
Reg Sanders' ‘Things not generally known’ opened the evening with a mish-mash of information gleaned through some 300 historical reference books.
For instance, he said that the expression ‘by hook or by crook’ came from the period of Charles II when there were two judges called Hook and Crook and ‘a man of straw’he discovered, was one who could be brought to bear false witness — recognisable by the straw in his shoes.
Ursula Oxley read from the memoirs of Henry Hunt who was born Wiltshire, was elected to parliament, and worked for the repeal of the corn laws.
On February 15th, 1835, en route to the west country he stopped at Alresford, was  seized by paralysis and died.
His mistress, Mrs. Vince, wanted his body to be placed in her family vault, but the family objected, and the corpse was eventually removed to Parham.
Some years later, another Henry Hunt, Alresford's famous architect, was born but there is no connection between the two.
Mrs. Oxley concluded her reading with three poignant poems about her son that she wrote herself.
The Russian monk Rasputin, who was influential in Tsar Nicholas II's court, was the subject of Cyril Flack's manuscript.
Mr. Flack's own interest began in 1934 when he was in court for the libel case brought against the MGM film company who had made a film about Rasputin.
The case became the standard for setting the difference between libel and slander.
Early memories of Northern Rhodesia were the inspiration for Robin Grieves-Cook's manuscript.
He remembered small birds cleaning teeth of 14ft. crocodiles and a close encounter when he accompanied a hunter and ‘bagged’ six crocodiles.
Motorcycle ride
One of the highlights of the evening was Roy Robins' beautifully written ‘A journey through Alresford’.
This recalled a journey from his home in Farnham to Dorset by motorcycle and sidecar in the 1920s.
His lively description had the audience sharing the thoughts of the small boy as he travelled through Alresford, Romsey, Wimborne and Blandford, and almost feeling his stiff limbs and sore bottom.
Elsie Sanders concluded the evening with a visit to West Meon cemetery, to the grave of Tom Lord, cricketer and founder of Lord's Cricket Ground.
He retired to Hampshire and died in 1832 at the age of 76.
The MCC continue to care for his grave.
In contrast, on the other side of the same cemetery is the grave of the Burgess family, where the ashes of the spy Guy Burgess, who died in Russia, were placed.
Appropriately, this manuscript was called ‘The Famous and Infamous’.
CHERITON CUBS GO FORWARD
BEAVERS and cub scouts of the Alresford scout district held their annual football rallies in the  grounds of Sun Hill Junior School.
Beavers from Alresford, Medstead, Ropley and Four Marks took part in the morning rally.
Every beaver played in the six-a-side on two pitches, each one receiving the certificate for good teamwork.
Referees were Tim Giles — who organised the event — and Mark Appleton.
The cub rally followed with eight teams, two Medstead, two from Four Marks and one each from Alresford, Cheriton, Ropley and the Candover Valley cub packs.
In the semi-finals Cheriton beat Candover Valley and Alresford won their game with Ropley.
A well fought final resulted in Cheriton beating Alresford 1–0.
The team from Cheriton will now go forward to the county finals on April 5th.
Referees were district commissioner David Harvey, Alan Pritchard and Bob Rodwell.
Live frogs at the club
LOCAL GP Dr. Michael Clark was  the guest of the Alresford Afternoon Social Club recently.
He talked about frogs, with a few live examples, plus some tadpoles.
After the talk he was invited to select the best dressed carrot in the club's competition for the month.
This was won by Ruby Lansley who had turned hers into a caterpillar.
Meditation for Lent
ALRESFORD Mothers' Union members were welcomed to their March meeting by Pat Ruffle, deputising for chairman Barbara Jones.
The Rt.
Rev. Leslie Lloyd Rees led a meditation for Lent, which opened with a hymn and went on to consider the ministry of Christ's passion and resurrection.
PLAYING SAFE
JAMES Linington, aged seven, Peter Rogers, aged six, and his brother, Alex, aged four, were having fun on the side at the refurbished play area at the Stratton Bates recreation ground in Grange Road, Alresford when it was opened officially by chairman of the parish council, Roy Downham, on Saturday morning.
Accompanied by Winchester city councillor Major Dougie Covill, Mr. Downham and Barbara Griffiths of the council's recreation committee, watched children enjoying the colourful new equipment with safety surfaces.
The cost of this project to the town has been £20,698 and Mr. Downham hoped that it would not only give much enjoyment, but would be treated with respect by all, so that it can be enjoyed for many years.
Second time winner
MORE than 100 guests took part in Perin's School Association's table quiz evening on Saturday.
Questionmaster was Colin Chard, and there was a break for supper.
The winners were Hilary and David Carr, Geraldine and Stephen Pinch, Liz and Peter Petherham and Diana and Edward Woolridge who also won the quiz last year.
Collecting her thoughts
THE March meeting of the Friends of the Curtis Museum and Allen Gallery, Alton featured a talk about antiques.
Describing herself as  the unrepentant collector, Mrs. Vernon Smith showed a variety of garments and artefacts.
Although costume items form a major part of her collection, she also showed examples of Victorian toys and miniatures, and a collection of buttons and hatpins.
She emphasised that everything becomes collectable in time, particularly when its history and date of manufacture can be authenticated.
Chairman Gerald Davies proposed a vote of thanks.
Wife pleads guilty to forging cheques
A ‘COMPULSIVE spender’ forged  cheques from her husband's own account to finance her drinking habit.
The 43-year-old Alton woman faked her spouse's signature on 29 transactions which together totalled £1,155.
The counterfeit cheques, for sums between £20 and £60, were made out over a five-month period from March last year.
On Monday, Ruth White, of Anstey Road, pleaded guilty to two charges of making, and also using, a false instrument.
She asked for 54 similar offences to be taken into consideration.
The court heard that her husband had become suspicious early last year and had gone to the National Westminster bank asking them not to release any further cheque books.
Unfortunately that didn't happen.
Crown prosecutor Bill Blanchard said that enquiries at Mrs. White's bank were later made.
‘It led to an examination of cheques, a number of which had been forged and negotiated,’ he said.
‘The signatures on those cheques to her were hers and she had done it to finance her drinking habit.’
Defending solicitor Bob Emuss said that problems for Mrs. White had come to a head last February.
‘Her husband was not aware of what she was spending,’ said Mr. Emuss.
‘She was running up debts, and when her full-time employment ceased not only did she have her alcohol problem but also had a number of clothing clubs pursuing her.’
Magistrates were told that the defendant had been to Mr. White's bank and had offered to pay the money stolen from them.
But the local branch did not have the power to agree to the offer.
Separated
The court heard that  Mrs. White, who is now separated from her husband, has taken steps to combat her alcohol problem and is paying off all her debts.
Magistrates gave Mrs. White a one-conditional discharge and ordered her to pay the £1,155 compensation to the National Westminster Bank.
£11,000 hotel fiddle
A WOMAN stole over £11,000 after fiddling the books while working as an accountant at The Bush Hotel, Farnham.
When an audit showed money was missing from the hotel, 45-year-old Sandra Walker told police she knew but ‘covered the loss’ in the books ‘in the hope of catching the thief when he stole again’, Guildford Brown Court heard on Friday.
Walker, of North Hanger Close, Alton, was ordered to do 180 community service and pay £298 costs after pleading guilty to four charges of theft.
She also asked for 31 similar offences to be taken into consideration.
LETTERS
4,000-year Holy Land link — and that's alien?
Sir,— It saddened me to see Mr. Reg Cleaver describe the Jews as ‘an alien people’ in relation to the land of Israel.
The Jewish people have had continuous relationship with the Holy Land for nearly 4,000 years.
Sometimes the Jews were independent (as in the periods of the Judges and the biblical Kings), sometimes a  beleaguered subject people.
They were often an impoverished and persecuted remnant, victims of wave after wave of invaders and persecutors — Babylonians, Greeks, Romans, Moslem Arabs, Byzantines, Crusaders and Ottomans until the present century brought British troops under General Allenby and the British Mandate in 1917.
But alien?
Never that.
There were always Jewish communities in the land.
Augmented by their co-religionists through the centuries, often in response to waves of persecution such as the expulsion from Spain which occurred 500 years ago this month.
Many great poets and spiritual leaders produced work of benefit to all mankind from the homeland of the Jewish people.
There are very few countries and groups of people which have had as devoted and heartfelt connection to a land as have the Jews to the land of Israel.
I share Mr. Cleaver's sentiment of placing equal value on every human life ‘whether that be Jew, Christian or Muslem’; the world would be a better place if more people did so.
But I am troubled that he mentions the deaths of British servicemen without any references to the closing of the gates of Mandatory Palestine to the desperate refugees who tried to leave Nazi Germany but found the rest of Europe and the Jewish homeland closed to them.
Perhaps Mr. Cleaver has forgotten that the British authorities turned away from Palestine ships laden with hopeless would-be immigrants who were forcibly, returned to Europe and the death camps.
Some of the ships sank on the way to or from the Promised Land, while millions perished for want of a safe haven.
By virtue of the existence of Israel, the threatened or endangered Russian and Ethiopian Jew can find a home, as did the 800,000 Jews who were expelled from Iraq and other Arab countries when the Jewish State came into being.
Yet Israel occupies less than a quarter of the  mandatory territory controlled by Britain after the first world war.
Its area is a tiny fraction of that occupied by the 21 hostile Arab states; Syria alone is seven times as large.
One may well blame politicians for much Middle East misery, as Mr. Cleaver maintains, but without forgetting that Palestine has been partitioned a number of times.
77 percent of it was cut off in 1922 and called Trans-Jordan; the remaining section was partitioned by the United Nations in 1947.
This would have given Israel about 10 percent of the original Mandated territory.
The Jewish community accepted the partition plan.
By contrast, the Arab population and surrounding countries did not accept this United Nations decision and five Arab armies attacked the new State of Israel as soon as it was declared in May 1948.
Hostility to the Jewish State has been unremitting except in the case of Egypt since 1977.
In his article, Mr. Cleaver omits any mention of successive attacks by Arab armies on Israel since in 1948.
In the Yom Kippur war of 1973, with no declaration of war, the Arab launched a ferocious war, the Arab launched a ferocious war on two fronts on the most sacred day of the Jewish year.
Mr. Cleaver also omits to mention any of the many infiltrations, bombardments and acts of terror towards a country which has not known a single day of peace in 44  years .
(It is curious that Mr. Cleaver is at pains to accuse Israel of war crimes, when his previous correspondence in the press has shown a soft spot for Nazi war criminals who may still be living in Britain).
To omit this background is rather like accusing the RAF of bombing innocent women and children in Berlin without mentioning that world war two was going on at the time.
For every act of violence quoted by Mr. Cleaver, one could cite an Arab attack, massacre or atrocity, not least during the Intifada which has seen well over 500 Palestinians murdered by  his fellow Palestinians.
But what good would this do?
Arabs and Israelis inhabit the same part of the world and will continue to do so.
The way forward should be for both sides to try and understand one another, to recognise each others' rights, feelings and beliefs.
If all sides in the conflict make every effort to co-operate in good faith then new life could come to the area.
Not only would the desert bloom but the commandment ‘Love Thy Neighbour as Thy Self’ would come to fruition.
That is why the peace process, for which Israel has been striving for 44 years, has to be seen as the only viable solution.
For Mr. Cleaver to seek to demonise one side while leaving out huge relevant chunks of history is hardly conducive to a  proper understanding of the issues, let alone their resolution.
Rona Hart
The Board of Deputies of British Jews,
Woburn House,
Tavistock Square,
London WC1H 0EZ.
The conversion of farm buildings
Sir,— The district council's countryside manager, Robin Truscott, recently said that easing planning controls on the conversion of redundant farm buildings would counter the decline of rural communities.
The wholesale conversion of farm building to expensive housing could seal the fate of a small community.
Thriving small settlements must have an active and mostly locally based economy.
That economy has traditionally depended on the land.
The main artery of rural life is being cut by intensive agricultural methods including use of pesticides and fertilisers supplied by large businesses, while retailing of produce is done by large companies taking a big slice of the profit.
The investment in equipment required to thrive in a market devoid of ecological and social concern has led to traditional sustainable farming being squeezed out.
Realistic energy pricing and policies that safeguard the long-term well-being of the land are needed, instead of short-term narrow market accounting.
A countryside under intensive farming which depends on leisure and service industries is a cosmetic, lifeless countryside.
It means fewer species, crises in food production, sameness.
The world turns a shade greyer.
Rural industry and agriculture could help to conserve our countryside and its people.
Mr. Truscott is faced by the demands of agribusiness and land speculators.
It is time communities had their birth right — their land — returned to them.
Ian Foster ,
5 Malthouse Meadows,
 Liphool 
•Mr. Foster is the East Hampshire Constituency Green Party candidate.
— Editor.
Grateful for hospital care
Sir,— Write in praise of the NHS and in particular the Royal Surrey County Hospital.
On Christmas Eve my nine-year-old grandson James was admitted in the early evening for an emergency appendix operation.
The care and attention he received was first class throughout his stay and  although he missed out on a family Christmas at home, the staff more than made up for it and he was showered with extra presents which helped to speed his recovery.
We will always be grateful to the doctors and nurses who worked during the festive  season , as well as all year round.
We really do have a health service to be proud  of and I thank all concerned.
Pauline Thompson
24 Yewens,
Chiddingfold.
Heroics in tune with our glorious heritage…
Sir,— That heroic huntin' person ‘name and address supplied’ tells us  the tearing to pieces of foxes by packs of half starved dogs accompanied by hordes of fancy dress killers on horseback is legal, efficient and beneficial to the fox!
I would remind those who yearn for their bloodlust to be perpetuated that, in their day, so also were public executions, the burning of witches and ritual disembowelling to mention but a few of the highlights of our glorious heritage.
Surely, even by the abysmal standards of these people, we can survive without this organised slaughter?
The fox population, like all of nature, will regulate its numbers without the revolting charade of killers attempting to justify their disgusting acts.
And before ‘name and address supplied’ asks, I was born and lived most of my life in the country; I know that it is unnecessary to rip animals to pieces to preserve the balance of nature.
Unless one is a sadistic, bloodlusting Barbarian, of course.
Bill Eames
69 Stoke Hills,
Farnham.
Calling up old comrades
Sir,— My regiment The Queens Royal Irish Hussars was formed by the amalgamation of The 4th Queens Own Hussars and The 8th Kings Royal Irish Hussars, in 1958.
Since then they have been on active duty in Aden, Persian Gulf, Malaya, Borneo, Northern Ireland, and Operation Desert Storm in the Gulf.
Each year old comrades gather in London for a reunion dinner.
There are, however, a lot of old soldiers who cannot attend but who would welcome the chance to meet their old comrades.
Would any ex-members of the Queens Royal Irish Hussars, 8th Kings Royal Irish Hussars, or 4th Queens Own Hussars, who are interested in forming a home counties branch of the regimental association, like to contact me at the address below?
Bill Stewart ,
14 New Road,
Minster,
Sheppey,
Kent ME12 3PX
Sorry, but…
Sir,— I have been puzzling over the purpose of P. Cowan's ‘Democracy’ letter.
Was it intended to illustrate the inferiority of the Third World illiterates who featured in his anecdote on corrupt voting practices?
Were his readers meant to conclude that the corrupt strategy of the Somali policeman was quite acceptable because he thereby produced the ‘correct’ election result?
Or was the whole episode simply an  occasion for our own informed superior merriment?
Perhaps Mr. Cowan should resume his more normal incessant political instruction on those matters that puzzle the lesser members of our own contemporary society, who are obviously deemed to lack any ability to think for themselves.
L.L. Adams
Flat 22,
Shaftesbury Court,
Forest Road,
Bordon.
Compulsory voting: it's a non-starter
Sir,— There is a small but growing voice to be heard expressing the desire for the introduction of the Australian system of making it compulsory for people to vote in political elections.
To introduce such a law in Britain would be ridiculous and would be another part of our personal freedom taken away.
Firstly, under our present system of confidentiality it is impossible to force someone to vote.
You can compel them to go to the polling station and even to put an official election slip into the ballot box but that slip could be blank or spoiled, so what would be achieved?
The answer is, of course, nothing.
There will always be a percentage of people who do not vote for various reasons.
Some say it is an irresponsible attitude but isn't it more irresponsible to use a vote just because the law commands it?
In my opinion it would be better to let sleeping dogs lie as there would be no mileage to be gained from such move.
Better that political parties adopt policies that would encourage people to vote.
Winston Burrows
Coppice Close,
Weybourne.
We must share the guilt of animal cruelty
Sir,— I was sad to read the letter from your correspondent complaining about the hard-hitting anti-fox hunting poster.
Children are subjected every day to newspaper and television news bulletins revealing the brutality and ugliness of the world and no matter how hard we try we could never successfully protect our young from the harsh reality of our violent world.
She talks about ‘innocent people’ being dragged in and therefore completely misses the point about hunting with hounds.
It is legal in Britain to inflict the indefensible cruelty of hounding defenceless animals to death and therefore the terrible stain of this brutality is on all our hands.
We have a moral duty to demand that this savagery is outlawed and until we succeed we are all guilty of allowing it.
Louise Middledorp
256 Darnley Street,
Pollockshields,
Glasgow.
Canal recreation and ecology
ABOUT STRIKING A BALANCE
Sir,— What a peculiar letter from Mr. Holford of Churt, about the Basingstoke Canal.
From his wording, it would appear he has picked up these rumours secondhand from somewhere.
But would it not have been sensible to go and see for himself, before rushing off a wholly inaccurate letter?
I live only  half a mile from the canal, and visit those parts of it nearby regularly.
Last August I walked the entire towpath from Greywell to New Haw, and can report it is in good condition throughout, is very well used except in the most rural parts, and is maintained regularly by the canal authority.
The canal did have an ‘official opening’ last May, but it did not stay open for long.
Shortly after, the Sheerwater section, which has a history of troubles, began leaking, and the canal below St. Johns had to be closed for the rest of the summer.
In August the navigation had to be closed at Ash Lock, in order to conserve water in the Hampshire pound.
It is well known that this canal always had water shortages, even before modern water extraction diverted part of its natural supply at Greywell, and thousands of thirsty trees grew up on its banks on what had been open country in 1790.
Additional supplies of water are being actively sought, but the simple truth is that the Basingstoke Canal was never designed for the types and levels of boating some people dream of.
Locks have suffered some deterioration, but this seems to have been mainly a result of idealistic notions of when the canal would be fully operational.
Some of the locks were ready long before the canal which serves them, and were literally high and dry for a time.
Lock timber needs to be wet.
On the matter of boat traffic, Mr. Holford seems unaware that the Basingstoke Canal has the dual role of a recreational amenity and a nationally important nature conservation site.
Some of the ‘weeds’, as he calls them, are national rarities.
The unique plant community of this canal (94 wetland species recently recorded, higher than any other wetland in Britain), means that a balance must be struck between the need to conserve rare plants, and the desire by some people to use motor cruisers on it.
Motor cruisers are the one type of recreational use which is harmful to wetland wildlife.
This is established beyond doubt, as a result of years of scientific study.
Motorised boats harm the ecology of waterways, unless use is kept at a low level, when there are some benefits.
The problem is to seek the correct balance, and to this end monitoring and studies have been in progress since 1989.
Some realistic guidelines are beginning to emerge, but further work is needed this year.
Boat traffic is low in Surrey because much of the canal there has been closed, and there have been further restrictions due to water conservation.
In Hampshire it is possible that boat traffic is too high at 1991 levels.
Boat traffic needs to be kept at modest levels in order to protect one of Britain's most outstanding botanical treasures.
Chris Hall
30 Florence Road,
Fleet.
Chief Whip's letter on John Browne ‘disgraceful’
Sir,— It is hard to imagine that the Chief Whip of the Conservative Party could ever write such a disgraceful letter to the national media (March 13th).
The vicious tone does him no credit whatsoever and in fact only serves to tarnish the image of the party.
It also confirms, if ever there was a question, that this serves to illustrate the injustice done to our Member.
Furthermore, it is in my view, that in writing this letter, the Chief Whip seriously abuses the power of his office when he actively tries to influence the electorate in Winchester and Alton.
I never thought that I would live to see such an important person write such a shameful letter, which is usually the behaviour of people in countries under dictatorship.
Douglas Covill
Ladycroft House,
Ladycroft,
Alresford.
•Major Covill is a New Alresford councillor.
— Editor.
Protection of byway status
Sir,— I write following an article concerning Dark Hollow and Sheet Common Way.
While I fully appreciate the concerns of the objectors at the recent public inquiry.
I wonder if they are aware of the protection that byway status confers on such a right of way.
Once a B.O.A.T., difficulties with vehicular use can be regulated by a traffic regulation order.
I have a suspicion that several objectors had more than the local interests at heart; those who have enclosed part of the lane and extended their gardens on to land over which the public have a right of passage.
Dave Tilbury ,
(Hampshire area rights of way representative, All-Wheel Drive Club),
Oakbank Cottage,
Oakbank Road,
Bishopstoke,
Nr.
Eastleigh.
Two-tier system of general practice clearly unfair
Sir,— I should like to say how much I agree with some of the sentiments expressed by Peter Cowan in your paper last week.
Outpatient appointments have need sorting out for many years.
 It would be nice, too, if patients had an obligation to keep their side of the bargain.
In my own practice the equivalent of two complete surgery sessions of people fail to turn up each week without letting us know.
This means that other people have to wait longer than necessary to see a doctor; if we could charge non-attenders, as dentists do, it would help.
However, improvements such as this could have been introduced without going wholesale into a market economy for health with its inevitable two-tier system for general practice.
The government claim that GP fund-holding has been a success.
Of course it has; for the seven percent of the population covered by the scheme.
However, it has definitely produced an unequal system, whatever Mr. Waldegrave, and Mrs. Bottomley might say.
It would be very difficult, if not downright negligent, for such a scheme to fail when it has been overloaded with money.
The seven percent of the first wave fund-holders was allocated £14.5 million to set up the administrative side of the scheme, but the remaining 93 percent were given a total of £19 million in the 1991 autumn statement.
Non-fundholders have to wait ten weeks in Guildford for an ultra-sound scan; fund-holders can have one within two weeks.
Non-fundholders wait ten months for some outpatient appointments, fundholders can bring the consultant to the surgery to see the patient within a couple of weeks; this of course helps to get a quicker place on the operation waiting list.
Fund-holders can spend any budget savings on things such as new equipment, extra rooms and extra staff.
Non-fundholders have to provide these facilities out of their own pockets.
The NHS was supposed to treat all equally but now it has become similar to the difference between first class and tourist class air travel.
We would all prefer to be in first, and becoming a fund-holder is a bit like a traveller being given the difference in the fare between the two classes.
Who would then opt to stay in ‘tourist’?
No wonder GPs are queueing up to join, even though a recent BMA survey, shows that a lot are doing so with misgivings.
The scheme has been a success for fund-holders' own patients, but detrimental to the rest.
The advantages that they are getting are admirable and important but reforms that only give these advantages to a select minority cannot be called fair.
We all pay the same towards the NHS; should we not get equal benefits?
It will take at least ten years before all general practices can join the fund-holding scheme.
This means ten years of persisting inequality.
In this country, quite rightly, people cannot be discriminated against on grounds of race, sex, or religion.
How strange, then, to bring in a scheme that disadvantages people in the basis of the status of their GP.
What a retrograde step!
A. R. Blackburn (Dr.)
Pinewood House,
Brook Road,
Wormley.
No, most people are not charged for prescriptions
Sir,— Both Mr. Newland and Mr. Chandler have referred to my earlier letter on prescription charge exemptions, when I pointed out that five out of six people do not pay for prescriptions.
Mr. Newland specifically asks me to reply.
Yes, five out of six people who take up prescriptions under the umbrella of the NHS are exempt from charges.
These include: children under 16, students under 19 in full time education, women aged 60 and over, men aged 65 and over, expectant mothers and those who have had a child within the past 12 months, whose on income support or family income supplement, war service pensioners and those suffering from a range of specified complaints.
The purpose is to exempt those who are on low incomes, pensioners and those who are suffering from ailments which require continual treatment.
In general, therefore, it can be said that those who are not exempt are those who require casual medication and can afford to pay the cost.
Peter Brewer
49 Ridgway Road,
Farnham.
‘Cataract op. care superb’
Sir,— In the present climate, with so many negative comments about the NHS, I feel I must record my great appreciation of the real care and attention I received at Frimley Park Hospital while undergoing a second cataract operation.
Moreover, the contract compared with the first operation some three years ago was most significant.
Then I had to wait some three  years , and the attitude in hospital and lack of administrative efficiency was unpleasantly conspicuous.
Phyliss Brown 
The Flat,
St. Austins,
Frensham.
‘What I want from the politicians!’
Sir,— Election time does not have to be like this, and it wouldn't be if politicians didn't behave like cocks, strutting their stuff!
They are patronising and they insult us by not understanding — and ignoring — the real requirements of our time.
I want to hear politicians talk about taxing the polluter, cutting energy, improving public transport, creating way for the disabled to travel easily and getting freight off the roads.
I want to hear them discuss how they will bring an end to all forms of intensive animal farming, ban bloodsports, end testing on animals, stop animals being used in circuses, ban imports of fur products and end this disgraceful trade.
I want to hear how politicians plan to remove all nuclear weapons now that we know from experience — following the Gulf War — that nuclear weapons are not a deterrent.
Julia Connor
Broad Oaks
Froxfield
Petersfield
Supermarket anxiety
Sir,— Thank you for publishing the letters of Mrs. Monica Brummell and Mrs. Rosemary Gomm, I fully agree with the contents of their letters.
I wish we at Homegreen House had been visited by a member of the council to explain what could happen if permission for a supermarket to be built is approved.
I remember when tennis premises extension plans were stopped by the National Trust.
I hope they will intervene again.
Helene Blee
36 Homegreen House
Wey Hill
Haslemere
Council's new management system
Sir,— As a quality assurance consultant specialising in local authorities and the construction industry.
I must agree with T. Hewitt that the timescale for the introduction of a BS5750 based quality management system as proposed by East Hampshire District Council is too long.
This is a common problem in large organisations especially when the wrong advice is given, or targets are not adequately defined.
Most of my clients, who have turnovers of between £1m and £40m pa, are able to register within 6–9 months of the date of the first meeting have an initial consultancy period of 16 weeks (most clients are subsidised by DTI).
A local authority should be able to register within 12 months of starting.
K.A.
Atherton,
Woodsett,
Glen Road,
Beacon Hill
Those blind eyes to animal cruelty
Sir,— The person who wrote the letter headed ‘Ugly anti-hunt shock tactics’ should be directing their disgust towards those people who inflict these atrocities on defenceless foxes and call it ‘sport’, and not those who seek to expose it (people who, I might add, have witnessed the animal suffering).
The ‘common low level’ lies in those people who acquiesce in this shameful pastime and, tut-tutting at the evidence of the cruelty, ‘pass by on the other side’.
Daphne Birkby
23 Bolle Road,
Alton.
Twyford Down scheme disgust
Sir,— When Malcolm Rifkind was made Minister of Transport I wrote a letter to him congratulating him on his appointment, expressing the hope that he would be a success in his job and asking him to instruct his Civil Servants to concentrate their efforts more on the railways of this country rather than on the roads.
I expressed my belief that the Department of Transport, as a whole, were keener on road construction than on improving the railways.
I also asked him to look at the Twyford Down plan with a view to having a tunnel under the Down rather than a cutting.
I offered to supply him with a list of Italian engineers and companies with specialised knowledge in the construction of tunnels through hills.
I know Italian roads well.
Mr. Rifkind did not reply to my letter although I addressed it to him personally at the House of Commons…
Doubtless electors will show the disgust and disapproval of this present scheme through their ballot paper.
R. Maitland Earl
Little Orchard,
Bentworth
The horrors of hunting highlighted
Sir,— In reply to the letter headed Ugly anti-hunt shock tactics, may I say that the aim of the Surrey Wildlife Protection Group is to enlighten the public to the true facts, by displaying posters and handing out leaflets.
I certain people do not like what they see they can always walk away.
We intend to continue out campaign until every adult and all children have learnt the horrors of hunting.
I have no doubt that the hunting fraternity will continue their campaign by trying to indoctrinate children from any early age through the guise of the Pony Club.
Sylvia Durant
Secretary, of the Surrey Wildlife Protection Group,
The Retreat,
Green Dene,
Honeysuckle Bottom,
East Horsley,
Surrey KT24 5RE
What's being done, for our disabled?
— CANDIDATES ASKED
Sir,— The following is an open letter to the general election candidates.
A lot of people would welcome statements from each of them:
I have listened in vain to hear anyone, in any political party, who has been courageous enough to face up to the crisis in the social services.
The recession, education, health, taxation, etc. are all being hotly debated, but nobody mentions the problems being experienced by social services, so vital to disadvantaged people, the chronically sick and disabled people, and the mighty army of the elderly.
I therefore challenge candidates of all parties to state clearly and publicly where they stand on the chronic and continuous underfunding of a service which is increasingly being asked to undertake more and more duties.
Pompous people are very quick to lay blame on the social services when things go wrong, but why does it happen?
It is the Cinderella service because it mainly deals with powerless people.
Please candidates, do not deafen us with meaningless statistics about global sums and ‘improvements in real terms’— they are political jargon for covering up the truth.
Those of us on the receiving end know that there is a real financial crisis.
How are you going to ensure that Care in the Community is not just a pipe dream?
Some of know that it is not working now, and will never work unless some government really faces up to the reality of the cost involved.
Those of us in the disabled world are weary of words without action.
We have seen the removal of former care facilities.
Our unofficial carers are tired from unrelieved caring.
WE have seen the imposition of charges from so called care groups and the imposition of VAT on private care charges.
We have watched the drying up of provision of aids and equipment.
The abolition of the old 75 percent grant system for adaptations to privately owned homes has been replaced by the bureaucratic nightmare on the new system which has dramatically decimated the number of grants made to  enable us to live in our own homes.
We have seen mass employers getting awards for schemes for employing disabled people, when they operate in premises which are completely inaccessible.
The traditional, massive unemployment of employable disabled people is far worse than it has ever been.
We still have to travel in guards vans like parcels, and are denied mobility in most forms of transport.
Every tiny improvement has to be fiercely fought for in the fields of housing, education and social pleasure.
We still have to wait months for payment of vitally important benefits such as the attendance allowance.
The former chairman of the Independent Appeals Tribunal said to me recently ‘I wonder why it is that no benefit starts from the premises ‘What can we do to help?’ but always seems to be ‘How can we stop the bastards getting away with it?'’— coarse, but true!
This list, by no means complete, is an indictment of a careless society.
Please can we have some honest answers which really address the true situation?
Peter Stock,
Chairman,
Disabled Citizen's Advice and Support Service,
Wilfrid Noyce Centre,
Crown Court Car Park,
Godalming,
Surrey GU7 1DY.
Village concern over housing requirements
REFUSE, footpaths and housing — or lack of it — formed the main topics for discussion at last week's meeting of Medstead Parish Council.
Tony Chivers reported that a number of villagers had volunteered to be footpath representatives and had been allocated two paths each, which they had agreed to walk at least twice a year.
Concern was again expressed about the proliferation of horses in the countryside.
Chairman Bob Kimber felt that it was important to try to keep the animals off the roads, perhaps by reclassifying some footpaths as bridleways.
Damage to BOATS (Bridleways open to All Traffic) by four-wheel drive vehicles and by the unlawful parking of mobile homes, also had an airing.
Mr. Kimber said the parish councils were now recommended to hold a contingency fund within their budget to deal with such problems.
The legal fees involved in removing a caravan, for example, could be crippling, he said.
Nuisance caused by travellers could escalate in Hampshire, according to the chairman, with an overspill from Wiltshire ‘who seem to have solved the problem of itinerants’.
Certainly Medstead appeared to attract ‘its fair share’.
There was, reported clerk Bob Park, a family living in a caravan parked in a layby on Trinity Hall.
East Hampshire district and Hampshire County Councils were aware of this family, who were waiting for a house to become available.
Trinity Hill
The use of the layby, however, gave concern and councillors suggested looking at the possibility of filling in the laybys along Trinity Hill to prevent further incidents.
£
It was suggested that the caravan dwellers might be hoping for a house on the new Greenstiles development, but Medstead housing group chairman, David Winter, felt it unlikely.
The Hyde Housing Association, responsible for the site, had already drawn up a list of people ‘with strong connections with Medstead — basically those who had been resident in the village for over five years, or former residents who had moved away and wished to return,’ said Mr. Winter.
It was hoped that the Greenstiles development would be ready for an official opening in May.
Interest was also expressed over another site in the village, adjacent to the school, which East Hampshire District Council were said to be looking at with a view to a second affordable housing development.
Mr. Kimber thought that, at this stage, this was ‘merely a feasibility study’.
The coming of the wheelie bin was another source of consternation.
The feeling of some councillors was that the accompanying contract was somewhat ‘one-sided’.
The chairman pointed out that ‘nobody is obliged to accept the contract but, if you don't, they you will have to take your own rubbish to the tip in Alton.’
The sliding scale for the disposal of large items was also thought to be unreasonable.
‘It is discriminatory against those without cars,’ pointed out Mr. Kimber, who supported district council officer Robin Truscott's view that stiff charges could lead to the countryside becoming ‘a litter tip’.
Sports council
On a lighter note, the discussion turned to matters of sport, including the official opening of the refurbished pavilion, to coincide with the Alton Sports Council Cavalcade of Sport on June 14th.
The council also considered the agreement to award a donation of £9 towards the setting-up of a new Neighbourhood Watch Scheme, to take in the whole of Paice Lane.
The grant covered the cost of hiring the village hall for an inaugural meeting, headed by local Pc John Pullen.
It was agreed to leave the co-option of a new councillor for discussion during the annual parish meeting to be held at the village hall on Tuesday, April 28th beginning at 8 p.m.
The speaker for the evening will be recreation manager for East Hampshire District Council Chris Young.
A NEW HQ FOR THE ARCHITECTS
THE president of the Royal Institute of British Architects, Richard MacCormac, officially opened the new headquarters of the southern region of the institute at Upper Farringdon yesterday (Thursday).
The red brick and terracotta building was constructed by the vicar, the Rev. Thomas Massey, over a period of 30 years from 1881.
In 1925 it became used partly as the school and partly as the village hall.
The school closed in 1987 and it is this part, together with the old playground and grassed area, which the RIBA have purchased and converted into offices.
Architects for the conversion were Cecil Denny Highton and Partners and the work was carried out in two phases, the contractors for the first being Newman and Kerry of Aldershot, and J. Edwards and Sons of Waterlooville for the second.
The second phase included the construction of a mezzanine floor in the old school hall to be used as a conference room, with two offices under, making five altogether.
The west wing of two large offices, toilet and kitchenette, not presently required by the RIBA, is being leased to a local company.
The regional council voted to purchase Massey's Folly to escape the ‘rental spiral’ in Winchester and the problems of traffic and parking.
It is intended to create a centre for the public seeking the services of architects and for members of the RIBA to hold meetings in their own premises and for large events to use the village hall facilities next door.
Regional chairman Andy Pottinger said: ‘The new headquarters will give a permanent base for the RIBA to market architects’ services to clients and will provide a meeting place for all interested in the built environment.’
Beavers help Promise Appeal
THE 3rd Alton beavers, the youngest section of the scout group based at the Den, Chawton Park Road, spent a recent weekly meeting at Rotherfield Park, the home of Sir James and Lady Scott.
In the walled gardens, guided by resident gardeners Amanda and Paul O'Carroll, they planted seeds for projects to be worked on later this year, and two cherry trees.
The trees, they hope, will be the first of many which will benefit the Promise Appeal — an effort by the scouting movement to raise £10 million this year.
The 3rd Alton are currently also working on another appeal, born out of their strong links with scouts in St. Petersburg, Russia.
At present, there are about 2,000 boys spread through approximately 20 groups in the city, but ten of those groups have insufficient equipment to function properly.
The Alton group are collecting equipment for them, and welcome donations in cash or kind to help.
A volunteer translator would be particularly welcome.
Further information about the appeal from Terry Roberts on Alton 86675.
Planting one of their cherry trees at Rotherfield Park are the 3rd Alton Beavers, pictured with leader Guy Bagshaw
Probation for roads ‘menace’
A KINGSLEY man, branded ‘a pest and a danger to everyone’ has been put on probation for two years.
Twenty-six-year-old Phillip Ironside, of Schoolfields, appeared before Alton magistrates on Monday.
He had pleaded guilty to two offences of driving while disqualified and two matters of no insurance.
The court heard that Ironside had been banned from the roads for two years in May 1990 and for the same period in February 1991.
Both sentences were in respect of disqualified driving offences.
But in January this year, Ironside was caught driving a Renault 14 car at Milford.
And some four weeks later was again caught in the same car at Kingsley.
On this occasion he ran off across the field, but was later arrested.
His solicitor Bob Emuss said that the defendant, who until February had been living in Surrey, had wanted to move to the Kingsley area.
When he was caught driving in January, Ironside claimed that he had been on his way to look at the possibilities of a council house exchange.
The second offence came to light when Ironside drove to a local shop to buy food.
Mr. Emuss admitted: ‘Ironside has an appalling record of driving.
He is a pest and danger to everyone.’
In addition to the two-year probation order, Ironside was banned from driving for a further two years.
Concern over hospitals
BORDON should have its long-awaited ambulance station within three to four years.
But Whitehill town councillor John Bennett is pointing out that, even when this happens, local people will still face a long drive to the nearest casualty unit.
‘The nearest hospitals are at Guildford, Basingstoke, Cosham, Frimley Park and Aldershot — an average distance of 30 miles,’ he said this week.
Building an ambulance station would only improve the time the ambulance took to reach the emergency.
‘What about the added tome to the nearest hospital which is just as important?’
Mr. Bennett is calling for an investigation into the whole subject of emergency cover for East Hampshire district.
‘While I support the building of am ambulance station at Whitehill, I feel that urgent consideration must be given to an emergency unit close by,’ he said.
So Mr. Bennett is asking local health authorities to look into provision at either Bordon, Alton or Petersfield's new hospitals.
Best in store
THE Petersfield branch of Boots has selected Olive Eves for the Boots Customer Service Award.
She has been voted the best assistant in the store by her colleagues, and goes on to the next leg of the competition, the district semi-finals on April 10th.
Office ransacked
BURGLARS ransacked the Opax  Farm office in Spatts Lane, Headley, on Monday night.
As yet the only items known to have been stolen are two radios.
The diary
PUBLIC SPEAKERS COME SECOND
THE Senior team from Churcher's College in Petersfield came second in the district final of the Rotary Club's Youth Speaks competition on Friday at Southampton University.
Speaking on the theme of ‘Where has all the magic gone?’ the team — Caroline Pollington, James Nicholls and Daniel Ogus — did well to get ahead of opposition from Southampton, Portsmouth and Bournemouth.
But they met their match in Ryde School from the Isle of Wight, who pipped them for victory.
The Churcher's team prize as runners-up was £35.
PAINT THE ENVIRONMENT
SCHOOLS around Petersfield have been invited to contribute to a mural competition to decorate the panels around the Tilmore Walk scheme.
The district council's latest move is related to Environment Week due to start on May 11th, when the murals should be completed.
The best mural patterns will be awarded cash prizes from the district and Petersfield Town Council.
They will also supply a panel to each school; paint is being provided by Prudential, developers of the project.
The object is to design and create a mural panel with the theme of the environment and methods of conservation.
The competition is divided into two age groups, six-eleven and 12–16.
Entries will be judged not on technical points but on the use of colour, space and understanding of the environmental theme.
The decorations will remain on the boards until completion of the town centre scheme.
CHOIR SHAPE UP
BORDON'S new and as yet unnamed choir are looking forward to an illustrious future.
They recently held their first practice session  at Barbados House, which turned out to be a rousing occasion.
The founder of the choir, Donald Carter, has announced a further practice session at the same venue on Tuesday, starting at 7.30 p.m.
WALK THE DOG FOR CHARITY
STEEP, Stroud and Petersfield Show are holding a Butser Trail sponsored dog walk in aid of the new Petersfield Hospital and the International League for the Protection of Horses.
The event starts at 11.15 a.m. on May 3rd but participants should arrive at 11 o'clock to prepare for the three-mile trail.
All dogs should be kept on a lead and walkers without dogs are still welcome.
All who finish will be given free entry to the show on July 26th.
The organisers ask that cars should be parked on the Butser Hill side of the A3 within the Queen Elizabeth Country Park.
A NEW BRANCH FOR AMNESTY?
ANYONE interested in forming a Petersfield group of Amnesty International is invited to attend a meeting in the Exhibition Room of the County Library in The Square on Tuesday at 7.30 p.m.
The regional representative of Amnesty International, Peter Mills, will speak about and answer questions on the organisation and the work carried out by local groups.
This will be followed by a discussion on the next steps to be taken.
More information is available from Brenda Pullen or Louise Banks.
ADVICE ON TRANQUILLISER ADDICTION
GUILDFORD Counselling Centre — part of the Surrey Alcohol and Drug Advisory Service — are manning a stand at the Friary Centre, Guildford on Monday.
The theme will be tranquilliser addiction and the many problems experienced by those affected and those recovering from this addiction.
The stand will be open all day to provide friendly and informal information, and a selection of relevant literature will be available.
Tranquilliser addiction, unlike alcohol and illegal drug addiction, is a prescribed problem which cause long term distress instead of the desired short term cure.
It results from the attempt to provide relief from psychiatric illnesses and has only recently begun to be recognised.
The Tranquilliser Support Group are on 0483 579313.
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
THE Hampshire branch of the British Retinitis Pigmentosa Society will be holding their annual general meeting on May 9th at Holy Trinity Church Hall, Upper Brook Street, Winchester, starting at 10.30 a.m.
FOCUS ON THE WEY
ALTON'S River Wey may be featured on BBC TV South this week as part of a series showing the effect on wildlife of the lowering water table.
A camera team were filming at Flood Meadows on Tuesday when presenter Paul Clifford interviewed Susan Bellamy of the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Naturalists Trust.
The Wey springs have failed in Alton this year leaving the river bed bone dry, the frogs still return.
The springs normally rise in January and February.
‘But we haven't had enough rain to replenish the water table which is itself in drought,’ pointed out Susan.
She fears for the future of the river's wildlife.
NEW HOSPITAL CHIEF EXECUTIVE
A NEW chief executive has been appointed for the King Edward VII Hospital at Midhurst.
Paul Benson, who is aged 39, will take over from John Goldsworthy at the 175-bed hospital, which is now one of the largest West Sussex employers with a staff of some 500 people.
Having worked in both the NHS and in independent healthcare management, Mr. Benson was recently based in London as director of human resources for BUPA Health Services.
Mr. Benson, who is married with a two-year-old son, lives near Havant and will take up his post at the end of April.
SPONSOR ANDREW
LISS teenager Andrew Brewster is hoping to raise £1,000 for Guide Dogs for the Blind when he walks from Alton to Kingsley and back on April 1st.
Andrew, aged 18, is a student at Andover and Basingstoke Training Ltd., and can be contacted for sponsorship on Alton 80472.
EMBROIDERERS HOST FESTIVAL
THE Petersfield branch of the Embroiderers Guild are hosts of this year's south west region festival.
Embroiderer and writer Beryl Dean will be speaking on Present Day Ecclesiastic Embroidery.
Pam Watts complements the all-day agenda with Machine Embroidery in the Home.
Trade stands and demonstrations will be open during the lunch hour.
The Town Mayor of Petersfield, Eric Goffe, will open the proceedings at the Petersfield Festival Hall tomorrow.
VAL'S THE BEST
STAFF at Boots, Alton, have voted Val Fitzpatrick the best assistant in the store.
She will now go on to the next leg of the Boots Customer Service Award — the district semi-finals.
If she is victorious in the area stage of the contest, Mrs. Fitzpatrick will be among 18 finalists in with a shot of the 1992 title in June.
EXPLORING COUNTRY PARKS
QUEEN Elizabeth Country Park are presenting an all day lecture on the Attractions of East Hampshire.
The talk will explore the sights and features of country parks in the East Hampshire area.
The venue is the Park Centre this coming Sunday.
CHANCE FOR YOUNG SINGERS
THE Hampshire County Youth Choir were formed last October to give young people aged 15 to 20 years the opportunity to take part in a higher standard of choral singing than perhaps would be open to them at their schools or colleges.
The choir, funded by Hampshire County Council, proved their potential at their first concert in December and have now several other events planned including concerts in Southampton Guildhall and Winchester Cathedral.
Vacancies still exist for tenors and basses in particular and also there are a few spaces for contraltos.
Any young singers who would like further information can contact Keith Smith.
THEY'RE AFTER YOUR VOTE
VARIOUS political ‘big guns’ have appeared in the Winchester constituency to boost their party's candidates in the election campaign.
Liberal Democrat Tony Barron was given a boost by Lord (Roy) Jenkins at a meeting in Winchester on Tuesday last week.
His colleague from the East Hampshire constituency, the Hon. Susan Baring, was also at the meeting.
The following day, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd appeared in the city, endorsing Conservative candidate Gerald Malone.
And on Monday, the Winchester Tories were visited by Sir Leon Brittan, on a tour of the Wessex area.
But none of these party heavyweights have, so far, found their way down the road to Alton.
OPEN DAY AT THE CLINIC
THE Fairfields Clinic, owned by Alton GP Dr. Chris Everett, will be holding an open day tomorrow (Saturday) from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. to demonstrate the benefits of natural medicine.
Situated in Fairfields Road, Basingstoke the clinic attracts many patients from the Alton area.
Available are aromatherapy, medical hypnotherapy, vasectomy counselling and operations, reflexology and a menopause and HRT clinic.
Admission to the clinic open day is free — all welcome.
CAMPAIGN AGAINST HUNTING ENDS
WE hear that there was a big attendance at the first meeting of the new Basingstoke branch of the League Against Cruel Sports, when the League's information officer, Kevin Flack, told them: ‘I believe that most people are opposed to hunting but it has been recent antics of the Quorn Hunt and publicity from the MacNamara Bill that has convinced them that something has to be done to put an end to their activities.’
Area representative James Hampton said that the role of local support groups was vital is the League's work in putting pressure on politicians and publicising the nature of hunting was to continue.
‘We have a real chance in the lifetime of the next parliament to see  an end to the hunting of live animals with dogs for fun.’
Further information from Mr. Hampton.
CYCLING CLUB FORMED
A PETERSFIELD couple are planning to form a cycling club in Petersfield.
It is aimed at all ages and for every type of cyclist.
Ability will be taken into account when planning distance and duration of rides.
Day, evening and weekend trips are planned along with a programme of meetings with invited speakers to discuss areas of common interest especially the general  aspects of cycle safety.
Organisers Brian and Christine Johns are keen cyclists and are both members of the Cycle Tourist Club, the promoters of recreational cycling.
For more details ring Mr. Johns.
BOOST FOR AGE CONCERN
AGE Concern is the chosen charity of the chairman of East Hampshire District Council, Elsa Bulmer, during her year of office.
Petersfield Rugby Club are helping Mrs. Bulmer organise a May Ball as a fund-raising event, and it will take place in a specially erected marquee at Penns Place adjacent to the club on May 1st.
The evening will include a Bucks Fizz welcome, dinner, live big band, disco and cabaret.
Tickets are available from Julia Fry at East Hampshire District Council or from Elsa Bulmer.
CHURCHWARDEN ELECTED
BLACKMOOR has a new churchwarden — Chris Turner was elected at Sunday's Easter vestry meeting.
The annual parochial church meeting heard the latest report on the £30,000 appeal for restoring outside stonework on the church.
Just under £6,000 has been raised so far.
It is hoped that  work will start this year.
They are waiting to hear from English Heritage and are  also hoping for a grant from the East Hampshire District Council.
ART ON SHOW
EDWARDIAN Images, the watercolours of Hampshire artist Mertin Shape, go on show at Alton's Allen Gallery tomorrow (Saturday).
The exhibition, which continues until May 2nd, will illustrate the changes in the county's landscape over the last century.
Mr. Shape comes from Gosport, and the paintings are all from the town's museum.
The exhibition is open from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Tuesdays to Saturdays.
CYCLE SAFETY
CYCLE coding will take place at Alton police station on Sunday.
Anyone who wishes to have their bike security marked should pop along between 10 a.m. and 12 noon.
THAT'S STYLE
A CHARITY fashion show is being held on Wednesday evening at the Assembly Rooms, Alton.
Organised by the Alton Inner Wheel, it will feature clothes supplied by the fashion shop Experience, and starts at 7.30 p.m.
Verse comes first for laughtermaker Les
IT'S seeing the funny side that keeps Les Barker buoyant.
His amusing analysis of human frailty has made him one of the folk world's more unlikely heroes — a bard who takes the knocks but never shows the bruising.
He was at The Wine Garden, Alton, on Tuesday night and quickly tickled the chucklebuds with his sharp and sparkling verse.
Les, whose cultured scruffiness adds pathos to the pzazz, is a shrewd operator.
He's appeared at folk festivals all over the land and is in constant demand for club work.
He mixes humour with humility and anger with understanding, but never lets indulgence obscure the entertainment.
His homespun philosophy soon found favour at the Wine Garden, one of the newer and most welcome venues on the local folk circuit.
Les clearly liked the look of the place, took an immediate shine to the audience and launched himself into a neatly structured tirade on what makes tradition tick.
His main target was vanity, and how materialism has put a brake on the human race.
But Les, who was preceded in the Alton spotlight by Odiham duo Acoustic Bikini, is more than just a  humorist .
Top singers
He's a gifted songwriter whose tunes have been taken up by some of the country's top folk singers.
His adaptation of Oh Dear Oh is regularly featured on June Tabor's repertoire and Mike Harding, Bob Williamson and Vin Garbutt have been known to tip into the Barker songbag.
Fairport Convention have performed the eccentrically entertaining Quasi B. Goode, and Richard Digance and Fiona Simpson are among numerous other singers who've experimented with his work.
But at The Wine Garden, the menu featured verse and monologues, and the impish Les sauntered through the trials and tribulations of 20th century indiscretion in a mockingly disapproving manner.
The audience approved though, and fired by their enthusiasm, he loosened the reins and charged cheerfully into the murky world of speed, greed and what the nation reads.
Knife thrower
Not enough, it seems, indulge in the works of this mercurial Mancunian whose act is difficult to pigeonhole, but easy to enjoy.
He's written over 30 books, recorded five albums and won friends wherever he's appeared.
Not bad for an ex-accountant, whose role as a ‘professional idiot’ began back in 1975.
Perhaps his most inspired piece is the saga of Cosmo, the fairly accurate knife thrower, whose failure to see the point makes him the sharpest act in town.
And this from a man whose more serious moments have spawned a folk opera about the island of Lewis and tuneful contributions to charity cassettes.
For a genre that often takes itself too seriously, it's reassuring to know that Les's jokes remain his greatest joy.
He certainly gave the Alton  aficionados lots to laugh about.
Les Barker
•The next folk night at The Wine Garden is on April 14th, when Derek Brimstone will be in the spotlight.
CHURCH SERVICES
Friday Focus
Prayers and the election
DURING the furore of the next three weeks of General Election campaigning, for Christians perhaps a few reflections about the institution which is the House of Commons — and especially about the men and women who are sent there — would not come amiss.
A thought first for those who have decided to retire, many after a quarter of a century or more as members.
Whether or not they expected it when they were first elected, nearly all of them will have learned to accept ant to derive fulfilment from the ‘welfare’ function.
Relief there will be from the grind of the daily pile of constituency correspondence and the regular weekend surgeries.
For most, the tedium of weekly travel, the long sitting hours and the heartache of separation from normal family life may soon begin to fade from the memory.
But, for certain, the fellowship of the place, the friendships — many of them cross-party — will be things they will long miss and never forget.
We should give thanks for their work and pray for them.
Next a thought for those who will lose their seats.
That they are an essential part of any system of parliamentary democracy will be of limited consolation to them.
Most will hope to return to the House; and on part form many will do so, but the immediate problems of adjustment will be hard.
They, too, will deserve our prayers.
The greatest number will be those returning for their second, third, fourth or later terms.
For some promotion will engender a proper sense of pride and excitement; but a sense of humility and service will equally be called for.
For others there may be a lack of preferment and other problems of staleness and complacency.
There are endless variation.
But this group are the bedrock of the institution — and as such should figure prominently in our prayers.
Finally, there will be the new Members.
Most will privately confess to an initial sense of utter bewilderment, but necessity will drive them to adapt to their new way of life.
Almost before they realise it, they may even find themselves defending some of the more absurd parliamentary conventions.
Their families will also find life very different and testing.
In some ways this group may be in most need of our prayers, but the sense of freshness and opportunity pervades.
All these thoughts seem right and proper at this time but, when all is said and done, might not much of the above be applied to any institution?
The House of Commons may be the cradle of our  democracy — a little better understood perhaps now that its proceedings are televised.
But, however special, it is first and foremost a workplace — in just the same way as a factory, a hospital, or school.
In commending it to God, we should couple it with all the workplaces in our land.
A member of the congregation, St. John the Evangelist, Churt.
When a person goes up in smoke
THE DOCTOR
‘I STARTED smoking 40 cigarettes every day, but I don't finish 40.
I find them ‘dead’ in the ashtray or unlit between my fingers.
I just forget about them.
What a waste of money!’
This was Mr. Spiers speaking in my surgery.
I wondered if this happened to many other smokers.
Does it happen to you?
As an experienced 40-a-day man for 40 years, he was very interesting to talk to.
He had tried to give up and was going over the problems he'd come across and continued:
‘You need something to do with your hands — hold a pencil in one hand and a rubber in the other or grasp the car steering wheel with both and keep them there.
When hands are fully occupied, smoking is more difficult.
‘Resist the temptation to light up, especially in the mornings,’ he added.
‘I reckon that if I didn't have that cigarette first thing in the morning, I could last out and resist the rest of the day.
That's the crucial one.’
So, we discussed how to avoid that first one in the morning.
Finish the last packet of cigarettes the night before and not dash out to the off-license or garage before going to bed in order to stock up.
I hadn't bargained for the next difficulty: ‘It won't work,’ he commented, ‘because my son smokes and he'll take pity on me and give me one when I run out.’
‘Why not try to stop with a friend and add an element of competition to the task.
Perhaps a small bet on who can stop first?
Better still, stop with your son and you won't be able to feed each other fags in a crisis,’ I suggested.
‘As soon as you wake up pop a piece of nicotine chewing gum into your mouth and chew it slowly whilst you are getting dressed and shaving.
That will give you a boost of the drug to start the day without the nasties.’
Nicotine is incredibly addictive — at least as powerful as cocaine or heroin.
However, it won't kill you — unless you inject it into yourself and then it is more lethal than those other drugs.
Jean Nicot, the French ambassador to Portugal who sent tobacco seeds back to the French court in 1560, has a lot to answer for!
Nicotine gums are safer than smoking.
The real damage comes from the nasties — tars, chemicals and the irritant effects of the smoke itself which causes lung and heart disease.
Nicotine chewing gum can now be bought over the counter at the chemists.
Mr. Spiers hadn't realised that.
Chewing and sucking are comforting for the human being and the roots of this go right back into babyhood.
Hence the comfort from eating, sucking sweets or a pipe, and drawing on a cigarette.
Nicotine chewing gum helps in more than one way, I explained.
He thought these were helpful plans — something positive to get to grips with the habit and see an end to cash shortages in the housekeeping as money was siphoned off for another packet; no more sandpaper taste in the mouth; no clothes reeking of stale tobacco and an end to the shakes.
He didn't like the tremors that went with the addiction — the wavering match as he lit up again and spilling his tea during a work-break was embarrassing.
‘I'll start now,’ he vowed, suddenly making up his mind.
‘Tonight,’ I reminded him, ‘after that last packet.
But no more.
If you've none in the house you can't smoke them.
No time like the present and anyway it is the first day of Lent.’
He grinned.
I don't think he thought of that!
I'll keep you posted on his progress and the best of luck to you as you give up.
Going crazy for cash
TELEVISION South are determined to make this year's Telethon the best ever, despite the disappointment of losing its franchise.
And they're looking for your money-raising ideas to top the record £2 million raised in the south last time…and the zanier the ideas the better, say the organisers.
Telethon co-ordinator Margo Horsley said this week: ‘This is the last time TVS will be able to take part in Telethon, and there is tremendous enthusiasm at the station to make it the most exciting ever.
When the 27-hour non-stop TV spectacular was last staged in 1990, the Hampshire people proved as dotty as anyone in the bizarre ways they raised cash for the needy in the local community.
•Dozens of railway enthusiasts pulled a steam train along a 100-yard stretch of the Watercress Line at Ropley and raised £400 in sponsorship.
•Four Petersfield drummers kept up a ten-hour drum-a-thon and raised £200.
•Over-70s at an elderly day centre at Portsmouth raised £150 with a sponsored sing-a-long.
Said TVS presenter Fern Britton, who will be hosting the show, with Fred Dinenage: ‘The things people do to raise money never cease to amaze me.
But it doesn't have to be something crazy.
‘We are delighted if someone just goes around their office rattling a collecting tin, though obviously the dafter the idea, the more fun the whole thing becomes.’
Telethon 92 takes place across on the weekend of July 18th/19th.
Although the event is still four months away, Fern says now is the time to start thinking up ideas and settling up events.
An information pack giving hundreds of money-raising suggestions and advice on how to stage events is available free from TVS.
To obtain one, ring the Telethon Hotline on 0891 666677 (charged at 39 pence a minute peak-time and 26 pence off-peak) and simply leave your name and address.
Generous Guild
ALTON Townswomen's Guild handed over charity cheques at the annual general meeting.
Jean Goodwin presented a £300 cheque to Dr. Bathall for Cardiac Support Group, and Heather Trimming presented a cheque for the same amount to Mrs. Todd for the Alton branch of Sight Concern Hampshire.
One of the main fund-raising events of the year had been the charity concert staged by the guild's drama and choir groups.
Another successful project had been their support of the National Woodland Trust Appeal, which had raised over £400.
Members had organised sponsored walks, lunches and other events to raise the money and had planted an oak tree at Kings Pond to mark the achievement, and recognition of their 25th birthday.
The group are looking forward to participating in the federation arts and craft event at the Assembly Rooms, Alton on April 11th.
Chess
No. 675 by D.J.
McCue
BLACK (Yilmaz)
WHITE (Davies)
IN the European Team Championship, Haifa 1989, Wales scored a victory over Turkey in this position.
Black cannot defend the threat of Q-Kt7 mate but has an immediate win by pressing home his own attack.
1.
Q-Kt7ch!
RxQ 2.
Kt-R6 mate.
Taking Liphook into the next century
THE people of Liphook have a golden opportunity to plan the future of the village for the 21st century, said parish council chairman Michael Croucher at the annual parish meeting.
‘Don't let it slip away, make certain your thoughts are known, visit the exhibition in the library and then write to East Hampshire District Council and tell them what you think…‘
Mr. Croucher was giving his chairman's report at Monday's meeting in the Church Centre.
He said the parish was already searching for premises large enough to house its office and the CAB.
The site must be central, easily accessible and close to parking facilities.
The present accommodation at Bohunt is cramped and does not afford sufficient privacy.
Giving a brief resumé of the year he paid tribute to the help the parish council had received from retired members.
The parish, he said, is a very nice place to live and this is reflected in the general environment, shops and the number of organisations which cater for everyone.
‘We owe a debt of gratitude to everyone who is actively involved in promoting village life.’
Elected only ten months ago, the current council had made several changes.
They had renamed the footpaths and bridleways committee the ‘Open Spaces’ to give a broader view of their work.
They had defined the activities and work committees, carried out a financial review and reorganisation of staff at Radford Park and the recreation ground.
The building of the bypass and a grant of land meant ground was now available for allotments and a new committee had been set up.
Parish and committees now meet on Mondays and council meetings are held in the Peak Centre.
‘We are,’ he said, ‘an open parish council.
Please come and see what we do and bring us any problem you feel we can solve.’
The bypass is progressing well and is scheduled to open in July with a parish celebration on July 19th.
After the bypass completion the parish would be looking forward to the de-trunking of the A3 which would become a B road.
At last the parish would have some say in lighting and maintenance.
There would also be an opportunity to enhance the Square.
Devolution, either from county or district, would mean more local information and reporting back to the relevant authorities by the parish clerk and her assistant.
It was important to remember the parish office was the first point of contact; it had the advantage of local knowledge and should be used.
He concluded by thanking vice-chairman Tony Rudgard who has produced the useful monthly newsletter for parish councillors.
Explaining that the parish precept had risen to 8 percent less than the 11–1/2 percent predicted for many other councils, David Clark, finance and general purposes chairman, was questioned by Col. John Dabson.
Col. Dabson wanted to know why so much money was to be spent on open spaces such as Radford Park and the recreation ground.
‘It is more than Alton, Petersfield and Whitehill, all towns.
It is out of all proportion,’ he said.
Mr. Clark said that the figures included costs of administration and rates on those places.
This was something not taken into account under the same heading by the other places mentioned by the Colonel.
‘Our terms are cost effective and most honest,’ he said.
Betsy Wilson asked if a breakdown of the figures could be given in community magazine so that people would know what was happening to their money.
Mr. Clark said this was being done.
High standards
A member of the public asked why Liphook had the second highest precept.
Mr. Croucher said there was a need to build up funds for premises, which towns such as Alton already had.
With devolution there would be a need to provide more services one provided by East Hampshire.
Simon Coyte listed the grounds that came under the umbrella of his committee — Radford Park, recreation ground, land at Fletchers Field and the Peak Centre, Ontario football ground and the Bramshott triangle.
‘We are pleased with the state of our grounds and proud that many visiting clubs have felt they were of a very high standard.’
He reported that £1,000 had been set aside for proper surfacing of paths at Radford Park.
Pat Clark, chairman of the new allotments committee, was asked about facilities at the site.
She said that water and car parking were available.
Questioned about charges and the need for allotments, she said that a fair charge would be made as to many people wanted an allotment, the waiting list might now have to be closed.
Adrian Bird, chairman of the Open Spaces, reported his was the largest of the committees, among whose members were councillors, walkers and riders.
Each undertook to cover paths and bridleways in the area and to report back on their state.
Problems on some paths take time to resolve, he said, and cited RUPP 45 as an example.
The committee were trying to complete the links in the Routes for Riders plan at Liphook Golf Club and Passfield Common.
There were several contentious rights of way matters still outstanding, some of which were linked to the bypass.
In planning terms, Liphook plays quite an important part on the district map, said chairman Mr. Croucher.
The Local Plan inquiry had been taking place and the village had made a large input thanks to help from Rear Admiral Charles Weston and Christine Darter, who had devoted time and effort in presenting the parish point of view on many matters.
The result is due in the summer.
Low cost housing
Affordable housing for families had become a priority.
The parish have two sited for such schemes.
Downland Housing Association are building at the Larch Cottage site, Portsmouth Road, while the second site is at Lynchborough Road, Passfield.
‘These low cost housing schemes are for local people and the children of local people.
Make certain this is known and make enquiries and applications now to East Hampshire District Council,’ urged Mr. Croucher.
Dealing with the petrol station site on the bypass at Griggs Green, he said councillors make site visits.
‘I think the developers are making valiant attempts to minimise the impact and are trying to preserve the areas of special interests.’
He was pleased to report that the car park in Station Road was complete.
‘It is a good additional facility to the area and will put new life into the village.’
Mrs. Wilson, on behalf of the district council, spoke of the tremendous working relationship between the parish and district council.
She explained that the three parish representatives had its interest at heart at meetings.
They were particularly careful of all planning and environmental issues.
She, too, was delighted that the Station Road car park was now complete because it would now relieve what had been a shopper parking problem.
People were using the bottle and litter banks and it was a pity they were often left in need of emptying.
The Saturday morning sport Outreach scheme was successful and Mrs. Wilson hoped that the first of the affordable homes would be completed by August.
Rosemary's legacy of care
LE COURT HEAD RETIRES
ROSEMARY Jarrett retired on Friday after 19 years as head of care at Le Court.
She and her husband Dennis will be going to Newcastle where they have relatives.
At a farewell luncheon, management committee chairman Eric Langley spoke of her dedication, knowledge, efficiency, sound judgement, firmness, imagination and sense of humour.
He recalled how she had given a great deal of help to the group of residents who in 1981 formed Project ‘81 — now the Hampshire Centre for Independent Living — which developed a structure to enable disabled people to leave residential care and live in the community.
‘Seventeen residents, as a result of her efforts, are now able to live in the community.’
Mrs. Jarrett had also contributed to the Le Court admissions policy document which was written in 1978 and is used as a guideline to ensure that the ethos of the home is retained.
Mr. Langley said it was ‘subject very dear to her heart’ and in use today.
Mrs. Jarrett was leaving them with a legacy.
Presenting her with gifts including an art deco clock and a cheque, he thanked her and her husband, a former chairman of the residents' association, for all they had done for Le Court.
Mrs. Jarrett, whose hobbies include china collecting, Scrabble, reading and ‘a little bingo’, spoke of the very many people who had helped and supported her over the years.
‘You made my work here very much easier.’
She likened Le Court to a village with many different facets and different groups of people.
‘If one little bit was missing, Le Court would not get like it does.’
Mrs. Jarrett thanked all who had helped her and all who had worked or lived at Le Court during her years there.
The many guests included those who lived and worked there along with a number of former staff and residents, representatives from the Leonard Cheshire Foundation, the statutory authorities and members of the management committee and support groups.
Group Captain Lord Cheshire, who had been unable to be present, had sent a telegram.
And, guests were told, Mrs. Jarrett's first pension cheque had been received that very morning!
She told the Herald that she would miss Le Court and probably be homesick for a little while but she wanted to spend more time with her husband and family.
‘It's the third stage of my life to get on with.’
Most of all, Mrs. Jarrett will miss the people.
And they will just as certainly miss her.
Publicity officer Frances Hopwood told the Herald: ‘It would be a difficult task trying to report on the many aspects of Le Court which have benefited from her influence and forward thinking during these 19 years but it is thanks to her that Le Court has evolved to be the ‘flagship of the Leonard Cheshire Foundation’.’
Over the years Mrs. Jarrett had seen many changes, not only in the staff and resident body of the home and in the facilities it now provides, but in government legislation within the various departments of health and social security, with whom she had established for Le Court a strong and trusting relationship.
After their marriage in 1984, Mrs. Jarrett and her husband, one of the residents, lived in a bungalow on the premises.
Mrs. Jarrett was presented with a selection of compact discs.
The new head of care is Jennifer Arthur, one of the trained staff, who takes up her appointment on Monday.
Rosemary Jarrett (third left) shakes hands with her successor as Le Court head of care, Jennifer Arthur.
Dennis Jarrett is right and Kathy Vowles, chairman of the residents' association, is left.
Eric Langley, chairman of the management committee, is second left and on the right is Roger Southerst, head of home.
FUN AND FRIENDSHIP
for under fives
THE under fives of Liphook have an opportunity to develop confidence and  fulfil their potential at an early age thanks to three afternoon pre-school groups.
Under the auspices of the Pre-school Group for Parents and Children, the children and their parents enjoy a variety of activities one afternoon a week at Liphook Infant School.
This Hampshire county Council funded family group is for three-year-olds, their parents or carers and any brothers and sisters under school age.
They meet in the school hall on Tuesday afternoons from 1.40 p.m. until 3.10 p.m. and the group is run by two mothers — both experienced teachers — Diane Danes and Carol Tubbs.
Sessions begin with the children taking the initiative and deciding what toys or activity they want and parents are invited to join in such things as organising the dolls' house, making sand pies, playing with trains, building houses, mixing paints and cutting up paper.
It is an ideal opportunity to play constructively together and a useful way for everyone to make new friends.
Playing is only a part of the session.
Children learn nursery rhymes, use the school's playground and listen to stories while parents chat and discuss children's problems.
The group have been so successful that Diane and Carol have a waiting list.
Diane and Carol also run a pre-school contact group for four-year olds and their parents, which excludes younger brothers and sisters, on four Friday afternoons each term from 1.40 p.m. until 3.10 p.m.
The emphasis is again on a parent-child partnership and sessions tend to have a special theme.
These have included discipline, road safety and dental health.
Mike Wearing senior warden of the Queen Elizabeth Country Park, is soon to give a talk to the group.
‘We are open to suggestions and ideas for the group’, said Diane, ‘and we hope parents will tell us what they think is needed.
Our role in the group is not to have all the answers but to direct parents to sources where these might be found.’
A getting ready for school group for the rising fives and parents funded by the school, is run by Christine Swaby, lower school coordinator.
Funded by the school, seven Friday afternoon sessions are held during the term preceding the child's start date.
Invitations come via playgroups but parents of the few children who do not attend one can contact the headteacher, Margaret Sutton, at the school.
Ben Gillespie age 3–1/2 and his mother Suzanne play trains.
Make believe dinner is being cooked by a group of under 5 children in the playhouse.
Psst!
Anyone want a cast iron bath?
DIY enthusiasts in Bramshott and Liphook may find a bargain or two going for free is they are quick and have transport.
Councillor Sam James took along a window frame to the March parish council meeting.
He told chairman Michael Croucher he had found the nearby new frame while he was walking along The Hollow (RUPP 45) at Bramshott and was puzzled as to how it came to be lost.
‘I have tried to find the owner, but nobody seems to have lost one.
Anyone looking for the window frame should get in touch with me,’ he said.
‘It would be a pity to turn it into firewood.’
Councillor David Warner, while commenting that he could not bring his find to the council meeting, reported that he had spied a full sized bath with one tap which had been thrown in the hedge in Tunbridge Lane.
‘We can only conclude these things have been dumped because people have no further use for them.’
Agreeing with other councillors that someone might be able to find a use for such items, especially now that cast iron baths are now in fashion, the chairman wondered if someone might consider using it for horses.
The parish clerk was asked to report the matter to the area surveyor.
A toast to recreation ground staff
PAST and present members of the Bramshott and Liphook Parish Council said farewell to two retiring members of recreation ground staff at the tennis club pavilion.
Simon Coyte, chairman of the recreation committee, welcomed guests and thanked Derek Offer who had been head groundsman for over nine years.
‘From where we are standing we can see examples of the care and attention you have given to the recreation ground and I know all of the clubs who use our facilities thank you for your efforts and hard work.’
His words were echoed by representatives from the sports clubs.
On behalf of them all Tony Pite, tennis club chairman, presented Mr. Offer with a leather wallet.
Mr. Coyte than thanked Albert Larmer, foreman of Radford Park and woodworker extraordinaire.
Mr. Larmer  started at Radford Park twelve years ago when the park  was being created.
 He was in charge of a group of MSC workers who were helping with the work.
When the scheme ended he stayed on and through his endeavours has helped to make the park a place of beauty.
The workshop, his special pride, had been responsible for turning trees blown down in gales and storms into durable and comfortable seats for the open space areas.
On behalf of the parish council Mr. Coyte presented the men with inscribed tankards as mementos of their services to the parish.
While Maggi Bennett, parish clerk, said she was delighted to be asked by the staff to add their gifts to those already received.
Thanking everyone, Mr. Offer said he had enjoyed working for the parish council, the clubs and with two chairmen of the recreation committee, Wing Commander Archie Derry and Mr. Coyte.
‘It  is nice to see the green are in good heart and looking so good.’
While feeling a little sad at leaving, Mr. Offer said that for the first time he would be looking forward to an extra hour in bed in the morning.
Before he became head groundsman Mr. Offer was a farm manager and won many prizes for stock as well as prizes for the best kept farm.
He will not be free to indulge in his hobbies of gardening, fishing, photography and some gentle camping but promised to go and see his friends from time to time.
Mr. Larmer, who prior to his work at Radford Park was a builder joiner, plans to continue with his woodwork at home in Lindford.
He confessed to enjoying making spinning wheels and rocking horses in his spare time.
As his reputation for making commemorative seats is well known in the area, it is certain he will quickly find a ready market for his work.
The presentation was to have included village litter warden James Budd, but a family bereavement prevented his attending the reception.
Simon Coyte, Albert Larmer, Tony Pite, Derek Offer, and Michael Croucher.
Sports honours
PUPILS from Bohunt School, Liphook have been selected to represent Hampshire in a number of different sports.
Alison Parker (Year 7) has been chosen for badminton, Colin Tozer (Year 11) for rugby, Katie Dewberry and Lyndsey Goulston (Year 9) for tennis, and Gareth Pugh (Year 9) has been selected for trials for cricket and rugby.
Bohunt girls' football team are just completing their first full season and remain undefeated.
They have recently received a new team kit provided by the school's parent teacher association.
Bargains on the catwalk
DEMONSTRATING what bargains are to be had locally, Liphook's Imperial Cancer Research Fund shop held their second charity fashion show at the Church Centre raising £1,500.
The shop in Station Road, Liphook, has a staff of more than 40 voluntary helpers who have raised more than £41,000 in the first year.
Many volunteers acted as models or helped behind the scenes with refreshments and raffle tickets.
Organised by Sue Barratt, who compèred the show, the models wore clothes donated to the shop and were warmly applauded.
Clothes from top designers were offered for sale at £10 or 15 and High Street stores' clothing was on offer at £5.
The show ended with a wedding scene, the bride's dress and veil costing just £10, bridesmaid's dress £5, and groom's frock coat and trousers, plus dinner jacket, £15.
So many people were interested in the bridal outfits that staff at the Liphook shop are thinking of extending into the hire business for formal special occasion wear.
After the show, there was a queue to buy the clothes and last year's total was doubled.
Thanking everyone for their help Sue Barratt paid tribute to volunteers and their friends, Hairlines of Station Road who had created the hairstyles, beautician Beverly who helped with the make-up and all those who went to the show.
Chairman drops in
THE chairman of East Hampshire District Council, Elsa Bulmer, paid an informal visit to the children of Liphook Infant School last week.
Introduced to the children by headteacher Margaret Sutton, Mrs. Bulmer said she was pleased to be able to make the visit and presented the school with a tree, which she hoped the children would be planting in the garden.
After watching Red class tell the story of wool and incorporate it into the morning school assembly, she commented ‘they did very well and were absolutely delightful.’
After assembly Mrs. Bulmer toured the school and stopped to say Hello, to children of Yellow class.
Sitting at a table with Rebecca Small, Richard Barton, Laura Lewis, Natasha James and Holly Randall she was able to see the children's work books.
Shedding light on fascia problem
SIMON Coyte has questioned parish objections made at a recent planning meeting to externally illuminated fascia signs.
He asked why the parish council were so against the signs ‘Do the parish have an official policy, because if they do, they should think again about the effect it has on the village.’
The area most recently affected by such planning decisions is The Square, a conservation area in the centre of Liphook.
Three shops — Circle K, the Bombay Restaurant and Border Insurance — display externally lit fascias and met with parish council objections.
Mr. Coyte felt this was wrong, he said: ‘Without shop lighting the village becomes dull and uninteresting.
While it must be said the illumination does advertise the shop it greatly brightens the area with its window displays.
‘In some cases the street lighting is poor and such shops signs give much needed additional light at no cost to the chargepayer.’
Using Circle K as an example he complained that since the lighting had been removed the corner was dull, dark and dangerous and not a place to walk late at night.
David Clark thought there might be some need for review while Adrian Bird felt that a blanket prohibition should only be a starting point which should be used in conjunction with local knowledge.
Michael Croucher thought it would be better to wait until the question of the enhancement of The Square was rediscussed and to incorporate any decision or changes into that scheme.
Apt theme for service
THE Women's World Day of Prayer interdenominational service at the Liphook Church Centre on the theme of ‘Living Wisely With Creation’ was thought-provoking and apt considering the current A3 construction works.
Although there was a leader, Carol Barrett, and spokesperson, Evelyn Bowden, it was essentially a service of audience participation and prayer with readings, a dance interpretation by Sue Galliano, and Vanessa Breach's solo singing.
Liss break-ins
A PETROL chainsaw and £283 cash were taken in a break-in at Rakelands Lane, Liss between Wednesday and Saturday of last week.
A Puck scrambler child's bicycle was also stolen last week from outbuildings in Woodlands Lane.
All change on the buses
COUNTY councillor David Clark warned of significant changes to bus services affecting Liss residents at the parish council annual general meeting last week, saying that there was bound to be some confusion for a time.
‘The county council have had to re-tender virtually all services in the Liss, area, and so people, as always with competitive tendering must be prepared for some changes tot he operators and timetables,’ said Mr. Clark.
‘Basically,’ he added, ‘there will be no reduction in the overall amount of services, but we will have Alder Valley, Hampshire and other operators all servicing the area in a short time.’
A spokesman for Hampshire County Council said: ‘The 202 service from Alton to Petersfield via Liss will continue to be operated by Hampshire buses and will now serve the heart of Greatham village.
On its way into Alton it will also call at Lord Mayor Treloar Hospital.’
Details of the new bus services are expected to be released by the county council later this week.
Bands play for charity
A CHARITY gig in aid of the Royal Association for the Deaf was held on Friday at Bohunt School, Liphook.
The idea came at a school council meeting and members of the fours bands, Euphoria, Affected, Jesse's Hat Collection and Necro-Cannibal Bloodfeast, all Bohunt pupils, had been practising hard.
Over £200 was raised and head teacher Dr. Alan Leech said that it portrayed yet another aspect of music at Bohunt.
‘Out of date’ stage
LISS Parish Council heard complaints from a group of residents at last week's annual general meeting about the large and out of date stage that was severely restricting activities in the village hall.
Alf Clark of the Modern Sequence Dance Club said that the stage took up too much room in the hall which was created for a much smaller population than the village now has.
A member of the Civil Service Retirement Fellowship said: ‘The stage means nothing.
It can easily be taken down and a smaller movable one would be quite adequate.’
In response to councillor Elizabeth Cartwright's comment that the parish council would have difficulties, should the stage be removed, as the wooden block floor does not continue under the stage, resident, Kevin Johnson, said: ‘There would be no problem.
In this day and age it would be very easy.’
Parish council chairman Gillian Woodcraft said: ‘We discussed this right at the beginning, and the parish council decided to retain it.
‘The Liss Friendly Social Club use the stage fortnightly and the playgroup also use it for their nativity.
The WI also voted,’ she said, ‘and members wanted it to be retained.’
Mrs. Woodcraft concluded:
‘This has been given much discussion and at the moment we have used all the available funds.’
Roping in new ringers
TOWER captain Joe Cripps shows Wendy Atkins how to ring a bell.
Wendy was one of a steady stream of would-be bellringers who visited St. Mary's Church, Bramshott in answer to the appeal for more people able to join the team.
With 17 weddings to be celebrated in the church this summer, bellringers knew it was time to hold an open day to recruit more people to help ring the church's six bells.
The bellringers thought the day a ‘marvellous success’.
There was ‘real interest, some came to join, others to satisfy their curiosity and a few of the very brave to climb the ladder to see the bells.’
Anyone who couldn't make the open day should go along to the Monday evening practice sessions.
Church outline plans to expand
MORE PASTORAL CARE
THE Church of the Good Shepherd at Four Marks have announced far reaching plans to extend pastoral care further into the parish.
At the annual meeting, some 70 people heard of the parish Outreach scheme and of plans to extend the building itself to provide a much larger Christian centre.
Speaking after the meeting, the Rev. Colin Noyce told the Alton Herald that since arriving in the parish some 16 months ago, he has realised the need for an extension of pastoral care, together with extra room at the church.
‘The two go in tandem,’ said the vicar, who would like to see ‘a living building as part of a living church.’
The need, on one level, is for extra space, particularly for the Children's Church ‘which is growing like mad.’
At present the parochial church council are awaiting the result of a planning application to install a Portakabin, which would provide a temporary home for the youngsters, as well as creche facilities.
What is needed in the long term is a larger worship area which can be adapted for other uses.
The vicar and his team, led by outgoing churchwarden Robert Parker, envisage an extension which would double the width of the existing church, and which would  include a parish office and a private room for counselling and other meetings.
A lot of money
But, said Mr. Noyce, ‘these plans are still very much in embryo form.
We still have to get permission from the deanery synod and the diocese, and plans have to be drawn up.
We are looking two to three years ahead at least.
And it will require a lot of money.’
Any future extension would dovetail with the present scheme to extend pastoral care into the community.
A lot of work is  already being done by the village care group and good neighbours, but Mr. Noyce feels the need to emphasise this work with the help of committed Christians.
An Outreach scheme has been devised which divides the parish into six areas, each manned by teams of church members whose job it is to identify ways in which they can provide help and report back to the church.
Mr. Noyce firmly believes that the work of Outreach is even more important than providing the improved facilities at the church itself.
‘I believe that the church exists for the community,’ he said, ‘and not just for itself.’
•Other business at the annual church meeting included the election of Andrew Hunt and Tim Griffiths as churchwardens.
Betty and Bill Lewis will continue as booking co-ordinators.
Simon Griffith was confirmed as treasurer, Basil Rooney will continue as cashier, and Janet Foster, Marianne Hodgson and David Foster were elected to fill three vacancies on the parochial parish council.
There were reports from Carole Fuller on the number of congregants which had increased from 128 to 141 over the past ten months, and on the musical life of the church.
Special mention made of  Johnathan Fuller and Lynn Whybourn who had assisted with services at Newton Valence, Helena Hunt and others had helped at Lord Mayor Treloar Hospital, Alton and Pam Smith who had played regularly at Bramdean.
Thanks were also expressed to Christopher Case and outline details given as to plans to form a family choir.
Other reports were given by secretary Robert Broderick, treasurer Michael Saltmarsh, Pilgrim's group leader Patricia Saltmarsh and Diane Loosemoore who appealed for more helpers for the Junior Church.
William Brautigan outlined the good progress being made by the church book stall, Peter Fitzmaurice reported on social events and Muriel Brautigan gave details as to the use of a £1,500 charitable donation and outlined arrangements for the next Deanery Pilgrimage, which will be to Bath on May 27th.
Elizabeth Wills reported first on the local Mothers' Union, now in abeyance, and then on the Scramblers group and deanery synod matters, while the final report came from Doris Martin on flower arrangements.
In his address, Mr. Noyce stressed the importance of everyone's efforts, giving special thanks to outgoing churchwardens Robert Parker and Richard Platts.
Art exhibition catches the imagination
THE local artists' exhibition which has been occupying Oriel Court, an empty office block on Omega Park, Alton, since March 16th, is to run for an extra week — until April 3rd — due to popular demand.
Watercolours predominate in the three-floor display, withe subjects from extremely local townscapes such as architect Jack Chamberlain's studies of Alton's market square, White House and museum square to the abstract — as an Alton artist Len Wilding's vividly coloured Galaxy.
Juliet Chamberlain, who shares the ground floor with her husband, also exhibits local scenes as well as evidence from both parties of the Upton Grey couple's recent trip to the Far East, and she also has on display a wealth of floral studies in pastel.
A large canvas of poppies provides a particularly attractive example of this aspect of her work.
Sharing the second floor with Len Wilding's varied contribution is wildlife artist Joan Wingate, with a selection of birds and animals — real and mythological.
Her nuthatch and jay paintings are particularly appealing.
Anita Skinner's gentle watercolour landscapes —‘the creativity of nature requiring no embellishment’— find contrast on the upper floor with Kay Ritchie's work which takes natural themes a step into the abstract with strong use of colour.
John Bassett  occupies a corner of this floor, with a small collection of vibrant oil colours, mostly on abstract themes.
Three dimensional works are represented too, with a display of Juliet Chamberlain's hand painted china, bedecked with pretty humming birds and water lilies, while Len Wilding shows a selection of terracotta clay figures and heads.
•The exhibition, which was sponsored by Security Pacific, Alton Chamber of Commerce and Lane Fox, is open from 10 a.m. to 4.30 p.m. daily, including Saturdays.
J.B. 
On the road to Romania
TWO Alton drivers are among a team on a mercy mission to Romania.
Ian Quinnell and Ian Gadbury, who both work for United Carriers at Mill Lane, set off with a lorry laden with relief supplies.
The trip, which was organised by Romanian Aid, will take them — and life-saving medical equipment — to the former eastern bloc country's hospitals and orphanages.
The two Ians volunteered to be drivers for the two-week journey and they are also joined by a builder, a pastor, photographer and a computer expert.
They will visit the Zalau hospital where operating instruments, disposable gloves, sterilised rubber tubing, syringes and antibiotics will be distributed.
The two Alton drivers will take the team to a number of kindergartens in Samleilei.
Paints, crayons and toys will be given to the children.
At Cluj disposable nappies and baby food will be handed out to a large orphanage
More foodstuffs and clothing will be taken to Brasov for orphanage babies suffering from AIDS.
And at Timisoara hospital the team will provide urgent medical equipment.
Peter May to open new pavilion.
WORK on Medstead's newly revamped pavilion should be completed by the end of May.
Members at last week's parish council meeting heard that the pavilion should be ready in plenty of time for the official opening by former Surrey and England cricket captain Peter May, on June 14th.
It will coincide with the hosting of the Alton Sports Council Cavalcade of Sport, which will involve a whole host of sporting activities, from archery to aerobics, football to hot air ballooning.
There will be displays by clubs hoping to attract more members, matches and tournaments, as well as static displays.
‘As the host village we certainly ought to compete in some form or other,’ said councillor Stan Whitcher, who suggested fielding a team of boules players.
It was decided to throw out a friendly challenge to other parish councils.
One of the problems envisaged for the day is parking.
With other attractions planned in the village, such as the church flower festival, it's expected to be a particularly busy day.
Councillors agreed to look at the possibility of closing off Roedowns Road to help with possible traffic-flow problems.
Remembering Dr. Macilwain
BORDON'S first doctor, the late Sam Macilwain, is to be commemorated at the new Chase Community Hospital with a ward named after him.
Dr. Macilwain, who moved to the area in the early 1950s, provided the first surgery at the end of Park Street.
His elder son Ian is a consultant in Aberdeen.
Wheels stolen
THE spare wheels and their support brackets were stolen from four cars parked on the forecourt of Chawton End Garage, Four Marks between 10 p.m. on Thursday and 8 a.m. on Friday last week.
Car burgled
A BLAUPUNKT stereo, valued at £250, was stolen on Friday night from a car at Wivelrod.
‘Vandalism’ charge over the footpath plans
ANCIENT TRACK CHANGES
A LOCAL historian has called plans to change the name of an ancient public footpath at the end of a leafy lane of substantial and secluded homes in Haslemere as ‘nothing short of environmental and  archaeological vandalism’.
Proposals to re-classify the ancient track crossing National Trust commonland as a ‘byway open to all traffic’ has brought growing fears that Farnham Lane could eventually become a link to the new A3 Hindhead bypass.
Residents have expressed fears about the move by Surrey County Council after a notice appeared on a wooden pole at the top of Farnham Lane with a map showing the changes affecting three rights of way in Haslemere and one in Chiddingfold.
Roman times
A favourite spot for horse-riders, ramblers and walkers, the right of way which runs in a straight line from a point close to the Royal Naval School comes out at the Hindhead gibbet.
The plans have already led to a number of Farnham Lane residents and others interested in protecting the track — which is believed to pre-date Roman times — to object to the reclassification scheme.
An anonymous notice has also been placed beneath the original at the beginning of the right of way urging people to oppose any plans to re-classify the track, and alerting them to possible future proposals.
Secretary of Hindhead preservation Group, Chris Woodward, who is an amateur historian and has been an active campaigner for the area for the past five years, said he was ‘totally opposed to the change’.
Describing the track ‘as one of the most ancient and well preserved sunken trackways in the south of England that could well pre-date Roman times,’ he said he was concerned about its ‘possible destruction’.
Traffic plans
Although difficult to date he believes the trackway to have been in existence for at least 2,000 years and may well pre-date Roman times.
There was also, he said, ‘already enough vehicular access points on to the common without more being introduced’ he said.
Mr. Woodward said that there was a substantial and clearly defined trackway used by local traffic presently running parallel to the east of the track joining others to the west and north of the parish boundary.
‘The re-classification of this public path to that of a byway open to all traffic is unnecessary’ said Mr. Woodward.
A Farnham Lane resident who did not wish to be named said that he was strongly opposed to any footpath being opened up to traffic.
‘If the Yellow Route is finally adopted for the A3 Hindhead bypass it could be the first step to bringing a lot of traffic and development to Farnham Lane’ he said.
‘Once the terminology for the right of way is changed, the authorities may well find it a lot easier to change their minds about the sort of traffic it carries’ said another resident.
Dispel fears
Surrey County Council's assistant county director for highways and transport, Paul Higerty, said he was able to ‘dispel any fears that residents may have over the reclassification scheme’.
It was, he said, solely a legal exercise and wouldn't physically change the rights of way.
‘It is something required by the highway authority and is purely a legal classification’, he said, and ‘it is extremely unlikely that any roads used as public paths would ever be considered as anything else than they are now’ said Mr. Higerty.
Come into the garden…
NATIONAL Trust houses and gardens open their gates for a new season of visiting, starting on Wednesday, April 1st.
During the winter months, behind the  scenes restoration and conservation work has been taking place and there are new developments at many houses and gardens.
A new visitor entrance and car park at Hatchlands, near Guildford, will give this season's visitors fine views of the newly-restored gardens to the west of the house.
The late 19th century parterre has been replaced by the sweeping vistas of lawns and landscape shown in Repton's designs of the 1800s.
In the Jekyll Garden to the south of the house, specially propagated plants, such as peonies, lupins, old roses and  foxgloves , are set to flourish in May and June.
Housing the Cobbe collection of keyboard instruments, paintings and furniture, this 18th century house is a popular attraction in the Guildford area.
The year 1992 has been designated National Trust Landscape Year and one of the earliest surviving English landscape gardens in Claremont, near Esher, which has new opening times this year.
The picturesque lake and island grotto, large turf amphitheatre, vistas, avenues and glades, combine to give something to delight visitors through the year.
Restoration work has been carried out on two towers in Surrey.
Repairs to Clock Tower at Polesden Lacey, near Dorking, are now complete and visitors can see the house free of scaffolding, revealing a new copper dome.
Work began last July to repair the weather vane and to replace the original plaster, joinery and  copperwork , all of which had been damaged by the weather over the years.
Work on restoring Leith Hill Tower has been completed and visitors can now climb the tower once more to enjoy the views.
Visitors to the rhododendron garden are now asked to keep dogs on leads, but they are welcome to exercise their dogs off leads in all other areas of Leith Hill.
Alan leads the bike veterans
THE 55th annual pioneer run for veteran motor-cycles was held last Sunday in damp and blustery conditions with 356 motor cycles, all pre-1915, taking part.
Among those taking up the challenge was Haslemere architect Alan Coombes, who entered for the 15th time with his 1914 three-and-a-half horsepower three-speed, 4,500cc Douglas.
‘I've entered every year for the past 15 years and my bike has covered the distance every time — with a few minor running repairs sometimes.
‘It is quite a rare model and only three or four others exist in this country and one or two in Australia.
This model was only made in 1913 and 1914.
‘This year's run was rather windy,’ he said ‘and quite a few people did have problems.
There were also some roadworks along the route and we did not pass our usual stopping place for a cup of tea so we pressed straight on to Brighton.’
The run has been held every year since 1930, apart from the war years and is the main event in the veteran calendar.
All machines have to meet stringent dating requirements and the organisers only accept pre-1915 veterans.
Entries come from all over the country to take part in the run — from Epsom Downs to Brighton — and there were also several entries from the continent, the US and Australia.
The oldest competitor on the run was 85-year-old Graeme Brown, from Godalming, and the youngest was Edward Baldock of Goudhurst, aged 17, riding an 1897 Leon Bollee tricycle.
Haslemere architect Alan Coombes arriving at Brighton on his 1914 500cc Douglas motorcycle last Sunday after his 15th successful entry in the annual veteran motor-cycle pioneer run.
Close behind is his son, Simon, who came along for the ride on his 1916 600cc Douglas, which falls outside the official December 1914 entry date.
HERALD SPORT
DAN AIR LEAGUE CLASS ELITE CUP: Semi-Final
Town's ten men reach another cup final
FARNHAM TN. 2, CRANLEIGH 1
Farnham reached their second cup final of the season — and they did it the hard way when they met Cranleigh in the semi-finals of the Class Elite Cup at the Memorial Ground on Saturday.
Town might have been expected to dispose of a side they have already beaten twice this season, but not necessarily with ten men for 68 minutes of the game.
They seemed well in control after 20 minutes, having taken an early lead and looked a class better than their mid-table opponents.
But Peter Browning's dismissal after 22 minutes changed all that and Cranleigh, having drawn level by half-time, looked a good bet to record a shock victory over the Dan Air leaders.
However, Farnham showed their true mettle in the second half with a gritty performance allied to Ernie Howe's shrewd redeployment of his players.
He withdrew striker Steve Flanagan and brought on young Sean Dowling at right-back, Farnham were thus able to rely on a strong midfield presence of Millard, Daly and May, with Deighan and Stairs looking to stretch Cranleigh wide on the flanks.
Dowling, in fact, showed great composure under pressure and Farnham were able to regain the defensive security that Cranleigh — chiefly through the pace of Roger Carpenter — had undermined in the first half.
Earlier, things had looked black for the visitors as Farnham moved into the lead after just 14 minutes.
Shaun May had already brought a diving save from 'keeper Jukes with a hard ground shot and the midfielder was also involved with the goal.
After combining with Gary Millard at a short corner, May lifted a high cross over a crowded goalmouth and Steve Harris stormed in on the far post to hit a great first-time shot into the opposite corner.
The determined Cranleigh side were far from downhearted and they almost got a quick equaliser when Chris Lamboll, having beaten 'keeper Paul Cann, saw his shot booted off the line by Steve Buckingham.
It was quite out of character when Browning, having tangled with Edwards, aimed a kick, apparently in retaliation at the Cranleigh player right in front of the referee John Ford.
After receiving treatment for himself, Browning was sent off.
Millard dropped to left-back, with Buckingham switching to the right, but Farnham's rhythm was disrupted and Cranleigh were quick to take advantage.
On 30 minutes, Farnham's defence was all over the place at a free-kick and the ball fell at a perfect height to an unmarked Lamboll who struck an unstoppable volley past Cann.
Carpenter's speed and control was even causing problems for Harris, himself no slouch, and Farnham's hearts must have been in their mouths when the Cranleigh number 10, having broken clear on the right, hit the deck after a late challenge by Cann who had raced out of his area.
However, referee Ford judged it to be a yellow card offence and the free-kick came to nothing.
After a narrow escape straight from the start of the second half, when Carpenter screwed the ball wide from a good position, Farnham's re-organised side played with growing authority.
The strong cross-wind was now more in Town's favour and they managed to keep play in Cranleigh's half for long periods.
It was not pretty to watch, with the ball often being held up and played back to Cann, but it was effective, and Farnham were ready to strike when their own chance came along.
A free-kick some 30 yards out gave them their opportunity with 12 minutes remaining.
Jukes could only parry May's blockbuster at the foot of the post and the alert Deighan squared the ball back in for Steve Stairs to force it over the line.
Cranleigh manager Roy Kelsey made a double substitution as Cranleigh battled to force extra time and they were almost rewarded in the final minutes, with Cann charging the ball down before the ever-dangerous Carpenter could place his shot.
FARNHAM: Cann, Browning, Buckingham, Hogg, Harris, Millard, Daly, May, Flanagan (Dowling 45 mins.),
Deighan, Stairs.
Sub: Metcalfe (not used).
CRANLEIGH: Jukes, Nash, Edwards, Robinson, Wells, Pain (Ramsay 80 mins.),
Scolfield, Lamboll, Hunt, Carpenter, Stacey (Bartlett 79 mins.).
Farnham's Shaun May in possession, with Marc Hogg in single-file and Steve Harris (left) ready in support.
Steve Stairs turns away in triumph after forcing Ben Deighan's cross over the line for Farnham's winner against Cranleigh.
HANTS LEAGUE: DIV.
I
Uninspired Alton unable to break down Fleetlands
ALTON TN.
BASS 1, FLEETLANDS 2
Fleetlands, who five weeks ago knocked Alton Bass out of the Trophyman Cup, added insult to injury by taking the point in this league encounter.
It was a dour struggle between two workmanlike teams.
Fleetlands’ well-drilled defence gave them the edge, supported by a midfield prepared to drop back in numbers.
The visitors  hustled and harried Alton, preventing them from settling into a rhythm and Alton, lacking the inspiration of the previous week, could find no ideas to counter them.
The strong diagonal wind allowed little more than a glimpse of the sweeping crossfield passing game of which they are capable.
Nobody worries too much these days when Alton Bass go a goal behind.
Rather, supporters tend to wait until the seemingly inevitable lapse of concentration in defence before expecting the side to get down to serious business.
On this occasion, it happened when 'keeper Barry Woodger was caught napping by a cross-cum-shot from Carpenter.
He managed to push it away one-handed, only for Mark Wallis to pounce and give the visitors the lead on 20 minutes.
Fleetlands had no respect for the usual scenario which has so often rendered Alton a 2–1 win, and extended their lead in the 28th minute when John Mumford headed home Edney's corner cross.
Alton stepped up their efforts and a determined run from the back by Miller set up a series of corners.
Dean Fosbury trotted from side to side to take kicks from alternate flags, eventually finding reward when Mickey Street was able to force the ball home.
The second half opened with a lengthy spell of defending against the wind by Alton, before they gradually regained the initiative.
Front-runners Gordon Stephen, Gavin Wood and Fosbury worked like Trojans to find a opening, but Fleetlands, equally determined to defend their lead, packed the Alton area.
A run from right-back Paul Bennett set up another sequence of corners.
A loose clearance was picked up by Miller whose thunderous long shot clattered the crossbar.
Then Stephen beat off two defenders in a run to the line and Dave Groves met the resulting cross with a diving header which was cleared in the goalmouth.
Stephen had the last word with a shot which flew inches past the top corner.
Although probably unlucky not to salvage a draw, Alton need to find more flair if they are needed to finish in the upper half of the table.
ALTON BASS: Woodger, Bennett, Guy, Miller, Tims, Street, Fosbury, C. Ventham, Stephen, Wood (sub.
Whiddett), Groves.
Sub.
(not used) Pigg.
•Alton Town Bass have an early kick-off for tomorrow's league match against Cowes Sports.
The game starts at 2.30 p.m. at the Bass Sports Ground, Anstey Road.
On Tuesday, they embark on the first of their midweek league fixtures, at home to Alresford with a 6 p.m. kick-off.
Synchronised football — Alton's Dave Miller shows nice control as he turns away from his Fleetlands opponent.
SURREY INTER.
LEAGUE CHALL.
CUP: Qtr-Final
Cup thriller carries on at Woolmer Hill
CHIDDINGFOLD 2, SHOTTERMILL 2 (after extra time)
A Peter Daynes header in the 80th minute earned Shottermill a reprieve in this fiercely contested quarter-final between two well-matched sides.
It was always going to be a tricky tie for 'Mill against two opponents, with the very unpredictable Chiddingfold pitch to contend with, plus a strong cross-wind.
To their credit, both sides managed to overcome the elements and produced an exciting cup-tie that will be continued on the wider spaces of Woolmer Hill.
Chiddingfold should have taken the lead after five minutes when Rob Madgwick conceded a penalty for a trip.
However, Chiddingfold's joy was short-lived as the spot kick was fired wide of the post.
'Mill's short-passing game was certainly not suited to the conditions, whereas Chiddingfold's long balls out of defence caused all sorts of problems for the visiting defence.
But after 15 minutes, 'Mill took the lead through ex-Chiddingfold player Anthony Hibberd.
Chris Renninson advanced upfield and clipped the ball over the defence to Hibberd who lost his marker before hitting a low cross shot that rolled into the net off the post.
After 30 minutes, Chiddingfold were level, 'Mill failed to clear their lines from a free-kick and a low drive took a double deflection off Peter Daynes and Peter Boxall to leave 'keeper Peter Liles stranded.
Minutes later, 'Mill went further behind, when Andy Berry was caught by a cruel bounce as he was about to clear and the ball spun up viciously to strike his hand.
The referee decided that this was a penalty and Chiddingfold converted to take a somewhat fortunate lead.
Shottermill's three main strikers, Bob Daynes, Nick Wells and Joe O'Shea, seemed to have lost their scoring touch just when 'Mill needed it most.
Chiddingfold looked dangerous on the break and could have sealed that match, but for some fine defending.
In goal, Peter Liles gave a solid performance under very testing conditions.
With time running out, another Bob Daynes surge down the right wing earned a corner for 'Mill, and it was Daynes himself who crossed the ball to pick out brother Peter who was unmarked in the penalty area to score with a thumping header into the roof of the net.
In the first minute of extra time, Bob Daynes shot inches past the post with the home 'keeper beaten.
Chiddingfold pushed hard in the second period of extra time, and Peter Liles saved 'Mill with a super save off his elbow, flicking a goalbound shot just over the bar.
•This Saturday Shottermill return to league action when they play host to leaders Sheerwater.
FARNHAM SUNDAY LEAGUE DIV.
I CUP: Semi-Final
Millers set up local derby final
PRINCE OF WALES 2, CAMELSDALE MILLERS 3
Millers join local rivals White Horse in the final after winning this well contested match in extra time.
A blustery wind made control very difficult and for too much of the time the ball was high in the air.
Prince of Wales had most of the play in the first half and went ahead after 20 minutes.
Fifteen minutes into the second half, the ball was played out of defence, down the left by Rob Madgwick to Tony Clarke and his cross found Joe O'Shea who headed in decisively to end a splendid three-man move and put Millers level.
Neither team were able to score again, but as soon as extra time began, Millers went ahead.
Clarke's corner caused a goalmouth melée and although the Prince goalkeeper parried a shot, Lee McAlonen's right-foot drive beat him in the end.
Miller's third and decisive goal came from a McAlonen free-kick which found Simon White in position to score.
Prince of Wales were 1–3 down, but  definitely not out and put the Millers goal under a great deal of pressure.
Steve Wilson was equal to it and made three excellent saves.
However, Price finished strongly and snatched one five minutes from the end and came very close to forcing a replay.
DIV.
III
The Oak come back fighting
ROYAL OAK 3, GENTLEMAN JIM 1
Royal Oak's title challenge looked in danger as Gentleman Jim took a first-half lead.
But, kicking against the strong wind, the Oak defended well to keep the deficit to 1–0 and they came back with a strong display in the second half.
In fact, Royal Oak equalised after only a minute when Finch's cross came to Clinton Ford who scored with a snap shot.
Six minutes later, Ford returned the favour, sending Richard Finch clear to lob the 'keeper, and the Oak were in front.
The home team's comeback was complete when Ford cross to the far post and Paul Read's low header gave him his 17th goal of the season.
MEON VALLEY LEAGUE
Paxton and Kennett reach cup final
Sunday was semi-finals day in all four divisions of the Meon Valley League.
The Div.
I Cup finalists are Sir Joseph Paxton and Kennett Brothers.
Kennetts beat Wickham Dynamoes 2–1, with Kevin West converting two penalties.
Dave Gynnne replied for Wickham with a fine header.
Paxton defeated Good Sports 3–2.
Ian Eggars of Paxton opened the scoring in the fifth minute, but Jason Chandler equalised before half-time when he spotted the 'keeper off the line and lobbed him.
Paxton regained the lead with an own goal and Mark Wise made it 3–1.
It stayed that way until near the end when Campbell Wilson scored from the penalty spot.
In the bottom of the league clash, White Hart drew 4–4 with Froxfield.
White Hart actually scored six goals, two into their own net.
Froxfield's other goals were scored by Grant Bransby.
Woking all but there
Woking virtually assured themselves of the Diadora League Premier Division title by winning 3–1 at Harrow Borough.
Trevor Baron gave Woking the lead.
Steve Conroy replied for Harrow, but late goals from George Friel and Shane Wye brought Woking their 13th away win of the season.
Nearest challengers Enfield lost their third game in a row by 2–0 at home to Basingstoke Town.
New signing Kevin Hoddy scored 'Stoke's first goal, with ex-Aldershot striker Paul Coombs adding a second.
Stuart Massey hit a hat-trick for Sutton United in the 4–1 defeat of Windsor & Eton.
COVE LOSE
Edgware Town recovered from a midweek home defeat by Horsham to defeat promotion rivals Hampton 2–1.
Edgware lead the Division Three table by a single point from Tilbury whose 2–1 win against Hornchurch preserved their unbeaten home record.
Chertsey, 4–0 winners at Bracknell, have moved into third place and brought their goals total for the season to 93.
Cove lost at home for the first time in 13 games, going down 3–1 to Epsom & Ewell.
ARMY FOOTBALL
Army take wooden spoon
The Army team's last hope in the Inter-Service Championship disappeared at Aldershot last week when they lost 2–0 to the Royal Navy, after being beaten by the R.A.F. the week before.
The Navy and R.A.F. were battling it out this week for the title, while the Army, unable to emulate their Youth team's recent triumph against their Navy counterparts, were left with the wooden spoon.
A few days earlier, a combined Army/Navy/ Youth team took on an F.A.
Colts’ XI at Portsmouth, losing 3–0 to the first and second year apprentices from league clubs.
Two of the goals came in the last two minutes.
•The Army will play Guernsey in a representative match at the Daly Ground, Bordon on Friday, April 3rd (k.o. 7 p.m.).
RES.
DIV.
I
Haslemere Res. collect vital points
CHURT RES. 2, HASLEMERE RES. 3
Haslemere Reserves gained their first league win since January 11th and two vital points in their fight to avoid relegation.
Kicking downhill in the first half, Haslemere had more of the play and after 15 minutes took the lead through Stuart Whiston who shot home after a Paddy Eames corner-kick was not cleared properly.
Haslemere were playing some good football and almost went further ahead when Whiston headed just over.
Churt were competing well and also had their chances.
After the interval, with the wind and slope in the home team's favour, they began to put pressure on the Haslemere defence and scored two well-taken goals in a 15-minute spell.
Earlier this season, Haslemere might have collapsed at this stage, but they came back to equalise with the best goal of the game.
Jason Brummell clipped a free-kick over the defence and Gary Traviss hit a superb volley just inside the far post.
This seemed to shake Churt out of their stride and inspire Haslemere to go for the winner.
This they got with ten minutes left, David Boxall heading home powerfully from another Eames corner.
Churt tried hard to come back and Paul Jones in the Haslemere goal had to make one particularly fine diving save.
This Saturday, Haslemere are at home to fellow strugglers Merrow in what is another vital game.
RES.
DIV.
III
Reserves enjoy goal glut
SHOTTERMILL RES. 16, MILLMEAD RES. 0
It was always going to be a difficult fixture for lowly Millmead Reserves against high-fliers Shottermill Reserves, and the visitors' hopes were totally dashed at the start when they could only field nine men.
It was therefore always going to be a question of how many goals 'Mill were going to score.
'Mill made maximum use of their advantage and scored eight in each half.
Carl Bloomfield was the top scorer with six, followed by Matthew Hadden who bagged four in only his second full game for the reserves (having scored a hat-trick on his debut!).
Eddie Pounder scored a second half hat-trick, capping another good performance.
The other scorers were Martin Horlock, Steve Gray and Michael Charman.
A good team performance from 'Mill thus ensured a comprehensive victory.
Millmead battled away and did the best they could, but their cause was blighted further during the second half when they were reduced to eight men due to injury.
BRIAN WRIGHT SCHOOLS TROPHY: Qtr-Final
Schools reach semi-finals
ALDERSHOT 4, MID-OXFORDSHIRE 1
Despite the blustery conditions, Aldershot's under-15 team turned in a fine display of attacking football to record a well-merited victory on Saturday.
Facing the strong wind in the first half, Aldershot defended superbly.
Andrew Liney, Davern Lambert and Mark Stanley kept a tight hold in the middle of defence, and Simon Nice and Darren Miles gave little away on the flanks.
Adam Christie, against the run of play, gave Aldershot the lead after 15 minutes, only for Mid-Oxon to equalise when a swirling corner-kick caused problems for 'keeper Ryan Canning.
With the wind at their backs in the second half, Aldershot penned the Oxford lads in their own half and Simon Nice, in his best form, drove the ball firmly home for the second goal.
Neil Musgrove and Richard Williams, now in tight control of midfield, both went close before Musgrove, from the edge of the penalty area, slammed in the third.
Nick Jansen, always searching for openings, dribbled neatly round the 'keeper for a deserved fourth goal to put Aldershot into a semi-final tie against near neighbours, Reading.
ALDERSHOT; Canning (All Hallows), Nice (Connaught), Miles (Wavell), Liney (Cove), Lambert (Ash Manor), Williams (Yateley), Stanley (Robert Mays), Musgrove (Weydon), Jansen (Yateley), Christie (Salesian), Headington (Frogmore).
Subs: Wright (Court Moor), Hart (Cove), Oram (Cove).
HANTS SCHOOLS MAYES LEAGUE
Eastleigh steal it
EASTLEIGH 3, ALDERSHOT 2
Aldershot's under-14 team, playing away to league leaders, Eastleigh, lost a close-fought game by the odd goal in five.
Aldershot's neat football, in  difficult windy conditions, kept them well in the game and for long spells they were firmly in control.
Russell Warner, back in goal after several months of injury, looked safe and assured and Steve Orsborn, in a good run of form, Gavin Smith, Lee West and Dave Bridger all defended well.
Skipper David Piper, an inspiring leader, scored Aldershot's opening goal and powerful Brian Gibbs netted the second.
Eastleigh replied with two goals from well taken corner-kicks and a harsh penalty award against Lee West.
ALDERSHOT: Warner (Ash Manor), Bridger (Weydon), Orsborn (Yateley), Smith (Ash Manor), West (Connaught), Scott (Cove), Piper (Yateley), Hayward (Ash Manor), Gibbs (Collingwood), Feeney (Ash Manor), Spedding (Heath End).
Subs: O'Malley (Cove), Betsy (All Hallows), Edwards (Oak Farm).
Aldershot's under-14 team are at home to Salisbury for their last Mayes League game of the season on Saturday (k.o. 10.30 a.m. at Cove School).
The under-15's travel to Bournemouth to contest the final of the Hampshire Schools Pickford Shield.
GUILDFORD LEAGUE: DIV.
I
Lally ‘special’ disallowed
FARNCOMBE 2, HASLEMERE III 1
Haslemere thirds' recent run of good results ended in a poor game at Farncombe.
Good football was impossible in the gale-force wind across the pitch.
Farncombe took the lead after ten minutes, but Haslemere soon equalised through an own goal.
The second half was again scrappy and Farncombe's winner came after a goalmouth scramble.
Martin Lally did find the net with one of his long-range specials, but the goal was disallowed for one of his team-mates being in an offside position.
Bordon win ‘5s’
In conjunction with the Action and Research against Multiple Sclerosis Campaign, The Nationwide Building Society sponsored Haslemere Town Youth FC's annual U/13 five-a-side competition at Guildford Sports Centre.
Eight teams from the Hants & Border Counties Youth League competed in two groups, won by Bordon and Vale, with runners-up Haslemere ‘A’ and Chiddingfold.
These teams progressed to the semi-finals, where Bordon narrowly scraped home 3–2 against Chiddingfold, and Vale comprehensively defeated the Haslemere ‘A’ team 3–1.
In a very closely fought final, Bordon pipped Vale 2–1 to deservedly take the trophy and medals.
3rd place in play off, Haslemere ‘A’; 4th, Chiddingfold; 5th, Milford; 6th, Haslemere ‘B’; 7th, Hale; 8th, Haslemere.
More than £40 was raised.
N.E. HANTS YOUTH LEAGUE; U/16 ASH TROPHY
Chiddingfold easy winners
HANWORTH 0, CHIDDINGFOLD 8
Chiddingfold's all-round strength proved too much for Hanworth and with Jonathan Fowler scoring four for the second week running, the visitors cantered to an easy victory.
Matthew Hunt converted a penalty after five minutes; then Fowler netted his first after a move started by Nikki Harman.
Before half-time, fine headed goals by Matthew Hadden and James Kay put Chiddingfold four goals in front.
Playing with the wind in the second half, Hanworth had their chances, but found 'keeper Robin Leach equal to their efforts.
They fell further behind when excellent Chiddingfold approach work ended with Leigh Allaker scoring with a fierce low shot.
The pace of Fowler was too much for the home side and three goals late in the game was just reward for some clinical finishing.
U/15
Thriller to finish with
LIPHOOK 1, MYTCHETT 2
Liphook entertained third placed Mytchett in their last game of the season, and what a thriller it turned out to be.
A very even first half ended with Mytchett one goal up.
In the second half, Liphook created more chances, but against the run of play Mytchett added a second goal.
Liphook rallied and Hight reduced the arrears.
Although Liphook  strove hard for the equaliser, they were unable to take advantage of the many opportunities created.
But this was an excellent match to finish the season.
U/12
Manor not to be denied
MANOR COLTS 5, GUILLIMONT 1
Manor took an early lead when Jamal Griffith side-footed home a Neil Pink corner.
Guillimont equalised midway through the first half from the penalty spot, while Manor were unlucky not to regain the lead when the referee blew for half-time just before a Lee Clutterbuck shot crossed the line.
In the second half, Manor continued their good form and Clutterbuck duly scored.
Griffith added his second goal and good ‘keeping by Andrew Sellers prevented Guillimont from reducing the deficit.
Clutterbuck scored a typical individual goal to increase the lead and Manor rounded off a fine win with a good passing movement, culminating in a strong shot from Neil Pink.
MEDSTEAD SPORTS AGM
Medstead Sports Club are holding their annual general meeting at the Wiltshire Room in Medstead Village Hall on Wednesday, April 1st (8 p.m.).
All members welcome.
HANTS & BORDER COUNTIES LEAGUE: U/13
United crush rivals
ALTON UTD. 5, HEATH END 0
The last real threat to Alton's championship hopes was this visit of Heath End.
But the visitors were unable to take advantage of the strong tailwind and it was Alton who scored a vital goal to lead 1–0 at half-time.
Lee Seymour hit a long, high clearance and Stuart Ewin ran 20 yards, beating off strong challenges, before driving the ball past the advancing 'keeper.
Alton, in contrast, made full use of the elements and hit four more goals.
Carl Barrett had a field day with his wind-assisted corners; one found the net direct and two others produced goals for Paul Balfour and Seymour.
Jamie Chung finished off with a spectacular goal, turning on a cross from Seymour to hit a venomous shot into the roof of the net.
The Light twins, Chris Rodwell and Carl Barrett played well in a stalwart defence.
U/10
MANOR COLTS ‘A’ 7, VALE 0
A good all-round team effort by Manor.
Lee Fagan scored no less than four goals in the first half, one with a great shot from outside the area.
Tom Cox and Lee Grant also scored as Colts built up a 6–0 lead.
Sam Reed had set up two of the goals and in the second half it was his cross that led to Grant's second goal.
U/11
CHIDDINGFOLD 6, HALE 0
Chiddingfold made light of the windy conditions to gain an easy win over visitors Hale.
Charlie Judge shot them in front and a penalty goal from Tom Patton made it 2–0.
Before half-time, skipper James Mariner scored with a fine shot.
Chiddingfold continued to dominate and Judge made it four following a corner.
Jake Mariner cracked home a great goal and the scoring was completed by defender Mark Howell.
LADIES HOCKEY
PORTSMOUTH & S. 1, ALTON II 1
Alton played well as a team in a close first half and took the lead after 11 minutes.
Jennifer Sclater received a good cross inside the D and struck the ball into the back of the net.
Portsmouth soon equalised and a stalemate followed in the second half, although Alton had some good chances.
EQUESTRIAN
Dressage at Parwood
Competitors travelled from as far afield as Middlesex, Berks and Kent for the end of season unaffiliated dressage championships held at Parwood Equestrian Centre, Normandy last week.
The show was organised and run by Margo Dwyer and the classes judged by Sue Petty, Christine Morgan-Owen, Gill Drew and Barbara Amos.
The judges commented that the exceptionally high standard was equal to any BHS affiliated show.
The star of the show was undoubtedly Sue Edwards from Middlesex, who rode nine tests on three different horses, and was not only the winner of the Preliminary and Elementary trophies with two different horses, but also won the 1991/92 points trophy for the most wins during the whole season.
The show was sponsored by Vicki Macrae of Mellow Farm Stables.
The Novice /Elite Championship takes place on Monday, March 30th at Parwood, and ‘dressage to music’ competitions and demonstrations on Monday, April 6th.
Further details from Mrs. Dwyer (0428 605411).
Paddy gives Gorman his first win
Arctic Paddy, ridden by Marcus Gorman, won the sixth G.N.I. City of London Race, at Tweseldown on Saturday.
The 4–5 favourite held on by a fast diminishing half-length from Swift Buck who was attempting to give his jockey, John McIrvine, a record third successive win in the race.
The winner carried the famous ‘Teaplanter’ colours of owner Richard Russell who missed the ride as he is still recovering from a bad early season fall.
Russell's loss was Marcus Gorman's gain, as the 28-year-old stockbroker was riding his first ever winner.
Best performance of the day was put up by Qannaas in winning the Ladies' Open, by 12 lengths, from course specialist Phelioff.
Qannaas' trainer, BBC commentator and former royal jockey Bill Smith, said the horse is likely to attempt to win for the third time this season tomorrow (Sat) at Parham.
RUGBY
Worthing surprised by fired-up Alton
WORTHING 19, ALTON 27
Alton gave one of their best performances of the season on Saturday.
They took on and beat a side currently leading London Division II South — a league above Alton.
The visitors also got the better of the try count, scoring five tries to Worthing's four in a fast-moving match.
It also put them in a positive frame of mind for their last league game of the season, at home against bottom-of-the-table Eastleigh this Saturday.
Eastleigh are without a league point to their name, with Alton a place above them on five points.
Alton had the incentives all going for them.
The last time they played at Worthing — when Alton were in Division II South — the then skipper Alan Fleetwood broke an ankle and after being easily the better side, Alton lost by just one point.
Added to this was the fact that Worthing's coach is former Alton captain and coach Robin Wood.
It was obvious from the start that Alton were all fired up and ready to go, even though they were forced into playing skipper Dave Osborne on the wing.
The Alton pack totally dominated their opponents and largely managed to keep the ball away from the excellent Worthing back division.
Flankers Darren Mitchell and Alan Purdon led the way, with John Fenn and Ian Robertson dovetailing superbly at half-back, and Les Bruckner again outstanding in the centre.
But they were only a fraction ahead of the rest of the side, who always gave the ball carrier excellent support,
The first half was fairly even, with Worthing kicking an early penalty and going on to lead 11–8 at half-time.
Alton's first-half tries came from prop Paul Wall and No. 8 Malcolm Osborne, from a short penalty move.
But it was after the interval that Alton really moved into top gear.
They were awarded a penalty try when winger Carl Knight was stopped on the line by a very high tackle, and then the pack gave Osborne a pushover try.
Second row Paul Warwick got in on the act and full-back David Rowledge stretched the lead to 27–11 with a penalty to add to his earlier conversions.
The Worthing backs then showed how dangerous they could be by scoring two tries, but Alton were too far in front to be caught.
Haslemere pay for lack of discipline
HASLEMERE 10, HOVE III 11
Having to hastily reorganise the backs late in the week, Haslemere expected to be short of their usual firepower, but on the day this was further confounded by the late arrival of another two players and an almost complete breakdown in discipline.
With minds on absent players 'Mere started cold and were lucky not to have given away a large margin within the first few minutes.
Right from the kick-off Hove took the game to Haslemere and only excellent defence held the visitors back from the line.
The scrums, in particular, were a shambles, with Haslemere being driven off their own ball.
In open play, 'Mere seemed more interested in arguing with the referee and reacting to any niggle from the opposition.
The only aspect of play where 'Mere could be said to have played to their ability was in the lineout where Gibbons and Daly won more than their fair share of ball.
Quite against the run of play, Smith scored an early try (which he went on to convert) created from a half-break by Purnell.
This was enough to give a slight breather.
However, Hove soon brought the scores closer when they dropped a goal following concerted pressure near the Haslemere line.
The 'Mere backs, however, had the perfect retort.
From the restart, 'Mere won a scrum and Smith fed a crash ball to Godwin who broke his tackle and rounded the fullback to take the score to 10–3.
Buoyed by this, the 'Mere forwards rallied and for most of the remainder of the half they at least managed to hold their own ball in the scrum.
Hove, however, came back more determined than ever in the second half.
Despite the arrival of Pow and Currey (who filled in for the absent Kolar), 'Mere continued to be driven back in the scrums.
Confident of winning the ball, Hove brought their full-back into the line, thereby giving them the overlap, but their rather mediocre handling and some excellent shadowing by Godwin prevented them from capitalising on this for much of the half.
Bannatyne's efforts in vain HAVANT MARINERS 22, HASLEMERE II 17
Haslemere travelled to Havant and were unlucky not to get a win.
In a full gale, handling was always going to play a vital role.
With the wind in the first half,’ Mere applied great pressure which was rewarded with an excellent try by Bannatyne who ran straight through the Mariners defence.
Further pressure caused Mariners' handling to deteriorate and with three penalties successfully kicked by Bannatyne, 'Mere were 13–0 up by halftime.
In the second half, the Mariners lived up to their name and made best use of the wind.
But 'Mere kept their heads and defended well.
With five minutes to go, it looked like a Haslemere win, but an error in the lineout call resulted in a Mariners try which was converted, giving them a 22–13 lead.
Haslemere replied with their forwards working as a unit and gaining tremendous ground.
This resulted in scrum-half Bannatyne scoring his second try.
Rampant Alresford destroy Nomads
ALRESFORD 58, NOMADS II 0
Alresford gave a devastating display of running rugby, scoring 12 tries in all, including hat-tricks from prop Bill Witchard and fly-half Chris Holmes.
Nomads never gave up the fight, but had no answer to an Alresford side on top form.
Nomads never gave up the fight, but had no answer to an Alresford side on top form.
Playing into the strong wind in the first half, Alresford's tactics were clearly to run all their possession.
Duncan Lee, at scrum-half, took a quick tap penalty, driven on by John Ainslie who gave Witchard the scoring pass.
Then, from a scrum in midfield, No. 8 Ainslie fed Edward Gander who was tap tackled by the fullback, but Lee swooped on the loose ball and was driven over by the pack.
Jon Scott was next on the scoresheet after a classy movement, and Witchard and Holmes added their second tries.
A quickly taken penalty gave Witchard the chance to score yet again before halftime.
With the wind at their backs in the second period, Alresford for a while did too much up front.
Then Powell scored a splendid individual try, and Alresford were on their way again.
Holmes scored twice, the second another solo effort, while Shane Tibbetts and Gander both showed a turn of speed as they increase the try tally.
Finally, Frank Crockford showed a clear pair of heels on a run to the corner after that man Powell had again made the opening by bursting through the centre.
TENNIS
VW Ratings action starts at Petersfield
Two of the Hampshire LTA Volkswagen Ratings Tournaments will be held locally this summer — and entries should be sent in as soon as possible.
The series opens with the tournament at Petersfield from May 1st to 10th.
Closing date for entries is April 13th.
After six further tournaments, the action arrives at the Avondale club, Fleet from August 15th to 30th.
Entries closing date for this event is July 27th.
To enter a tournament, players must be registered members/players of the LTA, which offers many benefits as well as giving a rating.
Entry forms are available from all affiliated clubs, coaches and sports centres, as well as from Hampshire Ratings coordinator Joan Cole — The Corner House, Church Lane, Old Basing, Basingstoke.
Tournaments in the Junior Ratings series will be played at The Dome, Kingsley from May 25th to 29th and July 27th to August 1st, and at Petersfield from July 22nd to 26th.
MOTOR CYCLING
Dismore back with a faultless ride
John Dismore of Seale is the reigning Southern Centre pre-1965 machine trials champion, but a lapse of form and a retirement from the recent opening round of the 1992 series greatly lessened his chance of regaining the title.
Then, in Sunday's second round, which was incorporated in the Basingstoke M.C. Club's March Hare trial near Newbury, Dismore bounced back with a win.
Riding his Triumph ‘Tiger Cub’, he gave a faultless performance on the tricky ten-section course of five laps.
Dismore's zero scoring ride was matched by fellow ‘Tiger Cub’ rider Adrian Matthews of Newbury and by another Berkshireman, John Ainsworth, who was best in the over-40s class, in which Farnham's Jim Scott was third.
Another rider on the crest of a wave is Wayne Holdsworth.
This talented young Liphook rider notched up a runaway experts class victory in the Bognor Regis Club trial at Lavant, near Chichester.
Riding his Pelling Electric sponsored Mecatecno, Holdsworth lost only 12 marks, 23 less than the second placed rider.
Lindford's Norman Gray finished third in the veteran class.
Churt 16-year-old John Bradshaw gave the best schoolboy expert class performance in Sunday's Waltham Chase Club trial, which took place at Hut Hill, near Chandlers Ford.
His younger brother, Frank Bradshaw, was best in the intermediate schoolboy class.
Headley Down's Paul Whillians has won senior schoolboy motocross races with monotonous regularity of late, but the monotony was shattered in Saturday's Bedfont Lake meeting at Four Marks where he managed no higher than third — a disastrous performance by his standard.
Darren Mason of Bordon braved the biting winds on the exposed Maddle Farm circuit at Upper Lambourn to achieve overall inter 100cc victory in the Berkshire Club motocross there on Sunday.
Up-and-coming Scott Keenan of Liss was fifth overall in the adult ‘B’ event.
The weekend sporting action begins on Saturday with the opening round of the Waterlooville Club trials championship at Ellis Copse, Froxfield (1.30 p.m.).
Then, on Sunday, the Farnham M.C. Club organises the annual three-stage trial on Slab Common, near Bordon (10 a.m.).
Also on Sunday, there is the 1992 Southern Centre team trial at Tadley (10.30 a.m.), a Berks & Hants Schoolboy motocross at Ashdown Woods, Blewbery, near Didcot (11 a.m.), a Gosport Club trial at Dibles Lane, Warsash (10.30 a.m.) and road racing at Thruxton, near Andover (1 p.m.).
•The opening round of the British side-carcross and four-stroke championships at Rusper in Surrey, which was planned for Sunday, has been postponed because the circuit is waterlogged.
TERRY WARREN 
John Dismore of Seale tackles a steep descent during the March Hare Trial.
England's 13/14-year-old synchronised swimming squad show their paces during a training session at Farnham Sports Centre last weekend.
Five of the girls are from the local Rushmoor club, including Liz Davey (Farnham) and Vicki Selley (Whitehill).
The squad: Claire Green, Georgina Hodgson, Liz Davey, Vicki Selley, Emma Pratt (all Rushmoor), Leslie Bates, Helen Nicks, Liz Whyman, Sam Luckett, Karen Clarkson, Victoria Saltmer, Kerry Smith.
BADMINTON
Bohunt ‘B’ join the top flight
The first finalist has emerged in the Haslemere Combination League, Admirals ‘B’ defeated Grange ‘B’by a margin of 13 points (plus handicap) in a match which saw the home team's men that little bit stronger than the visitors.
Alan Watkin won all his games for Admirals, while Elaine Simpson was only one point short of her maximum for the visitors.
Admirals will now play either Grange ‘A’ or Bohunt ‘A’in the handicap final.
In the lone match division one, Bohunt ‘A’ dropped only one game against Witley when Tony Nash and Josie Frost got home by just two points.
Bohunt have moved into second place in the division, but are 65 points behind Grange ‘A’ with two matches each to play.
At the bottom of the division, Witley are 48 points behind Oxted Green ‘A’ and both have two matches to go.
It is all over in division two.
Unbeaten Bohunt ‘B’ made short work of doomed Legionnaires ‘B’.
Congratulations to Phil Marsham, Paul Brooks, Vernon Retallick, Katie Land, Joy Arrowsmith and Allah Towns, with occasional help from Julie Dockree, Gavin Ward, Mark Finlayson and Pauline Retallick.
A special mention for Ah-lah Towns: during the course of ten league matches she and her parents have ended up only eight points short of her maximum of 630 points.
Statistically, Oxted Green ‘B’ can be denied promotion from division three but it is highly unlikely that they will fall in their last match.
Their defeat of Grange ‘D’ has put them in an unassailable position and they will return to division two after a season's absence.
At the bottom of the division, Oxted Green ‘C’ defeated Grange ‘D’to keep alive their hopes of escaping relegation.
With two matches each to play, Grange ‘D’ are ahead of Oxted Green ‘C’by a mere 31 points.
In the division's other match, three wins from Chris Spicer saw Twenty to a 43-point victory over Rogate.
A brief review of events in division four!
Suffice it to say that Demons have now completed their worst season for a long time and that Admirals ‘B’, with a match in hand, are only 99 points behind Borderers and are favourites for promotion.
If Borderers fail in division four, their men will certainly succeed in men's division two.
They defeated Rother and Grange ‘C’ by wide margins and need only a few more points to be totally beyond reach.
In the division's other match, Oxted Green were far too strong for Rother who suffered the penalty prescribed by the rules for fielding an unregistered player.
Rother's woes were further compounded when Richard Whitmore Jones was injured in the first game and took no further part in the match.
Witley remained the only undefeated team in ladies' division two when they extended their run at the expense of Grange ‘B’.
Rachel Potter had three wins for the home team, while Margaret Wilson was undefeated for the visitors.
Blackmoor pair triumph
The Blackmoor pair of Chris Royston and Christine Cawkell won the Alton & District League's mixed doubles handicap tournament at Alton Sports Centre on Saturday.
Sponsored by Bass, the tournament attracted a good entry of 18 pairs, with the winners and runners-up of each group going through to the semi-finals.
The eventual finalists were Royston/Cawkell, who defeated Chris Bewick/Joan Schiel (Eagles) 15–11 and Steve Boxall/Brenda Tierney (Liss), 15–7 winners against Jon Tiplady/Julie Webster (Four Marks).
In the final, Royston and Cawkell settled quickly and took full advantage of their five-point start to take the first game 15–5.
Boxall and Tierney came back strongly in the second game, but the Blackmoor pair pulled away at 7–5 up to take the game 15–7.
The plate was presented by Louis Ross.
It has been an excellent few weeks for the Treloar club.
The President's Shield final was fought out between two of the league's strongest sides, with Treloar finally beating Hammer by just four points.
This was the best final for some years.
A week later, Treloar followed up by winning the Rosemary Symonds Cup for the first time in 17 years, so ending Hammer's domination of this tournament.
Treloar defeated Hammer in an earlier round and, in the final, they inflicted a heavy 184–87 defeat on Eagles.
NETBALL
Welcome victory for Ants
Alton Ants at last found their true form and gained a long awaited win over Saracens.
Ants had to play the first quarter one player short and did well to hold the Saracens to 9–9.
The visiting shooter hit excellent from during the second quarter, but so did Hawtin and Talbot in the third and Ants had edged into a 24–21 lead at the start of the last quarter.
Saracens regained the lead, with the home team looking a bit nervous.
But then Ants showed their true grit and defended particularly well, while picking up vital goals.
The final whistle went with Ants holding a 34–31 advantage.
In Basingstoke League division one, Ants II had an easy 45–26 win over Martles, while in division two, Ants II drew 34-all with Brookvale in a very entertaining game.
Rebels topple leaders
Rebels (Alton) threw the North Hants Premier League division one championship wide open by beating leaders Zodiacs 35–30.
Goal shooter Jane Shipley excelled in the windy conditions.
And with Brook Simmons defending well, the teams were locked together 14–14, at half-time.
Rebels brought on Caroline Legg to give more height to the attack and Becky Crisp added fresh legs to the defence.
Going into the last quarter, Rebels held a slender one-goal lead, but they took hold of the game completely.
Becky Crisp and Gill Sargent made some vital interceptions and Tracy Farrar continued to give the shooters a good service.
Rebels played solid netball and pulled away to win 35–30.
REBELS: J. Shipley, K. Edgell, C. Legg, T. Farrar, G. Sargent, B. Simmons, B. Crisp, J. Pickin, J. Green.
In the Hants Manor Open League, Rebels lost narrowly, 34–39, to Maybury.
New sponsor for Flora Davis
British Gas South Eastern are to sponsor the Flora Doris and Admiral Dunlop (loser's plate) cricket competitions next season.
Over 50 local clubs are involved, including Farnham, Rowledge and Liphook.
Alton handicap winners Christine Cawkell and Chris Royston (holding shield), with runners-up Brenda Tierney and Steve Boxall.
ATHLETICS
Harriers eye up top division
The new Broadwater Park Community Centre, Farncombe, with its excellent facilities, was the venue for Waverley Harriers' annual social and presentation evening on Saturday.
Over 70 Harriers and their guests were present.
Chairman Robin Bellis said the year had been one of development and growth for the club.
Harriers, after two seasons in the Surrey Men's Cross-Country League second division, had finished for the first time in the top half — fourth, with the first division in their sights.
The awards, announced by Brian Baines, were presented by president Mick Ralph as follows:
Male Runner of the Year, Dave Worsfold; Female Runner of the Year, Elizabeth Ruocco; Best Youth, Toby Ewers; Best Boy, shared by David Hanna, and Conrad Allen; Best Girl shared by Angela Dixon and Sadye Writer; Best Colt, shared by Christopher Janaway and Robin Drew; Best Minor, shared by Louise Colbourne and Frances Ruocco; Best Under-11 Colt, Oliver Finch; Best Under-11 Minor, shared by Elizabeth Ruocco and Sarah Mowthorpe; Most Promising Newcomer, shared by Katie Hall, Rachel Hall and Faye Harman; Best Club Contributor, Robin Bellis.
On Saturday, Waverley's promising minor girl, Rachel Hall, qualified for the Surrey team with 11th place in the County Middle Schools' cross-country at Reigate Priory.
Rachel will represent Hampshire at Havant this Saturday.
Seventeen of her fellow Waverley juniors will compete in the Bracknell AC Young Athletes' open meeting.
Conrad Allen put in a first appearance on the track in the 600 metres at Crawley.
He ran strongly to finish second in his race (1 min. 44).
Border runners build up mileage
Haslemere Border road runners took on a windy and hilly course at Cranleigh last Sunday.
A small contingent of members were given the option of running either 15 or 21 miles.
Peter Bradshaw and Rod Payne, keen on building up London Marathon mileage, completed the 21-mile course in 2 hrs. 47 and 2–38 respectively, while in the shorter distance race Alan Davidson, in his last race before the Paris Marathon, finished in 1 hr. 43 mins. 30, followed by Dave Jones (1-44-30) and Graham Ward, also London Marathon bound,(2–34).
Rae Boxall was Border's only representative at the Fleet Half Marathon run over a new two-lap course.
She coped with the difficult conditions well to finish with a very creditable 2 hrs. 08.
Haslemere's new road running section have had a very successful start and are keen to welcome new members at Woolmer Hill Sports Ground on Tuesdays at 7 p.m.
Further details from Rod Payne.
Sarah sets another record
Another Alton Joggers Club record has fallen to Sarah Rhimes.
Running in the Portsmouth Half-Marathon (her first half-marathon) she reduced the Alton women's record by six minutes, with a time of 1 hr. 30 mins. 49 secs.
She finished 22nd in the women's race and was fifth in the veteran over-35s.
Husband Godfrey Rhimes is finding some form at last.
He returned 1 hr. 19 mins. 44 secs., his best for some time, he finished in 162nd position.
Due to injuries and unavailability, the team for the national cross-country championships at Newark (Notts) was severely reduced.
The race was run on a fast and flat course around an old airfield, now used as a showground.
Eamonn Martin of Basildon AC ran away from the large entry of 2,200 runners to win in a time of 40 mins. 29 secs.
For Alton, Mike Lake found some improved form after a long time out with injury, to come 899th in 50 mins, 05 secs.
Keith Vallis was 1,134th in 51–25, Graham Trott 1,262nd (52–22).
Roger Sayer 1,793th (55–44), John Harvey, 1,842nd (56–43) and Doug McLean 2,061st (60–02).
The team's overall position dropped to 208th this year.
The awards for last year's performances were handed out at the club's dinner/dance.
Jogger of the year was Sarah Rhimes and she also collected the ladies' road race championship trophy for 1991.
The men's senior road race champion for 1991 was the ever improving Matt Stevens.
The veterans champion was also a new name on the trophy, Tony Wardley.
The improved runners' trophies for the year were Graham Trott for the men, and Stephanie Hickman for the ladies.
Pre-season meeting
The pre-season meeting for I'Anson/Miller Cup captains, vice-captains and umpires takes place at Wrecclesham pavilion on Thursday, April 23rd (not 22nd as originally arranged).
Start 8 p.m.
Octopush girls delighted with 4th
Farnham Octopush Club ladies were delighted with their fourth placing in the national finals at Crystal Palace on Saturday.
Underwater hockey — for that is what octopush is — might be the ultimate non-spectator sport, but there was no doubting the commitment and team-work shown by the men's and ladies teams in this championship.
Farnham had the disadvantage of fielding the bare minimum of six players and were unable to make any substitutions in a gruelling programme of matches.
But, after a shaky start, they managed a very respectable record of two wins in five matches, including a thumping 17–0 victory over Yorkshire Ladies ‘B’.
Yorkshire ‘A’, winners for seven years, emerged as champions yet again after keeping a clean sheet throughout the tournament.
After their first foray into a national championship, Farnham ladies made a stern resolve to do better next time.
‘We'll stuff 'em all next year,’ declared team member Lisa Rainsford.
Farnham team: Claire Straiton (capt.),
Ailsa Williams, Caroline Whorlow, Jacqui Neate-Stidson, Alison Gould, Lisa Rainsford.
Farnham results: v. Sirens, lost 1–7; v York B, won 17–0; v London, lost 2–4; Yorks A, lost 0–11; v Harlequins, won 13–0.
SAILING
Frensham winter series ends on Sunday
The resumption of British Summer Time on Sunday conveniently concludes the 1992 winter sailing programme at Frensham Pond Sailing Club.
Despite some very inhospitable weather, causing the cancellation of racing on five different occasions, the series, which started the previous November, proved popular and very well attended over the five months.
Competition has been healthy rather than intense, and results are that close in some of the classes, that the overall winners will not be known until the Sunday evening.
Kicking off in tandem with the start of the summer series on Saturday, April 4th is the club's Royal Yachting Association based training programme which offers a wide and comprehensive selection of courses up until the end of October.
Further details can be obtained from the chief instructor John Davenport.
ATHLETICS
AFD awards
The annual presentations for the men's section of Aldershot, Farnham & District Athletic Club took place at the Military Stadium on Friday.
Trophies were awarded to the following:
Colts: Victor Ludorum — Michael Riddell.
Boys: Victor Ludorum — Nathan Brooker; sprint — Mark Phipps; middle distance — Nick Benham; field — Simon Pocock; sportsman — Tim Pratt.
Youths: Victor Ludorum — Darren Clark; middle distance — David Burton; field — James Denning; sprint — Graham Chapman; sportsman — Simon Bartlett.
Seniors: Victor Ludorum — Alan Leiper; middle distance — Paul Bennett; throws — Andy Denning; jumps — Chris Baldwin; cross-country — Rob Hudson; sportsman — Roger Ebbutt.
Those present received their awards from Mike Woods, president of A.F.D.
TRIATHLON
Triathletes tackle tough course
Four members of Farnham Triathlon Club competed in the hard and very testing Lord Wandsworth cross-country race over 4–1/2 miles.
The course was very muddy and undulating.
Fastest of the Farnham contingent was Nick Baugniet in 26 mins. 37 secs.
Next home was David Lodge in 27 mins. 23 which was a promising effort following a long lay-off due to illness.
Farnham's third man was Fraser Kennedy in 28 mins. 42, a time which enabled the club to claim third team placing.
Jim Boyd finished in 36 mins. 13 secs.
A third cycle reliability ride was held on March 15th by the Farnham club.
The distance involved was 90 miles in six hours, the route being in the Chichester area.
Successful riders were Ken Wood, Stuart Trower, Andy Haig and Kevin Wardell.
HOCKEY
Patel stakes late claim to first XI
HASLEMERE 3, O. TAUNTONIANS II 0
With the league season over, Haslemere first XI are free to experiment and for this friendly fixture, skipper Smyth gave debuts to three players: Hunter, McGrath and Patel.
All performed creditably and indeed Patel was such a revelation that onlookers must have wondered why he had been languishing in other teams for so much of the season.
Old Tauntonians are a strong club.
Over the previous two seasons, the clashes of the first teams have resulted in thrashings for Haslemere.
The move for Haslemere to play the Tauntonians second XI resulted in a hard-fought, tenacious encounter.
Haslemere started well, with solid moves starting from the back.
Playing the ball through midfield meant no players were left isolated and easy options enabled possession to be kept.
Good pressure produced a string of short corners, and a goal.
In a sweet movement of speed and motion, the ball was left to run long to Patel who deftly feinted with his left shoulder before picking out David Mayson.
With true brotherly love, he provided a cross for Anthony Mayson to finish in style for the lead.
Within five minutes, the ‘Blues’ were two up.
Sims threaded a pass to Richardson, who, after two shots against the 'keeper, changed his angle to put a cross ball to the right post.
This was met by a diving A. Mayson who showed agility beyond his height-weight ratio to push the ball in for number two.
The second half was very even and, as the sides tired, the mistakes and gaps in midfield were more common.
The visitors were unlucky to have a goal disallowed and were denied again by 'keeper Law who tipped a shot over the bar.
Mayson was denied his hat-trick by good ‘keeping and twice Smyth was through, only to go for the unselfish option when perhaps a shot would have been better.
Eventually, the third goal arrived, Bogaers made the initial run and Patel showed mature coolness as he slipped the ball beneath the prostrate 'keeper.
HASLEMERE: Law, Chapman, D. Mayson, McGrath, Hunter, Sims, Smyth, Pater, Richardson, Bogaers, A. Mayson.
SUSSEX 2nd XI LEAGUE
2nd XI make their skipper's day
HASLEMERE II 2, CRAWLEY II 1
The adrenalin was running high for Haslemere's final league game of the season and they began at a relentless pace.
With the midfield of Brock, Hatter and Isherwood constantly supplying wingers Willitt and Stokes, a goal was inevitable and after 15 minutes the latter obliged with a rifling shot over a stranded 'keeper.
Then disaster struck as Haslemere lost their rhythm.
Isherwood went off injured and with ‘super sub’ Hurst still removing his tracksuit, Crawley squared the match.
The second half was a more even affair.
Haslemere sweeper Ferguson and the defence of Crombie, Hull and man-of-the-match Cracknell were pushed to protect 'keeper Bradshaw who pulled off a remarkable stick save.
With injured skipper Martin Stoker hurling advice from the touchline, Haslemere made his day when Baynard netted a Stokes cross five minutes from time.
HANTS 2nd XI LEAGUE: DIV.
II
Top side held by 10 men
ALTON II 0, FERNDOWN W. II 0
Alton travelled to Ferndown with just ten players to face one of the top teams in their league.
But Alton started well, forcing several early short corners, and Evans had a shot well saved by the Ferndown 'keeper.
Ferndown consolidated as the game progressed and the game was very finely balanced.
Alton's defence played soundly and the team looked dangerous on the break.
Alton have three league games left and will looking to improve their points tally.
Ruffians refuse to lie down
O. TAUNTON.
OTTERS 3, HASLEMERE IV 3
The ‘Ruffians’ showed great character in twice coming from behind in a fast, sporting contest.
Haslemere took time to settle down against a predominantly young side, obviously well coached and organised.
The home team were kept at bay by the stout defence of Dilworth, Reeve and Snewing, but eventually a lucky deflection enabled the Otters centre-forward to score.
This roused the Ruffians from their lethargy and they were unlucky not to be level when a Sharman shot was deflected on to a post.
The first ten minutes of the second half belonged entirely to Haslemere.
Murphy, seemingly in perpetual motion, aided by Bennie and Panchaud, took control of midfield and supplied quick, accurate passes to the wingers.
Good work by young Nick Turner resulted in the cross from which Sharman equalised.
More skilful play by Roberts and Turner sent Hamilton clear and his well-struck shot put Haslemere ahead.
But as Haslemere relaxed the Otters came back into the game, equalised and went ahead from well-struck short corners.
Again Haslemere came fighting back.
Eventually, Murphy ran at the Otters defence and scored the equaliser with a brilliant solo effort.
It then took all the experience of the Haslemere defence to deny Otters a further goal.
Hockey ‘minis’ do Alton proud
Alton Hockey Club's junior section goes from strength to strength.
In recent mini hockey festivals at Basingstoke and Havant Hockey Clubs, Alton were represented at U/11 and U/13 levels, and performed creditably against accomplished opposition.
Contests were seven-a-side, with a number of short games being played during the course of the festival.
Opposition encountered at the two festivals were City of Portsmouth, Havant, Trojans, Winchester, Old Tauntonians, Blandford, Gosport, Hamble, Yateley and Bournemouth.
Alton's goal scorers at Basingstoke were Paul Schofield (U/11), Molly Hamblin 2, Kate Shaw 3 (U/13).
Goal scorers at Havant: Hannah Tompkins (U/11), Sophie Gordon, Jo Hawkes 2 (U/13).
U/11 team: Chris Evans, Tim Bonney, Daniel Higgins, Hannah Tompkins, Sam Moyce, Zoe Moyce, Kim Moyce, Mike Johnson, Tom Beveridge, Paul Schofield.
U/13 team: Tom Southgate, Kate Shaw, Jennifer Sclater, Sophie Gordon, Angelique Neave, Molly Hamblin, Jo Hawkes.
The next mini hockey festival will be at the City of Portsmouth Club of April 26th.
Junior hockey training is on Tuesday evenings at Alton Sports Centre's indoor area (6.20–7.40 p.m.) until the end of March.
From April until September, junior hockey training continues at Jubilee Playing Fields (6.30–8.00 p.m.).
New players welcome.
•Further information about Alton Hockey Club from Lesley Histead or Robin James.
CRICKET
Liphook's target is Southern League
Liphook & Ripsley Cricket Club are looking forward to the coming season with great expectation.
A full fixture list is in place for six senior teams, with the introduction of a 3rd XI on Sundays.
The Saturday 1st XI is to be captained by Richard Lewis, and will be hoping to go one better this year, after finishing runners-up in Hampshire County Div.
I last season.
The signing of Brad Pitts will strengthen the bowling attack and a New Zealand all-rounder will also be joining.
Liphook are strongly backed this year to achieve their overall objective of bringing Southern League cricket to Ripsley Park in 1993.
The 2nd XI will again be led by Tony Wood.
Last season they achieved their highest ever standing when finishing fifth in County Div.
IV.
Due to the restructuring of cricket in the county, they will this season be playing in the new County Div.
V.
A new league is the challenge for the Saturday 3rd XI.
After finishing runners'-up in the Southdowns League last year, they will play in the new County Combination East League.
Again under the captaincy of Steve Smyth, they will be hoping to top this league and gain promotion to the County Regional League.
The Sunday 1st XI have a full fixture list of friendly matches into September against some of the strongest clubs in the area.
The same full fixture list awaits the 2nd XI, again captained by Dave Elliott.
The new 3rd XI will be led by the experienced Dave Williams with fixtures every week until July, and will provide an introduction for youth players into senior cricket.
There is the unusual programme of mid-week evening cricket.
The 1st XI will be competing in the Flora Doris competition and the Noel Fisher competition, with an opening game against Alton.
The 2nd XI will again compete in the Ashurst competition.
Two tours have been arranged.
In July, Liphook return to Yorkshire and in September an end-of-season tour to the Isle of Wight has been arranged.
Liphook's youth set-up this year will be the largest ever: league cricket for Under-11's, Under-13's and Under-15's in the Rother Valley League and Under-13's 15's and 17's in the Two Counties League.
Youth coaching is already underway under the supervision of Ray Betsworth.
To provide this amount of cricket, there are obviously openings, for new members and assistance within the club.
Any new players, senior or junior, or anyone interested in umpiring or scoring, should contact club chairman George Roberts.
Champions prepare at Bohunt
I'Anson Cup champions Churt CC are looking forward to the new season, having wintered well at the Bohunt School indoor nets.
Chris Barnes continues as first team captain, with Peter Allatt as vice-captain.
Hugh Wylie is the new second team skipper and Richard Gooding becomes vice-captain.
The club again has a strong Sunday fixture list.
Brian Cervi leads the first XI, with Lloyd Edwards and Bernie Tutte looking after the second team.
New players are welcome and can attend the indoor nets which will continue until Sunday, April 12th (4.30 p.m. each Sunday).
Churt will, from the 1993 season, be playing in the Fullers Surrey County League.
Any potential umpires or scorers should contact Chris Barnes.
Lindford close on target
Lindford Cricket Club are closing ever nearer on the £5,400 target needed to pay for an artificial wicket and mobile nets at their Broxhead Common ground.
The latest figure, reports secretary Frank Lunt, is £4,300.
The club have found 30 sponsors in their fund-raising appeal and they plan a grand official opening on Monday, May 4th when Lindford will welcome all the people and organisations who have supported them.
The artificial strip will enable the club to fulfil a packed playing programme this summer, including 30 junior games.
Lindford's new chairman this year is Cliff Jarvis.
Mark Hoban will captain the I'Anson XI and Frank Lunt again leads the Miller team.
The Sunday skipper is Carston Waller.
Lindford are planning a short tour of Kent in May.
Lynchmere nets
Lynchmere Cricket Club begin nets this Sunday (March 29) at Bohunt School, Liphook, start 10 a.m.
Old and new players will be welcome.
Farncombe for new league
Farncombe Cricket Club are getting into shape for the new season, with net practise taking place at Broadwater School on Sunday evenings.
They have also doubled the nets area at their own ground and the players are enthusiastic about their entry into the new Surrey County (Fullers) League.
The first league game is on May 2nd against Teddington Town, but the season kicks off with a friendly against Liphook & Ripsley on the previous Saturday.
The club has recently installed a new electronic scoreboard which is due to be unveiled by Godalming's Mayor, Brian Sharpe, on April 18th.
Quiz result
The first semi-final of the inter-club cricket quiz, organised by the Farnham Umpires Association, was held at Grayshott on Tuesday.
Grayshott were convincing winners with 39 points.
Runners-up Churt (29 1/2) also go through to the final which will be held at Frensham on April 7th.
The second semi-final takes place at Lindford on Tuesday.
CYCLING
Antelope pair win Alton promotion
Alton Cycling Club promoted a two-man 20-mile team time trial on the local bypass course on behalf of the Border Cycling Association last Sunday.
A field of 37 teams faced a tough, windy ride, with times inevitably slow.
The fastest local team proved to be the pairing of M. Thomas and I. Cargill who recorded 50 mins. 27 secs. to take a fine third place overall.
An Alton rider also shared the award for the fastest composite team, with M. Tuero of Alton CC and M. Sparkes and Antelope Racing recording 53 mins. 04.
Other Alton team times were: P. Jones /P. Bowley 54 mins. 21 secs., J. Scott /R. Scott 56–37, R. Neville /S. Willis 57 /59, A. McReynolds /P. McReynolds 59–12, L. Brill /A. McLellan 1-3-03.
The fastest Farnham Road Club pairing of A. Lloyd-Langston and B. Robinson recorded a time of 54 mins. 18 seconds, although the result may have been different, with M. Barrett finishing solo in a time of 54–47 after his partner, D. Wright, had to retire with mechanical trouble.
P. Charman /J. Essex recorded 55–43.
The event was won by the Antelope pairing of A. Dawson and P. Pickens in 48 mins. 15 secs.
Farnham man a creditable sixth
Seven riders out of a small field of only 11 were Farnham Road Club members on the weekly ‘10’ last Saturday morning.
The fastest Farnham rider was Dave Wright in 26 mins. 47, followed by Gerry D'Auria (27–04), Gareth Hart (27–42), Andrew Lloyd-Langston (27–46), Peter Dunne (28–31), Paul Charman (28–32) and Mike Drake (30–58).
The winner was S. Kish in 24–42.
Farnham R.C. were represented in last weekend's Surrey League road race.
In-form Alan Fotheringham finished the 65-mile course in sixth place, only ten seconds down on the winner, C. Pawsey of Charlottville who had an average speed of 24.25 m.p.h.
The race had 80 starters.
Peter Dunne was the sole Farnham member in the Basildon C.C. ‘25’ held on the E72/25 course in Essex.
The exposed roads of the A12 meant that the wind was particularly strong.
Dunne finished in 1-10-15 and was placed 15th out of 120.
The event was won by E. Van Dieren from Catford R.C. in 1-03-48.
MEN'S HOCKEY
Cornish points away
TROJANS VETS.
II 0, HASLEMERE III 2
Haslemere thirds ran out deserved winners of a competitive match.
Stratford, Muldoon and Chandler, ably assisted by newcomer Napier, held command in midfield.
Wilson steadied the team at the back and was supported well by Lawrence and the other newcomer, Bain.
Haslemere went ahead after a determined run by Eddy down the left wing and a cross to Cornish who put the ball past the Trojans 'keeper.
Shortly afterwards, Chandler put away the second.
The second half was keenly fought, but neither side managed to score, although Trojans missed a penalty flick.
SWIMMING
Haslemere collect more Surrey medals
The final galas of the 1992 Surrey County Championships have been completed and there were more medals for Haslemere swimmers.
Katy Reynolds won the silver in the 1981 girls' breaststroke in her first championships and Margaretha Pedder took silver in the 1980 girls' freestyle.
Rachel Sherrington, swimming in the 1979 girls' backstroke, also won the silver and followed up with bronze in the freestyle.
Hannah Clement and Kerry Harman were fourth and sixth in the 1981 butterfly, completing a fine set of performances by the 1981 girls in these championships.
Jessica Wright was fourth in the junior girls' 200m backstroke and Catherine Denard and Beth Grant were both sixth in the 1977 girls' backstroke and 1978 girls' butterfly respectively.
For the boys, Robert Chapman did well to win the bronze medal in the 1982 boys' butterfly and Philip Traviss brought his bronze tally up to three with third place in the 1980 boys' freestyle.
Andrew McMullen completed the scoring for the junior boys with a fourth place in the 1980 freestyle.
Robert Blackaby rounded off for the boys with a good fourth place in the junior 100m freestyle.
IT has been a good Surrey Championships for Haslemere, with exceptionally good results by the youngest swimmers born in 1980, 1981 and 1982.
Overall Haslemere gave their best performance ever in these county age group championships, taking fifth position behind Leatherhead, Woking, Dorking and Cranleigh.
This augurs well for the future and should be reflected in some good team gala results this coming season.
Waverley championships
The 1992 Waverley Championships were swum at Cranleigh last weekend and Haslemere swimmers came back with 27 medals, just reward for the time and effort they put into their training.
The medallists were:
MOTOR RACING
Strong start by Oates in new class
Local driver David Oates from Four Marks, Alton has made a promising start to his first season competing in the prestigious Group N British Saloon Car Championship.
Oates is not without experience, having successfully campaigned a variety of cars in production saloons, also winning the 1991 class championship of the Ward Replicar Series.
Round 2 of the championship at Brands Hatch on Sunday was supported by a grid of 30 cars and the race was full of incidents during the 20 laps.
Oates finished a deserved third in class.
With the points gained from round 1, Oates now holds second in class and looks forward to round 3 at Silverstone on April 4th and 5th, supporting British Touring Cars.
Oates is seeking further sponsorship in his aim to remain competitive with the front-running teams, although half the budget has already been obtained.
David Oates going well in a new saloon car racing class.
GOLF
Liphook Ladies
Liphook Ladies held their annual White Elephant Foursomes Stableford last week.
This always proves to be one of the most popular and well-supported events in their golfing calendar, with every competitor bringing and winning a prize.
This year the prize table was especially attractive and the wide variety of ‘white elephants’ presented quite a problem of which to choose for the higher scoring competitors.
The first four pairs were.
Mrs. J. Tew and Mrs. B. Halsey (36 pts.);
Mrs. C. Browse and Mrs. R. Oehlers (34 pts.);
Mrs. J. Bullock and Lady Roxburgh (31 pts.);
Mrs. S. Neville and Mrs. J. Hayley-Bell (29 pts.).
Results of the March Medal: Silver Division winner, Mrs. P. Parkes (net 71); second, Mrs. B. Morgan (79).
Bronze Division winner, Mrs. P. Hughes (net 74); second, Mrs. J. Lang (75).
Winners of the March ‘roll-up’ Stableford: Silver Division winner, Mrs. C. Browse (38 pts.); second, Mrs. D. Ling (36).
Bronze Division winner, Mrs. R. Ewbank (33 pts.); second, Mrs. C. Tremlett (32).
Hindhead Ladies
Prizes many and varied and a warm welcome from the captain, Joy Barr, contributed to the success of Hindhead Ladies' Bring and Win, played in pleasant conditions recently.
The best scores of the day were recorded by: 1st, Mrs. Miriam Kink (net 67); 2nd, Mrs. Sally Hicks-Beach (71); 3rd, Mrs. Pam Hewson (73).
The proceeds raised by the March Stableford were donated to the Children from Chernobyl visit to Haslemere.
In lieu of the usual monetary prizes, club president Colonel Duncan presented a book to the highest scorer, Maggie Brown (35 pts).
Divisional winners were as follows: Silver — 1st, Mrs. M. Brown (35 points); 2nd, Mrs. S. Hicks-Beach (33).
Bronze — 1st, Mrs. V. Derwig (33 points); 2nd, Mrs. J. Dabson (31).
Results of the Dunhill Amateur Masters Winter Merit Tournament run between October and February were as follows: 1st, Mrs. V. Derwig (36 points); 2nd, Mrs. M. Brown (32).
Petersfield Stableford
Petersfield Golf Club held their March Stableford competition on Saturday, with the following results: Div. 1 — 1st, M. Sherman (39 pts.); 2nd, P. Sherman (37); 3rd, I. Stephens (36).
Div. 2 — 1st, S. Cann (36 pts.); 2nd, C. Connor (34); 3rd, M. Pack (34).
The Privett Cup medal competition was played on Sunday.
Results: 1st.
R. Deadman (net 67), on countback from C. Matthews; 3rd, C. Petley (70).
PETERSFIELD LADIES
March Stableford results: Div.
‘A’— 1st, Mrs. B. Upfold (32 pts.); 2nd, Mrs. R. Shepherd (30).
Div.
‘B’— 1st, Mrs. J. Robinson (30 pts.); 2nd, Mrs. M. Mattingley (29).
•Petersfield halved a mixed match against Cowdray Park on Saturday.
Hankley player wins
The Surrey Ladies Golf Association's Autumn Knockout competition has been won by Anne Buckingham of Hankley Common Golf Club.
In the final, played at Coombe Hill Golf Club, she beat her opponent 5 and 4.
Farnham Ladies
March Medal results: Silver Div. winner, Mrs. J. MacIndoe (net 82), on countback from Mrs. P. Parker, Bronze Div. winner Mrs. G. Frizzel (net 71); runner-up, Mrs. Q. Barnes (75); third, Mrs. T. Cowle (79), on countback from Mrs. A. Harvey.
ATHLETICS
Alison Rose second in Italy
Alison Rose, the 24-year-old from Farnham, running for the United Kingdom in her first cross-country international at a ‘Festival of Women’ event in Bergamo, Italy, last week, finished second.
She was passed in the closing stages of the race, having led throughout the 5,000-metre event.
Pamela dares to run
PAMELA Gregory gets help from son Benjamin when she does her limbering up exercises before going on a training run for this year's London Marathon on April 12th.
Pamela is appeals co-ordinator for the West Sussex Macmillan Service based at King Edward VII Hospital, Midhurst.
She lives with her husband and four children in Liphook and is hoping enough people will sponsor her run to raise a much needed £18,000 for the West Sussex Macmillan Service, which includes Haslemere, Hindhead and Liphook in its area.
Her entry in the marathon is the result of a dare by one of the hospital's doctors.
With no previous running experience, Pamela has spent just under two years training and preparing for the race.
Sponsor forms are obtainable from the Appeals Office, Midhurst 816065, W.A. Coyte and Son, London Road, Liphook and Barclays Bank, Station Road, Liphook.
Past reflections for the Camera Club
PRINTS made from 100 year old negatives had the members at Friday's meeting of Alton Camera Club envious of the quality.
The Lassavette — Glass Negative Prints of 100 Years Ago had been taken along by Peter Macdonald of Godalming Photographic Club.
Until his retirement three years ago, he had spent 38 years working in the photographic studio at the Victoria and Albert Museum.
The negatives had originated in Dublin and then had been stored in Bond Street.
On the verge of being destroyed, they had been rescued and stored in an alcove at Pinewood Studios.
It was here that they were found, over 30,000 of them, stored in boxes and covered in dust, some of them in a poor condition.
Some, mainly those of war time subjects and taken in the 30's and 40's were given to the National Portrait Gallery, but the best were retained by the V. and A.
Almost all the prints were portraits and Mr. Macdonald spoke of the problems associated with the use of long focal length lenses and the exposures required.
Supports were usually provided for the subject of these were ‘touched out’ of the negative.
The backgrounds and items such as papier maché columns used in the settings for the portraits recurred in several prints.
Celebrities
Royalties and celebrities of the time were the subjects.
One large group of negatives had apparently been taken at a fancy dress party organised by the Duke of Devonshire — over 100 guests had been photographed, most of them with different background settings.
Mr. Macdonald spoke of the methods used for making the prints, the shading required, the need for softer grades of paper and the treatment needed for cracked negatives.
A print of H.M.S. Discovery he regarded as ‘a triumph of the printer's art’.
Questions for the Independents
POLL tax and road safety matters were among questions put to a local government any questions session at last week's annual general meeting of the East Hampshire Independent Progressive Association.
The panel included Hampshire county councillor Keki Jessavala, Whitehall town councillor Jim Grieve, and East Hampshire District councillor, Lt.-Col. Michael  Digby who is also chairman of Hawkley Parish Council.
Last week, Col. Digby was re-elected chairman of the EHIPA and reported that following last year's district council elections the Independents now held the balance.
FOUR MARKS
A STAGE FOR BRUTUS
FOUR Marks Dramatic Society conclude their 40th anniversary season with J. M. Barrie's Dear Brutus, which opens at the Village Hall tonight (Friday).
Three young actresses: Sally Longlands, Claire Newman and Elaine Wyatt, who delighted audiences with their antics in the society's production of Daisy Pulls it Off, all take important roles in this production which is being directed by Andrew Day.
At 18, he is the society's youngest ever producer, and brings to the production the expertise gained as a Hampshire Drama Foundation Course student at Queen Mary's College, Basingstoke.
BARRACKS FAREWELL
WORK has started to demolish the flats in Weycombe Road, Haslemere, which over the years have been named the Barracks because of their appearance.
Over the past couple of years, Waverley Borough Council have been considering a number of plans to redevelop the area and it was recently decided that because of the state of the building it should be demolished.
Plans for the redevelopment have not yet been finalised, a spokesman for the council said this week.
Former tenants of the  flats have been moved to other council accommodation either is Haslemere, or if they preferred to other parts of Waverley.
Demolition of the flats is expected to take six weeks.
The site will be completely cleared and made safe until building work can start on the new development.
Mr. G. White and Miss A. Ingham Smith
YOUTH leader Stuart Glen White, who trained at Trinity Theological College, Brisbane, Australia, recently married Alice Margaret Ingham Smith, eldest daughter of Mr. and Mrs. John Smith, of Hammer Lane, Haslemere, at St. Peter's Church, Lynchmere.
Stuart is the youngest son of Mr. and Mrs. Barry White of Sydney, Australia.
The service was conducted by the Rev. David Prior.
The bride, who was given away by her father, wore an Elizabethan-style dress, in cream silk, with a train with tiny pearls edging the dress and decorating the sleeves.
Her jewellery consisted of a string of pearls, an antique pear and peridot pendant, and pearl and gold bracelet.
She wore spring flowers in her hair and carried a shower bouquet of similar flowers, with the addition of Australian mimosa and eucalyptus.
The bridesmaids were Lucy Smith, the bride's sister, and Katherine and Sarah Bruce, cousins.
Lucy wore a petrol blue watered silk dress with matching velvet jacket and had hyacinth pips in her hair.
Katherine and Sarah were in petrol blue velvet dresses and wore circlets of spring flowers on their heads.
All the bridesmaids carried posies of spring flowers, and wore antique pearl and gold necklaces and bracelets.
The best man was Kevin White, the bridegroom's brother.
After a reception at Lythe Hill Hotel, the bride and bridegroom left for a honeymoon in Southern Ireland, the bride wearing a lavender-coloured wool jacket with cream skirt, shirt and matching shoes.
Stuart and Alice will be making their home in Reigate where Stuart had taken up a post at St. Mary's.
Alice, who has worked in Brussels and London ever since leaving Cambridge, will be starting a teaching course in the autumn.
7 day tv guide
The agony is over for Anthony Hopkins
Sally Lowe's TELEVIEW
ANTHONY Hopkins' appearance on The South Bank Show is well timed — the following day he is in the running for an Oscar for his performance as the monstrous Hannibal Lecter, In Silence of the Lambs.
Past interviews have portrayed him as dour, introverted and something of a depressive, but now it's obvious he has turned that corner and views the world in a thoroughly positive light.
He smiles broadly as he describes his nomination for the Best Actor award alongside Nick Nolte for Princes of Tides, as ‘wonderful, fabulous and an honour.
I'm thrilled — you are around for years, and then suddenly you are discovered overnight,’ he muses.
‘Everything I ever wanted has happened to me.
It may sound smug, but I'm very fortunate.
I've had a very blessed career.’
The role had already gained him honours, including the Chicago Critics' Award and Bafta Best Actor Award.
But he is no stranger to monsters, having played Lambert Le Roux in Pravada and Hitler in The Bunker during the last 15 years.
He tells interviewer Melvyn Bragg in Sunday's South Bank Show that acting was a therapy that saved him from self-destruction.
He says: ‘I don't know if I would have been slightly criminal, but would not have been a very nice human being.
In a way, it has helped me to touch parts of my own personality, my own inner darkness.’
He revisits his birthplace in Port Talbot, where he was the son of a fiery Welsh baker who was himself a frustrated actor.
He admits he is not a professional Welshman, since he doesn't speak the language, doesn't play rugby and doesn't sing too well.
Hopkins, 54, a reformed alcoholic, was desperately lonely at school and a poor student and he now thinks he may have been slightly dyslexic.
He has a daughter of 23 by his first marriage and is happily married to his second wife Jenny.
The programme reveals that the actor was a notable pianist and once considered becoming a concert pianist.
He refuses to be filmed at the piano, but improvised the show's incidental music which he can be heard playing off-camera.
A superb mimic, Hopkins has had two years of varied non-stop work, which he loves because ‘I come alive, I feel it enriches me’.
He has recently been on location in Switzerland filming Richard Attenborough's movie about the life of Charlie Chaplin.
His latest project is the screen version of E. M. Forster's Howard's End, in which he plays Henry Wilcox.
Also due for imminent release is the science fiction film Free Jack featuring Mick Jagger, and the Australian comedy Spotswood, starring Hopkins as a time and motion expert.
Later this year he will be seen in Francis Ford Coppola's version of Bram Stoker's Dracula, in which fellow British actor Garry Oldman appears dressed as a bat.
‘I am constantly in a state of surprise that I have survived this long as an actor.
I find it easier now than I have ever done.
I know what I'm doing now, more or less.
It's not agony now.’
His current philosophy is summed up by a note on his fridge door —‘Ask nothing, expect nothing and accept everything’.
He says: ‘If you expect too much of people, you are going to be disappointed.
If you don't expect much, the bonuses are terrific.’
For years he had an inner voice which was always putting him down.
But now he has got the measure of it.
‘I say to this little voice — thank you for your opinion, go back to your room.’
And Hopkins grins like a man who is at last easy in his skin.
Anthony Hopkins
Leo McKern, Sara Kestelman and Ian Holm star in the BBC Screen Two presentation, The Last Romantics, on Sunday, a powerful story of love and betrayal set in the tranquil world of Cambridge University.
New dilemma for today's doctors
AIDS, medicine, patients and bureaucracy in the 1990s.
ITV's new six-part series of Medics beginning on Tuesday March 31 puts the spotlight on the embattled doctors caught up in today's troubled heath service.
And the bruising in-fighting between Henry Park's medics and the formidable hospital administrator matches anything that takes place in the operating theatre.
This is the second, somewhat revitalised series and stars Sue Johnston (Sheila Grant from Brookside) and Tom Baker (once Doctor Who).
The opening episode tells the story of Jonathan, a patient with full blown AIDS who needs dialysis.
His condition creates a crisis of conscience amongst medical staff — should a patient with a terminal condition really be allowed to take up already over-subscribed resources?
This is just one of the dilemmas presented within the series which, according to producer Tony Dennis ‘aims to capture some of the organised chaos that exists in hospitals.’
He says: ‘We've tried to avoid the gorier aspects of hospital life, and focused instead on the doctor/patient relationship.’
You can't scare me
I'VE paid my money to be terrified but you can't scare me.
This, according to film-maker Robert McKee, is the philosophy behind cinematic horror.
Friday the 13th, Nightmare on Elm Street, Alien, Dead Ringers and all those spine-tinglers we watch as we munch our popcorn are put under the microscope in the first part of Channel 4's new series Reel Secrets.
Over three weeks McKee, well known for his masterclasses on screenplay writing, will aim to debunk horror, comedy and Ingrid Bergman in a new three-part strand in the Without Walls series starting March 31.
Robert says the key to ‘reel’ horror is ‘to force the audience to think of a horror too horrific to create on screen — this is theatre of the mind.’
He found Dead Ringers (a tale about twins who are mirror images of each other, starring Jeremy Irons) particularly frightening ‘because it was about the fear of self.’
Trouble for medic Tom Baker.
Return of the twerp
HUGH Laurie and Stephen Fry return to the screen for another six one-hour episodes of Jeeves and Wooster, the continuing saga of the upper crust twerp and his trusty valet who gets him out of no end of trouble.
The third series of P. G. Wodehouse's immortal stories begins on ITV on Sunday March 29, coinciding with the release of an album of incidental songs and music entitled The World of Jeeves and Wooster, performed by the stars themselves.
The comic duo, soon to star in Branagh's new film Peter's Friends, are seen setting sail for New York in Episode One to escape Bertie's marriage to the unspeakable Honoria Glossop, but danger lurks among their fellow first-class passengers.
The action sequences of the new series gave rise to a number of stunts for actor Hugh Laurie.
He claims he did the stunts while the stuntman did all his acting scenes, but this of course is just his little joke.
He was, however, called on to perform some elaborate visual gags, like being patched with sticky tape to represent treacle.
Hugh loves Bertie's vulnerability, his basic decency and his hilarious use of language.
He says: ‘I can't really imagine anyone not hankering after Bertie's lifestyle.
Great suits, great cars, and your very own genie of the lamp.’
Magic for all
CHILDREN'S programmes don't usually have a strong appeal to adults, but one that does is Wail of the Banshee, running on Mondays on ITV at 4pm.
This spellbinding seven-part fantasy adventure is about Merlin the Magician and it is distinguished by its cast, who include Liverpudlian actor Michael (Boys From The Blackstuff, The Liver Birds, GBH) Angelis as Merlin, comedy actress Susie (Victoria Wood, Singles) Blake as a historian named Fay Morgan and David (The Chinese Detective) Yip as mysterious businessman Mr Myoto.
PICK OF THE FILMS
Saturday
Flight of the Navigator (1986), BBC1, 7.05pm.
Young David Freeman (Joey Cramer) finds himself torn between his family — who have become like strangers — and Max, an increasingly humanised spaceship computer who seems to be his only friend in a changed world on this science fiction fantasy adventure directed by Randal Kleiser.
Salvador (1986), BBC2, 10.40pm.
James Woods and James Belushi star in this tough, uncompromising political thriller from JFK director Oliver Stone which is based on the real-life experiences of photo-journalist Richard Boyle, a veteran of the wars in Vietnam, Cambodia, Central America and the Middle East.
In 1980, with his personal life in tatters, Boyle returns to El Salvador, accompanied by his disc jockey friend Dr Rock, looking for good beer, cheap rent — and his mistress Maria.
What he finds is a bloody civil war that is the change his life forever.
Sunday
The Killing (1956), BBC2, 11.30pm.
Stanley Kubrick's gripping story of a brilliantly conceived and executed robbery stars Sterling Hayden as ex-convict Johnny Clay who devises a daring plan to steal two million dollars from a heavily guarded racetrack.
The gang he assembles for ‘the killing’ includes the racetrack cashier, a crooked cop, a bartender, a reformed alcoholic and a hired killer who causes a diversion by shooting the leading horse in a top race.
Elisha Cook and Timothy Carey co-star.
Sherlock Holmes in York (1976), LWT, 3.15am.
Sherlock Holmes leaves England for New York City where he comes to the aid of his long-time love, the famous stage actress Irene Adler.
He also encounters his arch enemy Professor Moriarty in a mystery which involves a kidnapped child and returning stolen gold to the world exchange, thereby preventing an economic crisis and a world war.
Roger Moore as Holmes and John Huston as Moriarty.
Monday
The Stone Killer (1973), Thames, 10.40pm.
Charles Bronson stars as Lou Torrey, a tough, dedicated plain clothes cop who wages war against evils of society with a ruthlessness similar to that of the criminals he pursues.
Martin Balsam co-stars as Al Vescari.
Tuesday
A Nightmare on Elm Street (1984), Channel 4, 10pm.
Wes Craven's seminal 1980's shocker starring Robert Englund as long-dead child-murderer Fred Kruger.
Fred returns to haunt the nightmares of teenagers and to kill them while they sleep and dream.
With Heather Langenkamp, Amada Wyss, Nick Corri, Johnny Depp, John Saxon and Ronee Blakley.
Wednesday
Goldfinger (1964), TVS, Thomas, 8pm.
James Bond (Sean Connery) takes on Auric Goldfinger, a master criminal who plans to plunder the American gold reserves in Fort Knox.
The real star of the movie is the Bond-mobile.
Enter the Dragon (1973), Thames, 10.40pm.
Bruce Lee cleans up the white slave/narcotics market on an off-shore Chinese island, and he and co-star John Saxon polish off hundreds of Kung-fu experts.
Hysterically funny at times.
Thursday
You've Got to Live Dangerously (1975), Thames, 1.10pm.
Hired to get evidence on the mistress of an older man who has supposedly cheated on him, Diquet and his girl-Friday Leone find themselves involved in a strange plot that involves wartime collaboration and a fabulous diamond.
A good-natured French send-up of the Hollywood private-eye film, pitched somewhere between Raymond Chandler and Mickey Spillane and taking the more humorous from both.
Friday
The Experts (1988), BBC1, 12midnight.
John Travolta stars in this KGB comedy which is receiving its first showing on British network TV.
Deep in the heart of the Soviet Union lies the KGB's most closely-guarded outpost — a replica of small-town USA where future spies are raised as Americans.
Unfortunately, their conception of American culture woefully behind the times and Cameron Smith, a KGB man with a more up-to-date approach, convinces his superiors to allow him to give the place a more modern look by duping a couple of real American experts to act as advisors.
BUSINESS HERALD
Now you TAP into plans for new careers
COMPUTER NETWORK AT LIBRARIES
HAMPSHIRE Training and Enterprise Council have relaunched a counter-wide computer network to help businesses and individuals tap into thousands of training opportunities.
TAP (Training Access Points) systems of user-friendly computer terminals located in libraries, shopping centres, careers offices and businesses — has been taken over by the TEC and is the focal point of a marketing campaign to extend career opportunities.
Each one of the 36 terminals provides information on thousands of local work-related training programmes which can be easily accessed.
A print-out is instantly available.
The TEC have taken over responsibility for the service in keeping with their aim to encourage commitment to training.
Information
The new service was officially launched by TVS presenter Fern Britten at a reception hosted by the leader of Hampshire County Council, Freddie Emery-Wallis.
TEC managing director Dr. Max Wilson said: ‘In the current recession, more people and businesses need to have instant and accurate information about vocational training opportunities.
‘Our aim is to make TAP available to a wider, more broadly-based audience, as quickly as possible.’
Survival plan for mortgage firm
JASON ELLES and Alan Lovett of Ernst & Young's Reading office, have been appointed joint administrators to National Guardian Mortgage Corporation Ltd., in Grayshott.
The company have been trading since 1897.
Its business includes taking deposits and lending money and it has specialised until recently in second mortgages for home-owners.
The present difficulties stem from the recession and the collapse of the housing market.
There are about 1,000 depositors, who are owed around £10 million.
The book-value of the loans is around £10 million before provisions.
‘The purpose of the administration order is to allow the company an opportunity of finding an investor or partner thereby allowing it to survive,’ said Jason Elles.
Substantial
‘At present we are carrying out a detailed review of the loan book to establish its likely realisable value.
Mortgages will not be affected and payments should continue to be made in the normal way.
‘At this stage it is too early ti give an accurate figure for the likely return to depositors, however I do believe that in due course it should be substantial.
‘The great majority of depositors will have claims of less than £20,000 and therefore will be substantially protected by the deposit insurance scheme, whatever the outcome of the administration.
‘Ernst & Young will be writing to all depositors within 48 hours advising them of the position,’ said Jason Elles.
National Guardian Mortgage Corporation Ltd., is an authorised institution under the Banking Act 1987.
METOCEAN GO PUBLIC
METOCEAN Consultancy Ltd., management consultants in environmental issues, has restructured into a public limited company following increased demand for their services.
The company will now be known as Metocean plc.
To coincide with the change, the Haslemere company have reorganised into three divisions — environmental, maritime and engineering — all of which will work together to find the best environmental solution.
A south-western regional office, based in Plymouth, represents these divisions in the south-west, Wales and Ireland.
Metocean have a wide range of clients in the oil, gas and water industries and have been involved in studies worth millions of pounds.
Commenting on the change, Kevin Deeming, managing director, said: ‘Over the last nine years Metocean has grown and diversified by providing clients with a high-quality independent service.’
Forum boost for the region
PLANS for a major new initiative to help reconstruct the economy of Surrey, Sussex and Kent were revealed at a meeting of civic and business leaders.
Michael Pitts, managing partner of KPMG Peat Marwick's south east counties practice, unveiled plans for a top-level economic forum for the region to be held jointly by KPMG and the CBI.
He was speaking at the official launch of KPMG's new Gatwick base — the latest location in the firm's regional network of offices throughout the south-east counties of Surrey, Sussex and Kent.
Mr. Pitt said KPMG were strengthening their presence in the south-east and had chosen Gatwick as the focal point for their work for the region's business community.
The forum — entitled The Foundation for Business Recovery — will focus on the issues facing business in the south-east.
‘After a long and painful recession business needs to readdress the strategic issues to secure sustainable growth in the 90s,’ said Harold Eatock, director of the CBI south-eastern region.
‘This forum will open up a dialogue in the region on the key areas to establish a secure foundation for recovery.’
The Earl of Carnarvon, chairman of SERPLAN — the London and South-East Regional Planning Conference — will give the main address at the forum in June.
In the Park
INFORMATION Environments, a software and systems company, have moved from south-west London to the Research Park at Surrey University, Guildford.
They have been attracted by a combination of the environment at the Research Park and proximity to the University facilities.
FORGING AHEAD — IN REAL ENTERPRISE
UNUSUAL forged metal items produced by Ani Duckworth and Paul Gulati provided one of the most eye-catching exhibits at the Ideal Home Exhibition in London.
They were chosen by their sponsors, the Prince's Youth Business Trust, to share a stand at the Earls Court show.
Ani, of Beldham Road, Wrecclesham, and Paul, of Quennels Hill, also in Wrecclesham, set up their own business in forged metal work with the help of the Tindle Enterprise Centre in Whitehill.
Ani said: ‘People always seem to be impressed by a girl doing this kind of work.
Everybody thinks you have to be really strong to be a blacksmith.
But it is really just technique.
Once the metal is hot it is like putty.
Special factor
Ani and Paul learned their trade at West Surrey College of Art and Design in Farnham, where they took degree courses in 3D design and specialised in metalwork.
The project director of Tindle Enterprises, Duncan Campbell, explained a special factor about the enterprise centre — no rent is charged to the tenants.
Businesses pay a proportion of the rates, heating, lighting and costs.
Then the firm are given one year to make the grade.
Sometimes Mr. Campbell can extend the licence for another nine months and about 40 to 50 percent of businesses started at the enterprise centre have gone on to greater success.
Ani and Paul regularly display their work in Farnham — including the monthly market in Farnham Maltings.
Forged metalwork at Whitehill produce a variety of large and small scale decorative metalwork, such as candlestick-holders, iron gates, curtain-rails and even on one occasion, balustrading for a spiral staircase.
A decorative music stand brought admiring glances to the forged metalwork stand run by Farnham's Paul Gulati and Ani Duckworth at the Ideal Home Exhibition.
Beware — that suggestion is taxable!
BUSINESSES currently need all the help they can get in the current economic climate and maintaining staff is vital.
But Ann Laventure, senior tax manager for business advisers Grant Thornton's Petersfield office, warns: ‘If you run a suggestion scheme beware — you may be liable for tax.’
Mrs. Laventure highlights the ambiguity of the situation: ‘For any scheme to be partially exempt from tax the programme must be open to all employees and suggestions implemented — although a £25 encouragement award can be given for a suggestion with intrinsic value or meritorious effort.
‘However, when delving deeper into the rule book the situation becomes confused.
For instance, any award for an idea by an employee relating to their own job or department is liable for tax as the Inland Revenue rule that this is part of an employee's job specification.
Christina has the info
A WOMAN with more than 20 years’ research experience has joined Hampshire Training and Enterprise Council as head of information.
Christina Forrest will head a team of market analysts and researchers at the TEC's Fareham offices.
After work in Scotland, Christina moved to London and became research officer for the General Federation of Trade Unions.
From 1976 to 1981 she worked at the Henley Centre for Forecasting, where she was responsible for UK economics forecasts, and manager of special studies.
Christina then became a self-employed economist-researcher after which she spent four years as the economics research officer for a major political party.
Team of four
Between 1986–88 she worked as senior research officer at the UK Centre for Economic and Environmental Development while, immediately before joining the TEC, she was the Design Council's economic and business research manager.
As head of information, Christina will lead a team of four TEC staff to study local businesses and the labour market to identify areas of skill shortages and training needs.
Consultant post
INTERMEDIA PR, the Farnham-based public relations consultancy run by journalist Linda Findlay, have won two new contracts.
The consultancy have been retained by the Thames Valley offices of leading international accountants and business advisers Ernst and Young following a period of ad hoc work for the firm in Reading and Swindon.
Intermedia have also been appointed to handle a year-long publicity programme for Farnham Museum, covering renovation work and the relaunch of the museum in the autumn.
Intermedia is also co-ordinating the Focus on Farnham group of local venues, to promote leisure activities in Farnham.
Lynwood in new deal
LYNWOOD Scientific Developments, of Farnham, Britain's leading manufacturer of Unix workstations, have signed a distribution agreement with Cail Systems, the Canadian supplier of desktop solutions.
Under the agreement, Cail will distribute Lynwood's products in North America.
In return, Lynwood will be the UK distributor for Cail Systems' range of colour stations as well as providing maintenance and support to UK users.
Wine bar success
LEASEHOLD restaurants and wine-bars have gained in popularity in recent years ‘due to the relatively small capital required to set up business,’ says Chris Day, deputy managing director of Christie & Co.
But over the last year there was a 3.3 percent decline in prices, compared with 2 percent for 1990, according to the company's business facts, which puts the average price at £128,598.
ELECTRIC HELP
SOUTHERN Electric announce a tariff review that will limit electricity price rises to customers to an average of 2.2 percent.
Southern Electric's chairman, Duncan Ross, said: ‘Over the past decade we have held electricity price rises some 20 percent below inflation.
The new rises are about half the current inflation rate and we can now offer customers better value for money.’
He added: ‘With the launch last autumn of the Flexiheat tariff to complement Economy 7, night-rate electricity can now be purchased at less than a third of the standard domestic rate, offering economic efficient hot water and heating.’
For the average householder using 3,600 standard rate units per year, the review will mean paying less than 2p more a day.
In announcing the tariff, Southern Electric reminded customers of how it can help them use their electricity more efficiently.
‘In addition to a range of tariffs appropriate to different users’ needs — Southern Electric offer a number of energy advice services to customers.
Advice can be obtained from 0800 100 143, our 24-hour freephone energy advice line,’ added Mr. Ross.
The changes for domestic customers with quarterly accounts are effective from the first meter reading after April.
The first quarterly accounts with the new rates will be sent out in July.
Changes at Clover Leaf
SIMON MARSDEN, previously with Swain and Jones, becomes a sales executive with Clover Leaf, Farnham.
He is married with three children and lives in Four Marks.
Before moving to Four Marks, he lived in Alton for most of his life, attending local schools
Simon served a full mechanical apprenticeship with his former employer, gaining his City and Guilds motor vehicle electrician certificate.
He spends as much of his spare time as possible with his family, and enjoys caravanning and home wine-making.
ALAN STRONACH, who also becomes a sales executive with Clover Leaf, was also previously with Swain and Jones.
He originally came from North Shields, and was once in the catering trade.
A qualified technician, Alan is currently restoring a 1972 Triumph GT6 sports car.
He also enjoys motorcycling and has taken and passed the British Motorcycling Federating course and exam.
In his spare time Alan enjoys squash and swimming.
STEPHEN HARRIS has been promoted production manager at Clover Leaf Cars' Vauxhall-Rover franchise in Alton.
Stephen has been with Clover Leaf since 1986 and is a full time-served apprentice and MoT tester.
He lives in Alton, and in his spare time enjoys skiing.
In winter months he enjoys snow-skiing — he has recently been to Mirabel, France.
When warmer weather comes, he changes to water-skis.
He is an enthusiastic member of Chichester Water Ski Club, and regularly takes part in competitions.
Making space — and money
SPACEWAY South directors Malcolm Jeary and Roy Martin are celebrating a move to new premises to help them meet an increasing order book.
At a time when most companies are consolidating their positions, Spaceway South have found it profitable helping other companies make the most of their available space.
‘There is some irony in the fact that helping other companies make the best use of their existing premises — by installing mezzanine floors or space-saving racking systems — has meant that we have had to move to new premises to cope with the workload,’ said Mr. Jeary.
The company, now based at Weyside Park, Alton said that the additional space would help to fulfil new orders and provide a more convenient location for customers.
On the move…
Spaceway South directors Malcolm Jeary (left) and Roy Martin.
Community care — the next step
The consultative paper outlining how Hampshire proposes to implement community care was distributed to customers, carers, staff from other agencies, union representatives and county council members at the beginning of the year.
The county council's Social Services committee endorsed the paper's key objectives at their meeting last week.
These aims need to be put into practise over the next year so that the department can meet their new responsibilities under the NHS and Community Care Act.
From April 1993, social services will be responsible for assessing the needs of people, who may require residential or nursing home care.
This  care will be paid for using funds transferred from the Department of Social Security.
The proposed plan of action focuses on the way health and social services work together to provide services to those in need, particularly elderly people, including:
•The development of contract arrangements with the private and voluntary sector to ensure consumers have maximum choice in deciding which service most suits their needs, for example residential and day care.
•Ensuring consumers and carers are involved with the statutory agencies in the planning of future services.
Assistant director of social services, Andrew Brooker, said: ‘We have consulted with a wide range of staff and other agencies who have a direct interest in how Hampshire carry out implementation of community care legislation.
‘We are gratified to see that our approach is endorsed.
Much work remains to be done, but we have achieved the first  stage in gaining agreement to our approach in ensuring Hampshire's future services.’
Appeal lodged
THE owner of Valley Nurseries of Basingstoke Road, Alton, has appealed to the Secretary of State for the Environment against an enforcement order issued by East Hampshire District Council on January 17th, intended to stop them selling items other than agricultural produce from their farm shop.
The appeal suggests that activities taking place there do not constitute a breach of planning permission but that, if it is considered that they do, permission ought to be granted.
The district council claim that unauthorised use of the farm shop for the sale of goods not produced within the farm holding is not a use ancillary to agricultural use, and is contrary to policies laid down by the district local plan.
The use has led to further commercialism of the land and has been to the detriment of the rural character of the area, they say.
Furthermore, inadequate visibility from the access to the main road makes it dangerous for traffic.
The appeal will be decided by written submissions.
Anyone who would like to make recommendations can do so by writing to the Department of the Environment at Room 11/20, Tollgate House, Houlton Street, Bristol BS2 9DJ, quoting the reference APP/C/92/M1710/616168.
Special awards for 3,000 RAC members
MOTORISTS who have been members of the RAC for 50 years or more are to receive special awards.
Unique commemorative plaques have been produced featuring a classic grille badge from the RAC's early years and these will be awarded to members as they reach their 50th year of membership.
In addition they will receive a personal letter of thanks and congratulations from the chairman of the RAC, Jeffrey Rose, and 60-year members will be given honorary membership of the company's top-range UK service reflex.
Commented RAC Rescue Services head of marketing, Andy Brown: ‘It is quite amazing to think that many of the longest  surviving members have belonged to the RAC for more than two-thirds of its 95-year history.
Among the RAC's five million members are approximately 3,000 motorists who will qualify for the new long service awards.
DIGNITY AND DECENCY
Television drops ban on funeral advertisements
TELEVISION viewers in the south may soon be seeing advertisements for undertakers, as funeral directors gear up for an increasingly competitive and high-profile market.
The Independent Television Commission have now removed the ban on funeral directors.
But Mary Vincent, a director of Funeral Services (Petersfield), said she was appalled at the idea of television advertising.
‘It is a very personal thing,’ she said.
‘It is not like buying a three-piece suite.
You can hardly put into advertising something that is very personal to each family.’
But she welcomed publicity for pre-payment plans which could help to ‘put families minds at rest’.
Her company operates the NAFD scheme, which involves a lump sum being paid into a trust in advance.
A spokesman for Alton undertakers, Charles Read & Daughter, said they were not ‘over keen’ on television advertising and did not foresee small, independent firms such as theirs using it.
The proprietor of Bordon undertakers Thorne-Leggatt, David Leggatt, was unconvinced and agreed that the independent sector would probably not partake in it.
He said that while it was difficult to give exact prices, an average funeral cost £932.
Asked whether, in this increasingly environment-conscious world it made sense to use expensive oak or metal caskets, Miss Vincent said.
‘You cannot dictate to families what they can have.
Their wish is paramount.’
She added that the number of people who opted for cremation was increasing although there was still a section of society to whom cremation was unthinkable.
Mr. Leggatt said that 75 percent of funerals locally were cremations — higher than the national average — and he speculated that this may be because of the lack of cemeteries in the area.
Four years ago a new cemetery was opened in Whitehill after the churchyards at Blackmoor and Headley became full.
But Mr. Leggatt hoped that the lack of space for burials would not lead to restrictions in the future.
‘I would like to think that it will not be something that will be legislated.
Hopefully there will always be a choice,’ he said.
The Charles Read spokesman agreed that there had been an increase in the number of cremations, but was unable to determine the reason for the trend.
He said some people who found it difficult to pay for relatives' funerals — due to redundancy or mortgage payments were offered payment by monthly instalments while others who would not or could not pay were pursued to the small claims court.
‘You do not know whether somebody is trying it on,’ he said, ‘but one will be guided by one's own solicitor.’
Miss Vincent suggested people on a budget should contact members of the National Association of Funeral Directors (NAFD), because they worked to a code of practice.
‘The recession must have affected people but you can get assistance from the DSS (Department of Social Security), who are very helpful.’
Mr. Leggatt said the recession had affected the industry to a minimal degree, ‘When it comes to the last rites people will have what they best feel suits the deceased.’
Alan Mitchell's NATURE NOTES for March
AFTER a slow, grudging and hesitant start, spring had suddenly sprung on March 16th.
The sparsely flower speckled crowns of Pissard plums became clouds of densely held, bunched white and the later opening rather harsh pink flowers of the form Nigra emerged fully.
The lovely Accolade trees, having waited two weeks with deep rose-red buds and a few open flowers, burst into copious rows of sumptuous semi-double flowers of pure icing-sugar pink.
The related hybrid Pandora opened many of its pink buds into white flowers like a later, superior form of Pissards' on a neat crown.
The almonds moved into top gear, as did the sallows, the male trees now great bushes of bright gold, and a sycamore by the main road between Birdworld and Forest Lodge at Holt Pound has spread its leaves.
All this has happened in the absence of any balmy warm spell, just a few days without cold nights and with midday temperatures hardly as high as 50F.
It could be imagined that the trees had said: ‘Blow this for spring.
It never seems to arrive properly.
We have waited too long.
Let's go.’
It is, on the whole, more likely that they are responding to the cumulative temperature building up slowly until a threshold has been passed, and they are away.
The danger of our treacherous spring unleashing a killing frost, has receded to some extent, and although recent Aprils have done much damage, the early flowers are over by then and the bad spells are, every day, likely to be shorter.
Blackbirds and starlings
Where until two years ago, the scattering of currants near the door was eagerly awaited by a clamouring mix of blackbirds, starling, robins and a songthrush or two, lately there has been almost an indifference to the largesse.
The birds are still around, but remain largely aloof in the bushes.
Perhaps they really prefer more natural food and this has been plentiful, but that it not obviously so.
The crumb-spreading area of the lawn still attracts its full quota and the statutory trio of dunnocks is perennially on view and a pair of jays are often hopping around.
For a week or so in February, a pair of longtailed tits was often to be seen in and beneath the shrubs near the nutbag.
This was odd as it indicated that the winter flock had already scattered as separate pairs at this very early date.
Their feeding, however, was more strange still and out of character.
When the birds were not foraging with greenfinches, chaffinches and robins on the fragments beneath the bags, they were feeding on the nuts in the bag like other tits do, and this is seldom seen.
The great spotted woodpecker began brief but intense bursts of drumming in the second week of January which is a week or so earlier than in most recent years and many weeks earlier than was normal a decade ago.
Today, on March 18th, the lesser spotted woodpecker had a spell of drumming.
It was interesting to note a complete change in the timbre and resonance when the bird moved to another song-perch.
This could have been an argument for the theory of the mechanical origin of the sound in the days when some still insisted that it was vocal.
Not conclusive, of course, but an indication.
Today no such evidence is needed as the matter was settled in favour of the mechanical explanation, although it is hard to envisage any human attempt to produce the resonant sound from a branch with any contraption without a strong amplifier.
March 17th is my traditional early chiffchaff date and although a journey south to Poole and a short time near possible sites on that day, yielded no hearing of the bird, one has been singing in this garden today.
Snow-white flowers
The roadsides yesterday from Farnham to Winchester were spectacular over large stretches by Holybourne, Alton, and towards the Winchester bypass, and in many places between, with great drifts of snow-white flowers of Myrobalan plum.
It will inevitably by called ‘blackthorn’, which should not be in flower for a month, bringing its ‘winter’ with it, and growing on short-jointed tangles of stems rather than on the slender longer shoots of these bushy trees.
I do wonder if some of these are in fact the wild plum rather than Myrobalan, and I marvel that in summer we hardly notice any plum-like shrubs where we now see them so dominant over long stretches of banks.
It may also be noted that last year the true blackthorn overlapped the Myrobalan in flowering season.
Our robin with the white flashes in its wings has ceded the prime territory nearest the house to another and is now with its mate, centred on the next bed along and ventures only occasionally into the crumb-patch, from which it is firmly evicted.
Not being voyeurs, we have not observed the intimate occasions from which the sex of this bird can be determined.
Recognising the unsafe young, male driver
A PIONEERING study into why so many young men are unsafe drivers suggest that driver training should focus on attitudes and relationships as well as mechanics.
The study was undertaken for the AA Foundation for Road Safety Research by the department of Psychology and the transportation Research Group at the University of Southampton.
Its findings challenge traditional thinking about road safety education, suggesting that pre-licence training should include social influences on driving: the impact of parent, peer and passenger behaviour, drinking, music and mood.
Over confident
A significant minority of men aged 17–24 take risks when they drive because they feel confident in their ability behind the wheel.
They must be made to realise that driving skills alone will not prevent accidents, says the AA report.
Some young men believe that they are safe drivers even when they are not, the research finds.
As a result, road safety campaigns have little effect on them because they are seen as being directed at ‘unsafe’ drivers.
Successful road safety campaigns, says the report, are likely to be those that encourage responsible and considerate driving to be the norm.
Too many young people, particularly young men, seek to earn the respect of their peers through risky driving
The AA Foundation study also suggests that car radio/cassette players should be designed to be as automatic as possible, and sold with an information leaflet highlighting the possible influences of music on driving.
Young men generally find drink-driving unacceptable, according to the research.
If they do drive over the legal limit, it is usually because they are left with no other way to get home and they worry about parental reaction if they are late getting home.
The research
An earlier study undertaken for the AA Foundation by Southampton University compared the driving performance, attitudes and behaviour of 439 drivers between the ages of 17 and 40.
The report of that research —Accident risk and  behavioural  patterns of younger drivers , published last year — showed that more than a third of the men aged 17 to 25 were assessed as ‘unsafe’ drivers, and suggested that this had more to do with lifestyle than with driving skills.
For the new study, a researcher from the university's department of psychology conducted interviews with 56 young men who the earlier research had assessed as either safe or unsafe drivers.
Each was questioned on driving behaviour, experience, attitude to other drivers, the influence of others and leisure activities.
The use of in-depth qualitative methods is relatively untried in driver research, but here is shown to be most valuable.
Laughed at
Generally, drink-driving was frowned on by both the ‘safe’ and ‘unsafe’drivers; it often happened only when there was no other way to get home.
Being let down by friends or a lack of public transport not only encouraged drink-driving, it also led young people to accept lifts from friends who had been drinking.
‘A couple of boys used to make a thing about getting pretty drunk and then going out,’ said one of the interviewees.
‘It was laughed at, but secretly we'd say ‘Oh God, they're being stupid’.’
But the same stigma was not associated with accident involvement or dangerous driving.
Unsafe drivers, in particular, accepted that every male driver would at some time do something risky.
A crash or a motoring conviction was viewed as unlucky, rather than something that should have been avoided.
A 19-year-old commented: ‘People buy a wreck and don't mind wrecking it.
Funnily enough, none of them would drink and drive or not wear a seatbelt.’
A small number said that pressure of work made them take risks.
One driver told the interviewer: ‘I'm always thinking that they're sat back in the office thinking ‘Where has he got to’, and it puts you on edge so I always drive faster in a company car because time is against me.’
The ‘unsafe’ driver is more likely than the ‘safe’driver to be a non-manual worker and to have stayed on at school after the age of 16.
Others said that their driving was risky because friends and, to a lesser  extent , the public, police and insurance companies labelled him as ‘high risk’ and charged him a high premium, he might as well get his money's worth.
Passenger's influence
Ninety percent of the drivers reported that passengers had an influence on their driving.
Parents, adults and girlfriends as passengers encouraged safer or slower driving.
But some drivers who were assessed to be unsafe admitted that their peers encouraged them to drive fast.
Drivers of both groups said that drunken passengers were a problem: they ‘messed about’ in the car, grabbed the steering wheel and pulled on the handbrake.
While media seemed to have little influence on driving behaviour, both groups of drivers felt that it showed cars in an unrealistic light — only seven percent thought otherwise.
As one driver put it: ‘It's ridiculous.
It makes people think  they're invincible, they can put a seatbelt on and they'll be all right.
You see a car roll over in a film and people get up and walk away; people I know have rolled cars and broken arms and legs.’
A profile of the unsafe driver can be made from the findings.
He is interested in high risk thrill-seeking sports such as hang-gliding or motorcycling.
When he goes out in the evening he is invariably with his mates whose influence may encourage him to take risks.
He may well be a skilled driver with quick reactions, but he will deliberately take risks.
He loves driving, rather than seeing his car as a way of getting him from A to B, and sees his car as a status symbol, and means to power and freedom.
He also enjoys working on his car and talking about cars with his friends.
Affected by moods
His mood can affect his driving —‘If I'm depressed, I drive quite gently.
If I'm pissed off, I drive like a lunatic.’
A bad mood can be brought on by what he sees as ‘stupid’ behaviour by other motorists.
‘Clearly, only a minority of young men are dangerous drivers, but of those, too many are influenced by their peers to drive dangerously,’ said Kenneth Faircloth, the AA's deputy director general.
‘This situation must be changed if we are to reduce their involvement in road accidents.
‘The success of drink drive campaigns hinges on urging society as a whole to reject this behaviour — and they have been particularly successful among younger drivers; the same tactics should be employed to target unsafe driving.’
Project boosts history
HAMPSHIRE County Council planners are awaiting the results of a major archaeological research project which should provide valuable new information on sites, dating back to the Stone Age, located in gravel deposits throughout the area.
The Southern Rivers Project, which began last year and is funded by English Heritage, is concerned about the future preservation of nationally important Paleolithic sites.
Although the project is due to run for another year, the county council's planning department hope information will be made available this summer.
Wessex Archaeology staff are producing a series of maps showing all known Paleolithic find spots from past records, as well as the deposits for gravel and ‘preferred’ areas for extraction, contained in planning documents.
Progress on the project was given at the annual county council archaeology seminar, entitled Archaeology and Mineral Planning.
It was organised by county archaeologist Mike Hughes and chaired by Tim Greenwood, deputy county planning officer.
Archaeologists and planners met members of the aggregate industry to review the effects of recent government policies which protect the archaeological heritage, including the research project.
Power assisted steering on Transits
THE Ford Transit now has power-assisted steering fitted as standard to all 190 Popular and Standard long wheelbase models at no additional cost.
 Whilst stocks of one power-assisted models are still available, customers not requesting power-assisted steering on long wheelbase Popular and Standard Transit models will receive a reduction of £487.63 on the standard dealer list price.
The Ford Transit which now has power assisted steering as standard on its longbase models.