

MONKTON'S MYSTERIOUS MONUMENT
Most people who have travelled through the Monkton district of Ayrshire will have noticed the monument that stands on the high ground behind the Dutch House Caravan Park, and wondered what it is and why it is there.
The monument is in the form of a square tower, surmounted by a small spire, and overlooks Prestwick Airport to the south, the caravan park to the north, and the Monkton roundabout on the Prestwick bypass to the east.
It is called Macrae's Monument and is one of the few things left in Ayrshire to remind us of a very remarkable man called James Macrae.
During the 19th and early 20th centuries, several accounts of Macrae's life were published but most were more romanticised than factual.
The most accurate is probably the book,The Annals of James Macrae , by J. Talbot Wheeler, published in Madras in 1862.
The account that follows is a mixture of indisputable facts and local traditions, with an indication given of which are which, as often as possible.
Local tradition tells us that about 1675, a young widow called Bel Macrae and her 5 year old son, Jamie, lived in the village of Ochiltree.
Soon after her husband died, Bel moved to Ayr to be near her only relative, a niece called Bel McGuire.
In Ayr, they lived in a little thatched cottage and Bel obtained employment as a washer-woman to support herself and her son, albeit in the dire poverty of her class in that time.
The niece, Bel, was married to Hugh McGuire, a carpenter who supplemented his income by playing a fiddle at ‘penny weddings’ and other entertainments.
A ‘penny wedding’ was a marriage celebration, the equivalent of a modern wedding reception, at which the guests who could afford to do so gave a penny or other coin towards employing a fiddler to provide music for dancing.
Any money remaining after the fiddler had been paid, was given to the couple as a wedding present.
James Macrae was an intelligent boy and as soon as he was old enough, Hugh McGuire got work for him as an errand boy in Ayr.
But Jamie longed for adventure and, while still a boy, he joined the crew of a boat at Ayr harbour and went off to sea.
One tradition maintains that embarrassment drove him off after he had spent several nights in Ayr tolbooth (jail) for stealing a magistrate's apples.
Whatever the reason, Jamie left Ayr and did not live in Ayrshire again for about 40 years.
It is not known whether or not he ever returned to visit his mother during the first few years but it is certainly true that, latterly, he was not back in the county for many years.
In his absence, Bel Macrae was befriended by the McGuires and eventually taken into their humble home to live as one of the family.
There is no record of Jamie Macrae's early career but he must have made steady progress.
By his early 40s he was an army officer in India, which, at that time, was ruled jointly by the British Army and the English East India Company.
Official records show that in 1720 he was sent as Captain in charge of a detachment of men who left India with three ships to expand British interests in Sumatra.
He is reputed to have been an able administrator with a keen mind for commerce.
After his visit to Sumatra, he was appointed Deputy Governor of Fort St. David, and later Governor of Fort St. George, both on the south-east coast of India.
In January, 1725 he was appointed Governor of Madras Presidency, one of the most influential and coveted posts in all of the lands under British rule.
His time as Governor of Madras is well documented and is regarded as having been very successful.
In December 1730, James Macrae retired from his Governorship and in January, 1731, he sailed for England.
After some time in London, during which he bought an estate at Blackheath, he returned to his native Ayrshire.
He had left as a poor, working class boy and returned as an extremely wealthy man.
In 1736, James Macrae bought the estate and mansion house of Monkton.
He had been an ardent admirer and supporter of King William III, previously Prince of Orange, and in honour of the king he re-named his estate, Orangefield.
The property included all of the land now occupied by Prestwick International Airport and, until it was demolished about 1965, his mansion house was used as the airport hotel and reception area for about 25 years.
The airport control tower was built out from the roof of the house and several huts of varied design were built on to the ground floor as reception, customs and office areas.
Large murals from the mansion are now on the walls of Prestwick Indoor Bowling Club.
In 1734, Macrae presented Glasgow with an equestrian statue of King William.
The statue stood in Argyle Street, near Glasgow Cross, until the early years of this century, at which time the volume of traffic in the city centre necessitated its removal to its present position in Cathedral Square.
An odd, and possibly unique feature of the statue is that the horse's tail hangs from a ball-and-socket joint which allows it to sway in the wind.
When the statue stood in Argyle Street, it became traditional for Hogmanay revellers at Glasgow Cross to swing from the horse's tail.
James Macrae's wealth is shown also by his having lent a large sum of money to Glasgow City Council in 1745 to assist the city through financial difficulties created by requisitions enforced on the city by Bonnie Prince Charlie and his Jacobite army as they retreated northwards to Culloden and defeat.
The army commanders demanded clothing, provisions, horses and other items from the city and to ensure that their demands were met they took two of the city's Magistrates as hostages.
The sum  lent by Macrae is not  known and reports have varied from £5,000 to £15,000.
The City of Glasgow and the town of Ayr each honoured Macrae by making him a Burgess.
On his return to Ayrshire, James Macrae learned of the kindness shown to his mother by the McGuires.
He had no family of his own and his gratitude to the McGuires knew no bounds.
Over the succeeding years he repaid their great kindness with massive generosity.
In 1739, he bought a small estate called Drumdow near Trabboch, in Ayrshire, and gave it to Hugh and Bel McGuire.
Drumdow is now a farm.
To James McGuire, their eldest son, he gave an estate at Houston, in Renfrewshire, and an unknown substantial sum of money, on condition that he changed his name to James McGuire Macrae.
James settled down as a wealthy young laird and later married a daughter of the Swedish Ambassador.
The eldest daughter, Elizabeth McGuire, had been working as a farm servant (See Chapter 6).
Governor Macrae had her educated and ‘finished’ at a boarding school and in 1744 arranged her marriage to the impoverished 13th Earl of Glencairn.
As incumbent of Ayrshire's oldest Earldom, Glencairn was reluctant to agree to Macrae's suggestion that he should marry a commoner, especially one of such lowly background, but abandoned his scruples when told that Elizabeth's dowry was to be £45,000 in diamonds and the estate of Ochiltree which Macrae had bought for £25,000.
Unfortunately, her husband could not reconcile himself to having married a commoner and even taught their sons to be disrespectful to her when they were young.
Fortunately, the young men soon recognised the comparative worths of their parents and paid their mother great respect.
Countess Elizabeth of Glencairn became a highly respected member of Scottish society.
Robert Burns was introduced to her in Edinburgh and, no doubt, they would know they had friends in common in the Tennant family.
Her son, James, 14th Earl of Glencairn, became a friend and patron to Burns who composed a beautiful lament for him on his early death.
The Countess died at Coats House, near Edinburgh in 1801 and is buried in the Glencairn vault at Kilmaurs Parish Church.
Even in death, some members of the Glencairn family could not forget that she had been a commoner and objected to her burial in the vault.
The Earldom ended with her third son, the 15th Earl.
The second McGuire daughter was called Margaret.
James Macrae arranged her marriage to James Erskine, later Lord Alva.
He gave her an estate at Alva as a dowry and probably accompanied it with a large sum of money.
Hugh and Bel McGuire's third daughter was named Macrae McGuire in honour of James Macrae.
She must have been born before his return to Ayrshire but whether or not her name was changed is not known.
She became his favourite and when he died he left her £100,000 and his Orangefield estate.
In 1750 she married Charles Dalrymple, local landowner and Sheriff-Clerk of Ayrshire, an important post at that time.
Their son, James Dalrymple, was also a patron and friend to Robert Burns.
Unfortunately, he turned out to be a waster and dissipated his fortune before dying young.
The McGuires had another son and daughter, Hugh and Jacobina, but little is known of them and it is presumed that they both died young.
James Macrae died on 21st July, 1746 and was buried in Monkton kirkyard.
His grave is unmarked and it may be that the absence of a memorial stone is connected with  the erection of the monument that bears his name.
The monument was built in 1748 but collapsed soon after it was completed.
It was re-erected in 1750.
The exact circumstances concerning the building of the monument are not known.
He may have had it planned as a mausoleum before his death or friends may have erected it to his memory.
Legend maintains that his remains were removed from Monkton kirkyard and placed in the monument but this can not be substantiated.
To know the exact circumstances of the building of the monument to James Macrae is of no consequence.
It matters only that it is a tribute well deserved and well located.
From its lofty position one can see the parish of his birth, the route by which his mother took him to Ayr, the town of Ayr in which he ran errands as a boy, the harbour from which he went off to sea, and all of the land that was his estate of Orangefield.
By his romantic rise to fame and fortune and his great philanthropy to those who cared for his mother, James Macrae was a credit to the land of his birth.
His incredible story must not be forgotten in Ayrshire.
THE KNOCKSHINNOCH DISASTER
On the morning of Friday, 8th September, 1950, the small town of New Cumnock featured in the headlines of the world's news media.
A horrendous mining disaster had entombed 129 men, and the prospects for their rescue were bleak.
 Knockshinnock Castle colliery was situated on the south side of the New Cumnock to Dalmellington Road, near the miners' rows called Connelpark, about one mile east of New Cumnock.
About 720 men were employed at the colliery.
At the time of the accident, 135 men were underground, 6 of whom escaped to the surface immediately, and the rest were trapped.
Most of the management and men lived locally in New Cumnock or in one of the miners' rows in the district.
In most homes in the area, prayers were being said for the deliverance of a husband, father, son or brother, and several families had more than one man involved.
Two shafts gave access to the colliery; the main shaft was used for the transportation of men and materials, including the coal produced, while the other was maintained as an alternative or emergency route to the surface.
Both shafts were inaccessible underground after the disaster.
During the months preceding the accident, a set of underground workings, easiest thought of by the layman as a tunnel 18 feet wide and 7 feet high, had been following a seam of coal which was rising very steeply towards the surface.
The seam was expected to outcrop (break through) on the surface in the middle of a farm field, about 450 yards south-east of the main shaft.
Improved ventilation was required underground and the management planned to let the workings continue to the surface as a new air inlet for the colliery.
It is now known that back in the ice age, glacial action had created a depression in the earth's surface, in the area occupied by the field in which the seam was to outcrop.
Over the ages, the shallow basin-shaped depression, 45 feet deep at its centre, had been  lined with layers of clay, gravel and impervious mud, and filled with a lake of peat.
Field drainage had dried the top 2 feet of the peat, giving an impression of solidity, but beneath this crust was 10 feet of thoroughly water-logged peat of a liquid consistency.
The emerging workings were rising straight towards the centre of the depression with the consequent danger of the liquid peat flowing into the underground roadways.
On Wednesday, 30th August, 1950, the miners in the workings concerned blasted out coal and rock as they tunnelled on towards the surface.
The blasting showed that they had reached the end of the coal seam and had exposed clay and gravel.
Unknown to them, they had exposed the clay lining the bottom of the basin of liquid peat.
They were not aware of the lack of solid strata above them.
Confident that their management would have been monitoring progress closely, the men depended on the judgement of their supervisors.
When the gravel was exposed, a stream of clean water flowed from it and continued to do so for the next 7 days.
Thursday, 7th September, was a day of very heavy rain in the New Cumnock district and in the colliery it was noted that the flow of water from the exposed gravel had increased threefold.
It had undermined pillars erected to give extra support to the roof of the workings and about 6 p.m. that day the pillars gave way and about 200 feet of the roof collapsed.
Fortunately, no one was trapped under the falling roof but experienced miners knew that something was far from right.
The oversman in charge of the shift on duty underground was an experienced miner called Andrew Houston.
When the collapse of the roof was reported to him, he went to the surface and inspected the field above the workings.
He saw that an area 25 feet to 30 feet long and 10 feet to 15 feet broad had subsided to a depth of 2 feet and that the hole was full of water.
Concerned by what he had seen, but not aware that disaster was imminent, he telephoned the colliery Manager at his home; the Manager instructed that a fence be erected around the subsidence.
At that time, most concern was being shown towards preventing farm animals from falling into the hole in the ground.
Three men, including one called Andrew Cunningham, were brought to the surface to erect the fence.
Andrew Houston, the oversman, went back down the pit to inspect the workings under the subsidence.
On his way through the underground roads, he met a miner who told him of having seen heavy machinery being moved along by an unknown force.
Realising that something had gone wrong, the alarmed miner was making his way out of the pit.
While they were talking, they heard a ‘terrific roar’ and saw more heavy machinery moving past them.
The lake of liquid peat had burst through into the workings beneath it and was deluging into the colliery.
Its  irresistible force was pushing everything before it.
The miners in the colliery retreated before the flood of dark brown slurry which was advancing through the underground roads and filling them from floor to roof.
Andrew Houston marshalled them unto one group in a roadway well away from where the inrush of peat had occurred; it was a place still free from sludge but they wondered for how long it would be so.
A headcount of the miners showed a total of 116 men present.
Thirteen men were missing and search parties were organised from amongst the trapped men and sent out to look for them.
Hopefully, the searchers would also find an escape route.
When the parties returned, it was to report that no more men had been found and that there was no way out.
They were entombed!
Fortunately, the underground telephone system was undamaged and Andrew Houston was able to report to the surface on their circumstances and the results of the search.
The communication between the trapped men and those on the surface was of the utmost importance; morale underground  benefited from the men being kept informed of the steps being taken to rescue them and, on the surface, the planning of the rescue was helped by knowledge of the conditions underground.
The subsidence on the surface had increased to an area of about 2 acres and to between 40 feet and 50 feet deep.
Peat and water were still flowing into the underground roadways from the subsidence and attempts to block the exposed entrance to the workings were having no success.
It was estimated later that 60,000 tons of peat, sand, mud and gravel had flowed into the colliery.
On being told that the men still unaccounted for could not be contacted by the trapped men, the Manager asked for a volunteer to go down from the surface and search inwards from the main shaft.
Andrew Cunningham, who had been fortunate in having been one of the men brought up to the surface to erect a fence round the subsidence, volunteered to go back down into the unknown to search for his missing colleagues.
He was lowered down the main shaft and once underground tried to make his way to the area in which the missing men had been working or to any passageway in which they could have sought refuge.
The slurry was still advancing relentlessly and he could find no way through.
At one point he was almost cut off and, in the pitch black, in the bowels of the earth, he had to swing arm after arm from the overhead girders to stay above the advancing peat.
Later, with typical miner's understatement, he said that the experience had been ‘a bit frightening’.
The Manager joined Andrew Cunningham underground and together they continued the search but it was in vain and they were forced to return to the surface.
Eventually, the slurry not only reached the bottom of the main shaft, over the following 24 hours it rose 16 feet up it.
The roadways around the spare shaft were blocked also.
It was obvious that a major disaster had occurred and that a massive rescue  operation must be started as soon as possible.
Resources in men and equipment were summoned from the Ayrshire and Lanarkshire coalfields and within hours a team of vastly experienced men had been brought together.
The expertise in mines rescue work was great but the problem was enormous.
On the surface, to prevent further incursion of slurry from the subsidence, burns and field drains in the area were dammed or diverted.
The sides of the crater were made as secure as possible and the hole leading from it to the underground workings was fully exposed and kept clear.
Within a few hours, a team of very brave men descended into the crater and entered the workings where the disaster had begun; the danger of further subsidence from the surface and the extremely unsafe condition of the underground workings meant that they were knowingly putting their lives at risk.
Unfortunately, the 13 men missing could not be found.
Men went down the main shaft and tried to clear it by shovelling the slurry into tubs which were then hauled to the surface but this was soon abandoned as it was realised that it would take weeks or months to clear a way through to the trapped men.
In the meantime, the morale of the men was reasonably good, in spite of their air having deteriorated.
Davie Jess, a well known wag, entertained his mates with a flood of stories, many of which, as he said later, John Robertson, a  man known to have a fine voice was asked to sing a song; the only songs of which he knew the words were all hymns and soon rescuers gathered in the control room on the surface heard a strong, clear rendering of The Old Rugged Cross coming to them over the internal telephone system, with more than 100 trapped miners joining in the chorus.
The rescuers fell silent as they listened to the hymn from deep in the earth and few who heard it were without tears in their eyes or lumps in their throats.
Unknown to many of the trapped men, but suspected by the more experienced, poisonous gases had started to gather in the few roadways available to them.
Rescue was becoming extremely urgent.
One last possible means of rescue remained but it was dangerous and would require a great deal of equipment.
A disused mine, called Bank No. 6, the mouth of which was about one mile from the Knockshinnoch main shaft, had an underground roadway which extended to within 24 feet of a Knockshinnoch roadway, near to where the men were trapped.
The barrier between the mines could be tunnelled through and an escape route created.
The problems were formidable.
Much of Bank mine was filled with poisonous and explosive gases and if, when the gap was breached, the gases flowed from Bank into Knockshinnoch, the men would be asphyxiated.
It was decided that before the last section of the barrier was breached, a test hole would be bored and if the gases flowed through to the men, the hole would be sealed and some other means of rescue sought.
By the grace of God, the air flowed from Knockshinnoch into Bank and the tunnelling could be completed.
Powerful fans were brought in from other mines and taken down into Bank mine to disperse the gases.
On the night of Friday, 8th September, the barrier was broken through and rescue workers wearing breathing apparatus were able to take hot food and drinks through to the trapped men.
The visit raised morale and the men thought they would soon be free; after all, they were no longer entombed.
To their great disappointment, they were told that the gas in Bank mine was not clearing and their rescue would be delayed.
The barrier of poisonous gas appeared to be less penetrable than the rock that had been  tunnelled through.
In fact, unknown to them, the clearing of the gas had become a major problem.
An urgent decision was taken on the surface that the men would have to be brought out in groups of three.
Each man would wear an individual set of breathing apparatus and as each group got clear of the gas in Bank mine the equipment would be taken back into Knockshinnoch by rescuers and used by another group of three men.
The groups would be  led out by rescuers.
The wearing of breathing apparatus, although necessary, was known to be risky; the trapped men were not accustomed to the equipment and anyone who has used it knows how alarming and claustrophobic the experience can be; the effect can be a compelling desire to rip off the apparatus and if one of the trapped miners was to do so while passing through the gas in Bank mine, death would be almost instantaneous.
In addition to the hazard of wearing the equipment for the first time, each man would have to walk more than 800 yards through the disused roadways while wearing it.
At that point a young executive of the National Coal Board made a suggestion.
David Park had been born and reared in New Cumnock and had worked in the pits in the area.
At one time he had been the leader of the local rescue brigade and was familiar with the use of breathing apparatus.
He knew most of the trapped men personally.
After years of study he had qualified in Mining Engineering and had taken up a post as a college lecturer on mining.
From there he had moved to an executive position with the National Coal Board.
He suggested that it would be good for the morale of the trapped men if someone wearing breathing apparatus joined them and showed willingness to stay and share their predicament.
His own experience would enable him to demonstrate the use of the breathing apparatus, and he volunteered to go down.
At 3.40 a.m. on Saturday 9th September, David Park joined the trapped men and his presence did much to restore their morale and give them confidence for what was required of them.
He had taken a deliberate risk with his own life.
Conditions underground were deteriorating quickly.
The air was foul and the explosive, poisonous gas called firedamp — feared by all miners — was gathering near the men and spreading towards them.
Something had to be done soon or it would be too late.
The plan for the evacuation to be in groups of three had to be abandoned, as it would have taken 40 hours to get all of the men out and the gas collecting near them made it imperative that the exercise be completed in much less time.
It was decided that a chain of rescue men would pass the trapped miners along from one to the other through Bank Mine.
If any man collapsed, his condition would not be allowed to interfere with the operation.
A set of breathing apparatus would be required for each man and extra sets were borrowed from fire stations over a wide area.
Fresh air bases were set up in Bank Mine and a team of brave and dedicated doctors went underground to assist.
The traumatic experiences the men had already been through — the drama of the inrush of slurry, the knowledge that they were entombed, the foul air they had lived in for two days, and the threat of the gathering gas — meant that the half-mile walk wearing apparatus, and a further one and a half miles to the surface, would be a severe test of their remaining stamina and resolve.
One of the men was ill and very weak and would have to be brought out on a stretcher.
A rescue team went in for him at 12.30 p.m. on Saturday, 9th September, and returned to a fresh air base in Bank Mine at 2.45 p.m.
The ill man had reached safety  and the evacuation had begun successfully.
The last man reached the fresh air base at 12.05 a.m. on Sunday, 10th September, and soon afterwards, all of them had been brought to the surface.
David Park was the last man out of Knockshinnoch.
Relief at the deliverance of 116 men from a slow, horrific death, was blighted by the fact that 13 were still missing.
In due course, the sludge was cleared from the colliery and the bodies of the last of the men were recovered.
Eleven who had been working near the point of irruption had died in the torrent of stinking, clinging, liquid peat.
Two men had escaped the inrush but had been trapped in a long section of roadway; they had lived together in the pitch dark and freezing cold for about 8 days, until overcome by poisonous gas; there was no way in which they could have been saved in time had their position been known.
A disaster fund was set up for the widows and orphans and they were reasonably well provided for financially, although the sums they received seem very small by today's standards of compensation and value of money.
A lengthy public enquiry probed the cause of the disaster and attributed blame to certain officials, but blame is not a necessary part of this story.
The bravery of some men, including David Park, Andrew Houston and Andrew Cunningham, was recognised with awards for gallantry.
Many other men and organisations had reason to be proud of the parts they had played in the drama.
Deep mining has ended in Ayrshire, after having been an important part of the economy of the county for hundreds of years.
Now, there is no such thing in Ayrshire as a mining community.
In the past, these communities produced men and women who made valuable contributions to Scotland and mankind in general, in many fields of endeavour.
Even when poverty-  stricken and little above the level of slaves, the mining families had their pride and a determination to improve their lot.
THE TENNANT DYNASTY
Robert Burns and Alloway, his birthplace, are known throughout the world.
Thousands of books have been written about the poet's life and work, his family and friends have been scrutinised, and every place connected with him has been sought out.
At the same time, another Alloway family, contemporaries and friends of the Burns family, have been paid much less attention than their interesting story deserves.
That family were the Tennants of Laigh Corton Farm.
When the Burns family lived at the cottage in Alloway and later at Mount Oliphant Farm near the village, the Tennants were their closest friends and no account of the Burns story is complete without reference to them.
John Tennant (1725–1810), the father of the family, is thought to have been a witness to the baptism of Robert Burns, and it was he who joined the poet's father, William Burness, in hiring a young school teacher for their sons at Alloway.
Tennants had lived in and around the village for many generations and had served the small community as farmers, millers and blacksmiths.
John Tennant's father had died while John was still in his twenties and as well as taking over Laigh Corton Farm, he had taken responsibility for his mother and the rest of the family.
John married three times and had a total of seventeen children.
An anecdote tells how, when asked which of his wives he had preferred, he had replied,
John's sons by his first and second wives were contemporaries of Robert Burns and his brother Gilbert.
James, William, John Jnr.
and David Tennant grew up with the Burns boys; together, they attended school, explored the ruined Kirk Alloway, and played on the ‘banks and braes’ of the nearby River Doon.
Charles and Alexander Tennant were a little younger but knew the Burns family from childhood.
The friendships established between the families were to prove to be long lasting.
About 1768, while the boys were young, an incident occurred, the lasting consequences of which could not have been foreseen.
The Tennants had a highland bullock which went missing and, although the boys searched the district, the animal could not be found.
After a few days had passed, an old woman was walking from the Doon bridge into Alloway village and passing the partially ruined Kirk Alloway, when she heard a loud bellowing sound coming from the church.
Summoning up all her courage, she keeked in through a window and was startled to see a pair of large horns.
In terror, she lifted her skirts and ran off into the village, proclaiming loudly that ‘the diel’ was in Alloway kirk.
Of course, ‘the diel’ was the thirsty and ravenous bullock from Laigh Corton Farm.
The amusing story spread like wild-fire through the district and tradition maintains that it impressed the fertile imagination of the young Robert Burns, who was nine years old at the time, and that he recalled the incident many years later when he was creating his masterpiece, the poem Tam O' Shanter , which is set in the ruined kirk.
It is very probable that the seed sown on that day in Alloway, blossomed so many years later, and was harvested as the kernel of a fruit of genius.
An immediate sequel to the incident was that when two of the Tennant sons were retrieving the bullock from the kirk, it lost one of its beautiful horns while being extricated from the ruined pews.
The horn was taken home to Laigh Corton where it was hollowed out and used for many years as a bolting or drenching tube for giving medicine to animals.
In the Tennant family it was known as the ‘Auld Nick’ or ‘Clootie’horn, the former being another name for the devil, and the latter being a familiar Scottish name for a cow or bullock.
We will return to the story of the horn later.
A boyhood friend of John Tennant had been a girl called Elizabeth McGuire, who was employed at Laigh Corton as a servant.
Together they had laboured in the fields until fortune smiled on Elizabeth; while she was still in her teens, her family were befriended by a wealthy benefactor who had her educated and, in 1744, arranged a marriage for her with the 13th Earl of Glencairn.
(See Chapter 4).
As Countess of Glencairn, Elizabeth remembered her old friend and employer, John Tennant; she appointed him Factor of her estate at Ochiltree and gave him tenancy of Glenconner Farm on the estate.
The Tennant family moved from Laigh Corton to Glenconner but contact was maintained with the Burns's.
A few years later, the Burns family moved from Mount Oliphant to Lochlea Farm in Tarbolton Parish, within ten miles of their old friends.
When William Burnes died at Lochlea in 1784, John Tennant lent a horse to help to convey his body to Alloway for burial in the grounds of Kirk Alloway and memories of Alloway and the ruined kirk must have been recalled by both families when they met on that day.
In 1786, when Robert Burns was preparing his poetry for publication for the first time, he took his manuscript to Glenconner and read his poems to the Tennant family for their approval or otherwise.
Family tradition still speaks of the pleasure given by the poet's recitations.
Robert Burns called John Tennant, ‘a worthy, intelligent farmer, my father's friend and my own’ and his regard is borne out by the fact that when he was offered tenancy of Ellisland Farm, Dumfries, it was to John Tennant he turned for advice; they travelled together to the farm and after an inspection, the older man recommended it to his young friend.
The poet immortalised some of the Tennants in his poem,Epistle to James Tennant , addressed to John Tennant's eldest son.
The Tennant family prospered.
JAMES became Miller of Ochiltree Mill.
WILLIAM was ordained as a Church of Scotland Minister but later became an army Chaplain; he served in India for several years and wrote a series of books on the country which are still highly regarded.
JOHN Jnr.
became a wealthy farmer and owned several large farms throughout the county; as an agriculturalist, his reputation was such that when the government of the day commissioned a report on the state of agriculture in the county, he took a leading part in its preparation.
DAVID went to sea and rose to command a naval ship; after losing an arm in a naval battle, he was offered but refused a knighthood; in his book Memorials of Ochiltree , David Ramsay says that when David's brother James Tennant asked why he had refused the honour, he replied, ‘Deed, Jamie, I just considered it little better than a nickname.’
ALEXANDER emigrated to Cape Town where one of his grandsons became Speaker of the House of Assembly.
Of all the sons, CHARLES Tennant was the most successful; by energy and business acumen he established a vast industrial conglomerate and became progenitor of a distinguished family who have been eminent in world commerce for 200 years.
Charles Tennant (1768–1838) was the sixth son of old John Tennant and could not be employed on Glenconner Farm.
Handloom weaving was an important cottage industry at the time and Charles was sent to Kilbarchan in Renfrewshire to learn the trade; that was why Robert Burns referred to him as ‘Wabster (weaver) Charlie’ in the poem Epistle to James Tennant .
Linen was the most popular cloth of the period but no way had been found to bleach it to better than a dirty white colour and even that could be achieved only by up to eighteen months of processing.
Charles experimented with new bleaching agents and bought a bleachfield at Damley, now the site of a massive Glasgow housing estate.
Success came for Charles Tennant in 1798 when he patented a chlorine liquor  bleaching agent and was made doubly secure in the following year with an improved agent in powder form.
In 1799, together with business partners, he opened the St. Rollox Chemical Works on the north side of Glasgow to manufacture his bleaching powders.
The success was phenomenal and soon the company opened factories in other parts of the United Kingdom.
One of Charles Tennant's business partners was a young Glasgow chemist called Charles Mackintosh, the man who later gained world-wide recognition for his invention of a waterproof fabric and gave his name to a raincoat made of the material.
His process was superseded long ago but his name is still used for a type of raincoat.
Charles Tennant bought out his partners and expanded his business interests into other chemical processes, and into financing railway and canal construction.
Within thirty years, he had developed his chemical works at St. Rollox into the largest of its kind in the world.
In 1838, he was offered a knighthood for his achievements in commerce but refused it, the second of old John Tennant's sons to have done so.
‘Wabster Charlie’ died in 1838, aged 70 years.
In his life he had risen from being a poor farm boy to become the wealthy entrepreneurial head of a vast business conglomerate, all of it created by his own acumen, and had established a dynasty which still ranks high on the world's ladder of wealth and social standing.
Although that is the end of the story of the Tennants of Laigh Corton and Ayrshire, readers may be interested to know about some of ‘Wabster Charlie's’ descendants.
His son, John Tennant, expanded the business still further before the grandson, Sir Charles Tennant, moved the family home and business headquarters to London.
Of the next generation, a son was created Lord Glenconner, taking his title from the Ochiltree farm his great grandfather had left to start in business.
Three of the first Lord Glenconner's sisters married Lords, another married Henry Asquith the Prime Minister, and the youngest, Katherine, the widow of Walter Elliot, a Secretary of State for Scotland, is still on the front bench of the House of Lords in her own right as the Life Peeress, Baroness Elliot of Harwood.
The present Lord Glenconner is Colin Tennant, close friend of Princess Margaret who owns a luxury villa on his estate on the Caribbean island of Mustique, the villa having been a wedding present from his lordship.
A newspaper report that Lord Glenconner had spent over £500,000 on entertaining the rich and famous at his 60th birthday party a few years ago, must have made his hard-working forebears turn in their graves.
It may have been an exhibition of the Tennant family wealth but it could not be added to their list of credits.
The younger generations of Tenants still earn their share of fame and, unfortunately, notoriety.
They are far removed by more than distance from their roots in Ayrshire.
Before ending the chapter, let us return to the story of the highland bullock's horn, known in the Tennant family as the ‘Auld Nick’ or ‘Clootie’horn.
Several years after the Tennant's moved to Glenconner Farm, Ochiltree, old John Tennant learned that the village crier required a horn to sound before he made his proclamations around the district, so he had a silver mounting and mouthpiece fitted to the bullock's horn and presented it to the village.
About 1890, 100 years after his grandfather had presented the horn, Sir Charles Tennant, aware of the family tradition connecting the horn with Robert Burns and his poem Tam O' Shanter , decided to trace it and return it to the family's safe-keeping.
After much research, it was found in London, in the possession of a   descendant of the Ochiltree crier.
When it had been authenticated by its silver hallmarks, Sir Charles bought it and for the rest of his life regarded it as an important heirloom.
It is now in Glen House, Innerleithen, Peeblesshire, which is still owned by Lord Glenconner but operated by a private company as a conference centre.
LORD BALLANTRAE
Bernard Fergusson was descended from one of Ayrshire's oldest and most distinguished families which has produced many eminent men.
He pursued a military career and attained the rank of Brigadier.
After retiring from the army, he served as Governor General and Commander-in-Chief of New Zealand from 1962 to 1967, and was honoured with the title, Lord Ballantrae.
A prolific author and poet, his best-known book,Beyond the Chindwin , is a restrained account of his experiences as a Column Commander behind the Japanese lines in Burma during the Second World War.
The honours showered upon him in recognition of his distinguished military and literary career were K.T., G.C.M.G., G.C.V.O., D.S.O., and O.B.E. He was also made an Honorary LL.D of Strathclyde University, Honorary D.Litt. of St. Andrews University, Chancellor of St. Andrews University and Lord High Commissioner of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.
Although he was a master of English prose, he showed that certain feelings could be expressed only by recourse to ‘the mither tingue’.
THOMAS GARVINE'S INCREDIBLE JOURNEY
This true story of a young Ayrshire doctor starts in that vast country we know as Russia, 275 years ago, during the reign of Czar Peter the Great.
When Peter assumed his full authority as Czar in 1689, Russia was a backward country, hidebound in restrictive traditions and conventions which had prevented social and industrial progress.
Determined to transform his country, he studied his advanced western neighbours and welcomed to Russia able men of every important discipline.
Soon, Russia was seen as a land of opportunity and many men who went there attained high positions.
Peter the Great had a particular liking for Scots, probably influenced by his mother who had been reared by a Scotswoman, and by his own guardian after his father's death having been a General Menzies.
It has been said that Peter's military and naval staff headquarters were almost Scottish institutions.
It was also Peter's aim to improve the standard of medical knowledge in Russia and of an estimated 11 doctors, 87 surgeons, one eye specialist and 9 apothecaries who sought their fortunes in the country, many of the most prominent were Scots.
One in particular rose to a position of power and influence; Robert Erskine, a son of Sir Charles Erskine of Alva, who had been born and educated in Edinburgh, became Peter the Great's personal physician, confidante and adviser.
In 1713, by which time Erskine was at the height of his influence, he received a letter at St. Petersburg (Leningrad) from Ayrshire's Earl of Loudoun, asking him to favour a young Scottish doctor called Thomas Garvine who was working as a surgeon in St. Petersburg hospital.
Thomas Garvine (possibly an early version of the surnames Garven and Girvan common in Ayrshire at present) is thought to have been born about 1685, in or near Kilmarnock, although the Earl of Loudoun's intervention on his behalf suggests that he may have had an Irvine valley connection.
Where he was educated is not known but he was apprenticed to John Marshall, a surgeon from Kilsyth, who was in charge of Glasgow University's Physick garden in 1704 (a physick garden was a source of herbs and other plants used for medical purposes).
Word of Peter the Great's skilful physicians had spread throughout Europe and Asia, and in 1715 the Emperor of China sent an Ambassador to Peter asking that an able physician be sent to his palace at Peking.
A tradition says that the Emperor's wife was ill with a disease that baffled the native doctors but the letter which was carried by the Ambassador suggests the true reason; the Emperor's sexual ability seems to have been causing him more concern than either his own or his wife's health as he asked that the physician should bring ‘some medicines that would provoke the venery (encourage sexual indulgence)’, in other words, he wanted an aphrodisiac.
The request may well have been refused had it not been that western doctors were keen to learn Chinese methods of ‘variolation’(inoculation with smallpox virus) and, no doubt, Erskine would advise the Czar to send a doctor to Peking for that purpose.
Thomas Garvine was chosen to visit the Emperor, possibly due to Erskine's influence on his behalf, and was attached to a mission about to leave for China.
At the beginning of September, 1715, the mission left St. Petersburg on an  incredible journey that was to take it from the shore of the Baltic Sea in the west, almost to the Pacific Ocean in the east, crossing the full width of European Russia, much of Siberia, Mongolia's Gobi Desert and deep into China.
In this age of fast travel, supported by conveniences in every aspect of a journey, it is almost impossible to imagine the difficulties which must have faced the mission.
Travelling by horse and camel caravan, as dictated by the terrain, they would have to be self-sufficient for all of their needs as they traversed vast plains and mighty forests, mountain passes and arid deserts, experiencing great extremes of heat and cold.
Each day's distance would be governed by the time required to make and break camp, to hunt animals for food, and to prepare meals.
They would need clothing and shelter for the extremes of weather, and weaponry to protect themselves from the wild animals and hostile tribes which roamed the desolate regions they were to visit.
In a very brief account of his journey, Thomas Garvine referred to only 8 places he had visited between St. Petersburg and Peking.
Fortunately, with a little knowledge of the ancient trade routes between Europe and Northern Asia, the places he named enable us to trace the route he followed and to identify other interesting locations the mission must have visited.
The first section of the journey was from St. Petersburg to Moscow.
Although equivalent to the distance from Ayr to Portsmouth, the 420 miles on a busy route through a pleasant, well-populated region of flat or slightly undulating land, stippled with woodlands and attractive lakes, was barely a warm-up for what lay ahead.
From Moscow, the caravan travelled slowly eastwards for almost 1,000 miles to the Middle Gap of the Ural mountain chain, across seemingly endless plains of grassland and great forests.
Beyond the Urals is Siberia and the continent of Asia.
Siberia could contain all of Western Europe and have space to spare.
It was, and is, a vast, sparsely populated plain with countless lakes and some of the world's mightiest rivers, rivers which had to be crossed, but above all it has trees, mile after mile after mile of primeval forest, called the taiga, which, even today, is inhabited by tigers, bears and wolves.
During the winter months when snow is seldom absent and the temperature can plummet to -40°C, the mission travelled about 1,500 miles across Siberia to Yeniseysk, at which they turned south-east and followed the wild, raging Angara River for 1,300 miles through deep-cut, tree-clad highlands to Irkutsk and the magnificent Lake Baykal.
Set amidst panoramic views of snow-capped mountains of up to 11,000 feet, the lake is one of earth's outstanding features; 400 miles long and up to 50 miles wide, its dazzling blue, crystal clear water is over a mile deep in places and is reckoned to be one fifth of the world's supply of fresh water.
The route wound its way round the south end of the lake and through rugged mountain passes to the Russian/Mongolian border.
By then, the mission had journeyed over 3,500 miles and was still over 1,000 miles from Peking.
Outer and Inner Mongolia together are more than 13 times the size of mainland Britain.
The winters are long and very cold, with temperatures ranging between -16°C and -48°C from October to March.
Much of the land is a massive plain but the mission's route also took it across 500 miles of the arid, stony desolation of the Gobi Desert, which was  inhabited by hostile nomadic Mongol tribes.
The desert is a place of scorching heat by day and bitter cold by night and the mission would find little water for themselves or their animals for weeks at a time.
From Mongolia, at last they entered China, and after a few days came to the Great Wall, another of the earth's wonders.
In a region of high rolling hills, the wall is like a gigantic roller-coaster extending as far as the eye can see  to east and west; Garvine wrote of the wall that it ‘is built on such a scale that you would think it was the work of Gods rather than men’.
At the beginning of November, 1716, the mission arrived in Peking, having travelled more than 4,500 miles from St. Petersburg in 14 months.
The Emperor was in residence at his summer palace, a complex of lakes, pavilions and mansions, 7 miles outside Peking, and soon after his arrival Garvine was brought before the throne and questioned about the medicines he had brought.
On the next day, he had to appear again before the Emperor and was given a pair of white gloves to put on before he took the Royal pulse; he pronounced His Majesty to be in good health, which pleased the Emperor.
The tradition referred to earlier that a surgeon had been required for the Empress, maintains that Garvine had to diagnose her illness without being allowed into her presence and that he treated her successfully.
Garvine was ‘greatly honoured by the nobility’ during his stay in Peking and received many presents from the Emperor.
In one account of the visit, it is said that the Emperor was loathe to allow the doctor to leave China and did so only after Garvine appealed to him on the grounds that he wished to return to Scotland and attend to his aged and ailing father.
At the beginning of June, 1717, Garvine left Peking and began his journey back to St. Petersburg.
His return route is not known but he was much quicker than on his way out as he arrived in Moscow at the beginning of February, 1718, only 8 months after he left Peking.
He stayed in Moscow for two months before he returned to St. Petersburg and soon sailed back to Scotland.
On his return to Scotland, Garvine settled in Ayr where he practised as a doctor and, according to John Strawhorn's History of Ayr , he was elected Provost of the town for a record 14 terms between 1724 and 1755.
He bought the property of Camsiscan in Craigie Parish and married an elder sister of Hugh Montgomerie of Coilsfield, the man whose name was immortalised by Burns as ‘Sodger Hugh’, and who became the 12th Earl of Eglinton.
Thomas Garvine died c.1756, without issue.
He had lived outwith Scotland for only 5 years but during that time he had travelled further by land and had seen a greater number of interesting places than most people do in a lifetime.
Few men can have served a Czar and been feted by an Emperor.
IRVINE GRAMMAR — A GUID WEE SCHULE
Many Ayrshire schools have reason to be proud of outstanding men and women who have graced their classrooms as pupils.
Ayr, Irvine and Kilmarnock Academies could each lay claim to having had the largest number of scholars who went on to great things but, before these grander seats of learning were established, several small, seemingly totally inadequate schools had produced a succession of men of whom the county can be proud.
One such small place of learning was Irvine Grammar School of the 18th century.
Situated in Kirkgate, adjacent to the Parish kirk, with the kirkyard as its only playground, the low cottage appears to have had only one room, or two at most, in which about thirty pupils of varying ages and stages of education were taught by two teachers.
Although it was small and its facilities were poor, the standard of learning attained was high, as was illustrated by McJannet in his History of Irvine when he noted that as early as 1729, the pupils ‘translated part of a Greek Testament into Latin; some of the Roman authors into English…and also translated many English sentences into elegant Latin with great dexterity.’
There is little wonder that Irvine established a reputation as a centre of education.
The 5 years from 1784 to 1789 was Irvine Grammar School's vintage period.
During these few years, the school was attended by four boys, each of whom is worthy of our attention.
Their names were David Boyle, Henry Eckford, William Gilkison and John Galt.
DAVID BOYLE was born in Irvine in 1772, the son of the Honourable Patrick Boyle of Shewalton and grandson of the 2nd Earl of Glasgow.
At that time, sons of the nobility often started their education at the local school alongside boys whose parents were lower on the social scale and David attended Irvine Grammar School.
He left in 1784, studied law at Edinburgh University, and became an Advocate at 21 years of age.
In 1807, he was M.P.
for Ayrshire and appointed Solicitor General for Scotland.
Aged 39, he was raised to the Bench as Lord Boyle and later held the posts of Lord Justice Clerk and Lord Justice General.
In Scottish legal history he is remembered also as the Judge who presided at the trial of Burke and Hare, the Edinburgh body-snatchers who turned to murder.
David Boyle died in 1853.
A statue to him stands at the junction of Seagate and Castle Street, Irvine.
HENRY ECKFORD was born in Irvine in 1775.
Nothing is known of his background, other than that he was the son of John Eckford and Janet Black.
At 16 he emigrated to Canada and began work in a small shipyard in Quebec, owned by his uncle, John Black, who had gone there from Irvine a few years earlier.
Henry studied ship design and at 21 moved to New York and started building ships on his own account.
Before long, his ships had gained a reputation for quality and speed and his business prospered.
He introduced several unique design features, including a reduction in the size of stem frames and changes in the rigging of sailing ships.
In 1812, when war broke out between the infant U.S.A. and Britain over territorial disputes on the Canadian border, Eckford was asked by the U.S. Government to supervise the building of warships on the great lakes and to do so he gave up his own  business.
When the war ended in 1813, he returned to New York and took up an appointment in charge of the design and construction of ships for the U.S. Navy in its Brooklyn yard.
After 3 years, he resigned because of interference from and disagreements amongst Navy Department bureaucrats.
Eckford started up in business again as a shipbuilder and soon re-established his high reputation.
He built, to his own design, the steamship Robert Fulton , which made the first successful ocean voyage off the east coast of America, sailing from New York to Havana.
About 1829, he submitted a plan to President Andrew Jackson for the complete re-organisation of the navy.
The plan was adopted and he is acknowledged to have been the father of the modem U.S. Navy.
Eckford had become a wealthy man and, having bought a mansion and estate on Manhattan Island, he dabbled in politics.
Unfortunately, an insurance company with which he had become financially involved collapsed and he lost most of his fortune.
His reputation as a shipbuilder was still second to none and, having built a warship for the Sultan of Turkey, he was invited to Turkey to re-organise the country's construction of warships.
In 1832, on a visit to Constantinople to organise a new shipyard, he collapsed and died.
Henry Eckford's genius is remembered still in the U.S.A.
WILLIAM GILKISON was born in Irvine in 1777, the eldest son of David Gilkison, a partner in Gilkison, Thomson & Company, a small shipbuilding firm at Irvine harbour.
The family was reasonably prosperous and their home in High Street, with its roof in the shape of an upturned boat was a well-known landmark.
As was common at the time, William went straight from school into the merchant navy and he was seldom at home throughout his teenage years as he sailed the oceans of the world, learning the skills of seamanship and navigation.
Britain and France were at war and in 1794, or thereabouts, when he was about 17, William's ship was captured by the enemy and he was imprisoned in France.
After a year, he escaped and helped by having become fluent in French during his captivity, he was at liberty for 3 months before he was recaptured.
After several more months as a prisoner of war, he escaped again and this time succeeded in making his way to England in a small boat.
He returned home to Irvine but had already decided to emigrate and seek his fortune in Canada.
In 1796, aged 19, William Gilkison arrived in New York, en route to Ontario.
He had few finances but had in his possession a letter of introduction to a fur trader called John Joseph Astor.
It is not known who gave him the letter but it was to set him off on the road to fame and fortune.
Astor was a German who had settled in Canada about 12 years earlier and started in business, trading with Indian tribes and immigrant trappers.
He became North America's first multi-millionaire and founded a dynasty which is still prominent throughout the world.
Astor's North-West Fur Company had a small fleet of sailing ships on Lake Erie, transporting furs from warehouses on the Canadian shore to ports at the east end of the lake.
William was given command of a schooner and spent the next 6 years trading on Lake Erie.
If they transacted the Company's business diligently, Captains were allowed to trade on their own behalf and when this income was added to their basic salary, earnings were high.
In 1803, William married Isabella Grant, daughter of a wealthy and influential  family.
His father-in-law, Alexander Grant, son of the 8th Laird of Glen Moriston, Invernesshire, had been Commodore of the small British naval fleet on the Canadian lakes and had served for 20 years on the Executive Council of Upper Canada, for which he had been rewarded with liberal grants of land in various parts of Canada.
After his marriage, William gave up his employment as a ship's captain to manage his father-in-law's estate and business affairs.
In 1812, when war broke out between Britain and the U.S.A., William's life took one more twist.
He volunteered for duty and was appointed Quarter Master General in charge of the British army stores at Montreal.
His administrative post did not prevent him from taking an active part in several engagements, including the bloody battle of Chrysler's Farm.
The war ended in 1813 and as his father-in-law had died a year earlier, William was no longer required to manage the family affairs.
He and his wife had become reasonably wealthy and were free to consider their future.
They had 7 sons and, as schools in Canada had not attained an acceptable standard, the parents decided that their sons should have the benefit of Scottish education.
The family sailed for Scotland in 1815 and settled in Glasgow.
When the boys had been placed in good schools, William and Isabella spent much of their time travelling in Britain and Continental Europe.
They were happy together for ten more years until Isabella died suddenly in 1826.
William was inconsolable and, unable to settle at home, continued to travel extensively.
Ever since his return from Canada, William had paid regular visits to London, maintaining close contact with his cousin, John Galt, with whom he had attended school in Irvine.
It is thought to have been he who convinced Galt that Canada was a land of wonderful opportunities and influenced the novelist's future involvement in that country.
By 1832, William's sons had been settled in professions and some of them had returned to Canada.
In March of that year he sailed back to Ontario where he bought a farm, the land of which is now part of the city of Brantford.
On the recommendation of John Galt, who was then in Canada, he bought 14,000 acres of virgin land in Ontario, at the junction of the Grand and Irvine Rivers.
(It is presumed that either Galt or Gilkison named the River Irvine) William had a mill and a general store built, sold off plots of land to settlers, and established a community which he named Elora after a sailing ship which his youngest brother, Captain John Gilkison of Irvine, had just had built for the trade with India.
Unfortunately, William did not live to pursue his plans for Elora as he died suddenly in  1823 , aged 56.
For many years the town continued to develop, mainly due to an abundance of water power from the rivers, and many of the settlers were from his native town of Irvine, Ayrshire.
As water power became less important, the community declined but it is still preserved as an example of an early settlement.
It is now a picturesque village of about 2,700 inhabitants, at the centre of a large conservation area.
William Gilkison is remembered still in the history of Ontario and is listed as one of the founding fathers of the province.
JOHN GALT , a cousin of William Gilkison, was born in Irvine in 1779.
As a child he had a delicate constitution and started his education at home before he attended the Grammar School from 1786 to 1789.
When he was about 10, his family moved to Greenock, home port for his father, Captain of a sailing ship.
At 14, John left school and began work as a clerk in Greenock Customs House, moving later to a similar position  with a business firm.
In 1804, aged 22, he moved to a clerical post in London but soon left it to study law in the city.
John had dreams of being a writer and had tried his hand at poetry, including an epic poem on the Battle of Largs.
His restless spirit could not settle to his legal studies and in 1809, having obtained a commission from a merchant company to act as their agent and establish trade agreements, he went off to the Mediterranean area.
In the south of France he met Lord Byron, with whom he travelled to Gibraltar, Greece and the Levant.
His friendship with Byron fired his own literary ambitions and after returning to London in 1812 he published two volumes on his travels.
He devoted his life to writing and submitted numerous articles to Scottish and English magazines, but success eluded him and he was unable to support himself.
It was at that time he wrote the first of a series of Scots novels which were to secure for him a place in the history of literature.
About 1820, possibly due to the persuasion and influence of William Gilkison, Galt became the London agent for people in Upper Canada who were trying to obtain compensation from the British Government for losses they had sustained in the 1812/13 war with the U.S.A. He submitted a plan to the Government which led to the creation of the Canada Company, and, as its first Secretary, he was sent to Canada to acquire land.
He bought about 2 million acres, arranged its resale in lots to settlers and supervised the construction of roads and bridges to open up remote areas.
He also established the towns of Guelph and Goderich (later, the town of Galt was named in his honour).
By his efforts, the development of Canada was accelerated and the money raised through the purchase and resale of land was used to pay the war compensation claims.
John Galt's position with the Canada Company was undermined by jealous rivals and land speculators, who made allegations of irregularities in his accounts, with the result that he was recalled to London and dismissed.
That he had not been misappropriating money or land for his own benefit was shown by his dire financial straits which led to his brief imprisonment as a debtor.
His misfortunes spurred Galt to write with renewed vigour and until near the end of his life his output was voluminous.
In all he wrote 50 books, several plays, some poetry, and a great number of pamphlets and articles.
His best-remembered books are his Scots novels:—The Ayrshire Legatees — the story of an Ayrshire Minister and his family in London;The Annals of the Parish and The Provost — novels depicting social life in 18th century Ayrshire;The Entail ;Sir Andrew Wylie ; and Lawrie Todd .
In 1834, John Galt retired to Greenock where he continued his writing.
He applied his fertile mind to local affairs and produced a plan to make the Clyde navigable to Glasgow by building a dam and a lock at Bowling.
Also in 1834, his supposed misdemeanours forgiven and his contribution to Canada already recognised, he was appointed Superintendent of the British America Land Company, formed to develop the eastern lands of Quebec but bad health prevented him from taking up the appointment.
John Galt died in Greenock in 1839, an ill and unhappy man, unaware that his genius would be appreciated after his death.
When he had written his autobiography a few years earlier, he had started it with the verse:—
‘Helpless, forgotten, sad and lame,
On one lone seat the livelong day,
I muse of youth, and dreams of fame,
And hopes and wishes all away.‘
We now know that some of what must have been his ‘hopes and wishes’ and ‘dreams of fame’have been fulfilled; his worth as a novelist and his work in Canada have been acknowledged by succeeding generations.
BETSY MILLER — SEA CAPTAIN
In an age when the sea was even more of a man's world than at present, and when women's work outside the home was generally menial, Betsy Miller was the first woman to be recorded as a ship's captain in the British Register of Tonnage at Lloyds.
Betsy was born in Saltcoats in 1793.
Her father was a ship's master and wood merchant, and with his two-masted brig,Clytus , traded out of Saltcoats and other Ayrshire harbours, carrying mainly coal and limestone to small ports on the west coast of Scotland and around Ireland.
Although Betsy and her two younger sisters were reared in one of the better-off families of Saltcoats, she had a love of the sea and ships and from the age of 15 had gone on trips on Clytus as often as her parents allowed.
Her father encouraged her desire to learn navigation and other aspects of seamanship, and after a few years her proficiency was obvious to everyone who sailed with her.
When Betsy was in her twenties, her father died suddenly, leaving her mother with unexpected debts of over £800, a vessel without a master, and three daughters to support.
Sale of Clytus would not have cleared their debts and.
even then, they would have been left with no source of income.
Betsy suggested that the best solution to the problem would be for her to take over command of Clytus and continue trading.
With her mother's reluctant approval, she gave  up her easy life ashore and went to sea, a career she was to follow for almost 50 years and which was to bring her lasting fame.
Life on Clytus was always dirty and often dangerous.
When cargoes of coal or limestone are carried, the dust pervades the whole vessel and it is almost impossible for the crew to keep themselves even reasonably clean.
However, tradition says that Betsy Miller was always particular about her appearance and never went ashore without looking neat, fresh and feminine.
The Firth of Clyde and Irish Sea can be very hazardous for shipping and in the days of sail, small craft were lost regularly (See Chapter 33).
In an infamous storm on 7th January, 1839, which sank many boats in the Firth,Clytus was blown away from her moorings in Troon harbour and went aground on Barassie beach.
That may have been the occasion on which, according to tradition, Betsy went to her quarters and changed her clothes as disaster threatened, her fear of the elements being less than her horror of being washed ashore in less than spotless undergarments.
Fortunately, when Clytus went aground, the master and crew were able to scramble ashore through the breakers on Barassie's sandy beach, and the vessel was recovered undamaged a few days later.
During a debate on the Merchant Shipping Act in the House of Lords in 1854, the Earl of Eglinton referred to Betsy Miller and her life at sea.
As a result, she received a great deal of publicity in newspapers in both the United Kingdom and North America.
In 1862, aged 69 years, bad health compelled Betsy to retire from the way of life she loved.
She lived in Quay Street, Saltcoats and for as long as she was able to do so, spent much of her time around the harbour, conversing with the sailors amongst whom she had spent her life.
Betsy died in 1864, and tributes were paid to her in newspapers on both sides of the Atlantic and much further afield.
Her local newspaper, the Ardrossan and Saltcoats Herald , ended an account of her life with a prophesy which time has proved to be accurate:—‘Her memory, her deeds, and her example will live and be spoken of long after the generation who knew her personally will have passed away.’
A plaque on the wall of a house in Quay Street, Saltcoats, is to the memory of Betsy Miller, a truly remarkable woman.
A TALE OF DISASTERS AND DIAMONDS
Ayrshire has had a long association with the aeroplane, mainly centred on Prestwick Airport and the companies which have built aircraft on the site.
Aeroplanes had been seen in the county from about 1912 but it was during the First World War that they became common.
In 1913, the Royal Flying Corps had 8 biplanes at Gailes and during the same year an airship was seen over the county for the first time.
By the 1930s, the grass flying strip at Monkton, later to be developed into Prestwick Airport, was in regular use by a few pilots, and the aerobatic displays of travelling ‘flying circuses’ were a novelty in various parts of Ayrshire.
During the Second World War, the number of aircraft in and over the county increased dramatically.
There was a flying boat base at Largs, the ‘aerodrome’(as it was known) at Prestwick, airfields at Heathfield and Turnberry, and an emergency landing strip at Drybridge.
The busiest place, by far, was Prestwick; during the war years, in addition to other busy service and civilian traffic, 20,000 military planes were ferried in from North America for distribution to various bases and war zones.
The great increase in air traffic made accidents almost inevitable and it was not long until Ayrshire had its first major air crash.
On 14th August, 1941, a military aircraft crashed near Whitletts on take-off from Heathfield, with the loss of 22 lives, mainly British and American servicemen.
Several R.A.F. planes crashed at locations throughout the county but it was three years until the next disaster brought death and destruction to a quiet residential street in Prestwick.
About one o'clock on the morning of 28th August, 1944, a United States Air Force transport plane, with 20 service personnel on board, crashed on take-off and came down on Berelands Road and Hillside Avenue, Prestwick.
Two houses in Berelands Road were badly damaged and two in Hillside Avenue were demolished.
All on board the aircraft lost their lives, and four male lodgers and a little girl of five were killed in No. 6 Hillside Avenue.
Several local people had reason to be proud of the rescues they effected before the arrival of the rescue services.
The name of Hillside Avenue has been  changed and the site of the homes on which the aircraft came to rest is now part of Boydfield Avenue.
A stranger could never imagine that it had been the scene of such horror.
On 11th June, 1945, a converted Liberator bomber of the United States Air Force, en route from Lancashire to Prestwick, crashed on Pildinny Hill, about 4 miles south-east of Ballantrae, with the deaths of seventeen American servicemen.
The war in Europe had ended a month earlier and in the Far East the Japanese armies were in full retreat.
Most of the men on the plane would have been returning to their families and civilian life in the near future but, alas, they died on a remote and desolate Ayrshire hillside before they had seen their homes and families again.
The first peacetime, and civil, air disaster in Ayrshire occurred on the 20th October, 1948.
A Constellation aircraft of K.L.M. Royal Dutch Airlines left Schiphol Airport in Netherlands, bound for New York via Prestwick.
On board were 10 crew members and 30 passengers.
Weather conditions had deteriorated rapidly by the time the plane reached Prestwick and the pilot aborted his landing almost on touch-down.
The control tower staff saw the aircraft making a sharp left-hand climbing turn before it disappeared into thick low cloud.
After brief snatches of radio transmissions, the tower heard a despairing plea, ‘Have you any idea where we are?’
It was learned later that the plane had flown through overhead high tension power cables and left the topmost cable intact; 132,000 volts of electricity had passed through the aircraft, igniting all flammable material on board.
The Constellation crashed on Auchinweet Farm, on the eastern edge of Tarbolton parish, about 5 miles east of the airport.
Of the 40 people on board.
6 survived the crash but no one lived more than a few days.
The latest, and hopefully the last, of the county's major air incidents is remembered as ‘the Christmas air crash’.
About 1.20 a.m. on 25th December, 1954, the British Overseas Airways Corporation Stratocruiser G-ALSA left London Airport en route for Manchester, Prestwick, New York and Montreal.
On board were 11 crew and 25 passengers.
The flight had left London originally on Christmas Eve in another aircraft but after an hour's flying time it had developed trouble with its undercarriage and had to return to London.
The passengers and crew had transferred to the Stratocruiser and resumed their journey more than 3 hours behind schedule.
Before leaving London for the second time, the Captain of the aircraft received an updated weather report showing that conditions were bad at Manchester and deteriorating quickly at Prestwick.
It was decided to cancel the Manchester landing and fly direct to Prestwick.
Extra fuel was taken on board to enable the plane to fly on to another airport or return to London if the weather caused the closure of Prestwick.
The flight to Prestwick was uneventful.
The passengers were looking forward to being at home for Christmas and the atmosphere on board was cheerful.
Those who expected to be met by family or friends were aware of the inconvenience the delay would be causing.
The aircraft reached Prestwick about 3.15 a.m. and the Captain began his final approach procedure.
Under the direction of the control tower, all went as normal and the Stratocruiser was aligned for a landing on runway 31.
The families and friends waiting at the airport saw the plane break from a cloud at about 700 feet and make its final descent.
The long wait was almost over and they expected to be greeting the passengers in a few minutes.
Suddenly, catastrophe struck.
The plane touched down, bounced up again, slewed sideways and skidded along the runway, breaking up as it did so; the port wing broke off and the rest of the plane turned over on top of it.
In seconds, the whole wreckage was engulfed in raging flames and happiness had turned to horror.
The airport fire service was alongside the wreck within a few minutes but there was little the firemen could do.
The fuel tanks had exploded and the temperature in the burning fuselage was 2,000 degrees centigrade.
Twenty-eight people died — 24 passengers and 4 crew members.
One passenger survived by escaping through a hole in the fuselage as the plane broke up.
Seven of the crew, including the Captain, scrambled to safety through sliding windows in the nose section.
One of the crew who survived lost his wife and daughters who had been passengers.
Nine of the dead were Ayrshire people coming home for Christmas; they were from Alloway, Annbank Station, Ayr and Troon.
A lengthy enquiry concluded that the accident had been caused by the aircraft landing on grass, 127 feet short of the runway, so that the wheels dug into the soft earth and the plane went out of control.
The world-wide media attention given to the tragedy was renewed 5 days after the accident when a London firm of Insurance Assessors and Adjustors announced that the aircraft had been carrying almost £1 million worth of rough diamonds.
The matter had come to light when the consignees in New York reported to London that the diamonds were overdue.
The diamonds had been contained in cloth bags within canvas mail bags in the cargo hold.
The material of the bags had been destroyed in the fire and most of the burned  contents of the hold had been dispersed over a wide area.
To find the precious stones was going to be almost impossible.
A massive salvage operation was undertaken.
An aircraft hanger on the airport was set aside and placed under 24-hour police guard, as was the site of the crash.
The burned-out fuselage was taken to the hanger and every particle of debris and ash removed.
About 30 tons of turf and top soil, and several tons of burned tarmac, were removed from the area over which the aircraft had broken up and come to rest; the tyres of vehicles, footwear of personnel, and all items of equipment used at the site, were taken to the hanger and cleaned of mud and grass.
All of the ash, debris, turf, tarmac and earth was then sifted meticulously under the supervision of a team of London diamond experts.
The massive and complex operation took two months to complete but it was successful far beyond all expectations.
Of the 26,000 carats of diamonds dispatched, over 23,000 carats were recovered, a success rate of over 90%.
The experts concluded that of the diamonds which were not recovered, some could have disintegrated and others would have become embedded in molten metal.
It is unlikely that any of the missing diamonds had been picked up by persons involved in the rescue or who visited the site later as only an expert would have been able to identify them as precious stones.
According to diamond experts who have been consulted, at 1990 values, the stones dispatched would be worth £25 million.
As the 10% not recovered would now be worth £2½ million, a fortune in diamonds may be lying under the tarmac of Prestwick Airport's main runway.
It is now 33 years since the last major air crash in Ayrshire and we must pray that there is never another.
In the 80 years since the aeroplane first appeared in the county, it has brought a great deal of pleasure and prosperity.
Hopefully, it will continue to do so, but without the levy in lives it has taken in the past.
THE LEGEND OF OLD KING COLE
It is accepted now that many of our nursery rhymes are based on factual people or occurrences.
The Grand Old Duke of York did lead his men; Dick Whittington was a 15th century Lord Mayor of London; Ring-A-Ring-O'-Roses is said to relate to an outbreak of plague in London in the 17th century; and Bluebeard is based on a psychopathic French murderer of the 15th century.
Over the centuries, the stories have been altered until the boundaries of fact and fiction have been irrevocably obscured but it is wrong to be too quickly dismissive when judging the sources of nursery rhymes or other traditional tales.
So what of Old King Cole, one of the best known characters in all of British literature and one of the best loved in nurseryland for countless generations?
Did he really exist or is he merely fictitious?
Old King Cole was a merry old soul,
And a merry old soul was he;
He called for his pipe and he called for his bowl,
And he called for his fiddlers three.
According to an English dictionary of fables, ‘King Cole was a legendary British king of the 4th century after whom the River Colne and town of Colchester in Essex are named.’
The compilers of the English dictionary may not have been aware of, or may have chosen to ignore, Ayrshire's legendary claim to King Cole.
Through chauvinism or lack of thoroughness they omitted the many Scottish versions of the rhyme, even though some are known to be very old.
One variant known to have been common in Ayrshire in the 18th century was:—
The identity of Marjorie is not known but it may have been Ayrshire's Marjorie Bruce, daughter of Robert Bruce and mother of the first Stewart king (See Chapter 16).
The county's claim to King Cole is almost certainly based on a real historical character and the legend deserves to be maintained.
The factual part of the story is probably this — about 702 A.D., part of Ayrshire was ruled, or at least contested, by Coilus, a king of the Britons, and rivals for the territory were the Scots led by Fergus.
The Britons originated in the northern parts of England but had settled in the area that is now Ayrshire and Renfrewshire.
The Scots had come over from Ireland and colonised most of Galloway, Kintyre and Arran.
According to legend, first recorded as early as the 16th century, Fergus defeated the Britons in battle and King Coilus was killed.
The full legendary account of the battle is as follows.
King Coilus and his Britons were camped near the River Doon, not far from the shores of the little loch still called Loch Fergus.
Fergus and his Scots were camped nearby, on the south side of the river.
On being informed that Coilus and his men had enjoyed an evening of feasting, drinking and merriment, Fergus decided to attack.
Under cover of darkness, the Scots surprised the Britons and slaughtered many of them.
Coilus escaped and retreated eastwards with those of his men who had survived.
Their retreat brought the Britons to the river now called the Water of Coyle.
The river was in flood and tradition maintains that Coilus was able to cross only by leaping onto a large rock in mid-stream and from it to the farther bank.
The rock marking the crossing point is on the land of Knockmurran Farm, Coylton and was known as ‘the king's step’ until the early years of this century.
Unfortunately, it appears that knowledge of the legend and the stepping-stone is almost lost in the district.
Having crossed the river, Coilus and his men retreated northwards past what are now Coylton and Trabboch, towards the places we know as Failford and Tarbolton.
The Scots caught up with the Britons on land that is now part of Coilsfield Mains farm.
A battle ensued and a field on the farm is still known as ‘Dead Man's Holm’.
It is pointed out as the place where the warriors were buried.
During the battle, a burn nearby ran red with blood and in legend has been called ‘the bloody burn’.
In a field on the north side of the A758 Ayr/Mauchline road, about a mile west of Failford, there is the site of a tumulus that is said to have been the burial place of King Coilus.
It is located to the west of Coilsfield Mains, about 20 yards removed from the steading.
Originally a mound but now no more than a group of rocks, it was excavated in 1837 and a circular stone was found at a depth of 4 feet.
The stone covered a small burial chamber in which four small  incinerary urns were discovered, together with some bones and a quantity of yellow soil.
The items showed that the burial had taken place at the period when the cremation of bodies and burial of the ashes in urns was practised.
Unfortunately, the burial period must have been between 1400 and 1000 B.C., a time far distant from the legendary date of the battle between Coilus and Fergus.
Local tradition maintains that over the centuries, pieces of ancient armour and weapons have been ploughed up in the area In 1796, a carved stone was unearthed near the burial mound but its whereabouts is now unknown.
Even earlier, a more important discovery was made.
About 1615, in the field known as ‘Dead Man ‘s Holm’, a workman dug up an ancient bronze hunting horn.
It is 25 inches long, 2 inches in circumference near the mouthpiece, and 8 inches in circumference at the other end; the larger end has an aperture 4 inches in diameter.
On analysis it was found to be composed of 90.26% copper and 9.16% tin, with a loss of 0.13%.
As the burial mound was of the period known as the Bronze Age, the horn and the mound could belong to the same period.
There is no doubt that the owner of the horn must have been a person of considerable importance in his time.
It is known as King Coilus's Horn.
Tradition says that the only similar horn known about was dug out of the banks of the River Rhine in Germany in the 19th century but this has not been verified.
In his book,Tour Through the Whole Island of Great Britain , published in 1724, the English author Daniel Defoe wrote of having seen the horn and heard it sounded at Coilsfield House (later rebuilt and named Montgomerie House) to call the servants to their duties.
When the horn was found at Coilsfield Mains farm.
the estate was owned by the Cuninghame family.
In the late 17th century the estate was sold to the Montgomerie family and the Cuninghames moved to their seat at Caprington Castle.
The horn was taken to Caprington and is still on display in the castle.
The 375 years since it was unearthed seems to be short when compared to the 900 years or more it had lain buried.
King Coilus's horn is a priceless relic and an important item from Ayrshire's  history.
It is to be regretted that so few people in the county are aware of its existence.
The names Coylton, Water of Coyle, Coilsfield and Coilsholm, all in the ancient district of Kyle, bear witness to the presence of Coilus in the area The burial mound, ‘Dead Man's Holm’ and the horn give credence to the legend, especially as it was an ancient legend before the mound was excavated or the horn unearthed.
In a legend so old, discrepancies in dates can be expected and are of secondary importance.
The scholar, Hector Boece, first Principal of Aberdeen University, writing about Ayrshire in the first few years of the 16th century, observed that,, another indication of the age of the legend.
Our national bard, Robert Burns (1759–96), was familiar with the area.
His immortal sweetheart, Highland Mary Campbell, was employed at Coilsfield House, on the land of which the farm and its battlefield are situated.
Burns and Mary Campbell must have meandered around the estate in their courtship and the monument to their final parting is only a short distance from the battlefield and burial mound.
As an avid collector of folk tales, Robert Burns knew the story of King Coilus and the legend of Old King Cole, as is shown by the opening lines of his poem The Twa Dogs :—
In a note to his poem The Vision , Burns wrote, ‘Coilus, King of the Picts, from whom the district of Kyle is said to take its name, lies buried, as tradition says, near the family seat of the Montgomeries of Coilsfield, where his burial place is still shown.’
In the same poem, he called his own poetic Muse, Coila.
One more factual piece of historical evidence must be considered.
About 420 A.D., a powerful king called Coel ruled must of the North of England and South of Scotland, including what is now Ayrshire.
It may be that Coilus was, in fact.
Coel and that the Ayrshire legend has been mis-placed in the 8th century; it is possible also that Coilus was a descendant of Coel; we will never know.
If Coel or Coilus was the original of Old King Cole, he lived many centuries before smoking was practised in Britain and before fiddles had been conceived.
And yet, if a circle of blisters caused by the plague could give rise to a Ring-A-Ring-O'-Roses, and the famous Dick Whittington cat was not introduced until about 150 years after Dick died, why should embellishment through the ages not have taken King Coel or Coilus to Old King Cole, completed with pipe, bowl and fiddlers three.
It would be wrong to assert that Ayrshire's claim to Old King Cole of the nursery rhyme can be substantiated beyond reasonable doubt but only the foolish would ridicule the ancient legend.
Certainly.
those who omitted it from a dictionary of fables were less than scholarly.
The last word, evidentially, is allowed to the latest researcher of the subject.
In a well researched book,Folk Heroes of Britain , by Charles Kightly, an English scholar, the author successfully debunks the legend connecting Cole with the Colchester area and supports the view that the Ayrshire legend is based on fact, Coel or Coilus being the person celebrated in the nursery rhyme.
The reader is left to judge for himself.
One thing is certain, the legend is likely to live on in Ayrshire.
THE EVIL MASTER OF STAIR
The Massacre of Glencoe is probably the most infamous event in Scottish history.
For treachery and cold-blooded murder it has seldom been surpassed.
Every Scot knows at least part of the story of the massacre, but many are not aware of the background that led up to the atrocity and too little is known about the heinous wickedness of some of the characters involved.
In 1688, James II of England and VII of Scotland, the last of the Stewart Kings, was deposed and replaced by Prince William of Orange from Holland who became King William III.
Most of Scotland accepted the new King and a measure of much needed stability was brought to Scottish affairs.
But loyalty to the House of Stewart was strong in the highlands and Graham of Claverhouse raised an army from the clans in support of the restoration of King James.
In 1689 they defeated government forces at the Battle of Killiecrankie but Graham was killed and soon afterwards the rebel army was defeated at Dunkeld and the uprising ended.
The clan chiefs who had taken part against the King were offered pardons on condition that each took an oath of allegiance to King William before 1st January, 1692.
All but one of the chiefs took the oath  timeously , the exception being the aged McIan Macdonald of Glencoe who delayed until the last few days of 1691.
He then set out in a violent storm and heavy snow for Fort William, where he hoped to take the oath in the presence of the local commander of government troops.
Under the terms of the pardon, the commander was not empowered to accept Macdonald's submission and the old man had to make his way through the blizzard to Inveraray.
He did not arrive there until 2nd January, 1692, outwith the time allowed for the oath, and then found that the Sheriff-Depute who was empowered to accept his vow of allegiance was absent.
The official returned on 5th January and McIan Macdonald's oath was certified and a copy of the certification was sent to the Privy Council in Edinburgh.
In the capital, the certificate relating to Macdonald was received by John Dalrymple, Master of Stair, who had been appointed Secretary for Scotland by King William.
It had been Dalrymple's idea to require the clan chiefs to take the oath of allegiance and it became obvious that he had hoped for an opportunity to punish one clan as an example to the others.
When it was seen that all clan chiefs had taken the oath, Dalrymple was frustrated, but not for long.
He declared that McIan Macdonald's late submission was invalid and that vengeance was to be taken against his clan.
He prepared an instruction for the King's signature, declaring that the Macdonalds of Glencoe were to be pursued ‘by fire and sword’ and that troops were to ‘burn their houses, seize or destroy their goods or cattle, plenishings or clothes, and to cut off the men.’
For centuries, the Clan Campbell had been the enemies of Clan Macdonald and to ensure that no mercy was shown to the Macdonalds of Glencoe, the Campbells of Glen Lyon were instructed by Dalrymple to enforce the orders.
During February, 1692 the Campbells went to Glencoe and under the guise of friendship billeted themselves on McIan Macdonald and his kinsmen.
For a week they accepted generous hospitality and it is said that on the evening before the massacre their leader played cards with McIan and his family.
At 5 a.m. on 13th February, 1692, while the Macdonalds were still asleep in their humble dwellings throughout the glen, the Campbells began the slaughter of their hosts.
Each end of Glencoe was sealed off and every adult male who could be found was killed.
In all, 38 of the 150 Macdonald men were murdered, including McIan and his sons, and many more died of exposure while trying to escape in their nightclothes in the arctic conditions.
The massacre has left an indelible stain on the name of Clan Campbell.
Even now, 300 years later, their treachery is spoken of.
Tradition maintains that many of the Campbells warned Macdonalds in time for them to escape but it can not be denied that on that winter morning in Glencoe many of the Clan Campbell plumbed the depths of treachery and horror.
By now, many readers may be wondering why the story of Glencoe has been related in a miscellany on Ayrshire and its people.
It has been included because John Dalrymple, the instigator of the atrocity, was an Ayrshire man.
He may have brought only dishonour to the name of the county but his involvement in the massacre should not be forgotten.
He got off too lightly at the time and history has not brought his memory to full justice.
John Dalrymple, born 1648, Secretary for Scotland, Master of Stair and later Earl of Stair, was descended from an ancient Ayrshire family.
As early as the 13th century, they owned lands at Dalrymple village, from which they probably took their name.
By marriage they inherited more land and a mansion on the banks of the River Ayr at Stair, from which they took their title.
They also owned estates in other parts of Ayrshire and in Galloway.
John's father, James Dalrymple, was the first to bring the family name into national prominence when, in 1657, as the high point of an eminent legal career, he was appointed a Law Lord and took the title Lord Stair.
(See Chapter 38).
It was through his father's title that John Dalrymple was designated Master of Stair.
He followed his father into the legal profession and attained some of the highest legal appointments in Scotland, including the posts of Lord Advocate and Lord Justice Clerk.
During his career, the Master of Stair showed himself to be willing and able to flow or turn with the prevailing political tide, changing sides as it suited his purpose or ambition.
A strong supporter of the Stewarts in his early years, he was knighted by Charles II, but when the Stewart King, James II and VII was deposed in favour of Prince William of Orange, Dalrymple found no difficulty in throwing his full support behind the new King William.
King William appointed John Dalrymple as his representative and adviser in Scotland with the post of Secretary for Scotland and it was from that position of power that he influenced the machinations that  led to the massacre in Glencoe.
As has been noted, it was he who proposed that the chiefs should be required to take the oath of allegiance, he who decreed that McIan Macdonald's late submission was invalid, and he who prepared the instructions for the excess of vengeance against the clan.
Dalrymple's evil vindictiveness is shown by the wording of a letter he wrote to the leader of the men who were to carry out his plans —‘It is a work of charity to be exact in rooting out that damned sept (clan), the worst in all the highlands….
If McIan of Glencoe and that tribe can be well separated from the rest, it will be a proper vindication of the public justice to exterminate that sept of thieves….
For a just example of  vengeance, I entreat that the thieving tribe of Glencoe may be rooted out in earnest.’
After the massacre, he wrote, ‘All I regret is that any of the sept got away.’
An enquiry into the massacre, held by the government in response to public outrage, but not until 1695, declared the deaths of the Macdonalds to be murders.
Dalrymple was blamed and called to account, it being observed that the excessive language of his letters and instructions had encouraged the perpetrators of the crimes.
The King was asked to take action against him.
Later in 1695, his father died and John Dalrymple became Lord Stair.
He retired from public life for a few years and then returned to full prominence.
Again he occupied some of the highest posts in the land.
Not only did the King fail to punish him, he granted him additional revenues, and in 1703 elevated him to Earl of Stair.
Most of his energies were directed to bringing about the union of the Scottish and English parliaments and he died in 1707 on the eve of his aim being realised.
The King can not be exonerated from responsibility for the massacre; he signed the instructions and failed to punish those who were involved.
Clan Campbell.
rightly, have stood condemned for 300 years for having committed the atrocity.
We must conclude, however, that John Dalrymple, later Earl of Stair, was the evil genius of the affair.
His vindictiveness is beyond doubt.
It is surprising that in his time and ever since, his culpability has received so little attention.
In the county that has produced men of such credit to their country as Bruce and Burns, the name of John Dalrymple should be spoken of with shame.
AYRSHIRE'S RAILWAY RECORDS
Although railed tramways had been in use in various parts of the country from the middle of the 18th century, generally in connection with coal mines, the first true railway in Scotland was the line from Kilmarnock to Troon.
The double tracked and 9½ mile line was started in 1808 and completed in 1811.
It was financed by the Duke of Portland and built to carry coal from his mines in the Kilmarnock district to Troon harbour.
In Kilmarnock, the terminus and coal yards were in the area now occupied by Howard Park.
For the first 9 years, the wagons were pulled by relays of horses but in 1820 the Duke of Portland bought Scotland's first steam locomotive, which was named The Duke .
The engine operated until about 1848 but proved to be too heavy for the line and was never entirely successful.
Unfortunately,The Duke was not preserved but a model of it  can be seen in Troon Town Hall.
In the beginning, only coal was transported on the line but by 1814 passengers were being conveyed from Kilmarnock to the coast at Troon, at weekends and on holidays.
The fashion of railway excursions became very popular over the next 100 years, spreading throughout Britain and far beyond, and it is seldom realised that this leisure pursuit began in Ayrshire, with Troon and Barassie as the first seaside resorts for railway passengers.
A 4-arch stone bridge which spans the River Irvine, at Laigh Milton, west of Gatehead, was constructed between 1808 and 1811 to carry the original Kilmarnock to Troon line.
It is now in a ruinous condition but has the distinction of being the oldest existing railway bridge over a river in the world.
Ballochmyle viaduct, which carries the Kilmarnock to Dumfries railway line over the River Ayr, south of Mauchline, is in the  Guinness Book of Records as the highest railway bridge in Britain.
Built between 1846 and 1848, mainly of local red sandstone, it carries the line 169 feet above the river.
The central arch, at 181 feet wide, is the largest masonry span of a railway bridge in Britain.
MAYBOLE'S PRINCE OF AUSTRALIA
The aerial view of Sydney harbour, with its magnificent bridge and unique opera house, is one of the finest and best-known panoramas in the world.
It is likely, though, that few Ayrshire folk will know that a prominent part of the city's waterfront is named after a native of the county.
John Piper was born in Maybole on 20th April, 1773, a son of the local physician, Doctor Hugh Piper.
A brother, Thomas Piper, is known to Burns enthusiasts as ‘Spunkie Tammie’, a name given to him by the poet after the two men met in Maybole in 1786.
It has been claimed that a third brother settled in America and that one of his descendants founded the internationally known Piper Aircraft Corporation but research has shown this to be false.
John is difficult to describe but he was a character, certainly.
Easy going and charming, he made friends easily; adventurous and audacious, his exploits brought both fame and notoriety during his lifetime; intelligent but irresponsible, he made and squandered a fortune in a few years; all in all, he was an eccentric who lived life to the full.
There is little wonder that he is remembered still in Australia, his adopted land.
John arrived first in Australia in 1791, aged 18, as a lowly and poorly paid Ensign in the New South Wales Corps, an ill-disciplined and motley band of renegades raised in Britain and sent out chiefly to police the penal colonies.
According to contemporary writers, and repeated regularly ever since then, Piper had already gained fame as the first European to have been behind the Great Wall of China.
The circumstances of his adventure have not been recorded and it has never been authenticated.
Ensign Piper had been only a short time in Australia when he volunteered for duty in the convict settlement on Norfolk Island.
The island is only 14 square miles of rugged terrain in the south-west Pacific Ocean, 1035 miles north-east of Sydney, and was probably the most isolated and desolated outpost under British rule.
In 1795, Piper was promoted to Lieutenant and returned to Sydney but things did not go well for him.
After several minor scraps with authority, he got involved as a Second in a duel between his superior officer, Colonel Paterson, and a friend, Captain MacArthur.
The Governor of New South Wales intervened and stopped the duel and, with the others involved, Piper was arrested.
He then incurred the wrath of his senior officers by writing a rude letter to the Governor, telling him that he had no right to interfere in a dispute between gentlemen.
He was court martialled but to the anger of the unpopular Governor, was acquitted.
In 1804, Lieutenant Piper was posted back to Norfolk Island and as Acting Governor ran the island for six years.
His command was very successful and included seeing the settlement through a near-famine when a plague of caterpillars ate most of the green food.
It was recorded by a convict who was on the island at the time that ‘the Governor had the goodwill and respect of everyone for he always conducted himself as a Christian  and a gentlemen.’
In 1806, he was promoted to Captain.
On Norfolk Island, John met Mary Ann Shears, the daughter of a convict and they formed an attachment that lasted for the rest of his life.
At first, they were not married but had two sons.
In 1811 they returned to Britain on leave and soon it became obvious that he would have to choose between the convict's daughter and his military career.
He chose Mary Ann, resigned his commission and together they returned to Sydney in 1814.
The couple married in 1816 and had thirteen children in all.
John Piper's return to Australia brought a sudden and unexplained improvement in his fortunes.
Aged 41, he returned as Senior Naval Officer of the Port of Sydney, a civilian post in spite of its title and a very important position in the colony.
Someone of great influence in Britain must have exercised it on his behalf but who did so is not known.
As Naval Officer of the port, he was Chairman of the Harbour Trust, Chief of Water Police, Master of Lighthouses and, most important, Comptroller of Customs.
His basic salary as Naval Officer was only $800 a year which was not high for the importance of his position but compared favourably with the $180 a year he had received as an army Captain 3 years earlier.
In addition, he had small salaries for his Trust, Police and Lighthouse responsibilities.
However, it was from his Customs post that he drew most of his money.
As Comptroller, he was allowed to take a five percent cut of all revenues collected at the port, including customs duties, excise on spirits and harbour dues.
The port was growing quickly and already the customs office was the busiest in Australia.
Even in the early years, Piper's percentage gave him $8,000 a year, making him amongst the highest paid men in Australia.
Soon, John Piper had amassed a considerable fortune.
He dabbled in commerce and was made Chairman of Directors of the Bank of New South Wales; he was also a Steward of the Sydney Jockey Club, a Magistrate of the colony and President of the Scots Kirk committee.
Socially, he was at the top of the ladder and he lived to the limits of his wealth.
Contemporary comments on him paint a picture of his lifestyle.
He was described as ‘leader of the world in fashion’, ‘the great buck’, ‘the Prince of hosts’, ‘the gay cavalier’ and ‘the Prince of Australia’.
In 1820 he was granted 190 acres of land on the waterfront in a location which was, at that time, outside Sydney.
On his estate he built a mansion with a double-domed roof, which he called Henrietta Villa.
A description of the new house was lavish in its praise —‘There is nothing like it in the colony.
He has laid out immense sums and no expense has been spared to ornament this fairy palace.’
The banqueting room, which lay under one of the large domes, was in the form of a St. Andrew's Cross.
The garden, enclosed with a clipped hedge, also in the form of a St. Andrew's Cross, supplied ‘an abundance of the choicest fruits of every species.’
There was a private orchestra, boats and boatmen, several carriages, and a stable of racehorses.
Well over 100 people were employed in the house and on the estate.
Henrietta Villa was the scene of magnificent entertainments — grand balls, picnics and elaborate fetes of all kinds.
A friend said of John Piper, ‘He does things properly, for he sends carriages and four, or boats for those who like the water, and returns his guests to their homes in the same manner.
At his table there is a vast profusion of every luxury the four quarters of the globe can supply.’
His wealth and social eminence did not change John and he was still an easygoing  and affable man.
He was very generous and his friendship was abused by many who saw him as an easy touch financially.
He recognised no social barriers when making friends and was surrounded by an army of spongers.
It was said by one snobbish acquaintance that —‘There is no honour in dining with Piper for he invites everyone.’
His wife, Mary Ann, responded well to the challenge of her changed social position and soon the convict's daughter was a highly respected hostess.
As his influence increased, John obtained more grants of land from the government.
Throughout New South Wales he had a total of over 5,000 valuable acres in lots of various sizes and in Sydney, in addition to his estate, he had an acre of land in the heart of the city.
But John's heyday was not to be long-lived.
In 1825, by which time he was 52 years of age and had been back in Australia for eleven years, a new Governor was appointed.
Sir Ralph Darling was no sooner in post than he turned his attention to John Piper and an official enquiry was set up to investigate the customs accounts.
It was found that while the annual revenue was about $400,000, there was only about $1,000 in the account; John Piper had received $20,000 as his percentage and $8,000 as his salary, and the remainder had been frittered away by lax and costly administration.
The enquiry's finding was that John Piper had not been dishonest — he had been negligent, imprudent and irresponsible.
$229,446 was outstanding as unpaid customs dues, caused by laxity in their collection.
Although John's percentage cut depended on the total amount collected, it was known that he never harassed tax debtors, indeed, anyone with  genuine difficulty in paying was likely to be entertained to lunch at  Henrietta Villa by the sympathetic Comptroller.
The Governor suspected that John's banking affairs would be in a similar mess and a check showed that under his Chairmanship and by his influence, more than half of the assets of the Bank of New South Wales had been loaned to a small group of businessmen.
Once more, the collection of interest payments had been less than efficient.
John Piper was forced to resign from most of his posts, including those of Comptroller of Customs and Bank Director.
In addition, he was ordered to pay large sums of money to the government as compensation for his negligence.
He was left in financial difficulties and knew that he would have to sell his home and most of his land to settle his affairs.
However, ‘the gay cavalier’, ‘the Prince of Australia’, decided to go out with a flourish.
He summoned his boatmen and his private piper.
As the boatmen rowed him out into the middle of Sydney harbour, his piper played a lament at the stem and John stood at the prow in full dress uniform, with his sword held high.
When they reached the middle, he ordered the oarsmen to stop and with a last farewell he stepped overboard.
His servants loved him dearly and fished him out immediately.
Having made his eccentric gesture, John returned to his position at the bow of the boat and to the strains of a rousing strathspey he was rowed back to the shore.
The Piper debts were paid in full, even although a severe fall in land values at the time caused his properties and other holdings to be sold for rock-bottom sums.
John Piper retired with his family to a small country property at Bathurst, New South Wales, which he called Alloway Bank in remembrance of his Ayrshire roots.
He reared cattle, made cheese, kept sheep and sold wool.
He was a magistrate, sat on the board of the local church and was involved in many other aspects of the town's affairs.
Unfortunately, through a combination of drought, generosity and extravagance, he lost this property as well.
Wealthy friends who still held him in high regard as a man, raised money and set the family up in a 500 acre property which they arranged in the names of Mrs. Piper and the children.
John Piper died there on 8th June, 1851, aged 78 years.
A promontory on the south side of Sydney's waterfront which was part of John's 190 acre estate is still called Piper Point and streets in the district are named to his memory.
The Point, densely covered with expensive apartment blocks and high class properties, is the millionaires' district of the city.
The land that formed the estate and the acre John owned in the city centre are now important parts of Sydney and if they had been retained in Piper ownership until developed, his descendants could have been fabulously rich.
John Piper may have been a foolish man in many ways but he was always friendly and generous to all classes of people.
Many men  benefited from his kindness and many abused his friendship.
Fortunately, a few real friends recognised his true worth as a man and stood by him to the end.
One thing is certain, he led a full and interesting life.
DUNDONALD CASTLE — CRADLE OF KINGS
Like most parts of Scotland, Ayrshire has a wealth of castles.
They range from 13th century ruins, to 20th century replacements.
Of the most ancient, some have a place of honour in Scottish history, and others were never more than family strongholds in the county's many feuds.
Kelburn, Dean and Culzean Castles have been developed as country parks with visitor centres, and each of them reflects credit on its owners as well as adding to the attractions of the county.
Unfortunately, the most important castle in Ayrshire has been sorely neglected.
Dundonald Castle, which has a place in both Scottish and British history, is the finest example still existing of a Scottish castle of its period, and should be treasured as a national monument in our midst.
In fact, it has been allowed to become progressively more ruinous, has been a shelter for cattle, and has been ignored in all of the county's publicity material.
Few Ayrshire people, even those living in the vicinity, are aware of Dundonald Castle's place in our history and, in part, this must be attributable to the lack of interest shown in it by local authorities.
At the same time, it must be an indictment on the teaching of history in Ayrshire schools over many generations.
Nothing can excuse a teacher of history who fails to draw attention to local things that are of historical importance.
In 1124, King David I came to the throne of Scotland.
He had spent most of his life in England and admired both the feudal-system efficiency and military skills of the Norman knights who had administered that country since William of Normandy conquered it in 1066.
Scotland was still a divided and badly governed nation and David thought that progress to a well-ordered State could be achieved most quickly and effectively by an extension of Norman influence.
Already, there had been a steady flow of Norman families into the country from England, but they were thinly spread and had been given no opportunity to make an impact on Scottish society and administration.
The bloodless Norman conquest initiated by David I in Scotland was almost as effective as William the Conqueror's had been in England 60 years earlier.
David encouraged many more Norman families to settle in Scotland, enticing them with promises of land.
Several knights came to Ayrshire, one being Walter Fitzallan, whose father had moved from Normandy to England with William the Conqueror and had fought at the Battle of Hastings.
Walter had been friendly with David in England and when he came to Scotland, David granted him lands in Ayrshire, Renfrewshire, Argyll, Bute and the Lothians.
The Ayrshire land granted to Walter Fitzallan was in that part of the county still  called Kyle, which is, roughly, the land between the rivers Irvine and Doon.
Walter received the land between the rivers Irvine and Ayr, called Stewart Kyle, and the King retained the land between the rivers Ayr and Doon, called King's Kyle.
King David appointed Walter as his Steward.
The duties of the post are difficult to define but could be described as Keeper of the King's household, Administrator of the Royal Affairs, and Keeper of the Privy Purse.
In later years, the post developed into an early version of that we know as Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Walter built Dundonald Castle as his principle stronghold and residence, probably between 1142 and 1153.
It was erected on the site of ancient fortifications dating from about 500 B.C. When it was built, the castle was at least fifty percent higher than the ruined portion still standing, and was complete with turrets, battlements and curtain walls.
English forces occupied it about 1290 and Robert Bruce ordered its partial destruction about 1305.
It was repaired in 1330 and rebuilt in 1370.
As was the custom for landowners of the age, Walter the Steward gave money to support religious orders and to establish places of worship.
He founded Paisley Abbey and placed the churches at Dundonald, Riccarton, St. Quivox, Crosbie (Troon), Monkton and Prestwick under its jurisdiction.
In addition, he gave extensive lands around Mauchline and between there and the country's eastern boundary to the Monks of Melrose Abbey.
When Walter died, he was succeeded by his son Allan, who inherited the post of Steward, later called High Steward.
The  Fitzallan's played leading parts in Scottish life over several generations: the third Steward, Alan's son, was appointed Justiciary for Scotland by King Alexander II; the fourth fought at the Battle of Largs and was a Crusader; and the fifth was appointed a Guardian of Scotland during the troubled times before the rise of William Wallace.
The sixth High Steward was another Walter and he is of special interest.
He gave support to William Wallace in his fight for Scottish independence but deserted him and aligned himself with the English King Edward I who was trying to dominate Scotland.
At the Battle of Stirling Bridge, he took the field against Wallace but, when he saw how the battle was proceeding, changed sides once more and shared in the Scottish victory.
Although the High Stewards still had the surname Fitzallan, they had become known as The Stewards and over the generations adopted the name Steward, and later Stewart.
The spelling, Stuart, was a French influence.
When Robert Bruce, Earl of Carrick, took up the fight against the English and had himself crowned King of Scotland, Walter the Steward (Walter Stewart) supported him and fought by his side in 1314 at the Battle of Bannockburn.
Walter married the king's eldest daughter, Marjory Bruce, an indication of Walter's high standing in Scottish society and of the king's regard for him.
Walter and Marjory probably lived at Dundonald Castle and we can presume that before and after their marriage, Robert Bruce would visit the castle on his peregrinations in north and central Ayrshire.
The Stewarts had another residence, in Renfrewshire, and it was while they were visiting it that a tragedy occurred.
Marjory was riding near Paisley when her horse stumbled and she was thrown to the ground.
Her neck was dislocate and she died almost immediately.
She was in an advanced state of pregnancy and her first child was born on the spot by caesarean section.
The child was a boy and Walter named him Robert Bruce  Stewart after his illustrious Grandfather, Robert Bruce.
Robert Bruce Stewart, Lord of Kyle and High Steward of Scotland, lived most of his life at Dundonald Castle.
His caesarean birth left him slightly crippled for the rest of his life.
His father died suddenly when he was only 12 years of age and he had an early baptism of public life, being prominent in Scottish affairs while still in his teens.
He became responsible for all of the Bruce family interests, including their right to the throne, and was appointed a Guardian of Scotland in the absence of his young uncle, David II.
David, son of King Robert I and heir to the throne, had been sent to France by the English King Edward III.
Robert played a leading part in expelling the English from Scotland and in procuring the return of David II to the throne.
Unfortunately, although Robert Stewart had done so much to secure David's release and towards administering Scotland in his absence, David did not trust him and, in fact, had him imprisoned.
David's fear of his nephew was due to the fact that he, David, had no heir and Robert was next in line to the throne through Marjory Bruce.
David II died in 1371 and, as he still had no heir, the throne of Scotland passed to Robert Bruce Stewart of Dundonald who became Robert II of Scotland.
The monarchy had passed from the Bruces to the Stewarts and Robert was the first of a new and long lasting dynasty.
The progenitress of the Stewart line with Robert was his first wife, Elizabeth Mure of Rowallan, a member of another ancient Ayrshire family.
They were married in 1358, seventeen years before Robert became King, and tradition maintains that the marriage took place at Lady Mary's Chapel, at what we now call Ladykirk, between Monkton and Symington.
Unfortunately, Elizabeth did not live to be Queen.
Robert II reigned for 19 years and died in Dundonald Castle on 13th May, 1390.
He had numerous sons and daughters, legitimate and illegitimate, some of whom were the progenitors of many of Scotland's leading noble families.
One example is the Marquisate of Bute, which has a family home at Dumfries House, Cumnock, and originated with one of Robert's illegitimate sons.
Robert II was succeeded by his son John, who changed his name and became Robert III.
Robert III may have been born in Dundonald Castle and it is certain that he spent much of his life there before he became king.
By the time Robert III came to the throne in 1390, Dundonald Castle was probably about 250 years old and below the standard required for a royal residence; in any case, it was too far removed from the principal seats of government and power, such as Edinburgh and Stirling, to be a permanent royal household.
It remained in the possession of the Stewarts until the reign of James V, in the first half of the 16th century, and is likely to have been used occasionally by the royal family when they were visiting Ayrshire.
When it was about 400 years old, it was sold to a branch of the Wallaces of Craigie Castle.
It changed hands again several times but its subsequent history is of no consequence to this narrative.
The Stewarts reigned for 333 years, through 7 Scottish kings, a queen (Mary Queen of Scots), and 7 monarchs of Great Britain, making theirs the longest monarchical dynasty ever to rule in these islands.
In addition, two 18th century heirs who had legitimate claims to the throne, but are now known as the Old and Young Pretenders, were both of the House of Stewart.
The Stewart and Bruce involvement in the monarchy is still shown by the heir  apparent to the throne having the titles High Steward of Scotland, Earl of Carrick and Duke of Rothesay.
Dundonald Castle is entitled to be called ‘the cradle of kings’.
There is neither mystery nor doubt about its important place in history.
The only mystery is why it has been so neglected, and the only doubt concerns the quality of history taught in Ayrshire's schools.
It is pleasing to be able to end by reporting that at last Dundonald Castle is receiving some of the attention it has been denied.
Over the past 2 years it has been subject to extensive repairs and its site to archaeological investigation.
It is proposed to open the castle to the public when the work has been completed.
DAILLY'S ENTOMBED MINER
As the son and grandson of miners, I was reared on stories of coal and collieries.
As a wee boy I knew the jargon of the Ayrshire pits, names and terms incomprehensible to the uninitiated.
I was enthralled when miners talked of firedamp, rock falls, dust explosions and death and injury underground.
To most children — and adults — coal is simply coal; to me it was of many types — ell coal, tourha', major, five quarter, parrot, main or gypsy.
The older generations of miners were almost a race apart, misunderstood by outsiders.
They were hard men at work, but gentle at home; there was nothing intellectual in their daily toil, but many were well-read and very literate; some were hard-drinking and swearing, but many were God-fearing and kirk-going; they worked in the dark and the dirt, but their ambitions for their families were high; they could disagree violently, but they trusted each other for their safety underground.
The tight-knit mining communities had their own traditions and tales, and in Ayrshire one miner's name was a legend.
He was John Brown, a miner who had been entombed alone for 23 days.
Sixty-six years of age and unmarried, John lived in Dailly and worked in a small coal mine called Kilgrammie, on Bargany estate.
About 5 o'clock on the morning of 8th October, 1835, he was one of a group of men working underground when the rock above them began to ‘groan and grumble’, indicating to the experienced miners that it was settling and about to fall on top of them.
While his workmates ran to safety, John turned back for his jacket, and his delay was disastrous.
The roof of the workplace began to fall and John had no way through.
The collapse continued until many thousands of tons of rock were blocking a long section of the underground roadway.
John was trapped deep in a subterranean tomb.
After what seemed like an eternity of fearsome noise and choking dust caused by the rockfall, John took stock of his situation.
There was no sound of a human voice enquiring for his safety; he shouted that he was safe, but gave up when he got no re-assuring reply; he wondered if his friends had reached safety or had been caught under the falling rock.
At least, he was unhurt and able to move around in the considerable space available to him.
Unfortunately, the accident had occurred near the  end of his shift and he had eaten all of the food he had brought to his work.
For their refreshment, to be eaten at their workplace underground, miners carried sandwiches and a metal flask of water or cold tea, and some sweet cold tea remaining was important to John.
For light to work by at the period concerned, a miner had only a small coffee-pot shaped metal oil lamp with a wick protruding from the spout.
The lamp could be hooked onto the front of a miner's cap or hung on a wooden roof support while he was working.
The light produced was equal to that from a medium sized candle.
John's lamp light lasted for the first few hours of his entombment and from then on he was in total darkness.
It was the darkness of the blind; a blackness that can almost be felt.
A miner had no fear of the dark he was used to underground but the permanent blackness was disconcerting.
John was familiar with his ‘place’, as miners called the section of the pit in which they worked, and even in the dark was able to find his way to where a small stream of water leaked from the rock.
The water was heavily impregnated with minerals and unpleasant to drink but after the tea in his flask was finished, it was to help to keep him alive.
In the complete and oppressive silence of his tomb, John listened for the sound of rescuers.
Soon, he lost track of time and it was after what he judged to be many days, he was heartened to hear, occasionally, the far-off sound of metal on rock as his friends tried to clear a way through to him.
Even then, he wondered if it was only in his imagination.
Had he known the facts of the attempts to reach him, the trapped man would have despaired of ever being rescued alive.
The miners who had escaped, knew immediately that John had been left behind but did not know whether he had been entombed alive or buried under the rock.
They refused to go home at the end of their shift and worked frantically to reach him.
Very soon, however, it was realised that the fall of rock was so extensive that it would take weeks to reach John and, naturally, the initial urgency waned.
Another factor in the slowing of the rescue work was the condition of the air in which the men had to work.
Ventilation in 19th century mines was very primitive and the air in the confined space in which a passage was being cleared, soon became foul and lacking in oxygen.
The less oxygen, the less progress.
In addition, there was the constant danger of poisonous gas.
The mines in the Dailly coalfield were notorious for gas and there was a joke in the county's other mining areas that there was so much gas underground at Dailly that the farmers had to use a Davy safety lamp when ploughing the fields.
As the days passed, hope faded of finding John Brown alive and after 14 days it was agreed that there was no urgency as the search was only to find his body for Christian burial.
In his ice-cold and pitch black seclusion, John heard the sounds of his rescuers getting closer to him and tried to count the days by following the shift changes.
Eventually, he was too weak to make his way to the stream of water and, when he had sparingly drunk the supply he had collected in his flask, he could only lie still on the rough rock where he had finally stumbled and fallen.
He never lost hope and his mind was clear and calm.
His resolve to live was great but he thought that his strength could  fail him.
On 29th October, 21 days after the accident, some of the miners thought they could hear the sound of moaning and worked with renewed vigour.
It was a very fortunate mistake as by then John's voice was too weak to be heard by them.
On the late evening of 30th October, his rescuers reached John Brown.
He was still conscious and able to recognise them.
At first, he could utter only the first syllable of each name.
His lips were parched and cracked and one of the miners who had some sandwiches rubbed the butter from the bread on to John's lips to soothe them.
He was ice-cold and the men took off their clothes to cover him.
They also lay down beside him and pressed their bodies against his to heat him.
After some time, John was able to say, ‘Boys, oh, but you were long in coming.’
The way that had been made through the fallen rock was very narrow and uneven and to take John out he was laid on a board and pushed along as if on a sledge.
John expressed a desire for milk and one man went on ahead to the surface and asked one of John's neighbours to get out of bed and milk her cow.
John was brought to the surface at 3 a.m. on 31st October, having been entombed for 2 hours short of 23 days.
He was taken to his home and attended by a doctor.
Although too weak to leave his bed, he was able to give an account of his experience to his visitors.
Unfortunately, John was unable to recover from the hunger, thirst and cold he had endured alone for so long and he died peacefully on 3rd November, 1835, 3 days after he was rescued.
It was cruel that he had to die so soon after all he had suffered; it would have been more cruel if he had died alone, in the dark, knowing that rescue was at hand; at least he knew the relief of the rescue and died in the comfort of his own bed.
If you pass Dailly kirkyard, spare a thought for the unsung miner who lies there, and another thought for the men who still labour in the dangers of the mining industry.
A strange postscript to the story of John Brown was told by Sir Archibald Geikie in his book,Scottish Reminiscences (1906).
Doctor Sloan of Ayr who conducted a post mortem examination on John was approached later by a group of old miners with the question, The doctor confessed that he had not paid particular attention to the man's feet, whereat the miners went off with knowing expressions on their faces; superstition had convinced them that if the doctor had looked he would have seen cloven hoofs, proving that the devil had appeared in the guise of John Brown for some evil purpose of his own.
It also reminds us of how recently belief in the supernatural was part of life.
THE EGLINTON TOURNAMENT
Mounted knights in shining armour, jousting in the lists; lords and ladies clothed in raiment, bedecked with jewels and pearls; esquires, heralds and halberdiers; jesters and men-at-arms; all cavorting in the shadow of a turreted and battlemented castle.
A typical English medieval scene — but enacted in 19th century Ayrshire.
That was the stuff of the Eglinton Tournament.
It is not always easy to know why an event or action fires the imagination of the public and is remembered lo–g afterwards, whilst others, seemingly of equal importance or curiosity are soon forgotten.
The Tournament at Eglinton caught the fancy of the nation at the time but few who were involved could have thought that it would be so well remembered 150 years later.
Archibald William Montgomerie, the young man who held the Tournament, was born at Palermo, Italy on 29th September, 1812.
As the 13th Earl of Eglinton, he was also Earl of Winton, Lord Montgomerie, Lord Seton and Tranent, Baron Ardrossan and Hereditary Sheriff of Renfrewshire.
He had extensive estates in Ayrshire, Renfrewshire and the Lothians, which yielded him large annual revenues, and elegant houses in various parts of Britain.
Earl Archibald was a good natured, even tempered and affable young man.
As he had no profession, and took no interest in the running of his estates, he indulged himself in pastimes such as shooting and fishing, but above all in training and racing  thoroughbred horses.
In the latter, he had considerable success, winning such important races as the Derby, St. Leger, Ascot Cup and Goodwood Cup.
He had been hopelessly spoiled as a child and as an adult continued to act as he chose, accepting neither advice nor criticism.
When he inherited his title, the Earl was only 7 years of age and the family debt was about £270,000, several millions of pounds at 1990 values.
A group of trustees were appointed to administer his affairs, and he did not gain control until near his 21st birthday in 1834.
Before his birthday the trustees paid off all of his considerable personal debts, so that he could start afresh, but the Earl was not impressed by their suggestions that thrift was required and as soon as he took control he began to sell off parcels of the ancient family lands, all to finance his expensive tastes.
As a member of an ancient noble family, reared with its romantic traditions and in the atmosphere of a grand castle, Earl Archibald had dreamed of knights in armour, battles, crusades and the days of chivalry.
An ancestor had been to the crusades, another had captured Harry Hotspur at the Battle of Otterburn in 1388, and a Count Montgomerie had accidentally killed King Henry II of France in a jousting contest.
Eglinton Castle was a home to inspire dreams of the middle ages.
A castle or fortified tower had stood on the site since Archibald's Norman ancestors the De Eglintons were given the land in the 12th century but his castle had been completed only 15 years before his birth.
It had, though, a distinctly medieval appearance and atmosphere.
In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, there was a resurgence of interest in all things medieval.
Writers, led by Sir Walter Scott with his novel Ivanhoe , had fired the imaginations of the people with tales of chivalry, knightly deeds and maidens fair.
In addition, the industrial revolution was under way and its accompanying drabness made people look back to more romantic ages.
Mock-Gothic architecture, like Eglinton Castle, appeared all over Britain, and mock-medieval Tournaments were staged in England and various other European countries.
Bogside racecourse, Irvine, was part of the Eglinton estates and during race meetings the Earl entertained lavish house-parties.
At dinner after a meeting in 1838, a guest suggested that on the following year all house-guests should wear the costumes of knights and their ladies.
Lightheartedly, the Earl agreed and said that he would hold a Tournament.
The idea was taken up immediately and news of it spread throughout the land.
Before long, the Earl was totally committed to the project and had agreed to hold a Tournament in the style of the middle ages, ending with a medieval banquet.
It has been said by some writers that he had got caught up in an extravaganza far beyond both his intention and his control.
In fact, he probably enjoyed the nationwide attention he received and there was nothing in his previous conduct to suggest he would be worried by the escalating costs.
Meetings were held in London to organise the Tournament.
Initially, about 150 young bloods expressed an interest and took part in rehearsals in the home counties but most of them withdrew when they realised the costs of hiring armour and equipment, of having gowns and costumes made for their ladies and attendants, and of transporting their retinues to Scotland.
There was lengthy discussion on which format the Tournament should take as there was no specific programme or rules to follow.
From the 11th century, such events had  been popular for about 500 years but over the centuries there had been great changes to the ways in which they had been conducted.
In the beginning they had been manly contests of strength and skill, strictly conducted to emphasize the virtues of morality, honour and courtesy.
Later they had deteriorated into wild, unruly free-fights for bullies, in which any violence was allowed and often the losers were killed.
By the 16th century they had gone to the other extreme and were namby-pamby, play-acting affairs without  genuine combat.
It was decided that the Eglinton Tournament would be conducted in accordance with the original concept of chivalrous combat.
Contestants would engage in three types of contest: close combat, in which knights would fight on foot with blunted daggers, swords or spears; jousting or tilting, in which mounted knights on either side of a low barrier would charge each other with blunted lances; and contests of skill in which mounted knights would attempt to skewer rings from posts.
During the spring and summer of 1839, there was great activity at Eglinton.
Much of the castle was redecorated or refurbished, a new wing was constructed to accommodate the extra guests who would be in residence for the event, and a very elegant bridge was constructed over the Lugton Water, a short distance west of the castle.
The existing bridge at the location, although often called the Tournament Bridge, is not the original.
The Tournament arena was laid out on a flat piece of land in a loop of the Lugton Water, a few hundred yards east of the castle.
The enclosed area for the contests was a rectangle 650 feet by 250 feet, surrounded by a low wooden palisade; a wooden barrier, 5½ feet high and 300 feet long was erected down the middle for jousting; and the ring posts for lance targets were at each end.
There was covered seating for 4,000 invited guests and a grandstand with a royal box extended into the arena from the middle of one side.
Conical topped tents, or pavilions, for participating knights and their attendants, stood at each end of the arena.
Hollywood could not have created a better image of the middle ages.
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, 28th 29th and 30th August 1839 were the days on which the Tournament was to be held.
The event had created great excitement at all levels of society and was eagerly anticipated.
Admission was to be free but tickets were required for each day and demand was enormous from all over Britain and Ireland, from other European countries, and even from North America.
In all of Ayrshire at that time, there were very few hotels offering accommodation and every hotel bed available in Central Ayrshire was booked, some to be shared by several people.
All of the wealthy families had house guests and almost every farmhouse and cottage had arranged to have lodgers.
It was reported that, in the absence of accommodation, many visitors slept in barns.
During the last few days before the event, as spectators arrived from , Ayrshire was busier than it had ever been in its history.
Ardrossan harbour, still small and geared more to handling cargo, had to cope with large-scale passenger traffic.
As there was no rail link between Scotland and England, almost everyone travelling from south of the border did so by train to Liverpool and boat from there to Ardrossan.
Transport facilities in Ayrshire were almost non-existent and many passengers disembarking at Ardrossan had to walk to their destinations.
The Glasgow, Paisley, Kilmarnock and Ayr Railway Company line from Ayr to Irvine was opened hurriedly three weeks before the event.
Wednesday, 28th August, 1839, the first day of the Tournament, got off to a good start with a bright sun shining from a clear blue sky and the temperature high.
Although the opening parade was not due to start until noon, crowds thronged into the grounds o f Eglinton Castle from early morning, everyone hoping for a good place in the arena.
A magnificent spectacle greeted them.
It was a riot of colour in the sunshine, with gaily striped tents and awnings, cloth of gold and scarlet on the royal box, ornately uniformed attendants and bandsmen, and the glinting steel of weapons and armour.
The crowds had much to see as they waited.
The roads around Irvine and Kilwinning were jammed far beyond their limited capacities as a multitude of pedestrians and private carriages advanced upon Eglinton.
Progress was so slow that many found it quicker to abandon their carriages and continue on foot.
Every driveway to the castle was crowded and many of those on foot climbed the boundary walls of the estate and made their way through the policies.
By midday, a crowd estimated at between 80,000 and 100,000 had gathered in the grounds of Eglinton Castle.
About 11.30 a.m., the opening parade began to assemble in front of the castle.
It was due to leave the main door at noon and wend its way to the arena by a circuitous route through the grounds, so that as many people as possible would get a good view.
Unfortunately, the difficulty of mustering the parade had been badly miscalculated and it was behind schedule.
There is little wonder that organising the parade was difficult.
It was well over a half mile long, consisting of 2 military bands; more than 100 mounted men; well over 100 armed retainers on foot; 50 Irvine archers in Lincoln green outfits; the Duke of Atholl with a company of his Atholl Highlanders; several open carriages; trumpeters; a jester on a mule; Lord Eglinton as Lord of the Tournament; Lady Jane Seymour as the Queen of Beauty; and the 13 competing knights.
The parade was split into 40 sections, each in effect a mini-parade, in which the leading personages were preceded by their banner and escorted by halberdiers, esquires, men-at-arms, grooms, pages and retainers.
As the principals were all noblemen and their ladies, each used to having their own way in their own time, organising them was almost impossible.
As in days of yore, the competing knights were not identified by their names but by their insignia or the insignia they had adopted for the event.
They included the knights of the Dragon, the Griffin, the Swan, the Black Lion, the Gael, the Dolphin, the Crane, the Ram, and the Black Knight.
Midday came and passed, as did one o'clock and two o'clock, without the parade being ready to move off.
By then, some of the crowd had been waiting for 5 or 6 hours and many were becoming restive.
The novelty of the colourful sights was wearing thin.
Fortunately, the weather was fair.
At last, about 2.30 p.m., the parade was ready and, alas, at that long-delayed stage spots of heavy rain began to fall.
A flash of lightning and a peel of thunder heralded torrential rain and a squally wind.
In minutes, the spectators and participants were drenched.
The parade was postponed again in the hope that the weather would improve; unfortunately, it showed no sign of doing so.
The ladies in the parade were transferred to closed carriages and about 3 o'clock the procession moved off.
It did not arrive at the arena until almost 4 o'clock, by which time everyone was thoroughly soaked and miserable.
As soon as the ladies left their carriages, their beautiful gowns became sodden and muddied, and their elaborate hair styles were undone, their hair hanging  over their faces.
The heavy rain did not let up and soon the vast crowds had churned the whole area into a sea of mud.
The roofs of the tents and pavilions collected water until the weigh t burst the material and everyone inside was drenched.
Horses slipped and slithered in the mud and mounted men had difficulty in staying in their saddles.
The jousting could not be started and the close combat was soon abandoned as it had become farcical, contestants falling down when they tried to wield their weapons.
It became obvious to everyone that the Tournament could not continue and after another undue delay, the Earl of Eglinton announced that it was cancelled for the day.
If the weather improved it would start again on the following morning.
The crowd was disappointed but knew that cancellation was inevitable.
The mass of people of all classes of society, except for the Earl's house guests, moved off towards the exits, and a sorry sight they were.
Soaked, muddy and dejected; children crying and adults becoming ill-tempered; people jostling, arguing and complaining as they slipped in the mud.
Those who had come by carriage had dismissed their drivers with instructions not to return until early evening and now they were stranded, having to decide whether to wait or walk.
Those who had come by train had the same problem as the trains for the return journey were not due for several hours.
An early inspection of the arena on the Thursday morning showed that it would not be possible to resume the Tournament on that day.
The Lugton Water was in spate and the low-lying arena was flooded.
Workers were brought in from all of the Eglinton properties to repair the damage of the first day and to improve the condition of the lists.
The Earl announced that unless the weather deteriorated again, the Tournament would be resumed on the Friday morning and all of the participants spent Thursday drying out and preparing their costumes.
On the Friday morning, the weather was sunny and warm and the event got under way again.
A full day's entertainment was provided, complete with a re-run of the opening parade.
The knights engaged in close combat but the jousting was cancelled after the first few contests as the horses were unsure of their footing in the mud and consequently the inept efforts of the knights produced only laughter from the spectators.
Very large crowds attended on the Friday, although not as vast as on the first day.
In the fine weather, the brilliant colours, medieval costumes, pomp and heraldry, provided a splendid pageant and the public was well satisfied.
Alas, it rained again before the end of the day.
On the Friday evening, a fancy-dress banquet was held for the high ranking guests who had attended the Tournament.
It was an excellent feast with a menu in the style of the middle ages, and was followed by dancing until dawn.
Most of the house-guests stayed on at Eglinton over the weekend before leaving the Earl alone with his memories — and his bills.
He had achieved his aim of recreating the days of his ancestors, at least in part, but it had been at a great cost.
It was estimated that the Tournament involved expenditure of £40,000, today's equivalent being a few millions of pounds, but the cost was probably much greater.
After a few years, the Earl settled down to a more responsible way of life as a serious politician, Rector of Glasgow University, Lord Lieutenant of Ayrshire and Viceroy of Ireland.
He died suddenly in 1861, aged 50.
The Montgomerie family finances continued on their downwards spiral until, in 1925, they were so low that the contents of Eglinton Castle had to be auctioned off, including the suit of armour bought by the 13th Earl for the Tournament.
The castle had not been properly maintained for many years and after the auction it was allowed to crumble.
Eventually, to avoid taxation the roof was removed and the shell left to rot.
All that now remains is a single tower, a poor monument to a long history of noble residences on the site.
One tangible legacy of the Tournament remains in Ayrshire, and that is the magnificent Eglinton Trophy.
After the event, 239 of the Earl's friends subscribed towards a trophy to be presented to him as an expression of their gratitude and to commemorate the Tournament.
The trophy was designed by an artist, Edmund Cotterill, and made by Garrard of London at a cost of £1,775.
The priceless trophy stands 5 feet high, took 4 years to make, and is a beautiful work of art in solid silver.
The Montgomerie family generously presented it into the safe-keeping of Ayr County Council and when the Council was incorporated into Strathclyde Region, the trophy was passed to Cunninghame District Council.
It is now on permanent display to the public in Cunninghame House, Irvine, within 3 miles of the site of the Tournament it commemorates.
MAUCHLINE WARE & CURLIN' STANES
Wherever the works of Robert Burns are read, the name of Mauchline is known.
Its places and people, such as Mossgiel, Ballochmyle and the Cowgate; Poosie Nancy, Daddy Auld and Holy Willie Fisher; are familiar in many lands and have brought wide recognition to the town.
It should not be thought, though, that Mauchline's fame is restricted to its associations with the poet.
In particular, two small family firms, started early in the 19th century, have each manufactured products which, if not unique are certainly distinctive and have extended the town's repute abroad.
The first of these two family firms was W. & A. Smith, manufacturers in wood of small household articles and souvenirs.
In the first few years of the 19th century, the manufacture of wooden snuff boxes — sneeshin' mulls, as they were known — began in Ayrshire in Auchinleck, Ochiltree and Cumnock.
Soon, several dozen men were employed in the trade, working in cottages or small factories.
In the 1820s, the brothers William and Andrew Smith of Mauchline began making snuff boxes in a factory in the village and their firm was to become the best-known name in the trade.
Smith's boxworks was in Kilmarnock Road, on the site now occupied by the fire station.
Within a few years, snuff taking declined and the box manufacturers were forced to produce new items.
The Smiths of Mauchline were the most successful at diversifying and, as one member of the family put it, they produced ‘every article which you can conceive it possible to make.’
Over the next hundred years, these products included:— various types of fancy boxes; darning mushrooms; napkin rings; needle holders; matchboxes; spill holders; money boxes; spectacle cases; whistles; book covers; and a multitude of other small items.
Generally, the products were made of plane/sycamore wood that had been seasoned for about 6 months.
Joints and lids fitted perfectly and hinges were of a concealed wooden type, probably invented in Lanarkshire.
Most of the items had a varnished finish, applied by hand by women and children.
Varnishing took about 6 weeks to complete as numerous coats were applied — 15 coats for copal varnish and 30 coats for spirit varnish.
Some items were finished in black lacquer, often with a fern or flower decoration.
William and Andrew Smith invented an ingenious machine for printing tartan paper and from then on many of the products were partly or wholly covered with the paper, making them unique in the souvenir trade at that time.
Many of the articles bore hand-painted scenes and a few of the painters became famous later as artists.
Sir Daniel Macnee, Scotland's leading portrait painter of his day and President of the Royal Scottish Academy, painted boxes at Cumnock as a young man, and William Leighton Leitch who worked first in Cumnock and then for the Smith brothers, later found fame in London as a water-colourist and for over 20 years visited Buckingham Palace and other royal residences where he taught painting to Queen Victoria and her family.
The wooden articles became very popular in the gift and souvenir markets and few resorts or other places of interest in Britain were not represented both by name and a view on the list of decorations available from Smith's boxworks.
There was an extensive  export trade to Europe, North America and every part of the world-wide British empire, each country being catered for individually.
By the 1840s, the Smith brothers had 60 employees, many of them females, working 10 hours per day and 6 days per week.
The peak of production was reached between 1850 and 1875, during which period up to 200 men and women were employed in the trade, mainly in Mauchline but with a few in neighbouring villages.
Production continued into the 20th century but declined slowly from the start of the First World War until the Smiths of Mauchline were the only manufacturers of the wooden ware left in Ayrshire.
In 1933, Smith's boxworks was badly damaged by fire and large-scale production was never resumed.
Mauchline Ware, as it is known, irrespective of where it was made, was produced for over 100 years and in that time millions of items must have been manufactured and distributed around the world.
Items can be found on every continent and in recent years have become very popular again, especially as collectors pieces.
Collectors throughout the world seek out examples of the ware and pay highly inflated prices.
There are large private and public collections in several countries, the best in Scotland being in the National Museum of Antiquities, Edinburgh; the Burns House Museum, Mauchline; and the Baird Institute, Cumnock.
The second small family firm was Andrew Kay & Company, manufacturers of curling stones.
Although curling, as a competitive game, had been played in Ayrshire for many centuries, its popularity increased in the 18th and 19th centuries, with town competing against town, village against village, and parish against parish.
Every town and village, and most large estates, had natural or man-made ponds on which matches were arranged as often as the weather allowed.
At times, the most unlikely locations were utilised as curling ponds, perhaps the most unusual being Kilmarnock Cross.
which was often  flooded intentionally from a nearby well.
It is recorded that during the severe spell in 1740, men curled on the Cross on 23 consecutive days, excepting Sundays.
It is unlikely that before the middle of the 19th century there would be stonemasons specialising in making curling stones.
Stones would be produced to order, to the mason's or customer's preferred design; as there was no standard pattern the variations in size, shape and weight could make matches farcical.
In 1864, the brothers Thomas and Andrew Kay started specialising in curling stone manufacture in a small building at The Haugh, near Mauchline.
Soon, Andrew Kay invented and patented a machine for grinding stones of a standard shape and improved finish.
In 1879, a Canadian called Russell, who had emigrated from Lanarkshire, devised a new design of curling stone which was accepted as being of greater efficiency and accuracy than any that had gone before.
The Kay brothers took up the design, made further improvements to it, and produced their stones uniformly on Andrew's machine.
The popularity of the Kay curling stones spread to every place in the world where curling was played and established the firm as the leading manufacturer.
Unfortunately, Andrew Kay died young in 1888.
His widow split from her brother-in-law, Thomas Kay, and continued the making of curling stones at The Haugh, the new firm taking the name Andrew Kay & Company.
Mrs. Kay employed a young Cumnock stonemason called James Wyllie to supervise the business on her behalf.
Eventually James Wyllie married Mrs. Kay's sister and after a few years the Wyllie family took over the firm, retaining the name, Andrew Kay & Company.
The Wyllies have owned and managed the firm since then, the present owner being of the fourth generation.
In 1910 the first James Wyllie moved the business from The Haugh to a factory called the Victoria Works in Mauchline and the firm still operates from these premises.
Several parts of Ayrshire had rock thought to be good for making curling stones but the rock which was, and still is, most popular is from the islet of Ailsa Craig.
As early as 1829, 200 pairs of roughly hewn stones were shipped from the Craig to Canada.
Until 1973, most of the rock used by Kay & Company came from Ailsa Craig but escalating costs of quarrying on and transporting from the isle, coinciding with the  retiral of the family who did the quarrying, brought production to a halt.
Since then, rock has been brought from  Trefor Quarry in North Wales but in recent times the use of Ailsa Craig rock has been resumed.
The rock is received at the factory in rough hewn, cylindrical shaped blocks, each weighing about 100 lbs.
In the factory, each block is reduced to a finished curling stone weighing 40 lbs which can be described as a thing of beauty and is truly an example of the finest craftsmanship.
Andrew Kay & Company are one of only two curling stone manufacturers in the world, the other being a small firm in Wales.
Whereas, at the peak of their production, the Mauchline company employed over 40 men, now they employ only 8.
During a boom period in the 1950s and 1960s, they produced between 95 and 100 pairs of curling stones each week, but weekly production is down now to between 10 and 12 pairs.
The width of the game's popularity throughout the world is shown by the number of countries to which Kay & Company have sold stones.
In addition to the United Kingdom, they have been sold to Canada (the largest market), the U.S.A., Switzerland, Austria, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Holland, Luxembourg, Germany, France, New Zealand, South Africa, Japan, Russia, China, Ireland, Belgium, Australia, and a few have gone to the Ivory Coast, surely amongst the most unlikely of places.
Although curling is booming as a sport, the increased number of players is not reflected directly in the number of stones required, as very few curlers have their own stones.
Even at the top levels of competition, players use stones belonging to the premises in which they are playing.
Replacement of curling stones is long-delayed as a pair of stones can last up to 25 years.
Even although Andrew Kay & Company are the world's leading curling stone makers, at times they have found it difficult to stay in business.
To their great credit, they have kept men in employment and the firm in business by diversifying their products.
Now, they produce miniature curling stones for the gift and souvenir markets, and once more have succeeded in establishing a world-wide trade.
The Smiths, the Kays and the Wyllies were humble men who stayed on in their native county and did not amass great wealth, nevertheless, they are remembered long after most of the supposedly important people of their generations have been forgotten.
Much of the heritage of every place is derived from the lives of unpretentious people.
THE BARON OF BUCHLYVIE
This is the story of a horse, or to be more precise, of a horse, two men and an era.
The horse was Baron of Buchlyvie, the men were James Kilpatrick and William Dunlop, and the era was that of the heavy horse.
Baron of Buchlyvie was a Clydesdale stallion.
Born in 1900, it was one of the greatest heavy horse breeding stallions of all time and probably the most famous.
It was bred by William McKeich, Woodend Farm, Buchlyvie, and the finest pedigree Clydesdale blood flowed in its veins.
James Kilpatrick was a stud farmer par excellence.
Although born in Dumfriesshire in 1864, he was of Ayrshire farming stock and his family returned to the county when he was ‘just a wee laddie’.
His paternal grandfather farmed Craigie Mains, Symington and had a considerable reputation as a breeder of Ayrshire cattle.
On the grandfather's death, the farm was taken over by a bachelor son who set about founding a Clydesdale stud.
The uncle was fond of his nephew, and convinced young James's parents to let the boy live with him at Craigie Mains.
A few years later, his parents emigrated to Australia but James stayed on at Craigie with his uncle.
The Craigie Mains stud prospered and James Kilpatrick learned the skills of  breeding horses and of preparing them to look their best in the highly competitive show ring.
In his youth, he was already accustomed to leading champion Clydesdales to the winning of the highest awards.
In 1895, when James Kilpatrick was 31 years of age, his uncle died and James took over the stud.
Under his ownership, Craigie Mains went from strength to strength and soon he became the most prolific prize-winning owner the Clydesdale Society has known.
Clydesdale horses were popular throughout the world and where they were known, the name of Craigie Mains was respected.
William Dunlop of Dunure Mains was also of Ayrshire farming stock.
The farm is one of the best in the county and its steading high above Dunure is a well-known landmark for all who sail on the lower reaches of the Clyde estuary.
William had been involved with Clydesdales since his boyhood and in 1897 he bought two good mature stallions and a fine brood mare with which he established Dunure Mains as a stud.
From then on he devoted himself to buying, selling and exhibiting horses, travelling the length and breadth of Britain in his quest for outstanding stock.
He was recognised as an excellent judge of Clydesdales and within ten years his horses were winning the breed's major honours.
James Kilpatrick and William Dunlop were keen rivals but good friends.
They competed against each other in business and in the show ring but each respected the other's knowledge of horses.
In 1901, Kilpatrick saw a gangling yearling Clydesdale being exhibited by William McKeich of Buchlyvie.
The young horse was Baron of Buchlyvie.
It was thought by many to be far from impressive in its conformation and action but the experienced Kilpatrick recognised its potential and tried to buy it.
McKeich was also aware of his animal's worth and refused to sell, rejecting a second, improved offer a few weeks later.
Eventually, in 1902, McKeich sold the Baron to James Kilpatrick for £700, a considerable sum as at that time a good yearling could be bought for between £400 and £500.
At that juncture, an odd thing occurred.
In spite of his admiration for Baron of Buchlyvie, and having been so keen to purchase it, Kilpatrick sold a half share in the horse to his rival, William Dunlop.
He claimed later that he had done so for the reason that a few months earlier he had sold a stallion to Dunlop which had died within a few weeks and that his motive had been to recompense Dunlop for his loss.
Whatever the reason for the sharing of the horse, the two men kept their transaction-secret and for many months Kilpatrick was thought to be still the sole owner.
Baron of Buchlyvie was kept at Craigie Mains and as a three year old was exhibited as being owned by James Kilpatrick.
With the stud's expert preparation, the horse won prizes at Ayr, Kilmarnock and Glasgow horse shows.
Although a late developer, it began to take on the size and conformation of an excellent Clydesdale stallion.
It stood at stud at Craigie and half of its earnings were paid to William Dunlop, the sleeping partner.
Late in 1903, Dunlop asked Kilpatrick to sell him his half-share in the Baron so that he, Dunlop, could be sole owner.
At first Kilpatrick refused but eventually, and surprisingly, he agreed to sell.
The terms of the verbal agreement between the two men were to become the subject of lengthy, costly and bitter litigation, and to make the names of Baron of Buchlyvie and its owners known far outwith Ayrshire and the world  of Clydesdales.
In the meantime, the horse was delivered to Dunure Mains where it stood as stud stallion.
About two weeks later, Kilpatrick and Dunlop met on market day in the Tam O'Shanter Inn , Ayr to finalise their transaction.
It was then that they disagreed for the first time about the terms of their verbal agreement and a serious rift developed between them.
James Kilpatrick claimed that he had agreed to sell his half-share for £2,000 and that nothing less would have enticed him to part with his interest in the horse.
Dunlop said that £2,000 had been agreed as the full value of the horse and that he was to pay Kilpatrick £1,000 for his half-share.
After the dispute, the deal was called off by both parties.
The horse was to stay at Dunure and the men were to continue as joint owners.
The solution could have been an amicable one but it was not to be so.
In 1904, Dunlop paid Kilpatrick £250 for what the latter understood to be his half-share of the Baron's stud-fee earnings for the season.
Later, Dunlop was to claim that the payment related to another transaction; he said that by then he was sole owner of the animal and therefore not due to pay Kilpatrick a share of the fees.
Dunlop's claim could not be supported by any record of a lump-sum payment having been made to Kilpatrick.
During the following three years, Dunlop made no payment to Kilpatrick.
In 1908, the men met in Ayr and Kilpatrick asked for settlement of his share of the Baron's earnings.
Dunlop refused and for the first time revealed that he considered himself to be the sole owner of the horse.
Kilpatrick instituted legal proceedings immediately, and so began one of the most famous cases in both Scottish legal and agricultural histories.
In the Court of Session, Edinburgh, Lord Skerrington, another son of Ayrshire, found in favour of James Kilpatrick.
He declared that Kilpatrick was still half-share owner of the stallion and, as such– was due half of the stud fees earned since 1904.
William Dunlop appealed to the Inner House of the Court of Session which reversed the decision in his favour.
Kilpatrick then took the case to the House of Lords where Lord Skerrington's original decision was upheld and, in addition, he was awarded costs in excess of £2,000 against Dunlop.
In his judgement, the Lord Chancellor said, ‘I am seldom called upon to decide in a case in which I felt so strongly that on one side or the other there had been abominable wickedness.’
His decision in favour of Kilpatrick indicated his Lordship's opinion as to where the wickedness lay.
The final legal decision left the two men as half-share owners of the Baron of Buchlyvie.
It was an impossible arrangement in the circumstances and through their solicitors they agreed that the horse should be put up for public auction, each partner having the right to buy it outright.
The case had attracted the attention of the world's press and the public waited eagerly for the climax.
In an age so dependent on the horse, the depth and width of interest can barely be exaggerated.
The auction ring of Ayr cattle market on 14th December, 1911, was arranged for the ‘high noon’ of the dispute.
The normally busy market had never known such crowds.
The sale ring was packed far beyond its proper capacity and still hundreds crowded outside the doors.
At the time set for the sale, it was realised that a special trainload of buyers, pressmen and spectators was due to arrive at Ayr railway station and the sale  was delayed to await their arrival.
It was estimated that over 5,000 people attended.
It was suggested that the auction should be held in the open-air to enable more people to take part but William Dunlop objected, insisting that the venue be strictly adhered to as arranged.
Eventually, to avoid a near riot, the proceedings were relayed to the throng outside the sale ring.
Baron of Buchlyvie was brought into the ring and everyone agreed that it looked magnificent.
Unfortunately, the mighty and majestic animal had been reduced to a pawn in the squalid affairs of men.
The auctioneer opened the bidding at £3,000 and it rose quickly to £4,000.
William Dunlop had been bidding from the start and James Kilpatrick began with a bid of £4,500, a sum almost certain to ensure purchase of the horse in normal circumstances.
The bidding continued and Kilpatrick stayed with it, raising it to £7,000 and later to £8,000.
To everyone's surprise, Dunlop had dropped out.
A stranger entered the bidding and soon gave the impression that he was determined to carry on for as long as was required to obtain the Baron.
Kilpatrick stopped bidding but still the bids increased until, eventually, to the amazement of all present, the stranger was successful with a final bid of £9,500.
Necks were strained for a glimpse of the stranger and a buzz of excitement speculated as to his identity.
The theatrical aspect was maintained to the end when it was revealed that the stranger had, in fact, been bidding on behalf of Dunlop.
Some folk suspected that after he had dropped out, Kilpatrick had also had someone bidding on his behalf, if only to raise the value of his half-share.
Baron of Buchlyvie went back to Dunure Mains with William Dunlop the undisputed sole owner.
Dunlop professed to be well satisfied with the outcome but the dispute had probably left his business irretrievably damaged.
The £9,500 paid for the stallion was far beyond the previous record for a Clydesdale.
The £9,500 of 1911 equates to about £500,000 at 1990 values.
At present, a good stallion could be bought for about £25,000.
James Kilpatrick had lost his share in the horse but he was well satisfied as he had been truly vindicated.
He had won the court case, had obtained over £2,000 in costs, was due £4,750 as his half share of the sale price of the Baron, and William Dunlop had still to pay him half of the stallion's considerable stud earnings for the preceding six years.
Baron of Buchlyvie continued its career as a breeding stallion and show horse.
It was not invincible in the show ring but won many championships.
Its importance as a sire had been obvious for many years as its progeny had proved their worth in the show ring and at stud.
Unfortunately, it survived the auction for only 2½ years.
In 1914, the upper part of its nearside foreleg was broken by a kick from a mare and the Baron had to be destroyed.
It was buried in the rose garden at Dunure Mains but such was its fame that 4 years later the body was exhumed and taken to Kelvingrove Museum, Glasgow, where the skeleton is still on display, accompanied by an account of the legal battle over ownership of the horse.
James Kilpatrick and William Dunlop did not speak to each other for 22 years, until a mutual friend arranged a reconciliation meeting in 1935.
Kilpatrick was involved in the running of Craigie Mains stud until his death in 1956, aged 91 years.
He continued to win the highest show ring awards and was honoured by his fellow professionals with several testimonials.
William Dunlop disposed of most of his horses in 1917 and the remainder in 1920.
He gave up farming and opened a restaurant in Glasgow but his new  businesses failed after a few years and he left Scotland to live in Rugby until his death in 1937.
Although out of farming, he had retained his interest in Clydesdales and was in demand as a show ring judge.
The era of the heavy horse has passed.
Since ancient times, mankind has used its strength and stamina.
It has borne his burdens, taken part in his wars, and shared his leisure pursuits but, incongruously, its most important period began with the start of the industrial revolution; as man invented machines to revolutionise his industry, he found more need for the heavy horse; it provided the means of transport and made possible the rapid improvements in agriculture required to feed the expanding population.
Until the internal combustion engine was fully ‘harnessed’ in the middle of this century, man depended upon the heavy horse to enable him to reap the fruits of his innovations.
Those who have worked with the animals are filled with nostalgia for the gentle giants.
In the 1960s, the Clydesdale almost disappeared without trace, so much so that it was on the Rare Breeds Survival Trust's list of protected animals.
Fortunately, their popularity has recovered and they are bred quite extensively, with a leading stud at Drybridge in Ayrshire.
In many a country public house in Ayrshire and far beyond, a photograph of Baron of Buchlyvie is still to be seen on the wall.
The story of the Baron is part of the country lore of Ayrshire.
COVENANTING TALES
No history of the people of Ayrshire would be complete without a reference to the Covenanters and the suffering of ‘The Killing Times’.
This is not the place for a long explanation or analysis of the history of the period, but a brief resume may be beneficial for some readers.
Aware of the influence of the Kirk over the people of Scotland, successive Stuart Kings of the 17th century tried to bring the Kirk under their control.
To achieve their goal, they imposed the Episcopacy of the English church on presbyterian Scotland.
Under Episcopacy, the church is ruled by bishops, who are answerable to the monarch; in Presbyterianism, the Kirk is ruled by an assembly of the clergy and lay members, independent of the State.
No presbyterian can see why a monarch should have jurisdiction over a belief in God's kingdom.
In 1638, eminent men throughout Scotland signed the National Covenant in support of Presbyterianism, and for the next 50 years Scotland struggled to retain the Kirk's independence.
Supporters of the Covenant were known as Covenanters.
Only students of history are conscious of the fact that the Covenanting times lasted for over half a century and that before the end of the period some of the skirmishes were between factions, supposedly on the same side in the conflict.
The last decade of the struggle was the 1680s and the period is known as ‘The Killing Times’.
It was an appalling time of tyranny and religious persecution in which all classes of Scottish society, but mostly the ministers and farmers, and mainly in Ayrshire and Galloway, took the lead in resisting the final efforts of the Monarchy to  install Episcopacy, many paying with their lives for adherence to their faith.
The kirkyards and muirlands of central and south Ayrshire are dotted with headstones and  memorials to men martyred by the King's Dragoons.
It would take a separate book to give all of the tragic accounts of the killings, and, in any case, this has already been done.
To give an impression of the terrible times, the stories of 3 Ayrshire men have been selected, a purely personal selection.
The men whose stories are to be told are:— 1).
Reverend Alexander Peden, ‘The Prophet’; 2).
John Morton, ‘The Blacksmith’; and 3).
John Browne, ‘The Christian Carrier’.
Between them they reflect some of the attitudes and show some of the suffering of the period.
THE PROPHET
Alexander (Sandy) Peden was born in 1626 at Auchincloich in the parish of Sorn.
He was educated at the village school and at Glasgow University.
About 1646, he became village school-master at Tarbolton where his duties included acting as Session Clerk and Precentor of the parish kirk.
In 1660 he was ordained as a Kirk of Scotland Minister with the charge of New Luce in Galloway, but 3 years later he lost his post.
At the instance of the King, Parliament passed an Act decreeing that all ministers in Scotland who had been ordained since 1649 must have their appointments confirmed by the bishop of their diocese.
Almost 400 ministers refused to conform to this imposition of Episcopacy and as a result they were debarred from their kirks, deprived of their livelihoods, and disqualified from acting as ministers.
Most of the dissenting (Covenanting) ministers took other jobs and waited in hope for the ruling to be reversed, at peace with their consciences by having adhered to their principles, but many felt it incumbent upon them to continue with their vocation, preaching the gospel and making true Presbyterianism available to the people.
Alexander Peden was one of the latter group.
The ministers who continued with their duties had to do so surreptitiously in private homes, in barns or in the open air.
These meetings were well attended and were known as conventicles.
Before long, the kirks in many parishes were almost empty, especially in South-West Scotland.
Because of the scarcity of ministers, young conforming curates were appointed to many of the kirks but they were disliked, ignored and often abused by the congregations.
With the law being openly flouted and the king's attempts to change the kirk being thwarted, troops of Dragoons were sent out to patrol the countryside, to discourage the holding of conventicles and apprehend transgressors.
Penalties were high, especially for the ministers.
They were hounded day and night but would not be diverted from their mission.
Alexander Peden was greatly esteemed by the people of Ayrshire and Galloway and became the focus of authority's attention.
He was pursued all over Galloway, Carrick and Kyle, and given little respite, but still he preached at well-attended conventicles, baptised children, and officiated at weddings.
By 1673, he thought that too many of his supporters were being exposed to danger by his presence so he went off to Ireland for a cooling-down period.
He could not have stayed away for long because in June of that year he was captured by the Dragoons in Knockdow House in Carrick and confined on the Bass Rock in the Firth of Forth to await trial.
In 1678, after more than 5 years' detention on the barren rock, he was tried in Edinburgh and, with 60 other Covenanters, was sentenced to be banished to Virginia for the remainder of his life.
They were embarked at Leith and sailed down the east coast to Gravesend where they were  transferred to another ship.
The captain of the second ship liberated his prisoners, some say out of compassion and sympathy for their cause, others say due to the influence of members of the Scottish nobility in London.
Peden made his way back to Scotland, arriving in 1679, just after the Battle of Bothwell Bridge in which the Covenanters had been heavily defeated.
In the wake of the battle, things were very dangerous for Peden and his supporters; the Dragoons had become even more ruthless and what were to become known as The Killing Times had begun.
Once more, to protect his friends, Peden went off to Ireland.
Again, he could not have stayed for long as in 1680 he was back preaching in Mauchline.
Soon, the Dragoons became aware of his return and, as before, he was pursued relentlessly.
In 1682, he was forced to go back to Ireland and to stay there for 3 years.
On his return, he was accompanied by a band of 100 armed Covenanters who made their way through Galloway and South Ayrshire, causing alarm to the curates ensconced in the parish kirks.
At Cumnock, they raided the mansion house of Lord Dumfries, an active government supporter, and carried off arms and ammunition.
Peden was not armed and did not take part in the band's less reputable exploits.
As soon as possible, he was on his own again, moving from place to place, sleeping rough in barns, in caves, or in the open, and depending on the support and generosity of the common people for succour and sustenance, repaying them with prayer and preaching.
By then, Peden's exploits were legendary and he had become known as ‘The Prophet’ for his prediction of future happenings.
Many tales have been handed down and a great number of myths have been created around his memory.
One story tells how he called at a farmhouse for shelter but the farmer knew that the Dragoons were close at hand and liable to raid the farm.
As there was no cave or other suitable hiding place nearby, the farmer made a bed for Peden on the ground amongst a field of standing corn.
While ‘The Prophet’ was asleep, a violent rainstorm swept across the countryside but when it ended and the farmer went to see how the fugitive minister had fared, he found that, miraculously, an area around the sleeping man had been left untouched by the rain.
Another legend relates how a band of Covenanters, including Peden, was being closely pursued by a party of Dragoons and the minister's strength was almost gone.
To the alarm of his companions, he stopped, knelt down and said to them, ‘Let us take time to pray to the Lord.’
Reluctantly, they knelt beside him as he raised his face to heaven and prayed,.
Immediately, a cloud of mist hid them from their pursuers and, before it cleared, a messenger came and called the Dragoons off to another duty.
By the end of 1685, Alexander Peden knew that his life was nearing its end.
He was almost 60 years of age and had been a fugitive for 22 years, during which time he had had no permanent home, no source of income and little respite from danger.
He made his way back to his native area around Sorn, Muirkirk and Mauchline, where he slept at various farms, including Garfield, Meadowhead and Priesthill.
He preached his last sermon at Collin Wood, near the River Ayr, and spent most of his time in prayer.
The Dragoons were in the district and to hide from them he retired to a small cave on the  banks of the Lugar River, close to its junction with the Dippel Burn.
After a few days, he left his hiding place and went to the farmhouse of Ten Shillingside in Mauchline Parish, of which his brother was tenant.
He told his brother that he was close to death and would die in a few days.
As the Dragoons were still looking for him, he would not stay in the house but had a small cave dug nearby, with a gorse bush to hide the entrance.
After a few days in the cave, he entered the farmhouse, saying that his end was close.
He was put to bed in a room in the house so that he could die in some comfort.
Before his death, the Dragoons visited the farm; they searched all of the outbuildings and then the house but, as if by a miracle, they failed to enter the room in which ‘The Prophet’ lay dying.
Alexander Peden died on 28th January, 1686.
He was buried in Auchinleck kirkyard but, even in death, he was not allowed to rest in peace.
Six weeks after his burial, the Dragoons discovered his grave and dug up his corpse.
They took it to the Gallows Hill, Cumnock, intending to hang it from the gibbet but the Earl of Dumfries intervened and stopped them as he feared rioting by the people of the district.
After sorely abusing the corpse, they buried it at the foot of the gallows, intending the burial as a final disgrace.
A headstone was erected by local admirers and many years later, when Cumnock required a new burial ground, the intended disgrace was completely reversed by the people of the town deciding to have the ground around and including the minister's grave consecrated as their new cemetery.
In 1891, an obelisk of Aberdeen granite was erected as a memorial in place of the headstone.
Alexander Peden, ‘The Prophet’, was a brave, devout man of great conviction.
If he was a zealot, it was in his strict adherence to his Faith; if he was bigoted, it was in his belief that the kirk was of the people and answerable to no master other than God.
His name is revered still in Ayrshire.
Hundreds of admirers visit his grave each year and in many parts of the county children still play on Peden's Pulpits and hide in Peden's Caves.
THE BLACKSMITH
John Morton was the Darvel blacksmith, as his father and grandfather had been before him.
He had the power of his profession but was mild mannered and sincere by nature.
Many of his friends were Covenanters but, although he supported their cause in principal and loathed the barbarous conduct of the dreaded Dragoons, he took no active part in the rebellion.
In truth, his feelings were more nationalistic than religious as his principle objection was to English ways being forced upon the Scottish people.
Having said that, he enjoyed the depth of conviction to be heard at a conventicle and slipped away to a service on the muirs above the village as often as he was able to do so.
On the Sabbath morning of 1st June, 1679, the blacksmith had a visit from Captain John Nisbet of Hardhill in the parish of Loudoun, who was accompanied by George Woodburn of Loudoun Mains.
It was early in the day, before kirk time, and Nisbet's horse was badly in need of being shod.
Normally, the smiddy would not have been opened on a Sunday but the animal was in pain and its owner said he needed the mount urgently.
Captain Nisbet, a retired soldier, was well known and respected in the Irvine Valley and beyond.
He was an open supporter of the Covenant and when he visited his friend the blacksmith, he was on his way to join a band of Covenanters about to confront a party of Dragoons.
The 29th May, 1679, had been the anniversary of the restoration of Charles II to the throne and the authorities had lit bonfires in celebration.
A group of armed Covenanters, under the command of Sir Robert Hamilton of Preston, East Lothian, had assembled at Rutherglen, and being opposed to Charles, had travelled all over the district, extinguishing the bonfires and stopping the celebrations.
The rebels then returned to Rutherglen Cross where they made a rebellious proclamation before moving off towards Avondale and the Irvine Valley.
On the evening of Saturday, 31st May, the Covenanters halted for the night on the land of Harelaw, near Loudoun Hill.
They knew that they would be pursued by the Dragoons so they posted lookouts on Loudoun Hill and other vantage points.
Word went out to the people of the surrounding area that a conventicle would be held on the muir early on the Sunday morning.
On the following morning, a service began on the muir, conducted by the Rev. Mr. Douglas, a minister who was with the Covenanters.
Information had been received during the night that a large party of Dragoons, commanded by the infamous Graham of Claverhouse, were in pursuit of them and had spent the night at Strathaven.
The Dragoons had taken several prisoners and the Covenanters decided to intercept the soldiers and free the captives.
Most of the local men who had come for the conventicle, had come armed in case of a surprise attack, and many of the others agreed to arm themselves, but additional men would be required if the Dragoons were to be confronted.
Messengers were sent off to sympathetic neighbours, and, amongst them, Hugh Woodburn of Loudoun Mains sent his younger brother, George, to ask John Nisbet of Hardhill to come with all haste.
While having his horse shod, Nisbet told John Morton that, with George Woodburn, he was on his way to assist the Covenanters, and persuaded the blacksmith to join them.
Morton had not taken up arms previously, but he knew that some of his friends would have gone to the conventicle and would have volunteered to take part in the unequal contest against the soldiers.
Up on the muir, the Rev. Douglas finished his sermon to the conventicle by saying to his congregation, ‘You have had the theory, and now for the practice.
You know your duty.
Self-defence is always lawful.’
The service over, the Covenanters and their supporters moved off towards Drumclog on the Strathaven road.
After about 2 miles, Sir Robert Hamilton chose a position on the muir where he thought his amateur troops might have a strategic advantage.
He placed his mounted men on the flanks, and those on foot in 3 ranks across the middle.
In front of the men on foot there was a large boggy area which would hamper the mounted Dragoons.
The front rank of footmen were instructed that when the soldiers advanced on them, by command, they were to present their rifles, be steady, take aim, fire and lie flat on the ground.
The second and third ranks of foot were to stay flat on the ground throughout the manoeuvre, and then, in turn carry out the same tactic.
Another important order was issued that is worthy of comment.
No quarter (mercy) was to be given and no prisoners taken.
It was an order totally alien to the most basic principles of the religion they were fighting to uphold, and showed that after 40 years of the struggle, some of those fighting under the flag of the Covenant had lost sight of the most important aspects of their Faith.
They may have been corrupted by the atrocities committed against their people but, by stooping to the same level of conduct, they were corrupting their own cause.
The Dragoons arrived on the battlefield and sent a party forward under a flag of truce.
Claverhouse had sent them to say that if the Covenanters laid down their arms and handed over their leaders, they would be pardoned.
The offer was rejected and similar terms sent back to Claverhouse.
The Dragoons advanced to within rifle range and stopped to take aim.
As arranged, the front rank of Covenanters were ordered to be steady, aim, fire and lie down on the ground.
So successful was the tactic that the return fire from the Dragoons passed over their heads without inflicting a single casualty.
Hamilton then ordered his second rank to repeat the manoeuvre, followed by the third rank.
In the meantime, the Dragoons were floundering in the boggy ground, easy targets for the riflemen while finding it impossible to fire with any reasonable accuracy themselves.
The Covenanters drew swords and spears, advanced onto the soft ground, and engaged the Dragoons in bloody hand-to-hand fighting.
John Nisbet, George Woodburn and John Morton arrived on the scene as the close fighting began.
Nisbet sounded his bugle as he approached and, as the wily ex-soldier intended, gave the impression of a much greater number of reinforcements arriving.
When he reached the fighting, he charged in amongst the Dragoons, shouting loudly and urging his companions to follow him.
In the fierce, close quarter fighting, the blacksmith acquitted himself well.
Soon, he found himself standing over a young Dragoon who was lying on the ground.
The soldier's horse had been shot and he was unable to defend himself, one leg having become entangled in the harness.
Morton was on the point of killing the Dragoon when the soldier begged for quarter, adding that he had been forced into the army and had not wanted to be a soldier.
By then, it was obvious that the Covenanters had won the day and many of the enemy, including Claverhouse, were in full flight from the field.
Faced with the defenceless young man asking for mercy, the blacksmith could not kill him, so he relieved him of his sword and took him prisoner.
Several of the Covenanters, including some of the officers, told Morton that the order of the day had been ‘No quarter — No prisoners’ and threatened to kill the prisoner but the powerful blacksmith declared that having spared the man's life he would defend it with his own.
After the battle, John Morton was ordered to appear before Sir Robert Hamilton and the other officers.
He was severely reprimanded for having spared the Dragoon against orders and told that never again would he be welcome in their ranks.
Tradition says that, worst of all, he was informed that he would not be allowed to partake of Communion at any service conducted by a Covenanting Minister, a sentence equivalent to excommunication from the Kirk he believed in,
Shortly after the Battle of Drumclog, the Covenanters were severely defeated at the Battle of Bothwell Bridge.
Captain John Nisbet fought in the battle and, although he escaped from the field, he was hunted by the Dragoons for the rest of his life.
Finally, he was arrested in 1685 and was hanged at the Grassmarket in Edinburgh.
John Morton lived out his life in Darvel, always respected by the people of the Irvine Valley.
Three hundred years later he is remembered as an honourable man, an epithet to be prized above the highest awards attainable.
The story of the blacksmith's involvement in the Battle of Drumclog can not be substantiated by any written record of the battle but it has been handed down through many generations of people in the Irvine Valley and spoken of with pride.
(See Chapter 36).
THE CHRISTIAN CARRIER
John Browne lived at Priesthill, a cottage and small parcel of land on the bleak muirland north-east of Muirkirk.
He was born in 1628, probably at Priesthill.
As his land was not fertile enough to support his family, he supplemented his income by operating as a carrier, conveying small quantities of goods by pack animal to and from neighbouring villages.
John was a devout Christian and as a young man had hoped to be a minister, a vocation denied to him by a stammer in his speech.
As an adult, he ran a class in religious education for the young men of his neighbourhood, held in his home or on the open muir, as dictated by the weather or the presence of the Dragoons in the district.
To his friends and neighbours, John was known as ‘The Christian Carrier’.
The first reference to John that can be traced is in Muirkirk Session records in which there is an entry —‘On 19th September, 1680, it was delated to the Session that John Browne in Priesthill…(and others)…did not attend public ordinances.’
In other words, he had not been attending the kirk.
Like many men of the muirlands and remote districts of Ayrshire in the 17th century, John was a fervent opponent of the imposition of Episcopacy on to the Scottish Kirk.
Their opposition was on religious rather than political grounds, being based on the belief that God alone had authority over the kirk and that interference with the kirk was interference with God's wishes.
So strict were their beliefs that they objected to the church's Holy Days as they had been selected by men and because, to God, all days were holy and should be celebrated equally.
Kirk elders were instructed to visit offenders and report back to the Session.
The outcome of the visit to Priesthill is also recorded in the minutes —
The ‘indulgent Minister/person’ referred to was the Curate of the parish kirk and the ‘true messenger of Jesus Christ’was Richard Cameron, a leading Covenanter who, with 8 followers, had been killed by Dragoons on Airds Moss in May, 1680.
For failing to attend the Kirk, John Browne would be reported to the authorities by the Session and the Dragoons would pay him a visit — if they could find him.
There is no record of John having been apprehended and/or fined at that time, but it is almost certain that he would be dealt with in some way.
At the beginning of May, 1682, ‘The Christian Carrier’ was married to Isabel Weir, the ceremony being conducted — illegally in the eyes of officialdom — by the Reverend Alexander Peden.
One tradition says that the marriage was at Priesthill and another that it was ‘in a secluded spot near Sorn’.
Isabel was John's second wife and he was 54 years of age when they married.
‘The Prophet’ had always been made welcome at Priesthill and Isabel assured him that nothing would change; their door would be open to him at all times.
Tradition tells that Peden told the new bride to —.
John and Isabel were happy in their marriage even although they had to go into hiding occasionally, with friends or on the muirs.
They refused still to attend the kirk and word had got around that they had been married by ‘The Prophet’.
Fortunately, on the lonely and almost trackless muirs, it was difficult for the Dragoons to arrive at Priesthill unexpectedly.
On 1st May, 1685, John Graham of Claverhouse, ‘Bloody Clavers’ as he had become known, was at Lesmahagow in Lanarkshire and due to leave on a patrol of Ayrshire.
As he studied the list of names of men who had evaded the Dragoons, the names of 2 Ayrshiremen took his attention, both for the length of time they had eluded ‘justice’.
One was Alexander Peden, the fugitive minister who had defied the law for over 20 years, and the other was John Browne.
Clavers decided that he would make a special effort to apprehend both.
In the early hours of the next day, Claverhouse left Lesmahagow with 3 troops of  Dragoons.
It was a fine summer morning when they left and, avoiding the roads as much as possible, made their way up on to the high muirs on the Lanarkshire/Ayrshire boundary, intending to travel direct towards Priesthill and hoping to take John Browne by surprise.
It was suspected that Alexander Peden was sheltering at Priesthill and Claverhouse hoped to ‘catch two birds with the one stone’.
On the high ground, the soldiers were shrouded in a heavy mist, suiting their purpose perfectly.
About 4.30 a.m. that morning, John Browne and his family got out of bed.
After breakfast and morning prayers, John left to dig peats on the muir to the east of his home.
He was accompanied by his nephew, John Browning, who had been involved in Covenanting activities and was lying low at Priesthill.
Before long they were busily engaged in cutting the peats, with little talk between them.
In his concentration on the job in hand, John allowed his normal vigilance to slip.
As the sun rose higher in the sky, the mist began to clear and, suddenly, John saw the Dragoons coming across the muir from the east and heading straight towards them.
Although sure they had been seen, he thought that their only chance of escape was to run to better cover.
The two men ran off but, though they gave the troopers a good chase, were soon captured.
Their hands were bound with ropes and before they were led away towards Priesthill, Claverhouse questioned them.
He had been informed that John Browne spoke with a stutter but the elder of the two men in front of him spoke with such pride and composure that Claverhouse doubted if it was the right man.
When John confirmed his name, he was asked why he did not attend the curate's services, to which he replied that the man had been appointed under the king's law and not under God's law.
Claverhouse then asked if he was prepared to ‘take the test’— to swear, firstly, that he acknowledged the king as head of the Kirk and, secondly, that he would not bear arms against the king.
John said he acknowledged only Christ as supreme head of the Kirk and, in religious matters, would obey only His laws.
The two men were taken across the muir to Priesthill, where Isabel was waiting with her children in front of the cottage.
She knew what John's apprehension was likely to lead to and in her anguish prayed to God for strength to face her ordeal.
By the time the party arrived, she was calm and composed.
Graham of Claverhouse said to John, ‘Go to your prayers for you are to die.’
John did not pray immediately but turned to his wife; he told her tenderly that their hour of  parting had come, the hour they had for so long anticipated.
He then asked if she was prepared for the parting and she told him, ‘Willingly, John, in such a cause as this.’
'That is all I desire', said John, ‘I have no more to do but die.
I have been prepared for death for many years.’
Claverhouse then said, ‘Take goodbye of your wife and children’, and John kissed his family.
Having done so, he committed them into the care of Him who cares for all the needy, and knelt to his prayers.
Scarcely had he begun when Claverhouse ordered him to rise and when he did so, 6 soldiers were ordered to shoot him.
Most of the bullets struck his head and John Browne died instantly.
Not satisfied by the cruelty of his barbaric act, Claverhouse turned to Isabel, ‘What think you of your husband now, woman?’
Inwardly distraught but aware that sight of her grief would further gratify her husband's butcher, she said with pride and defiance, said Bloody Clavers.  retorted the widow, ‘But how will you answer for this mornin's work?’
‘To man I can be answerable, and as for God, I'll take him in my own hands’, said the brazen Clavers, and with that he turned his horse and led his men away, knowing that he had been deflated by a poor woman of noble demeanour.
The Dragoons took John Browning with them and he was hanged later at Mauchline, where his name is on a memorial to Covenanters on the Loan Green.
Tradition says that with other Covenanters he was hanged from the upstairs window of the house that still stands at the north-west corner of Mauchline Cross.
Left with her dead husband, Isabel succumbed to her grief.
When she had recovered some composure, she covered his body with her shawl and sat down beside it with her children by her, hoping a neighbour would hear of her plight and come to help her.
One came many hours later after news of the atrocity had been spread by Claverhouse as a warning to the district.
John Browne's neighbours buried him at the gable-end of his humble cottage.
The house disappeared long ago but a monument erected near the site in 1825 bears witness to the life and death of a sincere Christian man who was prepared to die for his Faith.
The monument is on the land of Blacksyde Farm, almost 3 miles east of the Muirkirk/Strathaven Road.
Priesthill is on bleak, desolate and wind-swept muirland.
In any weather conditions, the visitor must wonder how any simple man scraping a living in such a lonely and inhospitable place in the 17th century could have been judged to be a threat to the nation.
Alexander Peden, John Morton and John Browne were sincere men and a credit to the movement they supported.
Not all of the supporters of the Solemn League and Covenant could be so judged.
In 1689, Presbyterianism was accepted finally as the Faith of the Scottish Kirk and interference by the monarch came to an end.
By their long resistance, the Covenanters secured the freedom of the Kirk from state control and long may it be so in Scotland.
In its many denominations, the Scottish Kirk still cherishes its freedom, a right maintained and guaranteed by royal oath on the accession of each successive British monarch.
GEORGE DOUGLAS BROWN, OCHILTREE
George Douglas Brown was born near Ochiltree, the illegitimate son of George Douglas Brown, a farmer, and Sarah Gemmell, a farm servant, both of Drumsmudden Farm.
He was educated at Ochiltree and Coylton village schools until, at 12, he left to work on the pithead of Trabboch colliery.
With his mother he moved to Cronberry and then to Crofthead, near Ayr.
Encouraged by local school teachers who recognised his outstanding intellect, he resumed his education at Ayr Academy and went on to Glasgow University, where he graduated M.A. with first class honours in classics and won a gold medal for Greek.
From Glasgow he obtained a Snell Exhibition (See Chapter 38) and continued his studies at Balliol College, Oxford.
After university, he became a free-lance journalist in London, writing articles for most of the leading literary magazines.
Of his several works of fiction, the best known is the novel,The House with the Green Shutters , which is set in Ochiltree.
Unfortunately, he died aged 33, before his full potential was realised.
DUNLOP CHEESE & AYRSHIRE BACON
In Dunlop Laigh Kirkyard there is a headstone which has been removed from its original position and now stands in a comer, leaning against the south wall of the kirk, partly hidden by a bush.
The lichen encrusted inscription reads:—‘This is the burial place of John Dunlop of Overhill and Barbara Gilmor his spouse and their children — 1732’.
It would seem to commemorate a humble farmer and his wife, truly two of Thomas Gray's flowers ‘born to blush unseen’, but that is far from correct for Barbra Gilmor is a character in the story of Ayrshire's heritage, a woman with a unique claim to fame in the annals of the county.
Barbra Gilmor — Barbara Gilmour of Gilmore in its modem spelling — was the daughter of an Ayrshire farmer who, like many of his calling, was committed to the Solemn League and Covenant (See chapter 21).
During the ‘Killing Times’ of the 1880s, when the Covenanters were being hunted down and killed mercilessly, the father fled with his family to Ireland, where they stayed for several years, probably until after James II and VII was deposed in 1688.
After her return to Ayrshire, Barbara married John Dunlop, a farmer in Dunlop parish.
As is shown on their headstone, they lived at Overhill, which is now called Hill and is a short distance outside Dunlop village on the Stewarton Road.
On a door lintel at Hill there is an inscription, ‘J.D. — B.G.1692’, which followed a custom of the time and probably commemorated the date of their wedding or betrothal.
In Ireland, Barbara had learned a method of making cheese with unskimmed cow's milk and when she returned to Ayrshire she introduced the new process.
Soon, the fame of Dunlop cheese spread throughout the county and the process was adopted widely.
Generally, it is thought that the cheese took its name from Dunlop village or parish but it could have been from Mrs. Barbara Dunlop; we will never know.
Dunlop parish had been long-famed for its dairy produce.
In his Topographical Account of Cunninghame , compiled about 1600, Timothy Pont recorded —‘This part of the country yields a great deal of excellent butter but especially the parishes of Stewarton and Dunlop.’
By the middle of the 18th century, if not earlier, the parish was in the forefront in breeding new dairy cattle, later to be called the Ayrshire breed, and the increased milk production obtained enabled every small farmer to produce much  more butter and cheese.
Almost every dairy farm in Ayrshire produced Dunlop cheese and it became a thriving small industry which was an important source of income for the county's farmers throughout the many difficult times for agriculture in the late 18th and 19th centuries.
Most of the farmhouse cheese was sold direct to shops in nearby towns and villages but, as production increased, great quantities were sold at special cheese fairs, the busiest in Ayrshire being at Kilmarnock.
Dunlop cheese was produced on most Ayrshire farms right into the 20th century but began to decline after the Scottish Milk Marketing Board was set up in 1933.
The Board gave both a secure market for milk and a measure of financial security to the farmers.
Many farmers still retained some milk for cheesemaking but regulations on the production and use of milk during the Second World War almost brought farmhouse production to a halt and it has never been resumed on an appreciable scale.
Production of Dunlop cheese has now been commercialised in creameries and is confined almost exclusively to the islands of Arran and Islay.
A by-product of cheesemaking on farms led to another product which was to bring fame to the name of Ayrshire.
When the processed milk had separated into curds and whey, and the curds were processed further to make cheese, the farmers, at first, had no use for the whey.
Before long it was realised that the nutritious liquid was excellent feeding for pigs and, although pig-keeping had been unpopular in the county until then, almost every Ayrshire dairy farm began to keep a few of them.
Some farmers cured their own bacon but most of the curing was done commercially by a few firms established for the purpose.
Every farm kitchen had hams hanging from hooks in the ceiling in a comer of the room and the smell pervaded the kitchen.
The practice stopped many years ago but in many farm kitchens in the county, the hooks can still be seen.
Ayrshire bacon established a wide reputation for its excellence and took its place amongst the most popular bacons of Britain.
Its popularity is still high but the quality of the mass-produced, growth-promoted product of today is far below the standard of the succulent farmhouse bacon of the past.
It may be that Barbara Gilmour's place in Ayrshire's history is no more than a myth, but that she existed can not be disputed.
It would be difficult to understand why an otherwise ordinary country woman should have been singled out and made the central character of the tradition if there was no truth in the story.
Be it one way or the other, and I prefer to give credit to Barbara, her headstone deserves to be preserved as an item of great interest in Ayrshire's heritage.
KILWINNING'S PAPINGO SHOOT
During June each year, visitors to Kilwinning are likely to be perplexed if reference is made to the town's annual papingo shoot.
If they ask for an explanation and are told that it is shooting at a wooden bird in the graveyard with bows and arrows, they may think they are being hoaxed.
In fact, the account is correct, even if not very explicit, and as by now the reader will be equally confused, let us look at the history of the papingo shoot.
For over 400 years, until the middle of the 17th century, noblemen and other landowners throughout Scotland were required by royal decree to parade their armed retainers periodically for a show of weapons and practise of military skills.
Such gatherings were called wapenshaws and one test of skill for archers was trying to dislodge a model of a parrot, called a papingo, from the top of a high tree or tower.
The English equivalent of papingo (pronounced with emphasis on the second ‘P’), is popinjay.
When firearms became more readily available in the 17th century, interest in archery waned and did not increase again until the skill of the bowman was revived as a sport late in the 18th century.
In the meantime, archery had retained its appeal in a few places around the country, two of them being the neighbouring Ayrshire towns of Irvine and Kilwinning, in both of which contests were held annually.
In both places, the contest had become known as ‘the papingo shoot’ and was the main attraction on a local holiday.
There is no record of when Irvine's annual papingo shoot started.
A record dated 1665 shows that at that time the archery contests were held over 4 days.
On the fourth day, as the climax, the papingo was — and whoever was first to  was called Captain of the archers for the following twelve months.
It is not known where the papingo was placed to be shot at but it was probably on top of the old steeple of the parish church (demolished in 1721) or on the roof of the tolbooth which stood in High Street, between the Town's House and the Cross.
Irvine's Society  of Archers was in existence as late as the 1850s but for some reason unknown the papingo shoot appears to have ended as early as 1721.
The history of the Kilwinning papingo shoot is much longer and more interesting, The Ancient Society of Kilwinning Archers was formed in 1483 and is still in existence, although not with a continuous history.
According to the  Guinness Book of Records, the oldest archery company in Britain is the Society of Archers of Yorkshire which was not formed until 1673 but has been in being since then.
The  Guinness book acknowledges that the Kilwinning papingo shoot was first contested in 1488.
The Royal Company of Archers, based in Edinburgh, better known as the Monarch's Bodyguard in Scotland, was not formed until 1676,193 years after the Kilwinning Society, but as they have had a continuous existence also, they can claim to be the oldest archery company in Scotland.
The earliest existing record of a meeting of the Kilwinning archers is dated 4th September, 1688.
On that date, a group of men from Kilwinning and district —, in other words, they met to resurrect the papingo shoot.
There is nothing to show how long the game or the Society had been in abeyance before the meeting but in the same record a minute implies that the Society had been formed in 1483.
One thing is certain, the Kilwinning Archers Society is one of the oldest sporting organisations of any kind in the world.
After the revival in 1688, the Kilwinning papingo shoot continued with only a few brief interruptions through the 18th and into the 19th century.
It became the centre of a ‘grand annual festival’ with archery contests held over three days.
The festival began each year with a parade of the competitors through the village, led by the Captain and past Captains of the Society.
As they progressed, people lined the streets and hospitality ‘flowed’ at every tavern.
On the evening of the third day, the festivities ended with a grand dance, attended by local people of all ranks.
There is no record of where the papingo was placed for the contests held during the first century of the Kilwinning Society of Archers.
It is thought that from the late 16th century it was placed on top of the remaining tower of the ruined Kilwinning Abbey  (the Abbey was destroyed in 1561 at the time of the Scottish Reformation).
The tower was demolished by lightning in 1821 and since the present Abbey clock tower was erected on the site in 1822 the papingo has been placed there for every contest.
After about 400 years of the papingo shoots, table graves in the vicinity of the clock tower have been badly pitted by arrowheads.
In the past it must have been necessary for spectators to keep well clear or be vigilant.
No danger exists now as all arrows are rubber tipped.
As in Irvine, whoever was first to  the Kilwinning papingo was made Captain of the archers for the following twelve months.
In the early years, the prize for the winner was a piece of multi-coloured Persian taffeta, 3 ells long and 3/4 of an ell broad (343 × 85cm) to the value of £20 Scots.
The material was called a ‘benn’ and the winner wore it around his waist as the Captain's badge of office.
After many years, the prize was changed to a piece of silver, to be purchased by the Captain demitting office.
As only the better-off members could afford the piece of silver, this can be seen as the first sign that the classless Society of Archers was being taken over by the wealthier members.
In 1724, David Muir, Chamberlain to the Earl of Eglinton and a merchant in his own right, presented the Society with a silver arrow as the winner's trophy for the papingo shoot and proceeded to win it himself in the first year.
He returned it to the Society and it was agreed that the arrow would be retained from then on as the Papingo Trophy, with each winner adding a gold or silver medal bearing his name and the year of his success.
It was decided also that if any person was to win 6 years in succession, he would be presented with the trophy to keep; so far it appears to be an impossible goal as in the intervening 266 years, no person has won more than once.
As the winner had to add a gold or silver medal to the trophy, it is obvious again that only the wealthy could compete and hope to win.
Before the end of the 18th century, this was confirmed by the Society electing to have three contests annually on the day of the papingo shoot — one each for the ‘gentlemen’, the ‘merchants and tradesmen’, and the ‘boys’, with only the ‘gentlemen’ eligible to shoot for the papingo trophy.
This class distinction was taken even further early in the 19th century when a new rule allowed entrants to compete by proxy — skilled archers could shoot on their behalf — which allowed the gentry to be involved, and even to win, without the need to be competent with the bow and arrow.
The new rules were bound to have an adverse effect on the general public's attitude to the Society and before long it was obvious that the papingo shoot was losing its popularity with ordinary people, even as a spectacle.
In an age of widespread agitation for social reform, the new concept only emphasised the social divisions.
In 1859, the number of winners' medals had become too great to be attached to the silver arrow and the trophy was re-modelled in its present form, in which the original arrow is supported by a silver bow and crossed bolts, all standing on an ebony and silver plinth.
In his book,The History of the Counties of Ayr and Wigton , published in 1866, James Paterson wrote that ‘the annual competition at Kilwinning has been attended with a marked degree of interest’ and with improvements in ‘the number and respectability of the company.’
As most of Paterson's book deals with the histories of Ayrshire's leading families, his comment on the shoot may have been coloured by a desire to please the  gentry involved in the Society, as by 1870 interest had declined to rock bottom with no entries for the papingo shoot.
An attempt to revive the contest in 1871 failed, as did another in 1882.
We can presume that the novelty of the Society had worn off for the capricious upper classes.
After a continuous existence of 182 years, and a total history of 387 years, the Ancient Society of Kilwinning Archers and their papingo shoot was again in abeyance.
Like many other gems in our ancient heritage, it was neglected in an age of supposed advances in our civilisation.
The priceless trophy was lodged in the vault of a local bank for safe-keeping, a few years later was handed over to Kelvingrove Museum, Glasgow, and finally was given to The Royal Company of Archers.
After the Second World War, interest in archery as a sport increased again and several clubs were formed in Ayrshire.
In 1948, a Troon lawyer called George Hamilton, set out to revive the Kilwinning Society and called a public meeting in Kilwinning, at which it was reconstituted.
The Papingo Trophy was traced to The Royal Company and on 7th June, 1951, a contingent of Royal Archers paraded through Kilwinning and ceremoniously handed over the trophy to the joint care of the town council and the Ancient Society of Archers.
Until the regionalisation of local government in 1975, the papingo trophy was on display in Kilwinning Town Chambers but when the local council ceased to exist, the piece of historic silverware was placed in safe-keeping to await the selection of a new home.
Fortunately, this magnificent and irreplaceable part of Ayrshire's heritage is now on permanent display to the public in Kilwinning's new public library.
It is recommended for inspection by anyone interested in local history.
The Ancient Society of Kilwinning Archers is still in existence, kept going by a few enthusiasts, and the papingo shoot is held annually in June.
On the day of the shoot, competitors start by shooting at butts (targets) and the winner has the privilege, later in the day, of shooting first at the papingo.
The papingo shoot lasts for two hours with contestants shooting in rotation and taking as many shots each as the time limit allows.
The papingo, measuring 8 inches from wingtip to wingtip, is still fixed to the end of a pole extending outwards from the top of the Abbey clock tower, and the archers must shoot vertically at it with one foot on the bottom step of the tower.
It is not surprising that in many of the contests over the centuries, no archer has been able to ‘ding doon’ the papingo.
Now that Kilwinning has mushroomed from being a small village to having a population of almost 16,500, it is to be hoped that some of the new residents will take an interest in the town's historic past and will ensure the continued existence of the Ancient Society of Kilwinning Archers and the papingo shoot.
AYRSHIRE AROUND THE WORLD
The subject of the contribution made by Scots to the colonisation of the new world, tends to turn thoughts to the Highlands and Islands and to ‘The Clearances’.
In fact, although the Gaels were dispersed over many lands and made a great contribution in relation to their numbers, the mass of Scottish emigrants were from the lowlands, including Ayrshire.
Families from the towns and villages of the county emigrated in large numbers, especially in the 19th century, and their spread and influence can be judged by the number of Ayrshire place-names to be found throughout the world.
Australia has Ardrossan, Ayr, Brisbane, Cessnock, Craigie, Cumnock, Cunninghame (3), Dalrymple, Dunlop, Fullarton (2), Galston, Irvine (3), Irvinebank, Kilbirnie, Kilkerran, Largs, Loudoun, Maybole, Stevenston and Winton.
Canada has Ayr, Craigie, Cumnock, Cunninghame, Dunlop, Eglinton (2), Fenwick, Fullarton (2), Girvan, Irvine, Kilwinning, Saltcoats, Stair and Turnberry.
In addition, Galt is named after John Galt the 18th century author born in Irvine.
U.S.A. has Afton (3), Barr, Cumnock, Fenwick, Fullarton, Irvine (2), Kilmarnock, Loudoun (3), Stair and Stevenston (4).
New Zealand has Afton Peak, Ailsa Mountains, Avon, Ayr Hill, Carrick Range, Cunninghams, Eglinton River, Ellerslie, Fairlie, Glen Afton, Glencairn, Kyle, Mosgiel, Riccarton, and Winton.
There is a Fullarton in South Africa, a Loudoun in Malawi and a Darvel Bay in Borneo.
Although the list of 78 place-names may be far from complete, it shows that men and women from the county made a great contribution to the colonisation of many and varied parts of our planet.
Ayrshire's contribution is even more impressive when it is related to the county's small population figures at the periods when most of the settlements listed above were founded.
For example, in the first quarter of the 19th century, the county's population ranged between 85,000 and 100,000 and as late as 1860 was still under 200,000.
As emigration became a flood of families leaving for new lands in the 19th century, many towns and villages formed Emigration Societies in which people intent on leaving came together to plan and to save money for their departure.
The best reference to an Emigration Society in Ayrshire is in the book,The Annals of Fenwick , by Tom D. Taylor, which was created from a diary kept by a Fenwick weaver.
It records the emigration of many Fenwick families, including one called Dickie who went to Canada in 1832 and settled in the small town of Galt in Ontario.
Fifty years later, the Dickies held a reunion in Galt of the original settlers and their descendants and about 300 people attended.
Another family, also called Dickie left for New Zealand in 1860.
The father was a farmer called David Dickie and in 1963, when a centennial gathering of the descendants was held in New Zealand, almost 500 people came together, although the family tree showed that, altogether, about 950 people in New Zealand and Australia were descended from old David Dickie.
Much has been written about the pioneering spirit of the men and women who left their homelands in times of primitive travel facilities and poor communications, to settle on virgin land of which they had little or no knowledge.
In most cases, the  environments, climates and conditions they encountered must have been very different from what they had known in Ayrshire.
It is intriguing to wonder how some of the emigrants found their way to the outlandish places in which they settled, or how Ayrshire names came to be given to spots which are amongst the most isolated on earth.
In the Canadian Arctic, Eglinton Island, one of the Queen Elizabeth group, is a desolate ice-bound location beyond the limits of human habitation, within 700 miles of the North Pole.
About 500 miles south, on the frozen north coast of Baffin Island, the name is repeated in Cape Eglinton, which is close to a settlement called Clyde on Clyde Inlet.
In contrast, Darvel Bay in Borneo is almost on the equator and A–r in Australia and Loudoun in Malawi are sub-tropical.
Of the vast number of Ayrshire people who have emigrated to Canada, the man who was most successful financially was Robert Dunsmuir (1825–89) who went from Hurlford to Vancouver Island and amassed a fortune from coal mining and other businesses (See Chapter 31) but the man who did most towards the advancement of the new country was John Galt (See Chapter 9).
Moving on to Australia, we find another place-name commemorating the surname and seat of an ancient Ayrshire family.
The city of Brisbane, capital and chief port of Queensland, is named after Sir Thomas Makdougall Brisbane (1773–1860), whose home was in Largs.
A noted soldier and astronomer, he served in the army under the Duke of Wellington before being appointed Governor of New South Wales.
From 1824 to 1839, he was in charge of a penal colony on Moreton Bay, Queensland, and when the colony was made a free settlement in 1842, the town and river on which it stands were called Brisbane in his honour.
The vast, sprawling city of today, with a population of over 900,000, is one of the world's leading centres of trade and administration (See Chapter 38).
Brisbane Glen, Brisbane Mains Farm and Brisbane Street, all i n Largs, are reminders of the town's connection with the Brisbane family.
Close associations are maintained between the town and the city of Brisbane and relics from the now demolished family seat, Brisbane House, are kept in the city's guildhall (See Chapter 34).
Many other sons of Ayrshire prospered in Australia and contributed to the country's development but only a few can be mentioned.
JAMES SERVICE (1823–1899) emigrated to Melbourne in the 1840s and formed a large commercial firm; he entered state politics and rose to be Premier of Victoria from 1883 to 1885.
SIR HUGH MUIR NELSON (1831–1906) who was born in Kilmarnock, went to Queensland in 1853; in state politics, he became Minister of Railways in 1888 and President of Queensland's Legislative Council in 1898.
ROBERT BRUCE RONALD (1831–1907) went to Australia in 1852 as a clerk in a woolbroker's office and, later, laid the foundations for the Australian Mercantile Land and Finance Company, still one of the country's leading financial institutions.
His grandfather was Hugh Ronald, brother of Jean and Ann, who were immortalised by Burns in the poem The Ronalds of the Bennals .
The brothers, JOHN McILWRAITH (1832–1902) and SIR THOMAS McILWRAITH (1835–1900), of Ayr, became Mayor of Melbourne and Prime Minister of Queensland, respectively; it was Sir Thomas who was responsible for Ayr in Queensland being so named.
ANDREW FISHER (1862–1928) is the subject of a biographical sketch in Chapter 38; he rose through state politics in Queensland to serve terms as Prime Minister of Australia.
From Australia, let us move on to New Zealand.
On 27th November, 1847, the  emigrant ships Phillip Lang and John Wickliffe sailed from Greenock with 247 Scottish men, women and children bound for a new way of life in New Zealand.
Many of the families were Ayrshire members of the Free Church of Scotland, led by the Rev. Thomas Burns, and on the eve of departure the minister conducted a service on the shore.
The passengers were saddened by the thought that they were unlikely to see their native land again but probably neither before nor since has a group of people set out with more determination to establish a society founded on the highest principles of religion and education.
Rev. Thomas Burns (1796–1871) was a nephew of Robert Burns.
As a son of the poet's brother Gilbert, he was born at Mossgiel Farm Mauchline during the year that his famous uncle died.
From 1830 to the Disruption of the Church of Scotland in 1843, he was minister of Monkton Parish Kirk and his daughter, Ann Burns, is buried in Monkton Kirkyard.
The Disruption was the occasion in May, 1843 when on a matter of principle, 474 ministers, more than a third of the total in Scotland.
walked out of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland and formed the Free Church of Scotland.
Knowingly, they gave up their stipends, homes and churches so that they could live with their consciences.
Of 56 Ayrshire ministers, 16 walked out, and Rev. Burns was one of them.
After the Disruption, the new Free Church sponsored a scheme for a Scottish settlement to be established in New Zealand.
Rev. Burns travelled around Ayrshire, speaking on the advantages of emigration to ‘New Edinburgh’ as, at first, the settlement was to be called, emphasising the excellent climate, the opportunities for education and land ownership, and the guaranteed religious freedom.
During the long sea voyage, Thomas Burns was seen as a leader in more than religious matters.
In addition to conducting services three times during each week and three more on Sundays, he recorded all births, deaths and marriages, and acted as guide, counsellor and friend to all on board ship.
On their arrival in New Zealand in March, 1848, the emigrants found a beautiful virgin land, devoid of roads, bridges, houses or other amenities.
The women stayed on board the ships while the men went ashore to prepare accommodation.
With the aid of friendly Maoris, rough shelters were erected for the people and their belongings.
Before the shelters were ready, the sea became rough and some of the women and children had to be taken ashore.
After they landed, the wind rose and it rained heavily; when the rain stopped, there was a severe frost and eventually it snowed.
Many of the families spent the first night huddled together in the open but tradition maintains that no one suffered as much as a common cold.
Barrack buildings, sixty feet long and twenty feet wide, were constructed of roughly hewn timber frames with walls and roofs of grass and reeds.
In each building, one end was partitioned off for single girls, the other end for single men, and the middle section was for families.
Wooden cottages were then built for the leaders of the community.
When land had been apportioned, each family built their own dwelling.
The place where the emigrants landed is now the site of the city of Dunedin, the name having been given in preference to New Edinburgh.
Rev. Thomas Burns proved to be a great colonizer and to this day his memory is revered in New Zealand.
He was involved in the establishing of local administration, churches and schools.
In 1852 he became the first Moderator of the new Presbytery of Otago Province and in 1869 the first Chancellor of the University of Otago.
His son, Arthur Burns, was one of New Zealand's early industrialists and founded extensive woollen mills near Dunedin.
He established a township around the mills for his workers and called it Mossgiel, after the farm at Mauchline.
An early government land surveyor mis-spelled Mosgiel with a single ‘s’ and so it has remained.
It is now a thriving township of 12,000 people in the heart of the country's best agricultural land.
The examples given of settlements in Canada, Australia and New Zealand demonstrate the influence of a few of the colonisers who went out from Ayrshire and give an indication of the varied circumstances and locations in which the emigrants started their new lives.
Perhaps one day an Ayrshire school or other organisation will pursue the theme and bring the peoples of the old and new worlds closer to each other by reminding them of their common bonds.
It would be wrong to end without acknowledging that emigration from Ayrshire was not confined to the 18th and 19th centuries.
They may not qualify for the names ‘colonisers’ or ‘pioneers’, but great numbers of people have gone abroad from the county during this century.
In the first thirty years, about 62,000 emigrated; another 5,000 in the 50s and 60s.
Figures for the 70s and 80s show that, in total, about 75,000 people have emigrated during the first 85 years of this century, and emigration is still popular in 1990.
Over the centuries, Ayrshire's loss may have been the world's gain but one must wonder what the effect would have been if some of the intelligent and ambitious people who left had stayed at home.