

Hunting for an access Solution
Even though he did not cast a vote, I suspect that John Major's words of approval to Conservatives fighting Kevin MacNamara's Wild Mammals Protection Bill might have been a tactical error.
It is a topic which raises strong emotions and 80% of the population are opposed to bloodsports.
There are a small but not insignificant group of people who will be moved by this issue to vote in the General Election even though apathetic about other policies and the Prime Minister needs every vote he can get.
With Labour promising to revive the bill if they are elected, opposition to bloodsports being Liberal Democrat policy and the likelihood of a hung Parliament, it is no longer a question of whether hunting will be banned but when.
The bill's promoter stated specifically that he has no intention of going on to tackle shooting or angling.
Others have been less cautious, the League Against Cruel Sports stating openly that they will progress to these other two activities when they have stopped hunting and the Hunt Saboteurs' Association having also already shown an interest.
It was interesting to hear Ludovic Kennedy on the relevant evening's Any Questions?on Radio 4 stating that angling is by far the cruellest of these activities.
Hunting may well become outlawed but we are deluding ourselves if we expect angling to follow in the  foreseeable future although I am sure it will also go in future decades.
More people support angling and less people are strongly opposed to it than to the hunting of deer, foxes, hares and other mammals.
Nevertheless, public opinion is steadily turning against one form of cruelty after another as bear baiting, cock fighting, big game hunting, badger baiting and dog fights have in turn been outlawed or become distasteful.
Unlike a century ago, no longer is it considered a gentleman's right to shoot anything he sees, too late to save some of our wildlife species.
The public will also have been irritated by attempts to link bloodsports with conservation, to say that the countryside takes its present form to suit foxhunting and to claim that the fabric of society in the countryside will fall apart without hunting.
(On the latter point, when Richard Agar of North Shore Designs took over Taunton Hall Farm, one of his first actions was to stop the local hunt using his land, action which has now been followed by all the surrounding farmers.
Who were the country gentlemen who were so put out from pursuing their time-honoured pastime?
They were those environmental bastions of the local countryside, executives of one of the biggest chemical complexes anywhere.)
Where we can hope to gain is on the publicity front.
Anglers and shooters may now wish for a lower profile and conflict with canoeists and ramblers respectively will bring publicity they could do without.
They may prefer to take action against their minority who refuse to share rather than continuing to fight such innocuous users of the countryside.
Those opposed to cruelty will use the countryside access issue as an additional front on which to attack bloodsports.
If Labour come to power we have been promised that access to the countryside for canoeists and ramblers will be reviewed at an early stage.
Provided the Conservatives do not get a working majority in the General Election we can hope to see some attention being given to our access problems at last and increasing awareness and support from the general public.
Perhaps we will even be able to count on the support of Conservatives who have had a sudden conversion to freedom to undertake the activities of one's choice in the countryside overriding all issues including wanton cruelty.
Stuart Fisher   
The publicity shot Schlegel rejected, Andy Watt in the Grand Canyon.
On page 12 Whit Deschner explains why you would not want to go to this prime honeypot river.
Photograph by Dave Manby, who gives further reasons for staying away.
Late news:
The Welbeck reclamation and landfill project proposes to divert 2km of the River Calder from Kirkthorpe weir to Stanley Ferry to run alongside the Aire & Calder Navigation (p 31) with a new weir above Stanley Ferry although hydraulic considerations could be handled with a series of riffles in the rock-lined river channel, The site will have landscaping, washlands, mineral extraction and disposal of 1,000,000t of colliery spoil, power station waste ash, sewage sludge and domestic refuse to serve a large area for many years.
Caption Competition 65
The most humorous caption to this photograph received in writing before April 20th will win its sender a unique personal T shirt. 
Please write to Canoeist Caption Competition 65, 4 Sinodun Row, Appleford, Oxon OX14 4PE, including your own name, address, size and telephone number.
The winning entry will be published in the April issue.
‘No, son, they're not taking sweeties up to the giant’.
Caption Competition 63 winner: Simon Astle, Copnor, Hants.
Other negatives were Gareth Burnells's ‘No, mate, I don't think there's any particular dispute over this stretch of the Derwent,’ and Neil Newton Taylor's ‘No, we're just taking them for a walk'’on a picture postcard of Cauldron Snout.
Thanks to Steve Bamber for ‘Wasting your time, mate, that's just a thick layer of rock dove guano!’,
Colin Dodge for ‘Sorry chaps, you're too late, Crooksy and Blain did it last week in a Mobile Adventure open canoe,’ Eddie Cornfield for ‘When Fred said we were paddling in two inches of water I thought he was joking!’,
Steve Groves for ‘We shot it yesterday when it was 3 feet higher'’ Nick Reason for ‘Dad, I know you've got to have a head for heights to canoe over a waterfall like that but why's that man got two heads?’,
Elizabeth Young and Simone Tramontana for suggesting that the two bystanders were the same height before one of them shot the fall and all the people who spotted breakouts on the way down.
Angela Sture's photo shows husband Sten and Mike Hayward asking for permission to paddle Norway's River Grøvu.
Undercurrents
Welsh roadshow
The WCA have established the Canoe Wales Roadshow.
Comprising a fleet of canoes and a display stand, it can be used to promote canoeing throughout Wales.
Oxford cruise
The IWA are running a small boat cruise from Oxford's Riverside Centre on June 7th.
In the form of a fun time trial, it will include certificates for all participants.
Send a large SAE for details to Silecroft, Mill Lane, Yateley, Camberley, Surrey GU17 7TE.
Warrender steps down
Andrew Warrender has retired after 6 years as SCA Treasurer.
His work has resulted in the SCA receiving considerable respect from the Scottish Sports Council.
Paul Beck, Ackers Trust Canoe Club Chairman, receives the Stand Club Trophy for the greatest participation in the Strand Touring Awards scheme for the second successive year.
68 year old Idris Owen receives a Gold Badge for paddling over 800km last year while spending much of his time teaching handicapped canoeists on the Montgomery Canal.
The annual draw for a Falchion was won my W Longman of Bedgrove, Bucks.
For details of the scheme contact Mike Hubbard at 78 Derrydown Rd, Birmingham B42 1RT
Abbots Bromley club
A new club has been formed at Abbots Bromley near Uttoxeter.
The main aim is touring with Sundar tours, adventure canoeing, hostelling and camping holidays plus weekly pool sessions for beginners.
You may have seen the press photographs of Rebecca Ridgeway after her paddle round Cape Horn but did you know that her boat was on stands in a London street at the time the shots were taken?
Nigel Dennis helps her out after the photographic session.
New open canoe group
John Tompkins is wishing to set up an open canoe group for advanced paddlers.
At this stage he is thinking of something comparable with the Advanced Sea Kayak Club, perhaps operating as an offshoot of the Open Canoe Association of Great Britain in parallel with the Open Canoe Sailing Group.
He would like to hold a discussion meeting for like minds so if you are interested give him a ring on 0533 770531.
Columbus on Anglesey
The second International Sea Symposium on Anglesey on May 1st–4th is to have a 500th anniversary theme.
At least, that is the claim, the link being somewhat tenuous.
In practice it means that the keynote lecture will be given by someone from the New World.
Mike Watts is returning from Canada where he emigrated twenty years ago and his ‘bit of a holiday’ is as modest as the Columbus connection is an overstatement.
Men seek adventure
Men's toiletries producers Lynx have commissioned National Opinion Polls to carry out a survey on men's attitudes to pressures of living and work.
It seems that being married is less stressful and more exciting than being a  bachelor but both think doing something tough and physical such as white water canoeing would ease stresses and strains.
A core of 15 to 34 year olds suggested the main pressures and frustrations are financial (56%) followed by motoring (35%).
65% would like a more adventurous life and nearly half relieve their frustrations with music.
38% would prefer an exciting sport like white water canoeing or rough terrain buggy racing to an adventure sport like hang gliding or physical activity like weight training as an outlet for pressure and frustration.
32% of men have tried white water canoeing or would like to do so.
Green Italian tour
The Operators & Observers of the River Adige & Its Banks are running a second Green Canoe Tour down Italy's second longest river from 24th to May 7th to make the local population aware of the environmental threats to the river.
Mostly using open canoes, the tour passes from Alpine gorges to the Paduan plain on water up to grade 2.
There are camping and hotel facilities throughout and paddlers are welcome to join in for some or all of the trip.
For more details contact L & G Carcereri, Via Dietro Filippini 6, 37121 Verona.
Boats to borrow in India
Andy Watt will be stationed at the Mission Hospital, Manali, Kulu, Himachal, Pradesh, for the rest of the year and has two beat up Dancers which paddlers in the area are welcome to borrow.
Local rivers include the Beas (grade 3–4, best done mid April — June or late August/September), the Parvats (best done in low water) and the Chenab.
Trips
Karen and Dan Trotter have reached Australia's northern tip.
On the way they passed their first wedding anniversary during this extended honeymoon and received presents of grapefruit, chocolate, duck eggs, paw-paws and a nautilus shell from people they stayed with in remote spots.
One couple they visited live completely alone and collect many valuable finds such as waterproof cameras, dinghies with outboards and surfboards from the beach to sell to provide income, dugout canoes from Papua New Guinea coming ashore with them.
One night was spent less happily in close proximity to an interested large saltwater crocodile.
After travelling back south by barge, the pair have driven down to Tasmania to carry on the circumnavigation where they left off.
Pen pals
The American Canoe Association have set up an international pen pal scheme for children.
To participate, send the child's name, address, age and preferred language to ACA Inc, 85780 Cinderbed Rd, Suite 1900, POB 1190, Newington, Virginia 22122–1190, USA, and they will use their computer database to find a match.
Harwood winners
In the Alan Harwood Trust raffle drawn at Crystal Palace, the first prize of a Coleman Gold Medallist canoe went to A Graham of Liverpool.
Runner up Karl of Rochdale won a compact camera and the third prize of £50 in fuel vouchers went to R Hales of Rock Ferry.
The trust thank all clubs who assisted by selling tickets.
February fall errors
The February profile of Justin Bunn claimed that Shaun Baker was the first to descend the Falls of Llanberis.
In fact, Chris Hipgrave was first down.
The guide to the River Irthing in the same issue failed to mention a 10m fall in its bombing range section below Forster's Hill although it should be fairly obvious to anyone finding enough water to paddle this section.
UP THE CREEK
Howard had anticipated losses well before they reached the river.
INCIDENT FILE
Buoyancy caught in tree
Duncan Henderson was pushed into a tree and capsized below a grade 4 fall in November and caught up by his buoyancy aid.
He eventually left his boat and was able to grab one breath of air before being forced down.
The only way he was able to free himself was to grab the branch and work against the current, going back the way he came in.
He has since repositioned his  Karabiner in a pocket and removed as many loops as possible from his equipment.
Charted dangers
Before setting off on a coastal paddle it is important to check the charts for military ranges, amongst other dangers.
If any are marked, ring up to find out when they are operational.
If you don't have a number, ring the Coastguard who will be only too pleased to hear from you and give the relevant contacts.
At the beginning of February the Coastguard sector officer in Kirkcudbright had to deal with a pair of canoeists from a college in the middle of the Lake District who strayed into the Abbey Head ranges on the north side of the Solway Firth two days in succession.
He can recall worse, however.
One day he met some sea canoeists who had crossed Luce Bay.
They told what an excellent trip it had been and how they had sat on a platform in the sunshine halfway across to eat their sandwiches with not another boat in sight.
He suggested this might have been because at the time an aircraft 6km up was dropping laser-guided bombs onto the next platform (or target as they are usually known).
New BCU Director
Paul Owen has was appointed Director of the BCU and took up the post on February 17th.
A member of Reading & Leighton Park Canoe Club, he has been Publicity Officer for the Devizes to Westminster Race, Treasurer of the Marathon Committee and Southern Region Secretary.
Formerly an accountant with Ferranti, he has been in BCU HQ since October in order to prepare the BCU annual accounts.
He claims to have been paddling for 26 years, not bad for a 32 year old.
For the first 11 of those paddling years he never heard of the BCU and it was only through his activities with the Air Training Corps and their involvement with the Devizes to Westminster Race that he got drawn into the position of race Publicity Officer which he has held since the late 70s.
Although closely linked with the marathon racing side, he has only done a couple of races and his own paddling has mostly been recreational.
Until the autumn he was paddling about twice a week and most competitive activity has been running and squash rather than paddling.
There are a number of areas in which he wishes to see changes in BCU policy and at his interview he asked that, if appointed, he should be permitted to get on and do the job freely.
His immediate requirement is for financial stability and control of where the money is going, especially all the small sums spent on things which, on the face of it, all have perfectly laudable reasons.
A review party is presently working on the problem.
Access will be the issue of the 90s and freedom to use rivers doesn't just stop at getting onto the rivers.
For example, the NRA are talking about making buoyancy aids compulsory on the Thames and if that happens then the idea will spread elsewhere like wildfire.
Communications need a thorough review.
There are a lot of enthusiasts coming up with a lot of good ideas but the information never gets out.
Regions need a decision on their purpose.
We need to stop paying lip service to them.
Either we use them properly or we get rid of them.
Federalism is even more important but at present Paul does not pretend to have got close to the issues.
His initial appointment is for 5 years.
A number of issues need much more urgent attention than that, however.
Ron Emes 1927–1992
Ron died in the early hours of Saturday 15 February following illness which he had fought with characteristic resilience, striving to maintain his involvement in the many spheres in sport to which he had brought such positive influence.
First Vice President of the International Canoe Federation, he was also Chairman of the Central Council of Physical Recreation, a member of the Sports Council, a member of the British Olympic Association and President of the British Canoe Union.
Ron Emes served in the Royal Navy and the police force, later becoming Regional Secretary for the Police Federation.
His rise to prominence in sport commenced with the establishment of the Birmingham Canoe Club in the early 1950s.
He developed an interest in Olympic racing and later formed the Birmingham Racing Club.
In 1957 he met up with some of the world's leading canoeists who had fled the Hungarian uprising and this fostered an interest and ambition to see Britain rise from the status of also rans to the achieving of Olympic and World Championship medals.
Ron lived to see the latter ambition fulfilled from the foundations he laid as Chairman of the racing section of the British Canoe Union and Olympic Team Manager.
He attended every Games from 1960 to 1988.
After serving as a representative of the British Canoe Union on the Central Council of Physical Recreation, the largest federation of sport and recreation in the world, in 19877 he was elected Chairman of the Executive Committee.
His wide grasp of the practicalities of sports administration and the problems inherent in the voluntary nature of sport and its governing bodies enabled him to bring sound judgement in policy formation within the CCPR.
As an employee of the British Canoe Union and its Director from 1980 to 1987, Ron was the driving force behind the staging of the first ever triple World Championships to be held in one country in a given year.
Canoe 81 provided World Championships in wild water racing, slalom and sprint.
His deep understanding of the way in which sport is administered and funded enabled the £2,000,000 pipedream of an artificial white water slalom course to be built at Holme Pierrepont, Nottingham, to become reality.
He lived to see the headquarters of the organization to which he had devoted his life established in purpose-built premises on the site at the National Water Sports Centre.
Ron's robust style, his deep understanding of the constitutional issues involved and his ability to see straight through to the nub of a debate and articulate clearly the available options made him a powerful persuader.
He was one of whom it can truly be said he could ‘talk with crowds and keep his virtue or walk with kings nor lose the common touch’.
Ron Emes, MBE, will be sorely missed by his worldwide circle of friends and colleagues.
Our heartfelt condolences go out to his wife, Margaret, and family.
Dr Charles Fox receives a Valentine's Day cheque from Gavin Hill and Martyn Ireson of Northampton Canoe Club at one of their pool sessions towards a Bio-Rad machine for diabetics.
Twelve members of the club raised over £480 with a sponsored 40km marathon on the Nene from the clubhouse to Denford.
Access and environment
Sawdde talks
The WCA have met with the NRA to discuss access problems on the Sawdde.
Those wishing to use the river should first contact Janice Hearne who is acting as the  liason officer with the NRA.
Welsh directory started
The Welsh Access Directory has been started by Ian Bebbington, swimming pools being tackled first, followed by lakes.
A grant in support of the project is being provided by the Sports Council for Wales.
River structure changes
Deanston Weir on the Teith has now further broken up so that there is now a safe passage on the right but the chicken shoot on the left is dry.
The weir at Melrose Cauld on the Tweed has been rebuilt to a dangerous design and is no longer considered safe to shoot at any point.
Methods of operation of the Awe barrage since passing into private ownership have again been causing controversy this winter.
Such large volumes of water were released in the New Year that the old road bridge by the campsite has now been washed away and there is now a debris problem on the river bed.
MCS slam blue flags
The Tidy Britain Group, who are funded by the DoE, have set up a scheme of five different awards for beach cleanliness.
Although these are different from the European Blue Flag Awards, they will be indicated by variations in blue flags and may be understood by the public to mean that beaches meet European standards when they actually do not.
The Marine Conservation Society have claimed that is a politically-led conspiracy to confuse the public into believing that our beaches meet European standards when actually they do not.
A new tunnel on a fresh alignment has been opened on the Montgomery Canal at Welshpool, the first to by-pass a road blockage.
Slea restoration funding
The restorers of the Sleaford Navigation, the lower part of the Kyme Eau, have received a financial boost.
When the Countryside Commission received a bequest of over £300,000 they set up the Countryside Trust which is being used to make grants to assist fundraising for projects.
In this case the Sleaford Navigation Society are being supported in the making of a video to encourage official bodies to part with the major funding needed.
Over 60 NRA fish passes
The NRA have admitted to building over 60 fish passes and other structures for getting fishes to places they could not reach before, at the same time doing nothing to resolve existing access problems or the new problems thus created (The West Bank settlements attitude all over again?)
Water quality lectures
The Scientific Section of the Institution of Water & Environmental Management are holding an international symposium on Recreational Water Quality Standards in London on May 13/14th.
Papers include Freshwater Epidemiological Studies in the United Kingdom by David Kay, Lorna Fewtrell and Graham Newman (the studies involving canoeists)Managing Recreational Facilities: Some Problems & Prospects by John Davies of Holme Pierrepont and Definition of Recreational Water Quality Standards & Strategies for Their Achievement by Rupert Grantham of the NRA.
Where are all the access agreements?
We are increasingly being told by officials, be they sports, water or politically based, that local access agreements are the way forward.
To put this into context it is worth taking a look at what has been achieved over recent decades in obtaining access agreements for canoes to pass along our rivers.
The latest edition of the BCU yearbook contains a great deal of information including lists of rivers with contacts about access.
So, which ones have agreements?
Please note that this is not an access guide.
Many of the agreements are only for minority groups, especially BCU members, many give access to only very short lengths of river and dates of use can be restricted.
In each case the LAO listed in the BCU yearbook needs to be contacted for the details.
In addition to these rivers there are the canals and deep water navigations open to licensed power craft, the latter particularly in the south and east of England.
The SCA deliberately do not make agreements on the grounds that there is a legal right to paddle Scottish rivers, a position disputed by some.
There are also some rivers which are not listed but clearly do have agreements at times, the lower Tryweryn and Exe being obvious examples, while others like the Wylye do not have any agreements to the knowledge of the LAO.
There are also rivers for which LAOs have not attempted to make agreements on the grounds that there are no problems or there is not sufficient demand, all very well until someone decides to apply the letter of the law as it presently stands.
What is immediately obvious is that the agreements are all in the southwest or the north of England and that for the most part they are flat rivers.
It is also clear that only about 1–2% of our rivers have access agreements for anyone at all for any parts of their lengths at any time, a significant part of that minute percentage resulting from the work of Adam Box's team in the Wessex Water area over the last year.
It leaves an awful lot of scope for those who think that piecemeal agreements can resolve our wishes to be able to paddle in Britain as we can abroad.
Smegma rules
Henry Moore's Grand Canyon sculpture exhibition
You may not realize this but the name ‘Grand Canyon’ was actually one developed by DisneyWorld who own and run the place.
Really it is a Cold & Eroded Crack in the Earth's Crust; however, Cold & Eroded Crack in the Earth's Crust National Park just didn't have the right sound for luring Japanese yen, German marks and, should the occasion ever arise, British pounds and Zambian kwachas.
Sisyphus at work
Of course, Carol was not aware of this at the time she acquired her permit; she was not yet born.
She had thoughtful parents, though, who thought the Grand Canyon was for real and so they put her on the waiting list.
57 years later her number finally surfaced.
But still she could not use it until she spent an accumulation of 2 ½ years filling out Ridiculous Redundant Forms from the Grand Canyon's Department of Ridiculous Redundant Forms Redundancy Department, spent $4,967 in stamps mailing the forms in and had to get a skin graph on her tongue from licking stamps.
Then she ran into a problem: everyone she had wanted to ask originally was currently dead or no longer kayaked or was in a state somewhere between the two.
So, after licking another 485 stamps, she came up with a manifest of eight people, one Sloth, Gan Moondork (one of Nintendo's escaped bionic mutations) and Gan's woman (the Rubber Dummy).
And then…
The Grand Canyon Department of Arbitrary Silly Rules and Regulations cancelled her trip.
After subsidizing the Postal Department for 43 years, her last 29 cent  instalment that carried news that she was confirming the trip got held up in the mail office because, and I'm not joking, George Bush had flown all the way from Disneyland to have his picture taken in front of the Grand Canyon.
Actually, one of him leaping into the canyon would have been far more spectacular.
Because the Grand Canyon Department of Ridiculous Redundant Forms Redundancy Department feared that someone might mail George a get-well card with a bomb in it, they shut down their office.
The bomb went off when Carol learned of her trip being cancelled.
Unfortunately George had left.
Manby's Stunt Bat performing exceedingly well
The first thing I learned in running the Grand Canyon are The Rules.
There are big rules, little rules, fat rules, dumb rules, absolutely ridiculous rules and that no rules apply to those who run the joint; some apply to commercial rafters and all are implemented on private parties.
First rules is Benefit of the Doubt Rule.
Benefit of the Doubt must be given that all employed by the Grand Canyon were  brain damaged at birth and were given their bureaucratic procedure in India.
Second rule is: All articles written on the Grand Canyon must be written in chronological order.
Day 1) At the shuttle driver's house Dave Manby, struck with déjà vu, said ‘Hey!
Haven't I been here before?’
She slapped him hard.
‘That's the oldest line in the book!
I'm a married woman!’
‘But I'm serious!
I'm sure I was here at a party once and in fact I can show you the spot on the rug where I…’
‘Get out!’ she screamed.
So we left but not before Dave…on the rug again.
Day 0) Orientation.
First we were oriented towards the orientation building.
Then we were orientated towards the front of the room whereupon further orientation took place.
We were orientated on how to get rid of everything except on where to throw up (because there are no rugs) or what to do with it after you have done so.
It was also pointed out that all Dutch ovens must have adequate floatation.
And although pets are not allowed, guide dogs are, because of course how else would a blind person see the Grand Canyon?
And guide pigs are also allowed.
Pigs are good because with one along there is no need to bring a toilet and on the last night the pig can be eaten.
We were then oriented out of the door.
Day 1) Discovered that the rumour of a constant flow of 25,000 cfs was false.
This rumour was started the day after the dam was built and has been in circulation ever since.
Gan Moondork on the Bailey Breakfast Brew
We are running this in the off season, which means that only the Park Department is running motorized rigs and that there are only 25 launches a day.
The negative aspect of the off season is that we don't see as much wildlife, like rattlesnakes, scorpions and tarantulas.
The positive feature is that the weather is cooler, like today.
It is currently 35 degrees Fahrenheit out and the wind is blowing up the canyon at 87 mph hour which gives us a wind chill factor of — just a moment while I look at the chart — says ‘Should not be skiing’ which is good because we aren't.
Drying firewood
Upon reaching camp the Sloth crawled ashore and slept while we unloaded his raft.
Gan played Nintendo and his gal ran and grabbed the best tent site.
Day 2) Today we camped by an oarlock and several rivets from Bert Loper's boat.
After the Sloth, Gan and his woman retired from the fire they didn't help build, the merits of Gan's woman were discussed.
As follows:
Pros for bringing Rubber Girl —
Rubber Girl does not eat.
Rubber Girl does not fill up rocket boxes.
Rubber Girl does not argue.
Rubber Girl stores easy in raft or can be blown up to add extra floatation.
Cons against Robber Girl —
Cannot nibble Rubber Girl on neck.
Rubber Girl can burst if left unattended in sun.
Rubber Girl is not Coast Guard approved.
Day 3) Dave Manby talked of his current sponsorships — which explains why he is eating with Mexicana Airlines silverware out of a dog dish and also why there is 75 lbs of Portland Cement in his kit.
He did, however, mention his Stunt Bat which Graham Mackereth gave him for giving a speech.
‘Think he would give me one if I mentioned him in my article?’
I quickly asked Dave.
‘I don't know,’ Dave said.
‘You can always give it a try.’
Day 4) Dave's Stunt Bat performed exceedingly well.
Day 5) Did not see any other people today.
Did run into some scientists, however.
They told us they were studying erosion.
I asked them if they weren't several billion years too late.
Scientists do not laugh.
Seems if they really want to study erosion then they should go watch all the bagfuls of ‘pretty’ rocks being taken out at Diamond Creek.
If you wish to see the Grand Canyon in colour do so quickly; ten more years and it will all be black and white.
Day 6) From the guidebook: ‘More stupid pictures are now taken on Grand Canyon trips than the combined total of all stupid pictures taken elsewhere.’
Last year someone at last cracked the tide mystery.
We have brought along a TV guide and judging by a programme's popularity we can correctly predict flows.
We also know which show's ratings are plummeting.
Day 7) Camped at site where the first jetstream was spotted in 1956.
Upon opening food bags found that all 3,000 of the trip's bagels were soaked.
Day 8) Dave got his head wet today and as soon as he rolled up said ‘To hell with this,’ and crawled out onto a raft.
‘Evolution,’ he explained from his new perch.
Day 9) We reached Phantom Ranch.
If you hike down here (a much wiser thing to do at this time of year) the Grand Canyon Department of Arbitrary Silly Rules and Regulations have erected signs that read ‘Do not go beyond this point without water.’
(Strange, with a river at the bottom.)
Then ‘Do not go beyond this point without food.’
And finally ‘Do not go beyond this point without your credit card.’
We discovered they had beer but upon further discovery discovered the beers were cold so we left in disgust.
Day 10) There is so much history down here!
Tonight we camped at the site where the first Smith and Miranda expedition ended.
Smith and Miranda were the first to run the Grand Canyon on a kitchen table.
Their first attempt, however, was foiled when they lost the centre leaf and had to walk out at this point.
In a second National Geographic sponsored expedition they succeeded but did, however, loose a leg in Lava Falls.
The bagels, almost dry, got wet again.
Day 11) The water temperature released at the dam is 0 degrees Centigrade but here, 100 miles downstream, it has warmed to a comfortable 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
Day 12) Camped at bowstem of Bert Loper's boat.
Snowing.
Day 13) Today, for the sake of anthropology, I logged the language between Gan and his woman.
This is meaningful conversation between missing links took place after a rapid.
Gan: ‘Cool.’
Rubber Girl: ‘Huh?’
Gan: ‘Like wow.
You know?’
Rubber Girl: ‘Huh?’
Gan: ‘Well…
Like rad!’
Rubber Girl: ‘Yeah.
Cool.’
Day 14) Not only has Dave been on a raft the last week but today — honest Dave, I've waited two months for that 50 bucks you promised me not to reveal this, but it has not arrived —he got off the raft and walked around Upset.
Dave 15) It is as cold today as yesterday.
Years ago I used to think this was a fun sport but the reason for thinking this has escaped me for the last 2 weeks.
Day 16) Camp where Bessie supposedly shot her husband, Glen.
Glen accused her of letting the bagels get wet.
Despite the suspicious holes found in Glen there are serious holes in this shooting theory since no guns are allowed in the Grand Canyon.
Funny thing how people can get on each other 's nerves down here.
Which reminded me: the night before leaving we received a call from Dave.
Unfortunately my phone line runs through several dozen pastures and chances are, like when I talk to Dave, that at all times a cow is either standing or chewing on the line.
I could barely hear him.
There was something about a girl he wanted to bring and there was something to do with stones.
It could have been her last name, or a state she like to exist in but I think it was a number involved.
I couldn't be sure.
Twenty I believe is what he said.
I said ‘How long have you known her for?’
I asked because Carol was worried of having yet another stranger on board, which in retrospect seems a ridiculous notion owing to the Sloth's, Gan's and the Rubber Dummy's existence.
Coded road signs are Disney policy to help Japanese, German and Swedish tourists
‘A long Time,’ Dave answered with a capital T.
Only today Dave revealed how the conversation really went: ‘Hi, my name's Dave.’
‘Hi, my name is Mary.’
‘Want to come on the Grand Canyon with me?’
Day 17) Lava Falls.
Regulations state that all articles on the Grand Canyon mention the name.
Dave did make a cameo appearance in his kayak to run it but quickly reverted back to the raft.
Day 18) Years ago I went down the Canyon with the World's Greatest Rafter.
How did I know he was the world's greatest?
He told me so.
He also told the group and me that we did not do anything right.
His unmarked grave is just past mile 194.
I'm sure he wouldn't have liked the way we communally beheaded him but it did the job.
I say this because the Sloth so far has done nothing and it appears he doesn't plan to do anything except now he is reading a James Michener book.
Any other author and I might overlook the fact but now he has augmented his idleness with bad taste.
The author and the headless leader on a previous trip
Day 19) The Sloth is really bugging me.
Day 20) Murdered the Sloth.
Slipped a work application in his book and he died of a heart attack.
While burying him we sure found a lot of other bodies.
Day 21) Take out.
Got as far as a Smegma, Arizona, where the left front wheel on my truck decided it was time for a vacation.
The mechanic says that on that year the truck the part was handcrafted in Zogmolia near Flelzonia and not only is it double reverse threaded but that its made from a rare alloy rendered from toxic wastes in New Jersey; however, he has assured me while trying to hold back a laugh and spraying spittle all over me he knows a junk yard on Mars where he can get the part soon.
Seems like I saw this scene before on the Twilight Zone .
Day 22) The part has not arrived yet.
While I was waiting, a customer came in with a bullet wound in his chest.
Pants soaked with blood.
He wanted his car fixed.
A funny priority…but come to think of it, no, it's not a funny priority: who wants to die in Smegma?
Day 23) Small world.
The camp where we stay is owned by the mechanic's sister.
Smaller world yet: his wife runs the town's only restaurant.
We resolve to cook our own meals.
His parents own the grocery store.
Day 24) While I was fixing a meal, another truck like mine came in needing a rear axle.
Since I wasn't using mine the mechanic sold it to him.
Day 25) The part and another rear axle still have not arrived.
Ran out of money today.
Day 26) Got a job today pumping petrol.
Things are not all bad and what goes around has come around and bowled me right over.
I use the words I learned from Gan and the Rubber Dummy with my work mates and we get on fine.
I'm also reading the Sloth's book.
I'm on page 3489 — almost halfway through the introduction.
It's one of James Michener's better book's,Boise .
I think I'm going to like Michener and I know I'm going to like Smegma.
Look me up when you come through.
Whit Deschner.
More rules for floating the Canyon
Rule 1
Everyone must worry about the group dynamics.
Rule 2
The Brits on an American trip must worry about what group dynamics are.
This is easy once you realize that a Grand Canyon trip is an encounter group and not a river trip.
Rule 3
Everything must be packed and numbered in identical bags on day 1.
Rule 4
On day 6 everything must be repacked by someone who doesn't get involved with the catering.
Rule 5
You have to know where you are all the time; this means you must know what mile number you are at, so on day 4 you may be at mile 47.
This means you are 47 miles from mile 0.
No-one knows where mile 0 is.
Rule 6
If anyone asks about your Canyon trip when you get home you have to use one of three standard answers:
A. The food was great.
B. I got some great photos.
B. We had some ‘inter personal relationship problems’(to use American speak).
Never mention the river except in vague references to cfs levels.
Rule 7
When you get your own permit it will be different and much better.
Dave Manby.
Μαραθων
We are now coming to the time of the year when paddlers start competing again in marathons and it would be nice to remember the ancient Greeks who started it all off.
The original marathon was run on foot but the Greeks were never ones to waste a good idea, especially in sport.
They were mad about boats and being on the water and some of their techniques are still in use today.
The vase painting shows Ajax and Achilles getting ready for their equivalent of k2 paddling during a lull in the Trojan War.
The Greek army was camped on the plain below Troy next to the River Scamander (now known as the Menderes) which flowed into the sea at Hellespont.
They couldn't be fighting all the time and the Iliad describes them hunting, fishing, boating and even playing draughts.
The paddles they used were the very narrow bladed ones like the Inuit sea kayak paddles.
The helmet with a crest is only occasionally seen on the water now, mainly by the Kinver slalom team.
For their trireme warships they used the steering technique of an external oar and this copied in today's dragon boats.
Similarly, open canoes with passengers are still poled across rivers though not, presumably, any more on the River Styx in the underworld.
The Greeks did very little during the winter because of bad weather but each spring they were back on the water, checking that everything was nautika or boatworthy.
Elizabeth Young.
Films
Nahanni, Canada's Gift to the World
This film follows the 22 day descent of three couples in open canoes as they run the Nahanni in Canada's sub-Arctic, the first UNESCO World Heritage Site.
For a change the paddlers are ordinary people rather than white water whiz-kids and the difficulty generally does not go above grade 3.
Instead it is a true wilderness trip, flying in by float plane and then with no exit except by paddling.
The first section contains many rocky rapids but most of the run is on flat water or simple big waves.
Wildlife is there in profusion from black bear and caribou to no-see-ums and fresh fish out of the river.
It is also an ideal introduction to the scenery of the region, from tufa mounds and hot pools to the Virginia Falls, possibly the second best known falls in Canada, around which is a 2km portage trail, partly on wooden planks.
The film has some drawbacks on the technical side.
The cameraman's attention seems to wander at times, the water noise and sound of the wind blowing on the microphone could have been toned down before the commentary was added and the conversion to the PAL system has not enhanced the colour and focus.
Nevertheless, it is good to see a film about a region which is often written about but rarely filmed.
Threaded through the film are suggestions for beginners on calculating plane loads and river gradients an assessing requirements for clothing, camping and cooking.
These points are not laboured but there is enough here to suggest a few topics to which the inexperienced paddler should devote further thought and reading.
The video box illustration carries various official body contact addresses on the back for further information on the river.
Squirt the Video
Compiled by Peter Knight (author of our Squirt Technique series) and Simon Dawson (presently writing the Kayak Control series), this video introduces squirt paddling and fully complements Peter's written articles.
Considering there is sponsorship by Valley Canoe Products, Squirt-Tech and Outdoor Leisure Supplies, there is remarkably little on the equipment.
The film is primarily given over to demonstrating and coaching tail and bow squirts, screw ups, double enders, smashers, cartwheels, splats, swipes, mystery moves, blasting and wave moves, mostly on the Holme Pierrepont slalom course.
At the end there are sequences of free paddling, both at Nottingham and on natural water, allowing the viewers to see practical use of the moves and permitting them to see the film to examine the techniques, the paddling by the six paddlers involved always being very confident and competent.
The filmwork has been undertaken by Video Action for the Touring & Recreation Committee and the result is a thoroughly professional film, well edited with its own music and with such techniques as slow motion and freeze frame used where necessary but not excessively.
Graphics have also been used informatively, particulary in the early sequence which explains the principles of squirting by making comparison with an inverted aircraft wing and for marking an eddyline down which a paddler then proceeds to squirt his way.
It is a while since the BCU have been involved with making films but the comeback is well handled and is a quality film, making up in the information supplied on what it lacks on the American squirt films.
3D canoeing films start here.
Another Dudh Kosi viewing Thin Air White Water , the 1986 Kites & Kayaks descent of the Dudh Kosi, is to be shown again on the Discovery Channel on April 8th as part of their Great Outdoor series.
Missing film
The 1934 film Open Canoe Demonstration , of which there is only one known copy, has gone missing.
If you know where it is (or the whereabouts of any other classic films, for that matter) please would you contact Chrisfilm & Video who are making these archive films available via BCU Supplies.
Paris video
a 1½ hour video of the last World Sprint Championships is now available and includes all 500m and 1km finals.
With English commentary, the PAL format version costs F1,000 from FFCK Promotions, Mme A Val, 6 Grande Rue, Bousse, 57310 Guenage, France.
ALLAGASH WILDERNESS
Canoeing for the older paddler
From August 18–28th I went on a fabulous vacation in Maine, a canoe trip on the Allagash Wilderness Waterway.
What an experience!
When I signed up for the trip I really didn't know just what to expect; when I got my packet information I wondered how I would stand up to it but I soon found I adjusted very well and even though I had never slept in a tent in a tent in a sleeping bag or had any experience canoeing I did OK.
Each night I really slept like a log.
The trip started from the well known Camp Chewonki in Wiscasset, Maine.
There were ten people on the trip and two guides, one a girl of 31, Kaz, and Edward who was 22.
Camp Chewonki is a great place; it covers 400 acres on a peninsula which extends into Montsweag Bay, a protected arm of the sea.
It offers so very much to the young people who go there and also has a lot to offer adults.
They sponsor the canoe trip in May and August.
(I was told the May trip is great but the blackflies are very bad.
We did not have bug problems, for which we were all thankful.)
Almost all the food is grown at camp; they bake their own bread and the food is not only 100% nutritious but very delicious.
We had to have waterproof bags and pack in double garbage bags and separate bags to keep everything dry.
It was difficult to make sure I had taken the right things but not too much and I found I could have done with less.
I packed and repacked many times (before I left and after I got there).
I borrowed many items including a Navy sea bag, an army bag, foul weather gear, sleeping bag, ground mat and exercise mat (and it was comfortable).
By the end of the trip I was very adept at packing and unpacking.
Our clothes were in layers and we had no problem deciding each what to wear; it was the same outfit.
On Monday 19th we were scheduled to get underway at 5.30am but with the threat of hurricane Bob if was iffy.
It was decided to delay one day so we had one extra day in camp which I needed to get better organised and acclimatized.
Monday evening during dinner Bob hit and a huge tree was blown down across the power lines so we had no power and dinner was by candlelight.
By Tuesday 20th Bob had blown away so at 5.30am we heard the clang of the chow bell to awaken us and we made our preparations to get underway.
Our canoes were loaded on the trailer and we were in the van and on our way by 7.30am for a 5 ½ hour drive to the Allagash Wilderness Waterway.
The Allagash Wilderness Waterway begins in Millinocet, Maine.
It winds its way through the North Woods, 100 miles, and ends at Allagash Village, a  little town of about 250 people.
This is just across the border from Canada.
The river and surrounding wilderness is state owned.
Logging is still carried on in some areas.
The waterway is ruggedly beautiful.
The river rushes over rocks and boulders; it will suddenly empty into a beautiful serene lake, tumble over rapids and waterfalls, meet impassable dams and at each bend of the river you will see different terrain and totally different conditions.
It is a pristine waterway and kept that way by the many thoughtful campers that use the faculties along the way.
You see no trash of any kind in the campsites or anywhere; what you take in, you take out.
No-one even throws any food or scraps into the woods.
Even biodegradable soap is not allowed in the water.
It is primitive but oh so beautiful!
Maps of the waterway show the locations of the many camps, the Rangers Stations and the springs for getting fresh water.
The campsites are all very similar with two picnic tables and two natural stone fireplaces; over the picnic tables are poles to hang tarps in the event of rain.
We had to use a tarp only once.
The weather in general was very cool at night but warm in the daytime, hence the necessity of dressing in layers.
Each campsite had an outdoor privy, rustic but clean.
We put in at a very tiny stream that would lead to the main waterway.
The recent rain made the little stream passable and the water was very swift, shallow and rocky.
I shared a canoe with our guide, Kaz.
She was a tiny little thing but very strong and very well qualified.
We made several stops along the way and arrived at our camp around 4pm.
The canoes were unloaded and preparations for dinner underway.
Food is carried in four wooden boxes called Wanigans.
We carried one large cooler, no ice but the cooler proved adequate.
All our cooking, naturally, was done on open fires.
We learned how to bake in a Dutch oven and produce wonderful things.
The Dutch oven is a large iron pot on legs with heavy iron top; a bed of coals is placed under it and on top of the lid and in about half an hour the food is cooked.
It was really good eating yet we burned up calories by our vigorous canoeing.
For dish washing, two plastic containers were filled with lake water, one with soap and the other for rinsing.
Before washing we first cleaned any food residue using earth, pine needles or grass; utensils were pushed into the earth until they were clean then we washed in the soapy water; rinsed, then dipped into a pot of boiling water to sterilize.
We always had a pot of water simmering on the fireplace.
The weather was damp and chilly but the sleeping bag felt mighty good and I made it through the first night, sleeping like a log.
Wednesday 21st we awakened at dawn to a chilly overcast day but spirits were good.
Had expected to be sore or tired from the previous day but I felt great and was never tired, no sore muscles or any blisters on the entire trip.
After a fantastic breakfast we learned the art of taking down our tents.
They are very well designed and totally waterproof and bugproof.
(Fortunately we didn't have this problem.)
With the forecast of rain we donned our rain gear, loaded our canoes and the day got started.
We went across a large lake and then took a hike up a trail to see some old steam engines and lots of parts strewn about; the trains were once used to transport the logs.
Along the trail were wild raspberries which we all enjoyed.
We stopped for a snack and were introduced to gorp (good old raisins and peanuts), rather like a trail mix for energy.
We all carried water bottles and were encouraged to drink a lot of water.
(Pit stops along, the way were no trouble.)
After battling winds and rain across the lake we stopped for a nutritious lunch and continued to battle our way to our second night's camp.
We found a nice level spot under some pine trees with a bed of soft pine needles facing the lake and soon after dark we were happy to crawl under the sleeping blankets.
It was so still at night, so peaceful; the only sound we would occasionally hear would be the cry of the loons across the lake.
It made tingles run up and down our spines.
Mary, the author and Edie make a spice cake at Pillsbury Island
Campsite at Round Pond Inlet
Thursday 22nd, up at 5.30, we wanted to make it as early as possible to get to Churchill Dam where we would encounter our first rapids, Chase Rapids.
We had misty rain as we started out but the sun came out just as we got to the rapids.
At the dam the canoes had to be unloaded and the gear transported five miles downstream in the Ranger's truck (in case of capsizing).
The canoes had to be carried across and put in on the other side of the dam, then we were given, mini lesson on the art of canoeing in  swift water.
Then we started down the rapids.
Kaz and I went first; what a thrill it was.
We made it through, paddling to a quiet spot and awaited the others.
One by one our group started down the rapids and assembled together in the quiet water; suddenly we saw a canoe coming down the river upside down and realized one of our group had capsized.
Edward managed to retrieve the canoe and got it uprighted and then we heard Marge and Jerry on the opposite shore yelling that they were OK.
Edward picked them up and brought them over to where we were.
We made our usual rest stop and got water from the mountainside that had been piped in, so pure and tasty.
We often saw moose, deer, otter, beaver and so many different and beautiful birds, so many different types of trees and terrain.
We arrived at an other dam around noon; water was rushing over the huge rocks and it was too risky to try to paddle across so the canoes were lined across.
Our Friday and Saturday, camp was on a beautiful lake, Round Pond, with a great view of the lake and surrounding mountains.
At this camp we encountered some very friendly snowshoe hares that would take food from our hands.
They were brown but in the winter they turn white.
Sharing a joke at East Twinbrook Camp.
On Saturday we had an option of staying in camp and being lazy, reading or whatever, or paddling across the lake and climbing a 2 ½ mile mountain where we could climb a Ranger tower to see a  magnificent view of the entire area.
That sounded great to me so I opted for the hike.
On the way down I had my camera tied to my waist and it started to drop; in trying to grab it I lost my balance, got my foot caught in the tree root, took a tumble and twisted my ankle.
Although I knew it was badly sprained I did not feel it was broken.
On the way back across the lake I dragged my ankle in the cold water and back at camp kept it elevated with cold cloths, then Kaz wrapped it in an ice bandage.
On Monday 26th we made our way down the River.
This was the only day that Kaz felt life jackets wouldn't be necessary.
Sometimes the water would be calm then suddenly filled with little rapids called rips; huge rocks would sometimes be concealed under the water but we learned to recognise the water flow around them.
We learned to look for the black tongue, water that would take us between rocks.
Paddling on, we reached the famous and beautiful Allagash Falls, a 40 foot drop of rushing water that swirled and snaked over rocks and bends, huge boulders and whirlpools.
Canoes and gear had to be carried one third of a mile beyond the falls.
We grouped for lunch and again filled our bottles from a spring and got underway.
Tuesday 27th we camped at East Twinbrook, about five miles from where the waterway ends and where the Chewonki van would be waiting to take us back to camp.
Edward paddled across the river to the highway, hitched a ride into town and bought back beer.
Since it was our last night we all celebrated and partied.
What a marvellous group.
We never heard any grumbling, everyone ate everything and we never heard of any health problems (if there were any); it was totally refreshing for all to be themselves and be accepted as they were.
We got up at 5.00am and after a delicious breakfast we got underway to meet our van.
It had rained during the night but our tents were snug and dry.
We arrived at our takeout point around 7.30 and the van was waiting.
We were loaded up and underway by 8.00 for our 7 hour ride back to Chewonki.
On our journey home, at some unknown point, one of the canoes broke loose and came off the trailer and was lost.
This was very upsetting to Kaz since the canoes are valued at $1,000.00.
We got back to camp around 4pm unloaded the van, cleaned all our blackened pots, put away our food, unpacked our gear,had hot showers, washed our hair and got ready for a big lobster dinner with fresh corn and a huge green salad and gobs of ice cream or frozen yoghurt.
At dinner we all talked about our trip and had so many laughs and fond memories.
Marge, the gal who capsized and bumped over the rocks at Chase Rapids, showed us her bottom bruises.
Everyone cracked up and Jerry turned red but it was the highlight of the evening.
After dinner we all sat in the lounge, the camp supplied wine and Jerry supplied Scotch so we had a few drinks and said our farewells for the night and then back to our cabins were we slept on good mattresses.
So, it was quite an adventure.
I plan to go again.
Corky Mullaney.
The average age of the group was 65, the oldest being Marge at 79.
Lesley Faragher Profile
Blossoming forth
If you think white water rodeo paddling is all butch men with bravado and biceps then think again!
Lesley Faragher is Britain's top lady rodeo star yet is decidedly feminine, quiet, petite and at the same time of writing possesses the warm glow as an expectant mother.
Aged 28, Lesley claims not to be a natural competitor and in fact as a teenager dropped out of a PE teacher training course as she felt it made sport too serious and took the fun away.
Her introduction to canoeing when 20 was through her involvement in running a Scout group with her now husband Ross Faragher.
The desire to teach canoeing to the boys prompted enrolment into the coaching scheme to learn themselves, eventually reaching the level of Senior Instructor.
It is while at an Instructor training course at the scouts' Longbridge centre that they met the infamous Saun Baker and started to paddle with an informal group of Thames weir bashers.
The next few years saw her and Ross out with this band of fun boaters and future rodeo aficionados though Lesley remembers having spent much of these early years bobbing about in the boils on the edge of the rough stuff, a result of lack of confidence in her own ability and perhaps not being pushed to perform by the guys in the group as much as they would each other.
Fortunately, perfecting her roll was the breakthrough that gave Lesley the confidence to fight for her own to go on the top of the waves and start experimenting with hotdogging tricks.
Ross started the first ever Bitches Rodeo in 1988 and Lesley followed the next year, paddling poorly in the small ladies' competition but meeting up with her now great friend and rival, Mandy Castle.
The following year saw a much improved performance when she beat Mandy to win the ladies' event at the Holme Pierrepont Rodeo.
However, it wasn't until last year's event in Nottingham that she started to perform manoeuvres like throwing her paddle away and hand surfing in competition.
The catalyst to make her trust in her abilities and the improved results was there was no separate ladies' event.
This forced her to lift her game to compete with the men.
She made it through to the final and an eventual 6th place overall showed just how much she had learned and improved that year.
Following this was the rodeo World Championships on the Bitches which decided at the last minute to include a ladies' competition.
While the sport is in its infancy she believes that separate ladies' events are needed to promote more participation.
Ultimately she thinks the women will be technically as good as the top men and so they should compete together.
With the short notice Lesley was unprepared for this event, having been on holiday the previous 2 weeks, and was disappointed in her own performance but enjoyed it as an international event.
Overall, the standard was lower than she expected though she was impressed with the Germans, Sandra Schmidt and winner Jan Kellner who, she felt, was very stylish, fit and supporting.
While not in a heat Jan would be out encouraging the other competitors.
One of her fears for the future of white water rodeos is that they almost inevitably will become more serious competitions and less friendly.
The rise in standard of the dedicated will probably also lead to less people entering events just for fun.
With regard to women in canoeing, Lesley has some strong ideas on the subject that tend to contrast with the more feminist view.
She believes the general lack of women participants in the sport is that it simply does not appeal.
Canoeing is not seen as glamorous, unlike, say, skiing or sailing!
The small number of women involved in white water paddling, she feels, is due to a women's attitude to fear and taking risks rather than any negative feelings from male paddlers.
Generally she finds only support from male paddlers to her on the water though when there is a separate ladies' event at a rodeo it is not always taken seriously.
At a recent Thames rodeo the ladies had to provide their own rescues in a heat as the rescue boats had packed up and gone for a brawl!
However, rather than getting upset about this it spurs her on to try harder to show that they are worth watching.
While supporting ideas like the recent Feminine Article Competition in Canoeist she feels that, unfortunately, this will only be read by the converted and to really impact women's views canoeing articles will have to be feature in women's magazines.
She hopes, though, that other women will see herself and Mandy out having fun and want to follow their example.
With a baby due in April, Lesley is temporarily grounded as she can no longer slip into the cockpit of her Stunt Bat.
She intends to keep working in her job as an insurance administrator and be back in action helping run the Holme Pierrepont Rodeo in June.
Goals for the future include trying some more dragon boat racing and getting fit again to be selected for next year's rodeo World Championships in the USA, purely, she says, because it is fun and she wants to paddle abroad, though with a wry grin she concedes that maybe the spirit of competition also burns within her!
Andy Halliday 
KAYAK CONTROL
Paddle strokes — the low brace and high elbow Simon Dawson
In the last six articles I tried not to describe any canoeing technique as right or wrong.
The basic theory is rather than with increasing variation in boat shapes and canoeing activity we can no longer use one single approved style of paddling.
Instead we will have to study a range of styles and strokes.
A coach will then help each student select those methods which match the dynamic performance of the kayak in use and which are most appropriate to the personal aims and values of the trainee.
The current classic paddle strokes are fine in certain circumstance but there are other occasions when different techniques are needed.
The high forward paddling style is appropriate for a touring boat but not for a WW playboat.
Similarly, a bow rudder may be the appropriate breakout for a strong, fit, aggressive paddler and not at all useful for a nervous paddler with much less forearm muscle…
But there is, however, one single paddle stroke where I am willing to use the word ‘wrong’ and that is the low brace.
I believe that a low brace should be taught with a low elbow and not with the elbow raised above the paddle shaft as is commonly taught in the UK.
In this month's article I will be discussing this and in passing we can look at the wider aspects of how techniques and paddle strokes are developed.
Firstly, what do we mean by the term ‘paddle stroke’?
What exactly is a ‘technique’?
A paddle stroke is like any other model or diagram which is used to pass on information.
The important points are artificially emphasized and the complications are removed to reduce confusion.
The model is not a faithful copy of the real thing but because of its simplification it makes the real thing easier to study and learn.
As an example which we all know about, think of the famous map of the London Underground system.
If you were to compare it with a really accurate map there would be very little in common but the map achieves its aim successfully through massive simplification and artificial emphasis of the important features, in this case the stations and interchanges.
Compare this map with the forward sweep paddle stroke that we teach in the Star tests.
Very few experienced paddlers will ever use this stroke in real paddling.
They normally use a small portion of the stroke intuitively combined with other moves and manoeuvres.
Like the map, the taught sweep paddle stroke is unlike the real sweep stroke but still very useful.
The key points of extended reach and fully body rotation are artificially emphasized and the stroke is simplified and standardized to remove confusing variations.
The teaching of such techniques is an important part of any coaching programme.
For the rest of this article I will refer to the simplified taught techniques as paddle strokes and to real strokes by their normal names.
For example, we can compare the sweep stroke (as used by an experienced paddler) with the sweep paddle stroke taught to trainees.
The advantage of thinking about paddle strokes in this way is that it makes it clear which style is the real stroke and which is the copy.
As the sport slowly develops, the boat designs change and the efficient way to propel each boat will consequently alter.
The real stroke and the paddle stroke will drift apart in style over the years.
We must be aware of this and constantly compare the copy with the real thing to see if it is still valid.
A good example of this is the forward paddling style taught in the UK.
We developed this very useful paddle stroke back in the days of long four metre GP kayaks.
The stroke works well in boats of this length but in the last six years the average length of kayak has dropped by almost a metre.
The efficient forward stroke in such boats is different.
We now need to respond to this change by adopting a new forward paddle stroke when coaching in shorter boats.
There is a real and very understandable temptation to regard the taught paddle strokes as correct, fixed and vitally important but this is wrong.
Any map or diagram will eventually become inaccurate.
When that happens, to continue using it can be as bad as using no map at all.
A paddle stroke technique is simply a diagram of a move.
When any diagram becomes inaccurate it must be altered or thrown away.
Bearing this in mind, let us now look at the low brace and try to create the low brace paddle stroke from first principles.
In this discussion the brace is the one used for stability in stoppers or as a recovery stroke to avoid capsize, not the one used when breaking in or out.
As a WW recreational paddler I will be using recreational values in my work.
I am not looking for maximum performance or power.
I will be looking for a technique based on the recreational values of safety, economy of effort and enjoyment.
Figure 1 shows a paddler in the basic low brace position.
When looking at the paddle and arm positions the important points are as follows:
1.
The paddle shaft should be low.
This ensures that the paddle blade is flat on the water for efficient application of force.
Ideally, the centre of the shaft is only one or two inches above the cockpit coaming.
2.
The blade should be reasonably extended away from the boat's centreline to gain leverage.
This is just like the sweep stroke where we extend the reach to apply more force.
A lightweight or young paddler can cope with the blade close to the boat but anybody above about 13 stones must extend the blade.
3.
The centre of gravity should be kept low in order to make the paddler more stable and reduce the effort needed to stay upright.
Therefore, keep the body and arms reasonably low.
The Low Brace.
Fig 1
4.
The shoulder angle should be low.
Figure 2 and the accompanying box show how shoulder angle is defined.
As a basic rule, a low shoulder angle leads to a low centre of gravity (hence stability) and a lower risk of shoulder injury.
Having defined our new paddle stroke we need to check it.
The best way to do  this is to compare it with real paddlers.
You have to be careful here.
Many canoeists will have a style which is influenced by past use of old paddle strokes.
We should be careful not to look only at our friends and colleagues whose style may have been affected by the same paddle strokes that we are studying ourselves.
To get a true picture it is important to watch a wide cross section of paddlers with a range of different backgrounds.
If possible they should be from more than one country.
Blade lifted slowly by assistant to body's limit of movement Fig 3
But it is also important to study paddlers and boats relevant to the class of canoeing that we are working in.
If we are concerned with recreational WW touring we should study WW paddlers in plastic boats although we can also study suitable competition paddlers to determine the high  performance versions of the same moves.
For example, in the study of forward paddling we could look at slalom and polo as both classes of boat are short and directionally unstable, like our own.
The study of the K1 hull dynamics are totally different from those of a WW kayak.
Fig 4 Exaggerated High and Low Brace
Holme Pierrepont or the Bitches Rodeo are ideal British laboratories with a wide international mix of competent paddlers available to watch.
Careful study of such international mix of competent paddlers available to watch.
Careful study of such paddlers will show that most of them use a very low shoulder angle and low paddle position for the low brace.
Virtually noone at this level uses the high elbow that we commonly teach in the UK.
Our new paddle stroke is therefore probably correct.
It is this constant comparison with real paddlers that is important.
It is very easy and only too human to retain a favourite technique and not to look too hard at other paddlers with different styles.
It can be difficult but necessary at times to carry out this study and to slowly change our own techniques to keep in date with modern developments.
The important principle is that the study of experienced paddlers defines reality and good technique and taught paddle strokes are only ever working copies.
I think that the high elbow low brace is wrong and, in fact, dangerous for two main reasons.
Firstly, if the forearm and hand are constrained to be directly below the elbow they stop the paddle blade being extended away from the boat's side for added leverage.
There is an argument that by using the close-in position you can apply more force down on the shaft.
This may be right but what counts is leverage, not force.
A smaller force applied much further out can be equally effective.
Surely we reach out wide during a sweep stroke to obtain more leverage for the very same reason.
(Actually, until we carry out a properly calibrated experiment to measure the  forces involved in both versions nobody will know for certain which is more powerful.)
Fig 5 Real Low Brace Real High Brace
But even if a blade close to the boat and a high elbow allows greater application of force, is it still the best technique?
Try the experiment in Figure 4.
Sit in a kayak on the bank in the low brace position.
Get a friend to raise the blade vertically upwards to simulate crashing into a hidden rock in the stopper.
Use the high elbow position and see how far the arm moves before the shoulder is overstrained.
Then start with a low elbow and try again.
Which position is safest and gives least risk of injury?
If you are touring down a remote gorge do you choose a technique which gives maximum force and a high risk of injury or would you prefer a slightly less powerful stroke and a reduced risk of shoulder dislocation?
The question to ask now is how did this happen?
How have we come to teach a paddle stroke which is different from the real stroke, which produces a higher risk of injury?
I think the answer is to be found back in the basic theory.
In any useful demonstration the important features are artificially emphasized to make them stand out.
In the teaching of the brace there was a need to distinguish between a low brace and a high brace, especially when teaching beginners with flat blades.
This was easily done using the positions in Figure 4.
By exaggerating these postures the differences were obvious but as the paddle strokes were passed on from instructor to instructor the artificial distortions were slowly adopted into reality.
We have even developed theories to justify these distortions by teaching that the high elbow allows greater application of force.
Anybody who has played Chinese whispers will know how quickly and easily such distortions happen.
In real canoeing the study of experienced paddlers shows that there is very little difference between a high and low brace (Figure 5) and to make a distinction is often counter-productive.
The only important factor is whether the face or the back of the blade is in use.
In both techniques the key points of a low paddle shaft, an extended reach, a low centre of gravity and a low shoulder angle are equally relevant.
To sum up, then, paddle strokes as working tools are incredibly useful.
By simplifying and emphasizing the features of major strokes we can make them easier to teach but paddle strokes are only copies of the real thing.
They are not carved on tablets of stone.
We must constantly compare the copy with the reality shown to us by experienced paddlers and not simply look hard at a wide selection of paddlers and not simply look at our own friends and colleagues who may have been influenced by the same paddle strokes that we are studying ourselves.
Shoulder angle
The shoulder angle is simply defined as the angle between the upper arm and the torso when viewed from the front.
Figure 2 clearly shows the geometry involved.
It can be used when studying specific paddle strokes such as the low brace, forward paddling and bow rudder but is best used as an average overall measure of the paddlers style.
I find it very useful as a sign of the differences between recreational and competitive paddlers.
If one assumes that any paddler runs a risk of shoulder damage when the shoulder angle is forced beyond 180 degrees, then a canoeist can choose to paddle at high risk with an arm position close to the limit or at low risk.
The shoulder angle is also relevant to the paddler's centre of gravity and to the amount of power that can be expended on a stroke.
A slalomist will choose to use powerful manoeuvres with a high and extended reach.
The physical risk is greater (albeit within controlled conditions) and the paddler is fighting against a high centre of gravity.
Nevertheless, the choice of a high shoulder angle is entirely valid as it maximizes performance.
By contrast, a recreational paddler in a remote gorge will want to maximize safety and minimize energy expenditure.
A low shoulder angle will give a low centre of gravity and least risk, although at the expense of a reduction in the power of the strokes.
This again shows the danger of importing paddle strokes from competition into recreational paddling.
It may be valid to teach a stroke such as a bow rudder to a recreational paddler but even on the same paddle stroke the arm and paddle positions used by slalomists and WW tourists are very different.
To develop the recreational bow rudder paddle stroke we will have to study good recreational WW paddlers and not slalomists.
PARTY POLICY ON ACCESS
What the political parties say (or don't say) on access ahead of the General Election)
With the General Election looming,Mike Hayward sought the views of the three leading political parties on the access issue.
He wrote as follows:
I am writing to enquire about the policy of your party towards access to rivers.
I spend a lot of my leisure time pursuing the sport of white water canoeing.
I have been doing this for over ten years.
In this time I have noted the steady increase of people pursuing this activity and an equally heavy resistance to the sport by landowners and fishing groups.
I would estimate that my enjoyment of a day is spoilt on about 25% of occasions by various comments and objections that are made.
White water canoeing is a new sport compared to fishing and ‘landowning’ and is trying to expand but has nowhere to go.
Britain alone experiences such problems.
All member states of the EEC allow almost free access to their wild rivers.
Others, such as Norway, Yugoslavia, Poland, etc, show no resistance; no restrictions exist in Third World countries and in some, eg Costa Rica, all rivers and the land 10m on either side are under public ownership.
In Britain there is access for walkers, sailors, horse riders, mountain bikers, cavers and rock climbers and yet only canoeing is refused on a general basis.
It is true that there are a limited number of agreements between canoeists and landowners and other groups but these cover less than 0.5% of the total length of rivers in Britain.
In the 1980s the national governing bodies for canoeing and fishing got together; they made some hopeful noises but nothing concrete has materialised in six years.
The present government chose, despite representation, to ignore this when the NRA was set up.
The best solution from my point of view is simply to recognise that rivers are part of the natural heritage of our country and that they should be made public rights of way, just as footpaths are.
Could you tell me what is the policy of your party on this matter and if you were to be elected to power at the next election what would your party do?
Would you be prepared to pass legislation?
LABOUR PARTY
Sympathetic
Two replies were received from the Labour Party
we have said in our policy statement that we wish to have full access to all waterways for the general public and will examine how this can be brought about.
So far as far as water sports are concerned I would make one reservation which is that there has to be some form of rationalization between competed sports which may conflict with each other and I am sure this can be achieved through the Sports Council machinery.
Denis Howell Former Sports Minister 
Labour Party policy is to provide a general right of access to uncultivated land for walkers — a policy that specifically includes river banks and canal towpaths.
I am sympathetic to your case that this policy should be extended to unpowered craft on all rivers although I can also see some problems.
For example, there are difficult arguments concerning the balance of a general right of navigation (including powered boats) and nature conservation concerns.
Anglers may also object.
There is a long running case before the House of Lords concerning the River Derwent at present about whether rights of way can be established on waterways in the same way as on land.
There is also the question of licences.
On waterways administered by British Waterways and the National Rivers Authority licence fees are payable.
The present government is carrying out a review of navigation authorities, the results of which are unlikely to be known before the election.
We will obviously need a period of consultation in government before we introduce legislation.
this would provide an ideal opportunity to examine in detail ways of increasing access to white water for canoeists as part of our wide-ranging intention to increase access to all aspects of our countryside.
Bryan Gould Shadow Environment Spokesman.
This letter was written before the outcome of the Derwent case was known.
LIBERAL DEMOCRAT PARTY
Fishing more important
I am afraid that I cannot agree with you that all rivers should simply be recognized as public rights of way, attractive though that might appear.
Many other people have rights, including those concerned with fishing, and in my native Scotland the value of fishing has a significant part to play in the local economy, particulary in remote areas.
As a member of the Scottish Sports Council I was closely involved in setting up arrangements for access to rivers.
I am satisfied that these can be made to work with commonsense and goodwill on both sides.
Menzies Campbell 
CONSERVATIVE PARTY
Everything is fine
No reply was received from the Conservative Party.
Instead a reply was sent from the Department of the Environment who have the job of implementing existing Conservative policy.
It is recognised that the position on this issue is not always clear cut.
Where there are public rights of navigation, canoeing is of course permissable and this covers many popular rivers in England and Wales.
but where there are no formal rights of way the position is that permission should be obtained from the landowners.
The NRA promotes the recreational use of rivers and in many area play an active role in helping to secure amicable agreements over access.
The Sports Council has also played an active role in efforts to resolve problems in access to rivers and has set up a liaison group to discuss access agreements for rivers between all interested and affected parties, including of course, canoeists.
However, it is also necessary to take into consideration the need for conservation of wildlife habitats and the needs of the farmers and fishermen, as well as those of canoeist and other users.
There is understandable concern among landowners and tenants that increased access to waterways may disturb wildlife and lead to problems of erosion, pollution and vandalism.
because of this the Government considers that conflicts between competing interests, where they occur, should be tackled at a local level through negotiation.
Sara Charnell Water Environment A Division 
Going with the flow
Stormy, wet, windy, typical August weather, cormorants, wings flapping clockworklike against the force 5–6 wind, gulls gliding majestically, effortlessly over the wave tops, gannets swirling way up high before plummeting dramatically hurling themselves into the sea with terrific, surely painful splashes, then the puffins, taking off clumsily along the surface of the water, bouncing bomb style, crashing into successive wave crests in their attempts to stay clear of the bow, wildlife in abundance and this was only the view from the MacBraynes ferry!
Our appetites for a week's paddle around the North Uist and the west coast of Harris had been wetted!
Suddenly we were hit by reality.
We stood alone on the quayside at Lochmaddy.
The wind and rain swept upon us as the ferry, our fellow passengers and all associations with warmth, comfort and civilisation disappeared into the greyness.
This was to be our summer holiday.
Heads down, strenuously and determinedly we fought the southerly swell for a couple of hours before arriving at An t-Aigeach, a wild though sheltered inlet, respite, complete with deer, a heron and a live floating urchin.
As the urchin flexed its bristles I momentarily wondered if it would be edible.
An  aghast look from Heather and we decided to stick with the ‘dehy’.
Sabbath observance is held most strictly in much of the Outer Hebrides, travelling amongst the locals being limited with little or no public transport.
We needed to make ground; the winds, though still stormy, had moved to the southwest.
Initially, partly sheltered by the great landmass of North Uist, we made good progress southwards.
An attempt to paddle west along the north coast of Ronay towards more sheltered water was thwarted by the ebb tide ripping out, abetted by the mighty wind.
was this our punishment for attempting to paddle on a Sunday?
We landed near the southeast tip of Ronay. defeated by the elements, we decided to go with the flow and explore this wild, windswept and uninhabited island on foot.
We were surprised to discover a smart white building with a bright pillarbox red door.
Tentatively we knocked and entered.
Stepping through the door we entered into a musty Mary Celeste type atmosphere.
Rows of wellington boots and raincoats lined the inside porch.
The living area was filled with personal belongings, a library of yellowing books, charts, old photographs, pre-decimal coins, a pair of binoculars, even a half full pot of paint with well hardened brush!
Exploring inside was fascinating yet also chilling!
Without hesitation we decided a night under our damp flysheet was certainly preferable.
05.55, the familiar rousing pipe music heralded another predictable shipping forecast, 5 to 6, even 7, southwest to westerly.
Outside, the sea was still and calm, the rising sun brightly peering over a layer of cloud, giving the sky an orange hue.
we had to make the most of it!
Camp was broken in record time; a trip to the loo brought to mind the childhood phrase ‘Ants in your pants’.
Yep, the lack of wind encouraged the emergence of clouds of bloodsucking midges who found the sight of pale flesh irresistible; this hastened our departure even further without, unfortunately, restocking our water supplies.
Observed by a lone seal we headed west, the wind now beginning to pick up.
We paddled under a single track embankment linking North Uist with Benbecula, exchanging waves with the friendly local driving overhead.
I had almost expected to see giant Atlantic waves smashing against the great wall but, no, the far side was still quite calm, sunshine, a picturesque blue bay, shell white/silver beaches though, on the horizon, ominous looking ranks of white surf.
The ever-changing skyscape.
We landed in shelter then strolled along the deserted beaches of Baleshare and bodysurfed the blue foaming waves.
This was  truly paradise; it had to be savoured as we knew it short lived.
The wind began to pick up strongly; dense grey clouds skidded across the sky.
The tide had now retreated, forcing us to wade through shallow water, kayaks in tow.
High winds now prevented us from visiting the Monach Isles, reputedly site of the world's second largest seal colony.
Forced by tiredness, we made a tricky landing through heavy surf onto the Isle of Kirkibost.
After a mega portage up the beach, camp was made high in the sand dunes, giving a spectacular view of the thundering surf.
A venture onto the beach entailed braving a sandstorm which continued unabated over night, partially burying our boats!
The water supply indicated on the map proved undrinkable (the island was quite flat and heavily populated by cows); we had no option but to break through the giant surf.
It took a long, cold and drenching effort to clear the surfline before we were able to turn side on to the waves to make progress along the coast.
The rollers were so large we needed to ferry our noses towards them.
Heather was not looking too happy; we exchanged some tense glances.
Our predicament reached a peak as we rounded Aird an Runair, a prominent headland.
‘Those waves are as big as houses!’ she exclaimed, nodding to our right.
Squinting through my salt encrusted eyelids I had to agree her estimation was probably accurate; affirming that we were well clear and would soon be safely around the point didn't seem adequate reassurance.
Around this time Heather took on a philosophical mood and confided all she wanted out of life was ‘to be on dry land with a dry pair of knickers, clean teeth and to be able to wash in fresh water’.
Relieved to be round the point, we landed in the sheltered bay of Hougharry; it was a totally different world, calm, sheltered and, most significantly, quiet, no deafening communication dulling roar of wind and waves.
We explored the hamlet then chose a new-looking building offering ‘Bed and Breakfast’ from which to ask for water.
I was suddenly stunned by Heather's amazing speed and decisiveness; quick as a flash she had booked into the B&B!
Not relishing the prospect of a cold wet night solo on the beach, I had to follow!
Heather packing on Kirkibost Island.
The remainder of the day was spent exploring the coastline, watching the continuing onslaught of enormous waves crashing against the headland and the ominously changing moods of the sky as squalls of varying shades of grey swept in across the sea.
An especially strong shower forced us into motion; we fled, finding shelter under the gable of an apparently derelict croft.
Our dry set of kit was rapidly becoming drenched.
‘One, two, three’.
We made a Starsky and Hutch style raid down either side of the ‘ruin’.
Crash!
Heather's size 7 boot made firm contact with the door.
I arrived on the scene to find Heather a bright shade of red, apologising profusely to a small croftsman, cowering behind his dislodged door!
In spite of our obtrusive entry he made us welcome, inviting us in and lighting a fire.
He had been a fisherman and told tales of the waters ‘boiling’ with seals near the Monach Isles, of canoeists setting off for St Kilda and of frequent sightings of porpoises, dolphins, basking sharks, even the occasional whale…
Ah well!
It was Heather's turn to wake up for the forecast…‘4,5,6,7, even gale 8!’
Never mind, it was a good feeling to put on dry clothes and eat a large cooked breakfast.
I was forced to concede B&B had been a good idea!
Two lapwings, a couple of villagers and a curious dog gave us a fine send off.
The sea seemed cold, grey and  foreboding .
We gave the crashing waves off Rubha Dubh Tighary a wide berth as the force 5 picked up from behind.
I felt a tense atmosphere of anxiousness build between us.
Navigational transits were now flying past; glances were exchanged though no words spoken.
We were on schedule to pass Griminish Point around high water slack though the sea was anything but!
Just how bad was the point going to be I wondered, whilst simultaneously trying to exude an air of confidence.
The waves smashed spectacularly into the rocky coastline, creating instant waterfalls of white spume draining from the rocks before becoming drowned and engulfed by further successive waves.
Things didn't look too bad; the following rollers were large though not breaking.
We kicked left to avoid the breaking waves and clapotis; the transits continued to fly by.
We were now committed!
The waves seemed to increase in size as we passed the first section of headland, continuing to smash with awesome power to our right, too close to our right!
‘Kick hard left again’; I yelled to make myself heard above the deafening roar of the wind and the sea.
Concentration levels were immense; continually we had to stern rudder/low brace to stay upright.
We sighted a fishing boat in the distance, a sure sign of more sheltered water.
A gull buzzed us as if in encouragement.
The omens were looking better.
One last rocky outcrop of headland; it seemed to take an age to round.
the waves began to decrease.
We were safe!
Heather's face displayed a mixture of  ecstasy and relief; we were both on a big high.
Two fishermen stopped work to stand and stare in amazement.
I wondered what they were thinking, then pondered on the fineness of the dividing line between exhilarating adventure and irresponsibility.
A quick drink from the flask, hardly needed as we were still hot on adrenalin, and we were on our way again.
Almost effortlessly, our bodies acting as sails, the southwesterly surfed us along the coast of Vallay.
We sighted a farmer, possibly harvesting rye and oats, before our target, the shadowy image of Boreray, began to emerge out of the greyness of the horizon.
the shallow sandy bay was backed by a barren green hillside, covered by a vast scattering of dark grey rocks.
Most moving were the forlorn-looking ruins of an old chapel and crofts.
We felt we were invaders.
The island possessed a silent aura that demanded respect.
One could sense the energy, spirit and hardiness of the long gone inhabitants.
That night the wind and rain tore ferociously at the tent as the force 8 hit us; it was a luxurious feeling to be snug, warm and safe in our sleeping bags.
Thoughts of being stranded and stormbound drifted between the dreams.
The morning's forecast had a familiar ring, ‘Force 6 becoming 8’; there was a lull so we had to move.
Across the Sound of Harris the going was rough; we had a large following sea with waves aided by the wind and the flood around Berneray, pushing us both from behind and from a broad reach angle.
As we passed Pabbay we were hit by successive heavy squalls; the  promontory toe Head would be out of the question.
spotting a narrow isthmus on the map near Northton we opted for a large portage; half a kilometre would be a long way but, following our Griminish Point experience, the safer option seemed favourable.
Idyllic Taransay spoiled by man's flotsam.
Twang, the makeshift shoulder sling (my tow line) gave way.
Carrying two fully laden sea boats across ½ km of sand dunes was no mean feat; it was a major operation!
We'd move one 60/70 metres then have a ‘rest’ walk back to collect the other.
Every muscle in our bodies ached under the strain.
An hour or so later I was beginning to feel proud of our levels of determination and achievement as we topped out over the last sand dune, then my heart sank into my boots!
The water in the bay had disappeared.
No water!
I couldn't contain my feelings of disappointment, frustration and anger!
I stormed across the wet barren sands towards the thin line of sea on the distant horizon.
I felt so helpless; we were stranded!
Not stormbound but exhausted by our portaging efforts, we were now landbound!
Heather played the pacifist role, pointing out that despite all the litter and dead sheep it was quite a nice campsite.
The next daylight high water would not be until midday tomorrow but Heather reasserted that again we'd just have to go with the flow.
Inspecting the waves at Rubha Dubh Tigharry.
It is sometimes advantageous to cease continually pushing onwards; by stopping one has time to relax and see what otherwise would have been missed, the colours of the machair, wild poppies, buttercups, clovers, yellow rattle, eyebrights and even common ragwort, a visit to Northton, the smell of peat fires, a silent deserted main street, an antiquated petrol pump, a seized up old tractor, overgrown gardens, derelict corrugated iron roofed buildings and one shop that was a shop no more, signs suggestive of better, more affluent times.
The wind howled and the surf continued to roar as we explored beyond our landing point; we visited a ruined chapel.
The evening drew to a close as, between the showers, rays of sunlight, angled low across the sea, gave off a rare bright  translucence .
The enforced lie-in was welcome; we caught the tide and enjoyed a short, rough crossing to Taransay.
Observed by a colony of seals, we landed in a natural sheltered harbour.
Even in the rain we were enchanted; what a beautiful, wild island, otters, deer, virgin beaches marked only by our footprints, this image being temporarily shattered by the collection of man's waste amongst the Atlantic flotsam.
Subconsciously I remembered then began to hum the Robinson Crusoe theme music.
Though tired and weary, we impulsively dived into the cold sea, hoping the ever-curious seals would join us.
They fled!
We slept heavily; it still seemed the middle of the night as we rose at 5am in order to reach Tarbert in time for our ferry.
We bade farewell to the wild deer and, with the wind behind us, crossed Taransay Sound and gently cruised up the fjord-like approach towards civilization.
Feelings were mixed, a touch of sadness that it was all over and the thought of a shower, some dry clothes and other such luxuries one normally take for granted.
Cheering was the thought of other trips to other wild places still awaiting to be rediscovered!
Mike Klymko is based at Outward Bound Loch Eil .
Aire & Calder Navigation
Wakefield Section
guide
That's why the Castleford girls are so fair, They bathe in the Calder and dry in the Aire.
The Wakefield Section of the Aire & Calder Navigation runs northeast across West Yorkshire from Wakefield to Castleford, linking the Calder & Hebble Navigation with the main line of the Aire & Calder Navigation, part of the trans-Pennine route to the Humber.
William Hammond Bartholomew was the Resident Engineer on this broad canal which was usual in that it has been able to resist competition from the railways.
It is used by Tom Puddings, coal-carrying compartment boats which weigh about 40ft each and are towed up to 20 in a string, and is one of the most heavily used canals in the country, also carrying liquid fuels and general merchandise.
For this reason British Waterways do not wish it to be used by canoes.
However, Sunday is a quiet day because the locks are not manned except by arrangement.
Looking down the River Calder from Fall Ing Lock towards the power station.
There is limited parking at Belle Vue (SE343197) beside the Calder & Hebble Navigation (April 84 guide) which ends at Fall Ing Lock, below which are a flight of steps down to a convenient platform.
The Wakefield section uses the river Calder at first, on the opposite side of the which is Wakefield Old lock at the end of the short Old Wharf branch.
Next to this are heaps of coal and a conveyor cantilevered out over the river.
The water is dirty with unsightly debris along the banks but swans do not seem to be deterred and ropes hanging from the freight railway bridge downstream show that local children swim in the river.
Objects thrown into the river range from scaffolding poles to a Mini.
Two large cooling towers beside the river mark a power station at the end of the disused Barnsley Canal which linked with the Dearne & Dove Canal, a significant portion still being present and restoration helping to improve its prospects.
High ground on the right, topped by the hall at Heath, pulls back while a sewage works is located close to the left bank but remains hidden.
A railway bridge crosses and then the navigation carries on as the river bends right, to be crossed by a bridge carrying pipes which have been along the right bank.
Broadreach Flood Lock protects the navigation as the river begins several kilometres of meanders.
The portage is difficult with ladders to be negotiated both above and below the lock
The navigation then runs straight for over 2km.
Large dump trucks rumble past on the right bank as they extract gravel from the adjacent pits while airguns seem to be favourite canalside amusement.
Opposite, a colliery found its main market in Ferrybridge C power station.
the Calder aqueduct, the largest cast iron aqueduct in the World and one of the most ornate.
The hamlet of Stanley Ferry is the major point of interest on this canal.
Ramsdens Bridge is a swing bridge with a stone keeper's house which has been badly modified, a red brick porch stuck on the front and a concrete extension to the chimney owing more to utility than aesthetics.
The Ferry Boat Inn, positioned next to a spur which acts as a marina, is a popular venue and has a cruising restaurant moored alongside.
Birkwood Lock, the first mechanized lock with control tower and traffic light gantry.
The jewel in the crown, however, is the arched aqueduct over the River Calder.
The original design of six arches was rejected because of spate flow volumes in the river.
Instead, George Leather (with assistance from Thomas Telford) came up with this design, one of the most interesting aqueducts in Britain.
Each side has a cast iron arch in 7 segments from which the iron trough is hung by 35 wrought iron rods.
Built in 1836–9, it weighs 1,700t, holds 940t of water and is the largest cast iron aqueduct in the world.
Its full glory is not seen by paddling over it, however.
It is best viewed from the 2,300t concrete aqueduct built alongside in 1981 from where it is seen to have a dramatic Renaissance style with closely spaced fluted columns along either side and pediments in each of the four corners of the bridge.
Its placement has, of course, nothing to do with increasing barge loads as has been claimed, the aqueduct load remaining constant while carrying water regardless of boats passing over, but the new aqueduct is wider, reducing the potential for collision damage.
british Waterways have a large maintenance yard adjacent with an unusually large number of boats present.
To their credit, they floodlight the aqueduct each night, such is its splendour.
Also worthy of closer inspection is the church at Stanley, its twin towers ornately fashioned in stone although it is not possible to see any detail from the canal.
Large and boldly executed housing stands on the bank of the River Calder between Stanley and Bottom Boat, seen well across the flood plain from Birkwood Lock.
This lock is the uppermost of the mechanized locks and like those below, has a brick control tower and a gantry with traffic lights over the lock chamber.
Altofts is an outlier of Normanton, a settlement based on the canal trade.
Down the hill from the village is King's Road Lock from where relaunching is difficult although with care it is possible to climb down onto a floating baulk of timber moored on the left side.
Further down on the same side are the remains of Foxholes Side Lock, which served Foxholes Basin, now filled in. the banks hereabouts are in a poor state of repair and restoration has been in progress between here and the m62 Trans-Pennine Motorway bridge.
Below the farm at Penbank, marked with a sign like that of a public house, the Fairies Hill Lock Cut still exists on the right, formerly taking in Altofts Basin and Fairies Hill Lock.
These have now been replaced by the 4.1m deep Woodnook Lock which lets the navigation rejoin the River Calder above the railway viaduct rather than below it.
Exit above the lock on the right is not hard although the stonework bears black oily deposits.
Below the lock is a convenient platform with two heights above river level.
Floodwater leaves sand on the planks and this sweeps up into the banks with cornices through which it is possible to step inadvertently.
The river rejoins past a small sewage works and the navigation is now wider, not that the canal section was undersized.
The Fairies Hill Lock Cut and a colliery basin emerge together on the right midway between the railway viaduct and another around the following bend, to be followed soon after by a further bridge for a dismantled railway, such was the proliferation of lines in this area.
On the other side of Pottery Bridge, carrying the A639, a sizable marine vessel sits up on the right bank.
Facing it is a large sluice gate and a barrage of notices stating which anglers may enter and to beware of the bull.
The river takes a relatively straight line in the vicinity of Castleford Mere, cutting between various ox-bow lakes in former meanders.
A tank farm is passed on the right before arriving at a water crossroads with the River Aire at Castleford Junction.
There is a direction board and batteries of traffic lights pointing in all directions but exit from a canoe is far from easy.
The options are a high ladder on the right side of the lock, a point where the stone wall has been damaged (presumably by a vessel failing to slow down at the junction) or a paddle up the River Aire to find a point where the bank is lower.
Castleford Junction with direction signs, traffic lights and Castleford Lock.
On Sunday the British Waterways carpark at SE425264 is unused and easily accessible from the A656, with toilets adjacent.
Distance
From Belle Vue to Castleford is 12km.
Transport
Bus stations at Wakefield and Castleford are each about 1km from the navigation.
Campsites
There is a campsite 6km away at Wragby.
Youth Hostels
Langsett Youth Hostel is 23km away and York Youth Hostel is 31km away.
Water Quality
Poor (3)
Licence
A British Waterways licence is required, costing $1 per day.
The BCU membership fee covers use of this navigation.
Canal Society
Calder Navigation Society 
Weather Forecasts
Weathercall: W & S Yorkshire & Yorkshire Dales.
LETTERS
Letters, especially brief ones, are welcomed.
The Editor reserves the right to abridge letters to suit the space available.
A letter will not be considered for publication unless accompanied by the sender's name and address.
Anonymity will be retained where requested.
Liked the February issue
from Eric Totty ,President of Lakefield Canoe Club, Kendal, Cumbria .
I enjoyed the February issue of Canoeist , especially the account and photographs of Lakefield Canoe Club's recent visit to Costa Rica to enjoy the challenge of some magnificent rivers.
The photographs are of some of our leading members.
Lakefield Canoe Club has always specialised in running wild water rivers and this is not the first of the clubs pioneering ventures into little known canoeing waters.
Many years ago the club led a team into the Pyrenees to explore the possibility of wild water rivers in that area and they canoed some very exciting rivers in that region.
Other members have taken part in running the Grand Canyon of the Colorado on three separate occasions and in expeditions to Greenland, Norway, Sweden, Finnish lapland, Turkey, Yugoslavia and Morocco among other venues in search of wild water rivers as yet unknown to most of us.
Lakeland Canoe Club is an old established club, formed in the year when Queen Elizabeth II came to the throne 40 years ago.
Possibly it is better known for inaugurating and managing the Leven Wild Water Test which are the forerunner of all wild water racing in Britain.
This continued without a break for 35 years until the advent of plastic canoes changed the event into a series of open days for practice on wild water rather than a serious competition, in accordance with the wishes of most of those visiting the river.
I liked Mike Mill's letter In support of estuaries in the same issue.
It puts a point of view not shared by all canoeists.
I have consistently maintained that the canoe is the traditional craft for exploring wilderness areas without disturbing wildlife.
Our opponents say we do cause such disturbance but I suspect that is only that is only because they see all canoeists as a noisy bunch of exuberant youngsters.
But these are not canoeists in the true sense.
Usually they are a group from an outdoor centre who are being given a taste of what canoeing can offer them and they have yet to appreciate the finer points of our sport or recreation.
This was brought home to me recently when the Conservation Officer of the Cumbria Wildlife Trust countered my defence of canoeing and canoeists by accepting that two or three canoeists are no problem in a sensitive area, whereas a large group does cause unacceptable disturbance to wildlife.
It follows that such noisy groups of youngsters whether in canoes, on cycles or on foot, need to be broken down into smaller groups each controlled by a responsible competent leader or instructor until such time as they become mature canoeists and are able to appreciate the magic and wonder of their surroundings.
On another occasion David Bellamy said to me ‘You can't tell me that a canoe would not disturb an otter’.
My reply to that is that the quiet passage of a canoe going with the current is less likely to disturb the otter than a walker tramping along the bank of the river.
Editor's note:Paddlers wanting more information on Costa Rica are invited to write to Mike Hayward at 289 Downhall Green rd, Bryan, Wigan WN4 ONB.
Warm ideas
from Joy Perkins,Botley, Oxford to Andy Marsh.
Today I bought Canoeist , looking for warm ideas for some more canoeing; unfortunately there was nothing suitable.
But what a delight it was to come across your adventure, particularly so as Sept saw me doing 6 days canoeing the Zam with Shearwater, rafting Vic Falls 4–19 and a flip at 18, and I spent 2 days at Kariba lake on a houseboat.
You can imagine the excitement that returned to me when your pictures were so similar.
My canoeing skills, newly acquired, were not tested in Canadians, helmed by a guide, and I am disappointed but as I didn't acquire my elementary skills until I was a 61 year old female I'm not complaining but I do complain that I'm quite unable to find a suitable canoe companion now I'm on my own.
Where do people of my age go?
Well, that's not for you to worry over.
Thanks for your writings of Zim and Zam; I did love being there, on my own.
Any suitable warm suggestions would be very welcome.
Racism
From Aonghas Geddes ,Swindon, Wilts.
The Caption Competition , which usually gives me a source of amusement, in the Feb edition was in bad taste.
I refer, of course, to the runner up's entry and its implicit anti Irish joke.
Ethnic minorities in Britain have long borne the brunt of English racism as any Irish, Welsh, Scots, Cornish even Northerners, will testify.
It, of course, becomes even more obnoxious when applied to Black people, happily of whom many live here, contributing to the social, economic and cultural richness of Britain.
Racist jokes are the thin end of the wedge of racism.
Racial prejudice was avidly preached in the past in order to justify the extermination of the indigenous peoples of the Americas.
Also, we justified the wholesale slavery of millions of West Africans in order to exploit the riches of the Americas.
Not to mention the East, Australasia and so on.
My point is that the press has a powerful part to play in redressing the balance.
Canoeists are not exempt from this.
Andy Marsh's Zambezi article illustrates this point well.
An interesting article marred greatly by his reference to simple primitive African people being usually trustworthy.
We don't see such comments about simple trustworthy Welsh farmers on the Tryweryn.
The comment is irrelevant and demeaning to indigenous peoples living a traditional lifestyle.
Incidentally, the round African hut is highly appropriate for keeping cool in hot sun because it presents a smaller surface area than a square building would.
It is my opinion that we should do our own small bit to avoid our planet's destruction.
A small racist joke or ill considered sentence only serves to reinforce negative attitudes.
This perpetuates the myth of racial superiority/inferiority.
Racial superiority comes out of the barrel of a gun.
Sport can be an appropriate way of promoting cultural and social exchanges and development.
Canoeists should be looking to their own backyard to promote an anti racist approach within the sport.
Not perpetuate the elitist, male, capitalistic attitudes of the past.
Sad about the Derwent but what can we expect?
As for the moonie outside the café…
From John F Doran ,Peterborough 
I refer to you editorial in the January Canoeist; here you accuse the Australian government of racism.
South African sportsmen, black and white, have been excluded from competing in other countries as part of the sports boycott of apartheid regime.
However you view the almost indecent haste of sports organisations in South Africa to make themselves acceptable to the outside world, it is up to the individual governments to lift their own exclusions.
Despite the recent changes in South Africa, let us not pretend that it is suddenly squeaky clean.
It still has a minority government determined to hold on to power and interfering with the process of change by its illegal financial (and other) support of Inkatha.
The continued existence of financial boycotts, for example by the EC and the USA, attests to the fact that real change has yet to come.
And what of the racism?
You have only to look at your own publication of June 1991 to find racist comments related to the attractiveness of watersports to black people from the Chairman of the Transvaal Canoe Union.
These were repeated, with some proviso, in your editorial.
Real democracy may yet come to South Africa.
However, there still needs to be major changes in attitudes.
If the comments published in your magazine are typical, even the canoeing fraternity there have a long way to go.
Editor's comment:The Australian government are quite entitled to apply sanctions against South Africa if they so wish but the correct time to apply them is not after competitors have arrived for a World Championships in Australia to which they have been invited.
I believe the phase by Alan Witherden being referred to is ‘watersport is not particularly attractive to Black people’.
Does the proportion of black people taking part in canoeing in Britain suggest the situation is different here or are we racist, too?
Capsize drill necessary
From Jack Travers ,SI IS, Hallow, Worcester 
This will surely be one of many letters which you will receive concerning the article Capsize Drill by Ms Jackie Wynne-Freer (Feb 92 issue).
Let me say straight away that I am far from being a male chauvinist (many of my girlfriends over the years have been females), indeed the very first person to introduce me to canoeing was Marianne Tucker who subsequently represented England in the 1960 Olympics.
The number of top lady paddlers in sprint, shalom and coaching is legion and it would be invidious of me to select names although one has honoured canoeing by being awarded an MBE a few years ago and more recently one has completed almost the ultimate in canoe expeditions by paddling round the Horn.
I wonder, therefore, if Ms Wynne-Freer is doing the cause of women or, indeed, canoeing any favours by stressing no capsize and no swimming for ladies being introduced to her club?
It is an accepted fact that, in canoeing, panic is the greatest danger, incurring, as it does, a risk to the canoeist and any potential rescuer.
Consequently the guideline in the BCU Coaching Scheme lay down that all canoeists should be able to swim 50 metres in light clothing and that capsize drill should be included as an early lesson (p 357,Canoeing Handbook ).
I appreciate that outdoor water is usually cold and, having been on a canoeing course at Plas-y-Brenin some years ago, I know how cold the Conwy is in April.
It is, therefore, surely even more important that those using it should not be worried about leaving their craft in the event of capsize.
Worry leads to fear which leads to panic which is acknowledged as the greatest danger incurred in canoeing.
Admittedly, the ideal (some say the only) way to introduce safe capsizing is in the swimming pool.
Again, admittedly, this is not always easy to find.
(Plas-y-Brenin has one).
But the inconvenience of travel must be wiser than the don't-worry-you-won't-capsize attitude.
One doesn't have to start capsize drill in a closed cockpit and Ms Wynne-Freer contradicts the statements in her fourth paragraph with those made in her tenth.
Low tech cats
From Mike Alexander ,30 Aymer Drive, Chertsey Lane, Staines, Middx TW18 3LW.
I am a member of the Westel Canoe Club, based on the Thames at Sunbury.
We are marathon/touring canoeists.
If there is anyone out there who is using or can advise on joining two touring canoes to make a low tech catamaran in the Wharram tradition, enabling sailing to estuaries and creeks, dismantling and then exploring the local rivers?
any information or contact addresses would be a great help.
Dangerous reasoning
From Alastair Clark ,Wingerworth, Chesterfield.
Your book reviewer in the February edition of Canoeist resorts to some very dangerous reasoning: ‘I…would rather have polluted water I can share than pay for clean water to be used exclusively by others’
While the short-term expediency of such a position may be understood in the light of the desperate state of access to inland waters in England and Wales, as paddlers we must never allow ourselves to give any solace to the polluters.
The campaign for access must run in tandem with the campaign for clean rivers.
As paddlers we are often confronted with the filth that regularly gets tipped into our rivers.
We need clean rivers even more than the rest of the population of our planet!
JC Designs
From Andrew Davies The Firs, Stretford, Leominster HR6 9DQ
Does anyone know what happened to the JC designs of the late 1960s?
The JC Cougar I still have is a constant joy to paddle, as were the Ardèche double  tou40er and the Cub junior kayak.
If you're out there, JC, thanks for years of great paddling and if the moulds or plugs are still around perhaps fashion will come full circle and we'll be able to by JCs again someday.
In the meantime I could do with an Ardèche and a Cub or two for my collection: any offers?
Editor's note;The Ardèche is available in updated form from Granta.
The Cub mould wore out and was scrapped; Peter Haddon of Granta thinks one of the small polyethylene kayaks would be comparable.
The Cougar mould was last used about 8 years ago and is past its best; he suggests the Mirage is similar to the Cougar.
Loss of Conwy access
From the Owner of a Red Escort Van 
I am writing to respond to Mr Dave Ayres, whose article appeared in your February 1992 issue.
I don't know if it is coincidence that I own a red Escort van, have canoed the Fairy Glen on numerous occasions and have had words with the café owner about car parking.
Incidentally, mooning isn't one of my habits but for another canoeist to refer to the ‘dork2 who owns a red Escort van is a rather nebulous description of someone who could fall into that category simply because he owns a red van and whose hobby happens to be canoeing —it makes one feel guilty without trial .
My discussions with the café owner have always been amiable and I have paid for car parking (when asked) and have gone about my business in an unobtrusive manner.
The bottom line with the café owner has always been about payments for car parking but it becomes a problem if the establishment is closed more than it is open.
So I would suggests he erects a collection box and a sign clearly marked asking for all car owners to pay their levies.
Personally, I would not object to payment but it would be interesting to see if all users would contribute.
My dealings with the café owner have left me with the impression that he has got to breaking point with the number of canoeists being attracted to the Fairy Glen and has singled out a canoeist who happens to drive a red Escort van and has used this as an excuse for stopping other canoeists when the real reason goes much deeper and in my opinion is linked to financial gain.
Bearing in mind that canoeing is gaining in popularity, along with the leisure industry, the situation will get worse before it gets better.
This of course raises other questions about access.
There are so few places to paddle that those with agreements become inundated with canoeists, thereby exasperating the problem.
Surely it is about time England and Wales came into line with the rest of Europe regarding access instead of being trapped in a time capsule.
Having recently came back from canoeing in Austria where canoeists, fishermen and landowners all enjoy what nature has provided, it certainly dates what canoeists have to put up with in parts of this country.
My final message to Mr Dave Ayres is to be in full receipt of his facts before passing judgement on a fellow canoeist, using sarcastic comments that only inflame what is already a sensitive situation.
I'm beginning to feel that the greatest threat to canoeists are other canoeists which is extremely sad and reflects the pressure on the BCU to resolve the problems associated with river access before we all end up squabbling.
The Feminine Article Competition
The common woman's view of the Devizes to Westminster Race
We couldn't sport the name of Dark or Phillips or Brown or Davies or any other Worcester paddler who went out to give their all but we thought we would have a go.
Maundy Thursday we pitched a large trailer tent at Longridge to use as our base for the weekend.
They are interesting things to erect since one rushes round doing things to apparently little effect and then suddenly it's all there.
Mike Vater could be forgiven for thinking we were running around like headless chickens but he was visibly relieved when the trailer back came down and the stove and dinner emerged.
Adele, Jason, Rachel S and Rachel P did marvellous things with tent pegs, mallets, awning, ‘Wilton’ rug, doormat, bedding, mirror and curtains.
We were ready to play houses!
Later in the evening the three other important factors arrived, Jean, Rob and the boat.
At half past crack next morning we emerged, breakfasted and loaded into the van to drive the 70 odd miles to Devizes.
Rob managed to throw up twice and I felt decidedly off.
The combination of early breakfast, exhaust fumes and nerves is a potent cocktail!
The Quay at Devizes is quite a bustle, the headless chickens are definitely in on the act here.
We sign in, have our boat inspected by that nice man from Eclipse and are duly body tagged with a nylon cord bracelet and a number.
My remark that last time I had a bracelet like that put on I had a baby three hours later is greeted by a stony stare!
People from all over come to greet us, hugs from Cambridge, hand shakes from Poole; will we ever see all these wonderful people again?
We have made so many friends over the past few weeks.
We climb into the boat and are finally away.
Distance has no meaning when we are looking at 125 miles so we look at time; we will paddle for four hours and then have a five minute break.
The atmosphere is wonderful.
Those who are out for good times race but we lesser mortals chat and laugh, banter and encourage.
Everyone wants everyone else to succeed.
We are all in this together.
We plough through the inches thick green gunge that covers several miles of the first stretch, jokes about lawnmowers and gardening over Easter.
We negotiate the first of the infamous swans.
The support crew is there at every possible point and it's not so much what they give us, it's just the fact that they are there.
Theirs is a life  apart as far as we are concerned.
We have no concept of their struggles with traffic, map reading or parking; for us they are out sheet anchor and our link with a real life out there beyond this narrow strip of water.
We pass Pewsey Wharf and realize that the piece I hate most is on the horizon.
At the next portage we change seats and Rob drives us as we head towards Savernake and Bruce Tunnel.
Having twice swum in this tunnel I treat it with great respect and lots of fear.
I've always suffered with claustrophobia and swimming in a dark enclosed space has done nothing to improve it.
I leave it all up to Rob as I blank out my mind and hang on to my sanity.
All that escapes from me is a pathetic plea, ‘Talk to me’.
Some third of a mile later we emerge to my great relief.
Now I can enjoy myself.
We stagger and paddle the flight of locks at Crofton.
Most people run this stretch but we maintain our position by paddling.
At Great Bedwyn we stop for welcome break and cheer the first of the singles through.
We set out for out next four hours stint in good spirits.
We soon reach Hungerford and Rob's bridge which is so low that he usually gets cramp from bending flat on the boat.
No problem this time and we have the chance to wonder once more how the tragic massacre could have taken place in such a beautiful spot.
The next bit is always a bore.
It's long and straight and takes for ever but eventually we get to the outskirts of Newbury.
We portage the bridge, cross the canal, into the mill stream, crash down through the slalom poles, don't quite make the sharp lefthand bend yet again and pull into Newbury.
Time for another five minute break.
There are loos close at hand which makes a nice change from the back of a bush; so far I have behaved myself in the boat!
Off we go again, still in good spirits, and aim to get to Reading before we have another rest.
At Fobney the light has gone so we stop and fit the torch and then plough on once more.
The evening is beautiful and mysterious and the outskirts of Reading full of softly lit curtained windows and familiar homely sounds.
Suddenly, round a bend and there is County Lock and our support.
Fifty two miles done!
A rest, a quick conflab and we decide to do another twenty miles and reach our tent before we stop for a long rest.
Restored with food and warm drinks, we set off down Brewers' Gullet, portage our final canal lock and set out down the river.
The worst is over.
We have never paddled at night and are a little apprehensive but soon learn what we have been missing.
It is lonely but so peaceful.
The moon is full and glides above the tree tops, the mist rises from the river and the water fowl glide by like flimsy ghosts.
I can honestly say the next twenty miles was the best paddling experience that I have ever experienced.
Rob is still driving and is soon steering by the tree tops since the mist is so dense.
All seem to have lost their support crews in the dark and we are being fed by whoever is at a lock.
Squash at Sonning, tea at Marsh, malt loaf at Hurley, the same atmosphere that we are all in this together.
It begins to get very cold and hats and pogies appear but we press on and soon after midnight portage Marlow; a hundred yards downstream we find the campsite and land.
We park the boat beside the tent, regretful at leaving the water, but are soon seduced by showers, mattresses and a huge chilli con carne cooked by Jean; food never tasted so good!
That night it freezes hard and next morning after a brief breakfast we thaw out the boat and set off again.
The time is 8.00am, the gates are unlocked and the support team can leave with us.
The morning is brilliant and we soon begin to pass the all-night paddlers.
Some are in a bad way so we share what we have.
By 10.00am we realize our mistake in not pressing on all night.
The gin palaces are out, polished brass, blaring radios and peaked hats, and they don't care.
Thank heaven for spraydecks.
I'm now driving so I steer and we need all Rob's strength to support.
The water is getting into the boat down the neck of my cag!
We soon learn how to cope but still relieve the tension by shouting obscenities that can't be heard over the sounds of the engines.
I have never seen bow waves like these.
We are passing through England's history, under the M4, Windsor with St George's Chapel and the castle on the hill, Eton, Runnymede meadows.
The sun is really hot and I am in big trouble (I have an allergy to sunlight).
Poor Rob, what is he going to do with this middle-aged bat who is sobbing her way down the Thames?
A massive dose of sun cream and a sun visor and I'm back to my usual prattling self.
People wave from the bank and shout our names; heaven knows who they are!
We paddle past Bank Holiday beaches, through sailing regattas and literally hundreds of swans.
We are through Sunbury and there is Hampton Court on the left.
Only 22 miles to go.
Late afternoon and we are at Teddington and the Tideway.
We are well fed and watered by our willing support and once more I am into the fear of the unknown.
I have heard every horror story about the Tideway and have believed them all, fool that I am!
I demure about continuing and if our support hadn't forced me towards the river then the watching crowd would have done so.
The river is full to the brim and quite placid so we set off again.
Richmond, Kew, Chiswick, Barnes, the banners are out for the recently finished Boat Race.
We beach briefly to relieve the pain in our nether portions!
I swear that someone has gone over my bum with fine sandpaper!
On again, Hammersmith, Putney, another stop for a call of nature.
Someone takes the hat round for us and the Craig Evans appeal is several pounds better off.
We fit the torch again; we don't want to be disqualified at this late point.
On again, nearly swamped by a Port of London Authority launch.
It's getting very lonely in the dusk and the river is fast  disappearing, massive mudflats and a Lego landscape.
Are there really all those millions of people up there?
The Albert suspension bridge is all lit up and people cheer us.
Battersea power station, Chelsea, Vauxhall, Lambeth.
A brief view of the illuminated Savoy and there she is, the mother of parliaments, dwarfed by the skyline but still historic Westminster, and Big Ben is greeting us with seven clear chimes and the tears are pouring down my face.
They are all there to greet us.
All those who made it possible for me to realize a lifetime's ambition.
Phil, his ever-cheerful self, telling me he has stood up his girlfriend to see me through till the end.
She'll never believe this as an excuse!
(Phil, from my old club at Royston, has joined in the support, a real act of friendship for a young man to give up a weekend to support an old woman.
I know I pulled him out once but how many times has he pulled me out!
Paddling friendships really get into the blood!)
Mike Vater sprays us with champagne, urged on by a joyful Adele.
My daughter hugs me and tells me how proud she is.
Jason and Rachel Sheffield rush between us, helping with the boat, and there is Jean who has been our main support and encouraged and organized us through all the long months of preparation, fed us, nagged us and even done my washing!
And there is Rob.
What can I say?
Thank you, I've never enjoyed canoeing more and will probably never do so again.
What a privilege it has been to share that trip with so many wonderful people.
We now have friends all over the country and I often think about the elderly disabled chap who wouldn't accept help to lift his canoe at portages or the young white faced girl who wouldn't give up though exhausted.
I remember the people that we fed and those who fed us; after all, what were we but one vast family.
So, you see, you don't have to go to win; you can join the huge ranks of the A N Others and go for the hell of it.
All you need is a bit of stamina, a lot of guts and a big fellow in the back!
We probably came in about 130th but who cares?
But I now understand the following verse.
A sleepy old town is Devizes Not given to chaos and crisis The major event's A canoe race in Lent With stiff backs and sore bums as prizes!
We hoped to have made £250 for the Craig Evans Memorial Fund for the young deaf of Worcester.
PS We later hear how my daughter, bridge hopping bare-footed, gets on a Tube train which comes to a halt over the river just as we paddle beneath.
Her cries of ‘Look, that's my mum,’ are greeted by a stunned silence and then as one the phlegmatic Londoners rise from their seats and…rush from the compartment!
I think she and Phil were the nearest thing to soccer hooligans that canoeing can produce.
Do you really want a signature on this?
Hand Bagger ,alias Rosemary Preece.
Rosemary not only took 3rd place with this contribution but was sufficiently enthusiastic about the competition to send in a batch of other entries from the newsletters she has edited without even mentioning it to their writers.
She currently edits Worcester Canoe Club's Waterline.
Alpine News
There is a proposal by TIWAG (the Tirolean Power Company) to build a power station that would take the water from the River Inn from the Swiss border to Prutz.
This would be the end of the Finztermunzterschlucht (grade IV–VI) and the Tösenerschlucht (grade III–IV).
If permission is given for this then permission would follow for another power station to empty the Inn through the Imsterschlucht, possibly affecting the water in the Ötztaler Ache.
In the Tiroler Obergricht (the home of the Finztermunzter and the Tösenerschluchts) there is not a single local council for the scheme.
It would result in building sites that would cover an area the size of Pfunds (the largest town).
It would add 60 plus heavy trucks to the traffic for the five years plus of the construction.
It would bring little, if any, long term work for the locals, it would destroy the river, both for nature and for wild water paddling, and it would damage the tourist industry, the major industry of the area.
As a canoeist you can help the locals fight the scheme, help preserve the river and have a good holiday at the same time.
This is simply done by making the area the base for a holiday.
The rivers of the Tirol and some of Switzerland and Italy are within easy reach (the whole of the Inn, the Sanna, the Rosanna, the Trisanna, the Ache and the Pitzbach).
The accommodation is cheap, B&B from £7 per night, apartments about £5 per person per night, half-board from £12 per night or camping directly on the Inn at Prutz for about £3 per night.
For more information contact me,David Roland , The Alpine Rafting Company, Sauerbrunnen, A-6522, Prutz, Austria, tel 010 43 5472 2201 (answerphone, please speak after the tone), fax 010 43 5472 2244.
There is a newly formed Prutz Kayak Club whose members would welcome visiting canoeists and be pleased to show them the local sites.
At present Austria and Switzerland are having the best snow for years while France has average amounts in the main canoeing areas but better conditions than past years in the northern Alps near Geneva.
Michael V Bruce 
Eureka!
The Dragon 40 is a 12.2m Selway Fisher design to carry 10 people.
Built by Tim Bryan, it can be raced as shown, fitted with an outrigger for stability and twin sails or assembled with just the end two of its three sections to give a 7.3m canoe.
Another model now available in plan form is the Dart 22 sea kayak built in epoxy and tortured 4mm ply with bulkhead positions adjustable to suit the user's requirements.
Plans are £25 and £35 respectively.
Surrey & Hants coach
In addition to Jeanne Jones and Wayler, her dog, now at Surrey & Hants Canoe Centre, Alan Jones is to be involved in coaching courses at the site.
The Basingstoke Canal runs behind the shop and can be used for courses as well as trying out equipment before buying.
Showtime
The Canoe 92 Exhibition at Pewsey on June 27–28th is gathering momentum.
The prizes for the local Devizes-Westminster Race are to be presented at the exhibition.
There is also to be a polo tournament for complete teams of non-polo players at £20 per team for whom all equipment will be supplied.
For more details ring Keith Brigstock on 0980 54043.
The BCU have confirmed that the International Canoe Exhibition will be at Ponds Forge in Sheffield on 20th–21st Feb next year, much more central for the whole country.
Numbers at Crystal Palace this year were up some 20–30% despite the recession, fears of exhibitors and trends elsewhere.
The Exhibition Committee had advertised the event more widely to the general canoeing public than for the last decade.
The SCA are to run a Water Sports Exhibition in Perth on March 20th–21st 1993, taking in canoeing, windsurfing, rafting, skiing and fashion wear.
Demonstration boats may be paddled on the adjacent River Tay.
Thompson joins Pyranha
Jimmy Thompson, formerly looking after Scanro's production side, has joined Pyranha.
Brochures
It's time for the new catalogues and one of the most attractive around is Palm's.
In full colour throughout, its 32 pages of clothing items have been carefully laid out by Charles Willis with an interesting selection of canoeing photographs.
Franco Ferrero wishes to apologize for the delay in sending out his Kayak & Mountain brochure but by now it should be on the way to all who requested it.
P&H's colour brochure includes pictures from around the world, from Norwegian icebergs to palm trees in Florida via the Olympic slalom course at La Seu d'Urgell.
One of their newest craft is the Revenge polo boat, designed by Perran Shreeve with assistance from Alan Vessey, for which P&H are to increase production to reduce order times.
Patagonia's latest catalogue shows increasing interest in paddling with white water river paddling and outrigger shots, excerpts from the log of Ed Gillet's paddle from California to Hawaii and a warning about danger to the Grand Canyon of the Colorado.
Although they promote hard to American canoeists they have yet to make a start over here.
Designer William Towns rides the Waterbike, propeller driven in various configurations.
The supporting brochure says ‘Our island is criss crossed with canals and rivers.
These waterways wind their way through countryside often inaccessible by road and unchanged over the years.
This wealth of history, beauty and tranquillity is yours on a Waterbike.’
Granger's G-Sport is a spray-on water repellent for footwear and clothing, including Gore-Tex, in 200ml aerosols or 125ml nonaerosol sprays.
At the beginning of February A C Canoe Products and Palm got together at Ace's factory to show off their products to dealers and to reveal the secrets of rotational moulding to those not already in the know…
The Skua is a 5m transom-sterned craft being manufactured by AC Canoe products for Kirton Kayaks.
Just over a metre wide and  weighing a total of 100kg, it has military and civilian versions.
Foot steering of the outboard motor means that military users can keep both hands free to use weapons.
Daggers go in
Mobile Adventure have relinquished their dealership  on Old Town canoes and will, instead, concentrate on their Dagger franchise.
In future, Old Town will be represented by buoyancy aid manufacturers Plastimo who are owned by Old Town's parent company.
Palm have taken on the franchise for Dagger kayaks.
Ace and Perception see these as compromising the position of Palm relating to sales of their own kayaks with the result that Perception have withdrawn wholesale facilities from Palm and the special relationship between Ace and Palm has effectively ended.
A battery of three ovens (plus the ex-Scanro one waiting in the corner for assembly) and an impressive array of moulds make AC Canoe Products very strongly placed to forge ahead with the production of rotationally moulded kayaks.
Their own range plus the Scanro range have been relaunched with new graphics, the Breaker wave skis have been acquired and there are also the Scanro pontoons, Vinta sailboards and a sailing dinghy, the Dolfin, for Robin Witter to play with if he gets bored!
Ace have also joined those able to manufacture in 3 ply polyethylene, the chemicals used being claimed to be safer for workers than those used by other companies although long term properties such as UV stability have still to be checked.
Palm and AC Canoe Products are acting as importers for the Kober range of paddles with their Shock Absorbing System, a foam system which lets dropped paddles bounce higher without breaking.
The Magnum retails at £79.95 and the Magnum Extreme at £89.95.
Helios are manufacturing 70, 105 and 325l Stuff Sacks, priced from £16.39 to £23.44, featuring roll over and clip seals.
They also have a 220mm x 150mm x 90mm drybox for first aid kit or documents.
Eurocraft are making the Rapid Discovery, a hybrid craft intended to bridge the gap between canoes and rafts.
Narrow in shape, it can be used as a support and rescue craft and for disabled paddlers as well as in its own right.
It packs into a 115l backpack for carriage over short distances.
Sea kayaks are colourful this year.
P&H Orion, Icefloe and Iona and North Shore Freewater.
Pyranha towline system on a Magic Bat.
The two packets are floats for the karabiners.
Valley Canoe Products have located a source of indestructible deck elastics and hope to offer them in 6 and 8mm sizes.
At Crystal Palace they also showed their Silva compass for mounting on a hatch cover and Attwood WaterBuster electric pump for sea kayaks.
Blowing in the wind
Reed Canoes & Camping of Cambridge have been amongst the retailers having a difficult time of late.
After months of teetering on the brink, David Reed has filed for protection from his creditors.
He has taken steps to help resolve the financial difficulties and hopes to return to a normal trading position in due course.
Waterways are no longer responding to enquiries.
Lindsay Moore appeared to make something of a recovery with his Poole shop last summer but was again overtaken by the financial climate.
The saddest story relates to Canoe Store of Emsworth who were struggling like many others.
Carole Martin and their assistant have been  killed in a car crash and this has been the final straw for owner Trevor Martin, to whom we offer our condolences.
This aluminium sea kayak trolley, to be imported by North Shore, attracted a lot of interest at Crystal Palace.
Its designer shows how it can be fitted through a small kayak hatch in its assembled state.
The arms can be twisted and lifted out, the ends having hexagonal holes for use as spanners for the stand lock nut.
The McNulty Solar Panel at £165, mounted on a large hatch cover, charges up to a 50Ah 12V battery with peak output of 5W at 340mA.
Uses include electric pump, VHS radio transmitter, personal stereo, navigational light or tent light.
Arrowcraft have canoe and Kayak figures made from nails and coated in 24 carat gold, ideal trophies at about £10.
Foam seats in three sizes to fit all racing kayaks will cost about £35 from Arrowcraft.
Newing rejoins Taylor
Paul Newing, who formerly worked for John Taylor of Wavesports before the firm went under, has now left Olympus Outdoor World and is working for John's Peak Trading company in Czechoslovakia.
Peak Trading are making canoe clothing and hope to begin importing soon.
The name is likely to cause confusion with Pete Astles' Peak Performance, who also make canoe clothing.
John had the name first, this being about the only tangible asset retrieved from the Wavesports collapse, but when Pete set up his firm at a later date there was no indication that John would be producing clothing.
Growth in Japan
The Japanese market grew by 11% last year.
The major lines were imported polyethylene white water kayaks (27%), home built folding singles (23%), home built folding doubles (12%) and imported polyethylene sea kayaks (7%).
Polyethylene doubles and inflatables are the only products not made in Japan but 55% of canoes and kayaks are still imported.
RHB Design's clock at £12 can be purchased with your club name as an option.
The waterfall paddler is one of the latest of Ron Brown's intricate glassfibre models.
Roll on
Rola Europe Ltd claim their roofracks can be fitted to any vehicle with just 4 mountings, one of which is for cars with gutters.
Crossbars are oval in section with PVC inlays in the top to protect loads and feet have theft-resistant bolts.
There is a locking attachment for a windsurfer which may take a wave ski but there are no facilities for fitting uprights, C, J, V or U bars.
The brochure shows a polyethylene sea kayak held with just straps onto simple crossbars on the roof of a gutterless saloon car.
Slalom Sports move
By now Slalom Sports should have completed their move from Luton to 
Polo clinics
Dave Brown has set up the Canoe Polo Sports Clinic.
Day or weekend courses are run at clients' premises and include team tactics, individual techniques, training programmes and video analysis.
Compact sleeping bags
Snuggledown of Norway (UK) Ltd have extended their range of Ajungilak Kompakt sleeping bags.
Made with Pertex fabrics and Quallofil 7 filling, the Kompakt Lite weights only 1.2kg and, in its stuff sack, reduces to 7l.
Slough changes
Playboater are to pull out of retailing to allow more time for other projects.
They already open only on a part time basis.
Meanwhile, Field & Trek have opened up a branch in the High Street.
Pyranha child's seat
Pyranha are to re-introduce their clip-in child's seat.
In polyethylene, it will give a small child a better seating position.
New W Midlands centre
Scott Bader are to close their Stratford Road premises in Birmingham and replace it with a new centre backing onto the Merryhill Estate in Brierley Hill.
In charge will be Mark Potter who made a hash of Cowley Steps during the Exe Descent but is likely to be more efficient when he gets going on the inevitable canoeing aspects of the centre.
Crooked
Dave Crooks, who makes a habit of jumping off such things as Swallow Falls and the Anvil at the Bitches in an open canoe, was hobbling around Crystal Palace on crutches.
As is the way with people who undertake these, epics, the accident happened as a result of slipping over while going for a beer with Colin Broadway.
An eye for a profit
Following several crocodile attacks on the Zambezi, Erdnow Fantasy Products have now designed crocodile eyes aimed specifically at the intrepid paddler.
These must be attached to the rear of the boat as crocodiles always attack from behind.
They should get a nasty shock when they meet our eyes.
Although they eyes were specifically designed for the Pyranha Mountain Bat, we feel they would work equally well on other boats.
For the not-quite-so-intrepid paddler a special de luxe set of hippo eyes is available, at an extra cost, of course.
We have contracted a native dentist to design the super de luxe version with terrifying teeth, enough to clear the river of all nasty wildlife, and hope these will be ready for the next paddling season.
We have decided not to publish an illustration here in case any crocodile readers of this magazine should get advanced warning of what is in store.
Enquiries to our usual address will be dealt with promptly by our highly skilled, courteous staff, or else!
Fred Wondre 
The waterside in April
Procreation is the key word for April with everything from sticklebacks to water voles producing young during the month.
Many of the coarse fish are spawning in the vegetation at the side of the waterways from February through to July and April is the first full month that the fishermen give them the peace and quiet to do this.
The perch lays eggs around 2mm in diameter in long strings as flat bands or as a meshwork in the vegetation.
The eggs are left to their own devices and will hatch after 10 to 18 days during which time they develop into larvae 5mm long.
Once hatched, they begin to feed on zooplankton and as they grow they prey on larger species and they are even  cannibalistic .
The male three-spined stickleback stakes a territory out and defends it from other males.
In this area he builds first a small depression by removing mouthfuls of sand and then produces a nest from weeds which are coated with a sticky substance so that they can be moulded with his snout.
The mound of weed is bored through to produce a short tunnel into which the name entices females to come and lay her eggs.
The male becomes bright red under the chin while the females are more silvery in colour and swollen with eggs.
Whenever a female enters his territory he courts her by swimming in a zig-zag dance, eventually leading her to the next where she enters and he prods her tail to entice her to lay her eggs.
Once deposited, she leaves the nest and he immediately fertilizes the eggs.
He then chases her off and tries to attract other females.
The male guards the next, aerates the eggs and looks after the larvae until they are able to feed for themselves.
He even pursues stragglers and returns them to the nest in his mouth.
Although relatively few eggs are produced, the male's care ensures a good survival rate.
Our largest vole, the water vole, is very active at the moment as its breeding season will have just started in the last few weeks.
It has a complex tunnel system built along the banks of slow moving waterways with many exits above and below water level.
Water voles are aggressively territorial, marking their patches with musk from flank glands.
Water voles are very shortsighted and so with a little care they can be easily observed.
First look out for the spoor on prominent areas of the banks, scatter the area with pieces of sliced apple and then sit and wait.
As they patrol their area regularly you should not have to wait long.
While rejoicing in the first full month of the closed fishing season also look out for the pale new leaves of spring.
I always find it remarkable that such delicate structures can survive the harsh frosts and snows of winter.
Be aware that bankside vegetation is being used for nesting by moorhens, swans and coots and that sandy banks will be the home for sand martins arriving back from Africa.
Good boat and group control are essential to the conservation of our wildlife.
Dave Halsall 
SUPER RAFTING
Raft , n, an improvised float of planks fastened together to give support on water.
Mention the word ‘raft’ and, as per the above dictionary definition, people always o£conjure up visions of crude floating bundles of logs bound together with rope or, if they are canoeists, the vision of large inflatables careering down Canadian whitewater, etc.
However, as many canoeists who frequent the rivers Severn and Wye will confirm, the sport of super rafting is rapidly developing both in terms of the number and races and teams around the country and in the techniques and equipment used by the participants.
Super raft racing began in the early seventies with the advent of the 100 Mile River Wye Raft Race which remains to this day the ultimate challenge.
Held over three days in early May, the race covers the distance from Hay-on-Wye to Chepstow and currently attracts over seventy teams from across the country.
The Committee for Hereford Amateur Rafters is the organization that was formed following the first 100 mile race and, as such, is the backbone of UK rafting, acting as an administrative body providing information, advice and assistance to new teams as well as organizing the premier UK events.
Whilst concerned primarily with rafting and its supporters, CHAR both understand and appreciate the requirements of all river users and as such work closely with the various organizations and authorities that represent these fellow users.
Practice days are arranged well in advance and all rafts are required to carry unique identification codes to ensure proper conduct on the water.
Raft racing began as a charity event and in most cases remains as such with many thousands of pounds being raised for national and local charities.
The CHAR races alone raised over £100,000 in 1991.
CHAR rules and regulations provide size specifications with current full size rafts measuring approximately fifty feet long by ten feet wide and are constructed using aluminium or wood to create two pontoons, catamaran style, with glassfibre bows and new 25 litre barrels for flotation.
Steering is provided by a simple rudder.
Rafts are crewed by ten men (or women) who, using single bladed paddles, propel rafts very quickly through the water.
As I mentioned earlier, techniques and equipment are developing rapidly; teams are using thinner section aluminium to construct the raft sections, Kevlar is now used for bows, wooden Canadian paddles are either purchased or crafted and buoyancy aids are specially adapted to carry water bottles, etc, enabling drinks to be taken without interrupting the stroke.
Unfortunately, as the sport is developing, so does the cost.
Each new barrel costs £1.50; they are normally only used for one race and there are 50 barrels on a raft.
As many rafters are also canoeists, paddling techniques vary from team to team with blade strokes varying from short and fast to long and deep with each team striving to achieve perfect stroke timing.
Paddle styles also vary, long, short, cranked, etc, and, as single bladed paddle paddles are used, changeover routines are practised to maximize effort and ensure a constant pace.
A day's racing in the 100 mile Wye race involves paddling continuously for over 5 hours so physical and mental preparation are essential.
The pain barriers appear just as in marathon running and, as in other endurance sports, many people withdraw, suffering from either dehydration or cramp.
Each team has a backup squad who, aside from shouting encouragement, will prepare and maintain the raft and organize the team's campsite area as well as cooking, massaging aching limbs, etc.
The camaraderie between teams is amazing.
In the 1991 100 mile race one team wrote off their raft in an unfortunate accident.
Straight after the event a number of teams came forward offering materials to assist in the construction of a new raft.
The large campsites always have large refreshment marquees with discos to enable everyone to unwind after a day's racing.
Again, the atmosphere is friendly with everyone recounting the day's activities whilst making new friends and meeting old adversaries.
The smaller one day races, whilst not having the same cult status, are treated just as seriously with most races offering trophies and some even cash prizes.
Races exist across the country throughout the year and to this end I have produced, with assistance from many individuals, a handbook/calendar of rafting events.
If any individual or canoeing club is interested in either forming a team or joining an existing club or would just like to find out more about rafting please contact me on 0934 517756 or Patricia Hales of CHAR on 0432 820261.
However, as most of you are only used to leisurely paddling for an hour or two in low drag vessels, please consider your decision carefully; rafting is physically and mentally demanding and pushes mind and body to the limit.
It also promotes team spirit, raises thousands for well deserving causes and, above all, is fun!
Richard Coleman is a BCU member who hopes to see the formation of a rafting federation to represent all aspects of rafting, preferably outside the BCU.
The Afon Por-Gilli
The grade 3 upper section
I'd been told about the Afon Por-Gilli but never got around to finding and paddling it so when I found that I had the first Wednesday of the month off we set off westbound across the border.
The good old Ordnance Survey Landrangers guided our way and after about 2½ hours' driving we pulled up alongside the river and couldn't believe our eyes…
In the most beautiful of valleys flowed what appeared to be a classic grade III river.
In excited anticipation we completed the ferry and within minutes were ready for the off.
The lead in to the gorge
The gorge proper
Despite a week of little rain the crystalline waters flowed well with plenty of power over countless drops, grade II–III to start, through rolling unspoilt countryside with few signs of habitation.
After a mile or so the banks closed in and the gradient increased…
Inspection followed.
The following gorge must be the most continuous section of grade IV+ water in Wales.
The almost blue water tumbled over myriad falls and drops like pearls strung together on a necklace, each one challenging but nowhere desperate.
Around bends, over rocks, the river didn't ease for over four miles, a total height loss of over 600 feet.
The gorge walls, over 50 feet in places, came so close they nearly touched and, below, a river straight out of a canoeist's toybox, not large by any standards but clean, powerful, unspoilt and  appearing not to be reliant on heavy rainfall.
There are two or possibly three sections that require close inspection and ropework and the gorge should not be taken lightly but do not less this detract from a river that has everything.
What dreams are made of…and until now not in the guidebooks.
As the grades eased to the egress we were welcomed by the rodcarrying green welly brigade.
Anticipating the worst, the hospitality that followed came almost with as much pleasure as paddling the river.
I shall continue to dram of the Afon Por-Gilli.
We shall return.
Nick Reason paddles with Cheltenham Canoe Club.
The higher volume lower section
Books
The Big Muddy
The pleasure of long rivers is that no two trips along them are ever even similar.
Read Mississippi Madness and Paddle to the Amazon and then read The Big Muddy and you will have three entirely different perspectives of the mighty Mississippi.
This time it is the author and her husband paddling an open canoe down the river for four months in 1984.
If not quite ‘that elderly British pair’ as they were described by one TV station, they were older than the other writers and this sometimes had its benefits.
Surely it helped with the welcomes they received all down the river with locals for ever insisting they come in for meals, to stay, to be guests of honour in parties for the whole town, to be driven round and shown the sights and to have their strange English accents listened to.
One waitress even wanted to know if we have Christmas on December 25th in Europe.
Being driven into one town they were faced with a moving lights message over a bank giving in turn the temperature, date and ‘Louisiana welcomes British canoeists George and Sylvie.’
Once they even won by default the over 40s section of a marathon race which happened to take place as they were passing.
Not giving dates lets the story have a more relaxed and timeless feel about it.
Rather than having to push onwards all the time there is ample opportunity to absorb the history and geography, spend nights with the River Rats, Scotts Tennessee Artillery Company B of the Confederate Army and the jousting tents of ordinary American campers, be brushed by the cultures of Mark Twain, Elvis Presley, jazz, country and Cajun music, the Mormons and many more, to feed alligators from a boat, meet Delta pirogues and be blasted by  phenomenal thunderstorms.
The book very quickly gets down to the paddling with a token section at the source of the river.
They then move a little further down before taking up the major part of their trip, largely unbroken to the Gulf of Mexico except for stopovers to explore the towns and recover from incidents, including loss of their canoe on one occasion.
The one significant exception was a ride for several days from St Louis to Memphis on a barge train to see these monsters of the river from the top side.
Sylvie's book repeatedly shows a surprising degree of fear, fear of barge trains, of thoughtless pleasure boaters, of the storms and of the river itself.
It is a shame that there are no photographs but each chapter begins with a Tom Price sketch and the text marks Sylvie out as a skilled travel writer rather than just a traveller who writes, a thoroughly good read.
Magazine formats
The WCA magazine Ceufad has changed to a tabloid format.
While operating within tight financial constraints, editor Terry Davies has managed to give a striking and punchy presentation with plenty of information.
The Canoe-Camper is now on glossy paper and a selection of photographs are included for the first time.
Wychavon Canoe Club have launched the first edition of their club newsletter.
Touring guides
The BCU Touring & Recreation Committee are preparing 100 Paddles in England and 50 Touring Rivers in Europe , to be published later in the year.
The ambitious touring database proposals have been shelved.
Paddlers International yearbook
The 1992 members' yearbook for Paddlers International is even better than before in that members are now indexed in alphabetical order of name as well as by the waters on which they are knowledgeable and by club membership number.
The worldwide list of national governing body addresses is the most up to date anywhere.
In fact, it really is a who's who of international canoe touring.
Numeracy problems
One of the outdoor magazines recently published a canoeing supplement with advertisements bearing prominent numbers.
Readers of Canoeist will have been the only people to have know that the numbers on the advertisements as we originally published them cross referenced to the map on page 52 of our February issue.
Oops!
Polo
St Albans' double double
Crystal Palace Polo
The 1992 National Cup competition at the Crystal Palace exhibition was once again attended by the top men's, ladies' and youth teams who had either fought their way through eliminating rounds or prequalified by high National League placings last season.
The open first round started on Saturday morning with the tie of the round between last year's runners up, Luton, and top Scottish side Woodmill who, playing as CPC, won this event back in 1986.
Woodmill came out 4–1 winners this time to end Luton's hopes of reaching the final again.
The first round produced no other surprises but credit must go to Fourth Division Birmingham University who played defending champions Bere Forest and, against the odds and much to the crowd's delight, took a first half lead before Forest eventually came back strongly to win 4–1.
The quarter finals also took place on Saturday and produced a mixed bag of entertainment.
Meridian A had a very comfortable 7–1 victory over St Albans B and St Albans A also eased through to the semis with a 4–0 win against Viking.
Fortunately the other two matches were considerably more exciting.
Woodmill defeated Humberside 3–2 with a winner inside the last thirty seconds.
Woodmill came back well after Humberside had taken a 2–1 lead with a spectacular goal scored from inside their own half.
Bere Forest also had a tough match against Meridian B and, once again, they found themselves a goal down at half time but they took a 2–1 lead in the second half before Meridian B equalized to take the game into extra time.
Meridian B came close to winning several times but it was Forest who eventually scored the crucial goal in the last minute of sudden death extra time.
Sunday morning say the start of the ladies' competition with St Albans A and Mutineers going through to the semis to play St Albans B and Woodmill respectively, the latter two having been given byes to this stage.
The youth quarter finals followed and St Albans went through after extra time against Tynemouth, along with Viking who beat Humberside 4–0.
Friends of Allonby and Bere Forest were given byes to the semi finals.
The first ladies' semi final produced no shock with At Albans A beating their own B team 3–1 but the other semi between Mutineers and Woodmill proved much closer.
Full time finished with the score at 1–1 and sudden death extra time began with Woodmill seemingly well in control until one of their players conceded a foul off the ball.
The referee allowed the free throw to be taken inside Woodmill's half and Mutineers acted very quickly, taking the Woodmill defence by surprise to score into an empty net and earn their place in the final.
The youth semi finals did produce one surprise with Friends of Allonby beating youth league champions St Albans 3–1 while Viking looked strong in their 2–0 defeat of Bere Forest.
The open semi finals promised to be two very tight games and they did not disappoint.
The first pitched Scottish Champions Woodmill against Meridian, National League winners in 1990–91.
Woodmill controlled the game for much of the first half but could not get through the Meridian defence and it wasn't until two and a half minutes into the second half that the deadlock was finally broken.
Meridian won possession in defence and broke very quickly, allowing Dave Higson to score into an open goal and give Meridian a crucial lead.
Woodmill piled the pressure on and were finally rewarded with a Martin Shores goal with only thirty seconds left.
Tough tackling and controlled possession by Woodmill were the dominant features of extra time and no goals resulted, making the game the first of the tournament to go to penalties.
Meridian fell apart on the penalties and Woodmill went through to make their fourth appearance in the final.
Ewan Smale of St Albans B challenges Luton C's Alex Watson
The second semi final really was a battle of the giants with defending champions Bere Forest taking on League Champions St Albans.
Not surprisingly, the game was very close and as half time approached it took a piece of individual brilliance to put St Albans ahead.
Alan Vessey found himself stuck by the touchline near the corner and, with his back to the Bere Forest goal and with limited options, he succeeded in paddle flicking the ball into the top corner of the net for one of the finest goals scored at Crystal Palace in recent years.
In the second half, Bere Forest fought back well and, fittingly, it was Alan's Great Britain Captain, Gary Linton, who scored Forest's equalizer after a poor St Albans pass was intercepted.
The match was finally settled two minutes into extra time when St Albans won possession in defence and broke quickly.
Mike Vessey spotted his brother's long run and placed a superb long ball in his path which Alan duly put away to set up St Albans' third appearance in the final and a change of the League and Cup double.
The youth final was a game of many chances but it was defending champions Friends of Allonby who scored just five seconds before half time against Viking.
A strong fight back by Viking was not enough with many of their shots off target and the Liverpool side defended well to retain the youth championship.
Michael Vessey of St Albans A
The ladies' final was a repeat of the previous year's fixture with Mutineers (defending champions) playing St Albans.
This year it was St Albans who took the initiative with Jenny Hillyard scoring after two minutes.
The lead only stood until the end of the first half, however, as Mutineers' Lyn Knowles was fouled shooting and then scored from the resulting penalty.
The second half continued as a fast end to end game until, with two minutes left, Zoe Hillyard shot at the Mutineers's goal but with the ball taking a huge deflection and looping over the Mutineers goalkeeper's paddle and into the net.
St Albans held on for the rest of the match to win 2–1 and take the ladies' title for the second time and make up for four previous final defeats by Mutineers.
The 1992 open final between St Albans and Woodmill started brightly with the southern team quickly making their intentions clear with a Greg  Smale goal in the first minute and an Ian Plummer long shot which was just wide in the third minute.
A quick break by St Albans in the last minute of the first half saw Ian Plummer score into an open net to give his side a 2–0 half time lead.
Another quick break by St Albans set up Ian Plummer for his second goal at the start of the second half before Woodmill started to fight back.
A long spell of pressure by the Scottish team resulted in a goal for George Spittal and a whole series of on target shots but, unfortunately for them, Chris Parkes was in fine form in the St Albans goal.
The southerners had two more chances on the break.
Mike Vessey hit the bar with his effort but Alan Vessey put his chance away with only ten seconds left on the clock to give St Albans a 4–1 win and their second National Cup championship.
Neil McArthur of Luton C menaces Steve Marlow of St Albans B
St Johns player tries to block Matt Cave of St Albans
Jackie Marlow clears the ball for St Albans
Nicky Mowbray of Woodmill tackles Mutineer Lyn Knowles
Congratulations to Friends of Allonby for winning the youth championship and to St Albans for achieving League and Cup doubles in both open and ladies' classes.
Yet again, Crystal Palace polo provided superb entertainment and with, thankfully, a general lack of penalty shootouts, instead open and attacking play were the norm.
Andrew Leafe 
Nomads' illegal team
Potters Bar Polo
The rescheduled second tournament (from 6th July 1991) was held at Potters Bar on 25th Jan 1992.
At the last two tournaments that Nomad played they fielded an illegal team and have subsequently been disqualified from these two tournaments.
This has resulted in teams playing Nomads in one of these tournaments being awarded three point for a win, the goal difference being discounted.
The league table below takes this into account.
Congratulations to Meridian and London.
Carl Goulding.
Biggest ever event
3 Scottish Polo Championships
This year saw the biggest ever event with fifty six teams competing for the open, ladies', youth, junior and new veterans' titles.
Saturday's preliminary play took place from 9am–7pm at three venues and saw teams competing from Aberdeen and Fort William in the north to Selkirk in the south.
These games whittled the teams down to eight men's teams and four from each of the other classes.
Sunday's play was of a high standard with two semi finals going to extra time, then penalties.
One point which the SCA Polo Committee will discuss for the future is whether junior and youth players should be put under extra pressure in a penalty situation or whether games should be played to the first goal.
Jackie Moore 
Water Polo Champs
The first World Polo Championships will take place in Britain in 1994.
Sheffield will be acting as host city.
Slalom
A family affair
Cataract Gorge Slalom
After two events of the 5 slalom series Melvyn Jones shares equal first place with Lubos Hilgert, TCH.
Low numbers participating and also the quality of the start line rather detract from the value but British boats coming in first and second is excellent.
Ian Wiley of Ireland had a time some 3 seconds faster than the winner but his 5 second penalty for touching a gate put him in 4th place overall.
Comer and Masters throw an extreme turn at Crystal Palace
No British boats were competing in women's kayaks.
(Elisabeth Micheler and Melvyn Jones are engaged to be married, both winners at this slalom.
Myriam Jerusalmi in third is married to Richard Fox, second in the men's event.)
No British boats were competing in C1.
The slalom site at Cataract Gorge is sited on a 350 metre section of river fed by the Trevallyn Dam.
It is very technical and demanding.
Sue Wharton.
Perran Shreeve and Pete Horton in the Crystal Palace pool finals
Calling all judges
The World Cup series slalom at Holme Pierrepont on May 30th–31st will be the most important British slalom for some years and will draw a very high class field of paddlers ahead of the Olympic Games.
As such, a great deal of help is required with security, car parking, course maintenance and, particularly, judging.
A separate judge is required for every gate.
All officials will get free camping plus a  barbecue on the Saturday night and it is hoped to offer a further incentive such as a T shirt.
An international slalom sprint will take place on the Sunday.
Officials who get through the qualifying round will be able to compete against the best in the world and there will also be prizes by British divisions.
Entry should be to Chris Ebrey on a standard entry card with division marked and a note to indicate whether available to assist for Friday's practice runs.
To assist without paddling, ring Chris on 0978 352397.
Paul Brain and Chris Arrowsmith in the pool slalom finals
Annan resigns
The Slalom Executive's bid to overturn the AGM's narrow rejection of the Olympic pre-selections was soundly beaten, the voting being about 2:1 against pre-selection.
As a result, Chairman Roger Annan has resigned although he will continue to give assistance to the Executive on special projects.
Roger Fox, father of Richard and Rachel, has taken over as the new Chairman.
Approved helmets
The Slalom Committee have issued a list of approved helmets for use in British slaloms.
This has raised the question about what happens for competitors for whom none of these approved helmets fit, as some paddlers have found.
Unionless paddlers
Individual paddlers from the Commonwealth of Independent States will represent their separate republics this year with such flags and anthems if they win.
Winning teams will receive the Olympic anthem and flag.
From 1993 both teams and individuals will each represent their separate republics.
The ICF have now given provisional recognition to the canoe federations of Slovenia and Croatia as independent organizations.
Herts Championships
The Herts Association of Canoe Clubs will be running a combined marathon and slalom championships at Dobbs Weir on May 2nd–3rd.
The marathon will be over 6km (4km for under 18s) and the slalom course will be wide but interesting.
Both events count towards prizes.
For details of the low entry fees ring Brian Perrier on 0438 350249.
Canoe 95 moves ahead
Canoe 95, the World Championships in slalom and WWR, is likely to be run by a separate limited company to avoid subjecting the BCU to financial risk.
Chairman of the World Championships is Albert Woods with former slalom treasurer John Liddell again looking after the finances.
It is intended to run a Commonwealth Championships in Scotland following the events in England and Wales.
This last happened in 1981.
Sporting performances
Sports doctors at a conference in Austria have concluded that female competitors produce better results in sport after what is daintily referred to as a ‘turbulent amorous event’.
However, such an event produces a corresponding decline in competition performance for males.
Hexham rodeo
Ray Hudspith is running a mini rodeo on Hexham Weir on 12th.
The timing coincides with a near by WWR on the North Tyne.
Exhibition rodeo
The Bitches Rodeo on May 2nd–3rd will have the usual partying to accompany the competition.
In addition there will be several members of the trade exhibiting their products.
Leukaemia funds
Last year's Leukaemia Marathon raised a magnificent £5,500 for research into this particular form of cancer.
This year's event on the Tay will be on May 24th and will tie in with the canoe exhibition at Grandtully.
The canoe/cycle/run Lee Triathlon takes place on June 14th with Ford car phones amongst the prizes and a T short for each of the expected 300 entrants.
There will also be a new company team trophy.
Last year's event was won by Dave Hallam of Leaside.
Ring Carol Lester on 0992 767140 for details.
Tyne Classic
Tyne Valley Canoe Club are to run a Tyne Classic Canoe Marathon from Wark to Prudhoe on May 25th.
Taking in several large weirs and the Warden Gorge plus other smaller rapids, the 39km course offers plenty of interest and the organizers hope that it will grow to be comparable with the Liffey Descent and the Devizes to Westminster Race.
Ladies and under 16s will paddle a 19km course from Hexham.
The finish coincides with the popular Prudhoe Town Fair for which the club have provided a well received canoe trial session in the past.
It is hoped that the NRA will release water if necessary.
Additional penalties
A paddler at a Nottingham regatta this year will receive a 1 point penalty for paddling with an underweight boat.
Failure to report for weighing will incur 2 points.
Paddling in the sun
As part of their preparations for the Olympic Games, the Olympic Racing Squad were due to fly to Florida last month for a fortnight's training camp.