

1.
HISTORY OF THE CHANNEL TUNNEL
The concept of a fixed transport link between Britain and France has exercised the minds of engineers, businessmen and politicians for over 250 years, and the first recorded scheme was put forward by physician and geologist Nicolas Desmarets in 1751.
However, the history of the Channel Tunnel is generally said to have begun with the 1820 proposal of French mining engineer Albert Mathieu-Favier for a road tunnel lit by gas and ventilated through chimneys emerging above sea level.
Napoleon is believed to have been warmly in favour even though the tunnel was not designed for military purposes.
In the 1830s the advent of steam power focused attention on the possibilities of a rail tunnel and the engineer Aime Thome de Gamond spent most of his working life producing a variety of cross-Channel schemes including a single bore tunnel with two railway tracks and an interchange station for shipping on the mid-Channel bank.
Thome de Gamond realised the importance of preliminary geological investigations and this enthusiasm was such that he dived without any form of equipment to depths of 100 feet to survey the Channel bed.
His scheme attracted the support of many distinguished figures including Isambard Kingdom Brunel and Robert Stephenson.
Prince Albert and Queen Victoria, who was a martyr to seasickness, were also enthusiastic at a time when Anglo-French relations were noticeably warmer than in the previous 50 years.
A Franco-British Committee was set up in 1868 to consider a twin bored tunnel project developed by Thome de Gamond and the British engineers John Hawkshaw and William Lowe, and in 1875 an international commission was set up to consider the legal and regulatory implications.
Extensive geological surveys were carried out and a mile long pilot tunnel dug on the British side of the Channel before hostile public opinion led to the abandonment of the project in 1882.
Anglo-French relations has taken a turn for the worse and Queen Victoria's enthusiasm for the project evaporated.
Her hostility was matched by the range of influential figures including Lord Tennyson, Robert Browning, Thomas Huxley and Herbert Spencer who reflected the popular distrust of foreigners prevalent at the time.
However, the most telling condemnation came from General Sir Garnet Wolseley, the Adjutant-General and the Commandant of Dover Castle, who argued that a tunnel would ‘open up a route to the invader into England’.
Although the Channel Tunnel Company set up during the 1880s survived the abandonment of the project, the pro-tunnel lobby had little success over the next 40 years despite a rash of Bills in Parliament and an inquiry by the Committee of Imperial defence in 1913.
However, the difficulties of transferring men and materials to France during the war, and the realisation that the Channel was unlikely to remain an inviolable defence in modern times, led to a revival of interest.
By 1920 the English Channel Tunnel Company's scheme for a rail tunnel between Shakespeare Cliff and Sangatte was at an advanced stage of development and had attracted the support of MPs, businessmen and engineers who saw it as a major work of postwar reconstruction which would provide badly needed employment at a time of recession.
Churchill, as Secretary of State for War, saw no need to veto a tunnel on military grounds and the Home Ports Defence Committee concluded that it could be defended from attack, albeit at high cost.
However, the scheme came to grief because of the entrenched opposition of Cabinet Secretary, Sir Maurice Hankey, who believed a tunnel to be a major threat to national security.
The defence argument put paid to yet another proposal in 1924 but in 1929 the Labour Government set up a Committee of Inquiry which concluded that a ‘double barrelled’ rail tunnel could probably be built although it would be necessary to drive a pilot tunnel to demonstrate its feasibility beyond doubt.
However, in 1930 a White Paper ruled against the project on the grounds that the technical feasibility and economic benefits were too uncertain to justify the heavy expenditure needed to defend a tunnel in time of war.
Nonetheless, a Parliamentary Bill to construct a tunnel was lost by only seven votes.
The growing demand for cross-Channel travel, reflected in the establishment of the Dover-Dunkirk train ferry service in 1936, ensured that the issue would be revived after the Second World War and Anglo-French meetings were held as early as 1947.
The depressed post-war state of the countries' economies meant that little progress was made until the 1950s but the experience of modern warfare had at least convinced government circles that the old security arguments against a tunnel were redundant.
In 1957 a Channel Tunnel Study Group with British, French and American membership undertook extensive survey work and considered the relative merits of a range of fixed link designs, finally opting in 1960 for a twin bored tunnel with accompanying service tunnel.
In the following year the Channel Bridge Study Group, including representatives of the British and French steel industries, produced a road/rail bridge design consisting of 140 spans of up to 1,447 feet in length.
Both the schemes were considered by a joint Anglo-French working group which reported in favour of the tunnel in 1963.
Extensive geological and geophysical surveys were carried out over the next two years, and the governments negotiated with an international group of banks interested in financing the construction of the tunnel.
In 1971 an agreement was signed with the British Channel Tunnel Company Ltd and the Société Française du Tunnel Sous la Manche to carry out the project on the basis of a mixture of risk capital and government guaranteed loans.
Detailed agreements on Phases 1 and 2 of the project were agreed and a detailed cost-benefits analysis was carried out by consultants Coopers and Lybrand Associates.
In 1973 the government published a White Paper describing the expected economic benefits of a tunnel, and issued a consultation document the following January on a high speed rail link between London and the tunnel.
An international treaty was signed by Prime Minister Edward Heath and President Georges Pompidou in November 1973 but the two general elections of 1974 delayed the necessary enabling legislation and the British government was unable to ratify the treaty by the agreed date of January 1 1975.
At the same time concern was growing at a tripling in the cost of the high speed rail link following objections from people in Kent and Surrey.
Despite pleas from the Channel Tunnel companies the project was abandoned on January 20 1975 after some 300m of tunnel had been bored on the French side and 400m on the British.
This bibliography and review is mainly concerned with the current project but the following list of books form a basis for study of the history of the Channel Tunnel.
Brief historical surveys can also be found in Tunnels and Tunnelling, May 1980 12(5) pp60–64; the Independent's Special Report on the Channel Tunnel, 26 May 1989 p2; and Railway Magazine, Oct 1989 135(1062) Channel Tunnel Update Supplement pp4–7.
2.
FIXED OPTIONS IN THE 1980s
The abandonment of the 1973–1975 project did not dent the enthusiasm of the pro-tunnel lobby for long and agreement was reached with Kent County Council to keep the British terminal site free from further development.
By 1978 British Rail and the Société Nationale des Chemins de Fer Français (SNC) had started planning a single track rail tunnel for through rail services, commonly known as the Mousehole, and they put forward a plan to the governments in 1979.
The House of Commons Transport Committee considered the prospects for a fixed link in the light of changing European Community thinking on transport, and in March 1980 the British Minister of Transport invited tenders on the strict understanding that they should be viable without any form of public support or guarantee.
The Invitation attracted nine schemes including the BR/SNCF single track design, three further bored tunnel schemes, two bridges, an immersed tube and a combination of immersed tube and bridges.
A joint Anglo-French Study Group examined the proposals and its report in June 1982 suggested that all the schemes would be superior to existing services although the margin of improvement was slim.
However, a rail runnel scheme similar to that abandoned in the 1970s offered the best chance of success.
The Group did not look in detail at how such a scheme might be privately financed, and an Anglo-French banking study was commissioned to examine the issues.
It concluded that a twin bored rail tunnel scheme was the only one likely to attract sufficient private finance although even this would require some government guarantees.
Despite this rather gloomy conclusion the project was far enough advanced by November 1984 for Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and President Francois Mitterand to meet at Rambouillet and reaffirm their willingness to facilitate a privately financed fixed link.
A joint working group of officials was commissioned to develop guidelines on the undertakings to be provided by the governments, the legal and commercial framework, and the various technical, environmental and financial requirements to be met by promoters.
These were published in April 1985 as the Invitation to Promoters which asked for submissions by October of the same year.
Ten were received but these were rapidly reduced to four main contenders:
Channel Tunnel Group-Franche-Manche
Two single track bored rail tunnels for through and shuttle services together with a linked service tunnel: estimated cost £2.6bn.
Channel Expressway
Two bored tunnels for road traffic with rail tracks laid on one carriageway to allow one train per hour in each direction: estimated cost £2.6bn.
Eurobridge
A four-deck bridge with spans 5km long plus a single track bored tunnel for BN/SNCF through services: estimated cost £5.2bn.
Euroroute
A road link comprising two artificial islands at the edges of the main shipping lanes joined to shore by bridges and to each other by an immersed tube tunnel.
Plus two single tack bored tunnels for BR/SNCF through services: estimated cost £5bn.
The schemes were considered by a team of experts working under a group of senior officials appointed by the two governments and, in addition, the British government appointed Land Use Consultants to investigate their environmental implications.
The House of Commons Transport Committee also considered the options and reported in December 1985 in favour of the Channel Tunnel Group/Franche-Manche scheme.
European interest
The revival of interest in a Channel fixed link in Britain and France was matched by growing interest at European Community level although here the emphasis was on the role of Europe in providing financial support for improvements in transport infrastructure.
In 1979 a Green Paper examined the likely growth in transport needs to the year 2000 and formed the basis of future thinking on the concepts of ‘Community interest’ as a justification for European action to improve transport links between the various member countries.
Support for a fixed Channel link soon emerged as a prime candidate for assistance although the British and French governments remained committed to the idea of a privately financed tunnel.
Consultants Coopers and Lybrand Associates and SETEC Economique were commissioned to look at ways of identifying and measuring Community interest, and used the Channel fixed link as one of their main case studies.
In 1981 a report to the European Parliament by P. de Keersmaeker of the European Commission expressed wholehearted support for the principle of a fixed link, and in the same year reports based on consultations with the Council of Europe's Conference of Local and Regional Authorities came to a similar conclusion both about the fixed link and other gaps in the European network of trunk communications.
In 1983 a further report to the European Parliament by M. Vandewiele reinforced enthusiasm for Community support of a fixed link, and in 1984 the Round Table of European Industrialists added its voice to the campaign to upgrade Europe's transport infrastructure.
2.1 1980–1985
3.
THE EUROTUNNEL SCHEME
In January 1986 the British and French governments announced their formal acceptance of the Eurotunnel scheme and a White Paper explaining the reasons behind the choice was published in February.
The Treaty of Canterbury was signed later the same month and included among its provisions of the establishment of an Intergovernmental Commission to monitor the execution of the concession, and a Safety Authority which advises the Commission on all safety matters relating to the construction and operation of the Tunnel.
The Commission has many of the characteristics of an international administrative authority and is the organ through which the governments act in all matters to do with the concession.
It consists of two equal delegations of senior British and French officials with the Presidency alternating between the two.
However, the Commission operates much more like a diplomatic than an administrative authority with a strong emphasis on consultation and conciliation.
In March the formal concession was signed Eurotunnel for the construction of two 7.6m diameter running tunnels and a 4.8m diameter service tunnel between Britain and France, and the operation of shuttle train service for the carriage of road vehicles.
Hybrid Bill
Large scale developments of this kind are normally submitted to public inquiry in Britain, but in the case of the Channel Tunnel the Hybrid Bill procedure was chosen.
This allows both the public and private aspects of a development to be considered within one measure with detailed scrutiny of the latter by Select Committees of both Houses of Parliament.
Critics argue that the procedure does not allow petitioners to question the principle of a development and that the time allowed for consideration is too short.
However, it does have a number of advantages.
Select Committee proceedings may well be more searching than those of a public inquiry, and their recommendations are incorporated within the law.
As such they cannot be ignored, unlike the findings of a public inquiry which are purely advisory.
The Hybrid Bill procedure is also relatively speedy — 14 months from the first Channel Tunnel Bill to the final Act — when compared with major pubic inquiries which can drag on for several years.
Kent County Council, at least, has ben persuaded of the value of the Hybrid Bill and appears to favour it as a means of dealing with the Channel Tunnel Rail Link.
The Channel Tunnel Act does not give carte blanche to the developers and includes a number of important safeguards designed to protect the interests of Kent.
It grants outline planning permission for the construction of those works prescribed by the Act but the detail still has to be agreed through the normal planning process.
The Act also includes a Scheme of Operations designed to ensure that the construction of the tunnel produces a minimum adverse environmental impact in Kent.
Only a fraction of the aggregates and minerals used in construction will come from Kent itself while imported material must travel by prescribed rail routes wherever possible.
The Scheme also includes detailed instructions on land restoration, working hours, noise and dust control, and other matters affecting Kent directly.
The Channel Tunnel Joint Consultative Committee
Kent's interests during the passage of the Channel Tunnel Bill were also served by the Joint Consultative Committee set up following a formal commitment by the government given in the February 1986 White Paper.
The JCC is a unique body designed ‘to consider all matters of concern to Kent in relation to the Channel Tunnel project with a view to minimising adverse impacts and turning to best advantage its potential to make a positive contribution for the benefit of the county’.
It met for the first time on 25 February 1986 and includes representatives from the Departments of Transport, Environment, Employment, and Trade and Industry; Kent County Council; the district councils of ; elected members of Kent local authorities and  Parliamentary constituencies; Eurotunnel; Transmanche Link; and British Rail.
It has published major studies of the likely impact of the Channel Tunnel on Kent, consulted widely with local people, and petitioned vigorously during the passage of the Bill.
Although it has no normal control over policy the JCC is clearly an influential body with considerable support from both central and local government.
The construction contract
During the passage of the bill the various participants in the Channel Tunnel project continued their preparations.
In August 1986 the construction contract was signed between Eurotunnel and Transmanche Link, a joint venture of the ten founder companies of Eurotunnel .
Construction is let in a single design and build contract to the TML of which 40% (including the terminals and approach roads) is covered by a fixed price arrangement adjustable for inflation, 10% (including the shuttle rolling stock) by competitive tendering arrangements, and 50% (tunnel construction) by a target price arrangement.
In 1986 the Eurotunnel prospectus was published and some of £206m of private money raised in what is generally termed Equity II, Equity I consisting of an earlier placement of £57m by the founder shareholders of Eurotunnel.
Relations between Kent and Nord-Pas-de-Calais
Meanwhile Kent and Nord-Pas-de-Calais were consolidating their relationship with regular meetings at member and officer level which culminated in the protocole d'accord, or draft treaty, signed at Leeds Castle on April 24 1987.
This contained general diplomatic objectives together with more specific ideas on joint approaches to tourism, planning, environmental protection and other mattes of common interest.
In June 1987 the leaders of the two councils had a formal meeting, known as the ‘réunion des quatres présidents’, with the English and French chairmen of Eurotunnel, and a collaborative Channel Tunnel research programme involving the Universities of Kent and Lille II was set up.
The Grand Chantier
In France a Déclaration d'Utilité Publique was promulgated by the Prime Minister on May 6 1987 to authorise the compulsory acquisition of land need to build the Tunnel and associated infrastructure, and on June 15 laws number 87–383 and 87–384 authorised the President to ratify the treaty.
The Channel Tunnel is to be built using the grand Chantier, or large scale works, procedure hitherto used only for the construction of nuclear power stations.
It involves close cooperation between central and local authorities and is designed to ensure that large scale developments bring the greatest possible benefit to the areas in which they are sited through, for example, the use of local labour and materials.
Despite the universal belief in France that the Channel Tunnel is a project with major public sector implications, there was some opposition to the use of the Grand Chantier procedure from both local and regional authorities on the grounds that it challenged the spirit of the 1982 decentralisation laws.
More specifically the contractor was not required to finance the kind of economic development procedures common to classic Grands Chantiers.
However, in practice the system appears to be working well following modifications introduced by the Chirac government to appease local sensibilities.
Rail usage agreement
On July 23 the Channel Tunnel Act received the Royal Assent.
Six days later the treaty was ratified and the concession agreement came into force to last until July 28 2042 when the Tunnel reverts to the governments.
Eurotunnel also signed a usage agreement with British Rail and reverts to the governments.
Eurotunnel also signed a usage agreement with British Rail and SNCF under which the railways are entitled to use half the capacity of the Tunnel.
They undertake to start regular commercial passenger and freight services on the Target Commencement Date (expected to be the date of the Tunnel's opening), and to provide a  passenger journey time between London and Paris of between 2h 55m and 3h 5m within two years of that date.
British Rail and SNCF usage charges, comprising a fixed annual amount and a variable element according to the number of passengers and tonnes of freight carried, will form a major part of Eurotunnel's revenue and will be not less than 9m per month (at 1987 prices and exchange rates) for the first 12 years of operation.
Eurotunnel's public flotation
Following the ratification of the treaty Eurotunnel prepared for its public flotation.
£253m had already been raised through Equity I and Equity II, and a total of £5bn of credit facilities arranged with a variety of institutions including the National Westminster and Midland Banks, Credit Lyonnais, the Banque Nationale de Paris, Banque Indosuez and the European Investment Bank.
Under the Credit Agreement signed on November 4 1987 loan drawdowns cannot begin until expenditure exceeds £700m, and the public flotation was designed to raise £770m.
Despite the impact of the October 1987 Stock Market crash the issue was underwritten although there was a substantial shortfall in the expected take-up.
The shares opened at a discount of 110p on the issue price of £3.50 but recovered strongly in the following months.
Since then the market in Eurotunnel shares has proved volatile although their price has always remained above the opening level.
3.1 Official reports
3.3 Finance
This section is mainly concerned with the initial stages of rising capital for Eurotunnel but in recent months there have been growing doubts about the financial viability of the project.
Worrying delays and cost increases emerged soon after construction began in January 1988 and Eurotunnel was forced into lengthy negotiations with Transmanche Link which resulted in significant management changes announced in the early part of 1989.
The £1bn allocated to cost overruns in the Offer for Sale was substantially reduced by two upward revisions of the budget which raised the total cost from £4.87bn in November 1987 to a little under £5bn in March 1989.
The management changes introduced at Eurotunnel and Transmanche Link produced a rapid improvement in tunnelling performance and by the late Spring of 1989 the project was back on target.
However, by July there were signs of more serious trouble and City analysts believed that Eurotunnel might need a further £1bn to pay for a near tripling in the cost of the shuttle fleet and meet the rapidly increasing costs of labour and materials in South East England.
Eurotunnel co-chairman Alastair Morton admitted that the company was in technical breach of its main credit agreement but argued that the cost overruns could be justified in the light of improving traffic and revenue forecasts.
However, during September rumours continued to affect Eurotunnel's share price and on October 2 and announcement that the November 1987 estimates could rise by as much as £3bn sent the market into a steep decline.
This has been fuelled by uncertainty over the exact figures with Eurotunnel claiming a final cost of about £7bn, Transmanche Link £7.5bn, and the banks' technical advisers £8.1bn plus a six month delay in opening.
Whatever the truth of the matter Eurotunnel's costs have risen by at least 48% in the 22 months since construction began.
Neither the British nor French governments show any sign of bailing the company out although a future Labour government might take a different view.
However, it seems unlikely that the international banking consortium will abandon the project given the large amounts of irretrievable money already committed.
Eurotunnel is expected to make a new rights issue next year and will presumably negotiate new loans on the strength of recently amended  forecasts which show a sharp rise in revenue after 2003.
Despite this there are still rumours that the banks may remove Eurotunnel from the project altogether, or that Alastair Morton will be replaced as the British co-chairman.
At the very least they are likely to demand much more stringent terms for future loans, thus prejudicing the overall returns for investors.
To add to its problems Eurotunnel, is also under investigation by the British and French Stock Exchanges as a result of claims that insider dealing in its shares took place during the period immediately preceding the July announcement of a cost overrun.
Most of this appears to have taken place in Paris although there are some indications that a major London firm of stockbrokers was also involved.
4.
COMPETITION WITH SEA AND AIR TRANSPORT
The Eurotunnel Offer for Sale argues that the Channel Tunnel will offer significant advantages to cross-Channel travellers in terms of reliability, frequency of service, absence of booking and checking-in requirements, and time savings over ferry and hovercraft services.
Its estimates of journey times between common points on the M20(UK) and the A26(France), and between London and Paris, are as follows:
Dover-Calais
Channel Tunnel
Hovercraft
Ferry
London-Paris
Channel Tunnel/high speed train
Aircraft
Hovercraft
Ferry
Eurotunnel's consultants, SETEC Economique and Wilbur Smith Associates, originally estimated total cross-Channel traffic volumes of 67m passengers and 84m tonnes of freight in 1993 rising to 94m/123m in 2003 and 119m/170m in 2013.
They predict that in 1993 the Tunnel will carry 30m people, or 44% of all cross-Channel passenger traffic, and 17% of all freight business.
The Tunnel itself is expected to generate additional traffic as well as attracting business from existing modes.
In September 1988 revised figures were published showing a dramatic rise in both passenger and freight traffic based on a expected increase in economic growth and a likely rise in ferry tariffs to compensate for a post-1992 loss of duty-free trade.
Critics argued that these estimates were wildly optimistic or that the original figures were far too low.
Further figures issued in October 1989 show fewer rail passengers and bulk freight using the Tunnel immediately after 1993, but more shuttle traffic.
The net effect leaves revenue forecasts unchanged for 1993 but sharply increased by 2003 as rail traffic rises on the completion of high speed links.
The ferry industry
The impact of the Tunnel on the ferry industry has been studied by the Joint Consultative Committee, Channel Tunnel Research Unit, London Business School and a range of other bodies.
It seems inevitable that redundancies will occur in the ports near the Tunnel as companies shed surplus capacity in an effort to improve productivity.
The Kent Impact Study predicted losses of between 4,500 and 6,500 from a total workforce of 12,500, heavily concentrated in a few ports, and these figures are not disputed by the recent Kent Impact Monitoring Report.
The effects in France may be even worse but in the context of a buoyant post-1992 European economy, and technical developments in ferry design, it seems likely that the ferry industry will be able to compete effectively for both passenger and freight traffic in an expanding market.
The Dover Harbour Board argued in the early 1980s that ferries would be both cheaper and more reliable than a fixed link, a stance later adopted by the Flexilink consortium of ferry companies in its attempts to convince Parliament that the Channel Tunnel would be a financial disaster.
The loss of the Herald of Free Enterprise led to the collapse of Flexilink's campaign but the industry has regained confidence since 1987, partly because of a conviction that the government wants it to survive as a competitive spur to Eurotunnel.
Sealink and P&O, with an estimated 80% share of the short-route ferry market, are pinning their hopes for the future on large capacity super-ferries and changes in manning procedures introduced after the last seamen's strike.
They also hope to develop some kind of a synchronised timetable to provide five or six ships sailing at least every hour for 364 days a  year.
The expected loss of foot passenger traffic to the Tunnel will enable an upgrading of services to other users and provide spare capacity for those who do not book in advance.
The timetable proposal is currently under investigation by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and a decision is expected before the end of 1989.
The future of the industry also depends on ease of access to the ports and a smooth progression through customs and immigration procedures.
Flexilink is pressing the government for improved road communications with Dover and customs/immigration facilities on a par with those provided for Tunnel users.
It has also sought, without much success, a guarantee against predatory pricing by Eurotunnel although it seems clear that the government would not allow the ferries to go bankrupt as the result of such a strategy.
Any remaining doubts about the industry's ability to compete effectively with the tunnel may be dispelled if the results of recent research from the London Business School (published in the journal Economic Policy) are to be believed.
This suggests that a 20%percnt; reduction in ferry costs through new manning arrangements and the use of larger ships would reduce the profitability of the Tunnel to zero in 1994; a reduction of 40%, which is within the bounds of possibility, would produce a £4bn loss.
In view of the financial vulnerability of the project, the researchers argue that the most efficient solution would be for the governments to re-purchase the franchise once the Tunnel has been built and run the operation at marginal cost.
However, such an outcome seems highly unlikely in the present political climate.
The ports
Whatever the future of the ferry industry it seems clear that the Channel ports are bound to suffer sharp job losses in the short term.
The French ports have been particularly vociferous in pressing for compensation and in January 1986 the French government made a package of aid available to Calais, Boulogne, Dunkirk and Dieppe to upgrade their deep water and other maritime facilities and to diversify their local economies.
A new ferry dock is under construction at Zeebrugge and the Belgian port has also launched a competition to design a new super-ferry terminal.
On the British side of the Channel port developments are underway at Dover, Folkestone, Ramsgate, Sheerness, Chatham and Dartford, and the Kent Structure Plan is promoting economic diversification where appropriate.
Ports at a distance from the Tunnel, whether dealing principally in passenger or freight traffic, are unlikely to suffer much loss of business after 1993.
Associated British Ports, which owns Southampton, Hull and Cardiff, believes that a Channel Tunnel strategy is  unnecessary given the overall prospects for growth of trade within and beyond Europe.
Consultants appointed to study the implications for the container port of Felixstowe came to a similar conclusion but its owners, P&O, have nevertheless embarked on a £50m project to upgrade facilities by the end of the year.
A major factor in the continued success of ports outside the South East is likely to be the state of the roads: as long as the bulk of freight traffic is transported by lorry, the level of congestion on motorways leading south will be an important deterrent to the use of the Tunnel as an alternative to a local port.
Airlines
The response of airports and airlines to the Channel Tunnel has been coloured by the impending deregulation of air transport in Europe which is expected to lead to a substantial fall in fares and a rise in business over the next few years.
In this context the loss of a few passengers to the Channel Tunnel is a relatively minor issue.
In the November 1987 Offer for Sale Eurotunnel's consultants estimated that competition from through-rail services using the Tunnel would attract 15% of London–Paris air travellers.
They expect the average tariff for an air trip to be £64.00 (at 1987 prices) in 1993 compared with £39.90 for a through rail trip.
The airlines clearly believe that they can hang on to their lucrative business market despite evidence from France that high speed trains can have a major impact on travel preferences.
However, increasing congestion in the airspace over southern England may alter the balance of advantage although this has yet to have much impact on scheduled flights.
In January  1989 the Civil Aviation Authority's study of the long term options for the use of airspace and airports in the South East painted a gloomy picture of increasing airport delays and flight cancellations in the absence of more runway capacity.
In its brief analysis of the impact of the Channel Tunnel it estimated that some £5m passengers (or 50,000 air passenger movements) would be diverted to the tunnel in 1995 rising to 6m (65,000 movements) in 2000.
This represents nearly 10% of total London area traffic movements and is almost certainly an underestimate, according to Eurotunnel, because it fails to take into account the effects of increasing congestion.
Although the recently announced European Air Traffic Control information system may facilitate the movement of aircraft across national boundaries, it cannot create more airspace in the already crowded skies over southern England.
If delays and cancellations remain a regular feature of summer travel the airlines may find package holiday operators turning to the Tunnel as a more reliable way of getting their customers to destinations in Western Europe.
However, for most airports with overall impact of the Tunnel is unlikely to be more than a temporary hiccup in the strong growth of traffic.
Notes: much of the information for this section comes from the Channel Tunnel Special Report published by the Independent, 26 May 1989 and a Financial Times survey on The Future of Continental Transport Links, 9 May 1989.
5.
CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION
Although preliminary construction began on the French side soon after the ratification of the Treaty of Canterbury in July 1987, the main Channel Tunnel construction did not start until January 1988.
The size of the project is impressive: 150km of tunnel driven by 11 tunnel boring machines (TBMs) which will extract 7m cubic metres of spoil at estimated peak rates of nearly 7,000 cubic metres per day on the British side and 4,000 cubic metres per day on the French.
Over 6m tonnes of aggregate and 725,00 precast concrete lining segments will be used during the project which will create 90,000 man years of employment in the UK alone.
The terminals are among the biggest single development sites in Europe with the 750ha Sangatte terminal as large as Heathrow Airport.
Geology
The geology of the Channel Tunnel route is probably as well known as that of any undersea area in the world.
Some 7,000 soundings and 3,250 sea bed samples wee taken during the 1880s, and 52 separate survey documents carried out in 1964–65 supplemented by information from further boreholes sunk in the 1970s, and studies carried out for Eurotunnel by the Bureau de Recherchés Géologiques et Minières and Mott Hay and Anderson.
The sea bed between Dover and Sangatte consists of a largely uninterrupted thick layer of chalk separated from the underlying cretaceous chalk by a layer of Gault clay.
The layer is divided into white chalk, grey chalk and chalk marl, the last being virtually impermeable and highly suitable for mechanical cutting.
All tunnel designs over the past hundred years have capitalised on this impermeable layer and 90% of the undersea sections of the current scheme follow it.
The wisdom of this choice is confirmed by the excellent condition of the pilot tunnel dug during the 1880s which has been incorporated in the Eurotunnel's design.
The major geological risk, water penetration, is thus considerably limited except near the French coast where the chalk marl dips sharply to the south leaving the engineers no option but to tunnel through the more permeable and fissured grey and white chalk.
As the service tunnel is driven probes are used to test the ground around the heading and remedial work is undertaken where necessary to strengthen the ground or prevent water penetration.
Design
The Channel Tunnel system consists of two running tunnels, each 7.6m diameter, located on either side of a 4.8m diameter service tunnel.
The running tunnels are connected to the service tunnel by cross passages every 375m, and to each other by piston ducts every 250m to reduce the aerodynamic resistance of trains passing through at high speed.
In addition there are two cross-overs in mid-Channel to allow partial closure of the tunnel for maintenance purposes.
The tunnel is designed as far as possible to stay within the chalk marl but the alignment is constrained by the geometric requirements of a high speed railway including a minimum horizontal curvature of 4,200m and a maximum gradient of just under 1%.
From the coastal sites at Shakespeare Cliff and Sandgatte the tunnels continue landward.
On the French side the short 3.2km stretch of service tunnel to the Coquelles terminal site has already been driven and work on the southern runnel tunnel is well advanced.
In Kent the tunnels continue landward some 5 miles to Cheriton through the geologically difficult area of Castle Hill where special measures are being taken to protect the local water supplies.
An open air stretch of route at Holywell is being constructed using cut and cover techniques in order to protect the security of the Tunnel between Shakespeare Cliff and Cheriton.
Worksite organisation
On the British side the restricted nature of the Shakespeare Cliff site has produced a variety of access arrangements: workers descent to the tunnels through a shaft sunk from the top of the  cliff while spoil is removed using a conveyor system sited in the inclined adit constructed during the 1970s.
Most of this is being used to create an artificial platform which will extend a mile along the base of the cliff and 250m out to sea.
A further adit has been constructed to accommodate rolling stock delivering lining segments and other materials.
The main tunnel portal is inland at Holywell where part of the tunnel spoil will be offloaded for use in the construction of the Cheriton terminal.
Tunnel linings are manufactured at a specially constructed and highly automated plant on the Isle of Grain in the Thames Estuary and transported by train to Shakespeare Cliff using a branch line connected to the nearby Dover-Folkestone railway.
In France all the facilities are contained within one site at Sangatte, some 400m from the coast.
A huge access shaft 55m in diameter and 70m deep has been dug and protected against water penetration by a specially constructed curtain wall.
The TBMs start work from a point some 45m down while the bottom of the shaft acts as a mucking basis from which slurry is pumped to the nearby Fond Pignon spoil disposal site.
The French tunnel lining plant is also at Sangatte together with assembly shops, storage facilities, a water pumping and treatment station and a whole range of other facilities.
Tunnelling
The different geological conditions encountered on the British and French sides of the Channel demand the use of different types of TBM.
On the British side Howden shielded machines with no rear sealing are sufficient for most conditions although they do include an emergency system to make the cutting waterproof if necessary.
On the French side the Robbins-Markham machine is designed to operate in open or closed mode according to conditions.
In areas of water-bearing or fissured rock the machine is operated in closed mode and spoil is removed as slurry; in more competent ground the open mode can be used together with more conventional mucking out techniques.
Tunnel linings on the British side are generally of the expanded grouted type used successfully in the 1973–75 project but in poorer ground cast iron linings are used.
On the French side a fully bolted, gasketed design built within the tailskin of the machine is used when the TBMs are working in closed mode.
The difficulties of coordinating such complex tunnelling project became evidence soon after the start of construction and delays rapidly reached six months on the French side and three months on the British.
Management changes and the resolution of teething problems with machinery improved matters although the target completion date has been put back from May to June 1993.
Over 700m of tunnel were driven in two weeks of March 1989 compared with only 1,000m during 13 weeks in the summer of 1988.
By June 1989 the British service tunnel had been driven nearly 9,000m seaward and 5,000m landward while in France the landward service tunnel drive was completed.
Progress on the seaward drives of the running tunnels was up to, or ahead of , schedule and Eurotunnel hopes to meet its target dates in 1990 and 1991 for the meeting of the English and French construction teams in mid-Channel.
However, the recent emergence of technical difficulties on the British side, including problems with water penetration and spoil removal, does cast some doubt of the company's optimism.
Safety and security
In its November 1987 Offer For Sale Eurotunnel stated that ‘safety and security considerations have been central to the overall design of the System and the plans for its operation’.
The role of the Safety Authority is crucial in this respect and numerous detailed specifications require its approval.
Specific safety features include the provision of a separate running tunnel for trains travelling in each direction; up-to-date signalling and control system sand in-cab communication with drivers; the maintenance of the service tunnel at a higher air pressure than the running tunnels to exclude smoke and fumes and event of fire; locomotives at both ends of the train to exclude smoke and fumes in the event of fire; locomotives at both ends of trains to reduce the risk of total breakdown; and the use of ‘non-fire-propagating’ and ‘minimum smoke’materials wherever practicable.
However, despite Eurotunnel's concern with safety numerous changes have been made to its designs and specifications, especially of the shuttle fleet, which have contributed significantly to the increasing costs of the project.
Apart from concern about the possibility of a ‘natural’ disaster in the Tunnel doubts have been raised about its security against sabotage and terrorism.
Eurotunnel dismisses these fears as unwarranted but international expert on terrorism, Professor Paul Wilkinson, has claimed that the Tunnel could attract tourists ‘like wasps to a jampot’.
Its symbolic significance as a link with Europe, and its possible use for transporting arms, troops and hazardous materials all increase the risk in Professor Wilkinson's view.
The British police have expressed grave worries in recent months at the failure to develop a coordinated approach to the security problems arising from the establishment of the Single European Market and the opening of the Channel Tunnel.
The international forum established after the Rhodes Summit in December 1988 has made little headway on the issue of border controls, and the police are critical of the British government's delay in making its own position clear.
However, the government is in something of a quandary in trying to reconcile the demands of a more liberal European transport market with the need to maintain controls over illegal immigrants, terrorists, drug smugglers and those trying to bring in animals illegally.
As far as the Channel Tunnel is concerned it has reluctantly accepted the need for on-train immigration checks but is still insisting that customs checks must be carried out at the terminals, against the advice of commercial interests who see such checks as detrimental to the ‘user friendliness’ of the Tunnel.
Rolling stock
Two types of train will operate through the Tunnel: high speed through trains operated by British Rail and SNCF between various destinations in Britain and the Continent, and specially designed shuttle trains carrying road vehicles and passengers between the Cheriton and Coquelles terminals.
Shuttle trains
In the Offer for Sale Eurotunnel described three types of shuttle wagon: single deck for coaches and caravans, double deck for cars, and freight wagons designed to take a fully laden lorry.
The wagons will be the widest rail vehicles ever built and a complete train with a 25kv locomotive at each end will be some 750m long.
The cost of the shuttle fleet, including specially designed locomotives, was estimated at £226m and a range of companies expressed interest following the release of detailed specifications in early 1988.
However, when the successful contenders were revealed in July 1989 the figure had risen to £600m as a result of inflation and more stringent safety requirements.
The contract has been awarded to the Euroshuttle Consortium (consisting of Asea Brown Boveri, Brush Electrical Machines, Bombardier, ANF Industrie and BN Constructions Ferroviaires) and two Italian companies, Breda Construzioni and Fiat Ferroviaria.
ABB and Brush will design and build 40 electric locomotives, the remaining three Euroshuttle companies will manufacture 252 ‘tourist’ wagons to carry passengers, cars and non-commercial vehicles; and the Italian companies will be responsible for 252 freight wagons.
At the beginning of August Eurotunnel also announced that Racal had been awarded the contract to supply voice and data communications within the Tunnel in the face of fierce competition from Alcatel, Siemens and other major European Companies.
Through trains
Under the rail usage agreement between British Rail, SNCF and Eurotunnel half the Tunnel's capacity will be used for through rail services, and the charges imposed by Eurotunnel will form the largest single element in Tunnel revenue.
British Rail, SNCF and SNCB (Société Nationale de Chemins de Fers Belges) are cooperating in the design of a special fleet of high speed trains for use on the London-Brussels-Paris lines, and an international consortium of companies has been formed to tender for their detailed design and construction.
This includes .
In addition a group of three design consultancies (Design Program, Jones Garrard Ltd and SPRL Inov) will work on the interior and exterior design of the trains in conjunction with the main contractors.
The specifications for the new trains have been described as ‘fairly demanding’ including the ability to accept the different power supply systems used in Britain, France, Belgium and (possibly) West Germany).
Trains will have a power car at both ends, each capable of starting the train on a maximum gradient of 1 in 40 and accelerating rapidly to a maximum operating speed of 300kph.
A high level of passenger comfort will be provided with air conditioning, a full range of catering facilities, telephones, nursery provision for young children and separate accommodation for police and immigration officers carrying out on-board checks.
British Rail expects a marked increase in Railfreight services to and from the Continent after the Tunnel opens and extensive alterations to the Willesden/Wembley Freight Complex are underway to marshal trains from the South East and other parts of the Country.
Regional terminals will also be developed although many critics believe that British Rail's plans in this area are over-cautious.
Tenders have also been called for 7,500 hp Co-Co two-voltage Railfreight locomotives capable of operating on both sides of the Channel, and BREL (1988) Ltd has already submitted initial designs.
5.1 Geology
This section covers only a few of the documents published over the past hundred years on the geology of the Channel bed, including a few relating to the 1970s project which seems particularly relevant today.
6.
REGIONAL IMPACT
6.1 European integration
Peripherality is a major source of the economic problems of depressed regions in Europe, and the British government has been at pains to stress the role of the Channel Tunnel in reducing Britain's isolation from potential markets.
In crude terms improvements in accessibility brought about by the Channel Tunnel will reduce transport costs and thus make remoter regions more competitive.
Unfortunately, as work by Vickerman and others at the Channel Tunnel Research Unit shows, transport forms a relatively small component of overall product costs and it is difficult to isolate the benefits of specific infrastructure improvements.
On the whole it seems likely that the Channel Tunnel will have a minor regional impact in its own right although it could bring short term benefits to depressed areas through, for example, the awarding of Tunnel-related contracts.
However, as part of a pan-European transport network it could have a major effect by breaking down to the deterrents to trade imposed by national frontiers.
The regions surrounding the tunnel such as Kent, Nord-Pas-de Calais and Hainaut are all adjacent to national frontiers and, in some cases, the additional barrier of the Channel.
The removal of administrative and physical barriers after 1992/93 could, in theory, give a substantial boost to economic growth by allowing the development of more natural economic market areas.
The Channel Tunnel, in particular could have enormous symbolic significance in the development of a truly united Single European Market.
European views
As Section 2 showed the European community has demonstrated an increasing enthusiasm 1979 for the use of major investment in infrastructure as a means of promoting European integration.
The European parliament, Community of European Railways and Round Table of European Industrialists are all in favour of a special European infrastructure fund for rail development and the removal of transport bottlenecks at, for example, the English Channel and the Straits of Messina.
The current Transport Commissioner, Karel van Miert, is an ardent supporter of a pan-European rail network and is confident that he can succeed in persuading the Council of Ministers of the need for a fund.
Britain, not surprisingly, is lukewarm about the proposal but so also is France despite its heavy investment in high speed railways.
Most of the major West European countries have embraced the concept of high speed rail networks with enthusiasm.
In Germany the Federal Infrastructure Plan of 1985 makes provision for 4,500km of high speed line including 800km of new line; in Italy and the Alta Velocita network will consist of 2,200km of new and upgraded line in a T shape linking Milan, Rome, Naples, Turin, and Venice; in France the TGV (Train a Grande Vitesse) network will eventually total 7,000km including 2,300km of new lines such as the recently announced TGV Nord which will link with the Channel Tunnel: and in Spain the government has decided to adopt the standard European gauge for all new high speed lines with priority being given to the Madrid-Cordoba-Seville and the Madrid-Saragossa-Barcelona-French border lines.
Set against the British Rail's as yet unapproved plans for a single specially constructed high speed line between the Channel Tunnel and London look rather modest although work is underway to electrify the three main trunk routes between London and Glasgow to take trains at up to 225kph.
However, there are no plans to upgrade track north of London to accept the Continental loading gauge, a development which many critics feel is essential if Britain is to become a full member of the European rail network.
Its reluctance is largely a result of the strict financial regime imposed by the government as part of its general campaign to improve efficiency in the public sector and under which all rail improvements have to demonstrate an 8% return on the capital before approval is granted.
At the same time levels of public expenditure on the railways have been declining steadily over the past few years in the run-up to an expected privatisation and are now well below those of Britain's Continental neighbours.
Although the recent decisions on the Channel Tunnel and the PBKAL (Paris-Brussels-Cologne-Amsterdam-London) line are signs that Britain may be coming in from the cold, the country is still seen as an isolated outpost of a European transport network in which the main traffic flows will run north to south linking the industrial areas of France, Germany and Italy.
Although European railway executives see British rail traffic as important, it is quite clear that it is not crucial to plans for the development of a European network which will proceed whatever happens on the other side of the Channel.
The corridor effect
The Channel Tunnel Research Unit has looked in some detail at the likely impact of the Tunnel and rail infrastructure improvements on European integration and the development of particular regions.
Researchers have examined the ‘economic shadow’ cast by national frontiers on surrounding regions and the likely impact on the removal of such barriers in the absence of associated improvements in the infrastructure and economies of such regions.
One possibility seems to be a corridor effect in which improvements in the links between major centres (the ‘grands poles Europeens) reinforce their dominance at the expense of regions in between.
According to this analysis regions such as Nord-Pas-de-Calais and Kent need to invest in education, training and infrastructure in order to maximise the potential benefits of the Channel Tunnel, particularly in the long term when congestion costs in the grands poles become insupportable and investors look elsewhere.
Such arguments are even more potent in the case of the peripheral regions of Britain which are already suffering from the alleged North-South divide and fear a haemorrhage of business and skilled labour to the South East when the Tunnel is opened.
On this issue there is a major difference of opinion between the British government and almost all commentators on the Channel Tunnel which forms the basis of much of the argument about its regional impact.
6.2 Nord-Pas-de-Calais and adjacent regions
The French are as committed as the British to the concept of a privately financed Channel Tunnel but are also concerned to maximise its benefits for the surrounding region, and the economy as a whole, by the judicious use of public investment.
Nor-Pas-de-Calais is a relatively depressed area and political support for the Tunnel is dependent on its ability to bring specific benefits to the region.
The Plan Transmanche accord signed between the central and regional governments in February 1986 recognised that the Tunnel was not being built specifically for the benefit of Nord-Pas-de-Calais and that supportive investment in  infrastructure, education and training would be necessary to exploit its potential and overcome its adverse effects on the Channel ports.
Transport infrastructure
Transport investment is central to the strategy and the announcement of the TGV Nord is seen as essential to the competitive future of the Tunnel.
The outstanding financial success of the Paris-Lyons TGV has convinced the French that investment in high speed railways can act as a powerful catalyst for development, and there has been fierce competition between the cities of the North to attract the new line.
The citizens of Amiens, for example, are engaged in a tireless battle to make their city a compulsory stop on the new line, a phenomenon which must be incomprehensible to the inhabitants of Kent and parts of Belgium where opposition to Channel Tunnel rail links is fierce.
The main focus of the new line will be at Lille, some 100km from the Tunnel, where branches from Paris, Brussels and the Tunnel will converge on a new station in the heart of the city.
The TGV Nord will be linked to the rest of the high speed network by a new line skirting Paris which will open up the possibility of a five hour journey from London to Lyons and a seven hour journey to Marseilles.
In addition to its investment in the TGV Nord SNCF has also embarked on the electrification of the Calais-Hazebrouck line which will allow freight trains to reach the Tunnel without changing traction mode.
The road network in Northern France is also being upgraded in time for 1993 following the announcement of a major investment plan by the national government on January 22 1986.
The Nordausque-Marck and Laon-Reims sections of the A26 have already opened and Eurotunnel will provide a link between this motorway and the Coquelles terminal.
Other important developments include improvements to the Dunkirk-Boulogne coast road, the construction of the Rocade Littoral linking with Rouen to the west and the Belgian motorway system to the east, and the proposed A16 motorway route between Boulogne, Amiens and Paris.
The Regional Council's strategy
French policy is clearly dictated by the particular economic circumstances of Nord-Pas-de-Calais but also by a longer term vision of the likely impact of rail transport in Europe.
It is accepted that the corridor effect may well operate in the years immediately after 193 and the current rush of development is, of course, partly designed to offset the loss in employment caused by general economic decline and the likely transfer of business away from the Channel ports to the Tunnel.
Section 4 on competition between the Channel Tunnel and other transport modes indicated the strength of the Channel ports lobby in France and a total of 750m FFr has been made available to Calais, Boulogne, Dunkirk and Dieppe to offset the adverse effects of the Tunnel.
However, the strategy also has a longer term aim to upgrade the infrastructure and skills of the region to enable it to compete effectively for investment when congestion costs in the ‘grand poles’ become insupportable.
At this point regions with good transport links and a high quality workforce will be at a competitive advantage in bidding for inward investment while those who are content to ‘regarder passer les trains’ will suffer.
The Nord-Pas-de-Calais strategy is clearly designed to pull it in the former camp and has a number of existing advantages to draw upon including a good geographical position and relatively low land prices, wages and corporate taxation rates.
The Regional Council has been considering the likely impact of a fixed link since the early 1980s, and in 1984 a study commissioned from consultants Bechtel-France resulted in a comprehensive planning strategy.
This linked the Channel Tunnel project indissolubly to improvements in road and rail links and included in a wide range of recommendations on, for example, economic diversification in the Channel ports, environmental protection along the scenic Côte d'Opale, tourism, inward investment, and education and training.
At the beginning of 1986 the Regional Council negotiated an agreement with Transmanche Link under the bulk of Channel contracts and employment go to regional firms.
In addition TML is devoting 8.8% of its total wage bill to training and is cooperating in a major  programme with the national and regional governments which has provided 2,000 to 4,000 people with new jobs or skills.
At European level the Regional Council, in cooperation with Kent County Council, is lobbying for massive infrastructure aid using the concept of Community interest as the basis of its arguments.
At local level individual authorities, which have rather greater freedom in planning than their English counterparts, have been active in encouraging investment.
In the Calais area, for example, the Chamber of Commerce has masterminded a business park/retail development project with the local authority and the British firm Arlington.
Preliminary talks began only last Autumn and building work is expected to begin in early 1990, an outcome in stark contrast to the experience of developers on the other side of the Channel.
This positive approach to the challenges offered by the Tunnel is also evident in the activities of Projenor, a company set up by a number of organisations involved in the Channel Tunnel including Eurotunnel, SNCF, local and regional authorities in France, and major financial institutions such as the Belgian Credit Communal and the Midland Bank.
Projenor was established in response to fears about the corridor effect and aims to promote the economic, cultural and environmental restructuring of the regions around the Tunnel.
It is involved, as a catalyst, in major projects along the French coast and inland at Arras and Lille.
However, despite its interests in all parts of the Euro-zone bounded by London, Paris and Brussels it has yet to launch its first British project.
Public opinion
The enthusiasm of the inhabitants of Nord-Pas-de-Calais for Tunnel-related development is in stark contrast to the grudging acceptance or outright hostility of many across the Channel.
Reasons include the depressed nature of the regional economy and its often poor environmental quality, factors which persuade local people to welcome, and even compete for, development as the promise of a better future.
Eurotunnel's advertising campaign has been highly successful in overcoming initial scepticism among those who believed that the project would meet the same fate as its predecessors.
A very large proportion of the population now believes that ‘un pas de gèant’ will be taken in 1993 and that the Tunnel will be a commercial success.
Opposition has been muted and sporadic except from the farmers who have successfully extracted high levels of compensation for land taken over for Tunnel purposes.
In contrast the ecological lobby is weak and poorly organised in an area whose people have little romantic attachment to the countryside and see environmental protection as something of a luxury.
Local people are bemused by the influx of Britons attracted by semi-derelict farmhouses and where the environment is an issue, as on the Côte d'Opale, the main consideration is its future as a tourist venue rather than a haven for native Frenchmen.
6.3 Kent and South East England
Although the British government is firmly convinced that the Channel Tunnel will have little differential regional impact, it accepts that there will be major effects in Kent, particularly in the Channel ports and around Ashford where British Rail is to build a new international passenger station.
For this reason the February 1986 White Paper proposed the setting up of the Channel Tunnel Joint Consultative Committee, one of whose main tasks has been the preparation of the Kent Impact Study and its follow-up, the Kent Impact Monitoring report.
Short and medium term impact
Despite its location in Britain's most prosperous region, Kent, and especially East Kent, is a relatively depressed area with above average levels of unemployment.
In the short term it might be expected to gain considerably from the actual construction of the tunnel and figures for the period up to March 1989 show that the South East, including Kent, had gained 27% of the £492m worth of contracts placed in the UK by Transmanche Link: Kent, as a single county, attracted a high share of 9%.
Unemployment has fallen in the county, although not as fast as in other parts of the region, but it does appear that some 800 previously unemployed Kent people have gained work as a direct result of the Tunnel.
However, there is also evidence the emergence of serious skill shortages in some occupations which may prejudice the county's  ability to prepare for the longer term challenges of the Tunnel and the Single European Market.
In the medium term the Kent Impact Study estimated that, on the basis of firms' plans in late 1986 the Channel Tunnel would produce losses of 4,500 and 6,500 jobs in the ferry industry to be offset by gains of 3,200 jobs directly related to the operation of the Tunnel at Cheriton and Ashford, and 13,000 to 14,000 new jobs in other industries of which 3,700 were attributed to firms moving into Kent from other parts of the country.
However, this last figure may prove to be an underestimate if the results of a recent survey by the London Chamber of Commerce are correct, and the KIS estimates do not, of course, take into account the possible impact of a Channel Tunnel Rail Link.
Its estimates of job losses in the ferry ports are still broadly accepted although there is little evidence of much decline as yet.
The June 1989 report by the London and South East Regional Planning Conference (SERPLAN) on the impact of the Tunnel on the South East suggests that the principal beneficiary in the period immediately after 1993 will be tourism with an estimated 450,000 extra overseas visitors expected.
However, SERPLAN concludes that, with the exception of tourism and the distributive trades ‘the tunnel may have a smaller impact on the economy of the region than is popularly imagined’.
The first report of the Kent Impact Monitoring Group notes an increase in development activity at Ashford, Dover and some other towns but states that there is no noticeable Tunnel effect on property prices and rents.
Where these are rising the main stimulus to be motorway development.
Long term impact
These recently published analyses of the likely impact of the Tunnel seem to confirm the notion that infrastructure improvements do not, of themselves, have much effect outside their immediate locality.
However, as members of the Channel Tunnel Research Unit and others have pointed out, the longer term dynamic effect may be much greater if the image of Kent as a business location undergoes a transformation as the result of related investment in supportive infrastructure, especially transport.
SERPLAN's analysis, while accepting that the tunnel itself would produce only modest effects in the South East, states that ‘a combination of Single European Market, the Tunnel and its associated infrastructure, the introduction of new methods of production, and overall trends within the British economy could lead to significantly higher levels of economic activity in the region’.
In his response to the January 1986 Tunnel announcement Kent County Council Leader, Tony Hart, said ‘the fixed link offers opportunities for Kent but only if there is a determination at national and local level to make sure Kent reaps the benefits — not just the drawbacks — from having the project on the doorstep’.
The French, as the previous section showed, have accepted this challenge and have embarked on a wide range of measures to offset the adverse effects of the Tunnel and capitalise on its potential.
In Britain, however, there is a little evidence of a comprehensive strategy to ensure that Kent, or any other region, can take full advantage of the Tunnel.
This is a natural sequel to the government's belief that the Tunnel will have no particular regional implications and in line with its generally sceptical attitude towards the merits of strategic planning.
In addition, its support for the Tunnel project is based on the firm understanding that it can succeed entirely as a private venture.
Nothing must be done to give the Tunnel an unfair advantage vis-a-vis other modes of cross-Channel transport and this includes investment in Tunnel related infrastructure.
Any proposals for road and rail investment in the South East must satisfy the government's general criteria and will not be approved simply because they are deemed to be necessary adjuncts to the tunnel.
The Channel Tunnel Rail Link
In the early stages of the Channel Tunnel project British Rail believed that the existing rail network in the South East could cope with any extra traffic after 1993 despite the fact that a report to Kent County Council in 1985 stated that ‘the rail lines to London are already very  heavily used and have little spare capacity’.
Its first rail link proposal was not produced until July 1988 and the public furore which followed forced major and extremely expensive changes to the design which have made it financially vulnerable.
British Rail is continuing to explore methods of funding with the private sector but P&O and Trafalgar, the only two consortia still interested in the project, have made it clear that they will not continue with some form of government help.
Full private funding of the link would require a rate of return of between 12%percnt; and 15% and British Rail has argued that the project cannot even provide the 8% return demanded of public sector investment.
The government is faced with an apparently insoluble problem.
It wants the rail link to be built (if nothing else, as a demonstration of the feasibility of privatising British Rail) but Mrs Thatcher has stated quite clearly that ‘users of the new line should pay for the full costs, including environmental costs’.
Even if the private sector could be persuaded to take on the project, whose estimated costs have now trebled to £3bn, the fare levels needed to make it profitable would make trail travel to Paris through the tunnel barely competitive with the airlines.
The Transport Secretary, Cecil Parkinson, has hinted at a possible change of heart by refusing to rule out government support, but a firm decision will have to be made soon if the deadline for the Channel Tunnel Rail Link Bill, to be introduced in November, is to be met.
During 1989 the rail link controversy has extended to London with growing objections from people living along the route of the new tunnelled sections.
British Rail's choice of King's Cross as the second London terminal in addition to Waterloo has raised a storm of protest not only from Camden Council but also from Newham which has emerged as a kind of British Amiens in its campaign to site the terminal at Stratford.
Stratford's claims are also being supported by other groups pressing for alternative rail link routes including the socalled RACHEL plan which extends the Channel Tunnel all the way to London and has attracted the support of a major American bank.
Despite the advanced stage of the Bill to authorise the construction of the second terminal at King's Cross, these groups still feel it worthwhile to pursue their case in view of the financial difficulties facing British Rail's proposal.
They may also gain increasing support from Kent MPs worried at the electoral implications of running a surface link through their constituencies.
Road transport
Whatever the outcome of these various campaigns none of the rail link plans are likely to materialise much before the end of the century, and traffic leaving the Tunnel will have to rely on the roads and existing rail lines.
Eurotunnel cochairman Alastair Morton predicts ‘an almighty traffic mess, a swamp in South East England’ and criticises British Rail for short-sighted planning.
In view of the stringent financial requirements imposed on BR by the government this may be a little unfair but it does neatly encapsulate the views of many commentators looking at the likely impact of the Tunnel on the South East after 1993.
Even if British Rail could increase its present share of the cross-Channel freight market to 25% (a highly unlikely prospect) this would still leave some 60m tonnes travelling by road in 1993, and 90m tonnes in 2003, on the basis of Eurotunnel's most conservative forecasts.
Consultants for the pressure group Transport 2000 claimed in 1987 that there was scope for transferring some 888 to 1,644 heavy goods vehicles per day from road to rail.
However, Kent County Council pointed out that even the higher figure was only just over 1% of daily lorry movements in the county.
Road conditions in the county are generally considered to be inadequate and the construction of the remaining Maidstone-Ashford section of the M20 is programmed for completion in 1991.
The latest roads White Paper also includes further improvements to the M20, M23 and M25 but, despite government streamlining of the planning and construction process, it is unlikely that many of these projects will be completed before the year 2000.
In any case Kent County Council is concerned that they do not go far enough and has produced its own traffic strategy designed to reduce the pressure on smaller roads.
It estimates that an extra £50m a year will  be needed to protect the county from the effects of traffic and calls for the upgrading of the M2/M2 to ease pressure on the M2) which will be the main road link to the Tunnel.
Public attitudes to development
Many organisations including the Town and Country Planning Association, Council for the Protection of Rural England, Royal Town Planning Institute, and the South East Economic Development Strategy have called for a comprehensive planning and transport strategy for the South East, arguing that this is essential both to protect the region from the adverse effects of the Tunnel and to maximise its benefits.
The failure to produce one is naturally laid at the door of the government which has progressively weakened regional strategic planning over the past ten years, but it is also undeniable that any large scale infrastructure programme would produce massive public opposition.
In Nord-Pas-de-Calais there is a plentiful supply of vacant land and general support for development from the public, local and regional authorities who are generally convinced of the value of public investment as stimulus to growth.
In the South East developable land is scarce and there is a powerful environmental lobby ranged against further development of what is already perceived as a congested and overheated local economy.
The County Council, having been presented with the Channel Tunnel as a fait accompli, is concerned to maximise its potential benefits by directing associated commercial development to those areas which will benefit most.
However, the structure and local planning process is frequently cumbersome and some district councils are faced with opposition to development among their electorates.
If, as the government intends, the structure plan system is abolished in favour of‘advice’ from county councils, the chances of a coordinated approach to Tunnel-related development are even more remote.
In view of the government's ‘presumption in favour of development’, which is enshrined in its latest planning policy guidance, it is not difficult to  foresee a chaotic future in which intense development pressure is countered by equally intense environmental opposition with the county council less and less able to take a strategic view.
Recent Ministerial changes at the Department of the Environment may put new heart into the environmentalists but, so far, there is little sign of the emergence of a more coordinated approach to planning in the South East.
Sir Nicholas Hunt of Eurotunnel, writing in Annales des Mines, claimed that the Kent Impact Study had done much to reassure local opinion about the Tunnel and that the doubters were now in a minority.
However, the furore aroused by the rail link, and continued opposition in Ashford to development associated with the new international railway station, show that, whatever the future benefits of development might be, a substantial proportion of the population wants no part of it.
Despite the relative dereliction of some parts of Kent, the image of the garden of England remains a powerful influence and is likely to figure in many planning battles to come.
6.3. a General regional impact
6.4 Peripheral regions of the United Kingdom
In European terms the whole of the United Kingdom may be considered as a peripheral region and even the South East has relatively under-developed links with the Continent.
However, the problems of peripherality are much more severe for other regions which are already suffering the effects of the socalled North-South Divide.
In keeping with its stance on regional neutrality the government has undertaken no studies of the regional impact of the Tunnel outside the South East despite the fears of more remote regions that their businesses will move to locations nearer the Tunnel or lose trade to southern and French competitors.
The arguments of these regions centre on the need to provide efficient transport links with the Tunnel but, as previous sections have shown, the government is reluctant to comply.
It is sceptical about the value of regional assistance and investment in transport infrastructure in stimulating depressed economies, and determined to maintain strict financial controls over British Rail.
Thus regions may make a case for transport links with the Tunnel on the grounds that current levels of business demand it, but may not request them as a necessary precondition to the creation of that demand.
This policy puts the regions in an impossible Catch 22 situation: they cannot satisfy the government's current demand criteria for new rail investment because of past under-investment in the network, and cannot stimulate such levels of demand without that investment.
The government points to ‘massive’ expenditure on the motorway network and the electrification of the London-Glasgow rail routes as examples of public investment which will give the regions better access to the Tunnel.
The provision of a Frontier Station at Kensington Olympia, and the decision to site the second London terminal at King's Cross are also of benefit.
However, the critics argue that this is insufficient to offset what Transport 2000 describes as ‘a growing perception that the centre of economic gravity will be pushed ever further south east’.
Local authority views
A conference of northern local authorities was held soon after the January 1986 announcement of the Tunnel project in order to consider its likely impact on the region, and the North of  England Regional Consortium has lobbied the government ever since for improved transport links.
It argues that free market mechanisms cannot resolve, or even erode, the North-South Divide and that positive national and regional planning is needed to ensure that it does not widen after 1993.
Research commissioned by the NOERC from the Henley Centre suggests that, in the absence of such a strategy, the Channel tunnel will benefit southern companies much more than northern ones.
Perhaps even more worryingly it also predicts that French companies will benefit more than either.
Following extensive lobbying at the Select Committee stages of the Channel Tunnel Bill NOERC succeeded in promoting an amendment under which British Rail is required to consider post-1993 needs for passenger and freight services, especially for regions north of London.
Section 40 consultations have been going on since May 1988 and BR's plan is expected in the late Autumn of 1989.
However, many commentators believe the consultation process has focused too heavily on passenger, mainly tourist, traffic and that it underestimates the potential growth in freight traffic using the Tunnel.
NOERC is calling for further electrification schemes, the adoption of the Continental loading gauge, a more flexible attitude towards the provision of regional freight depots through the use of grants payable under Section 8 of the Railways Act 1974, and an early decision on the provision of regional inland customs clearance facilities to complement those at British Rail's main Tunnel freight assembly point at Willesden.
Local authority associations
The local authority associations have also expressed concern at the likely impact of the Tunnel on peripheral regions, and a conference was held in the early Summer of 1989 to launch a Channel Tunnel initiative with the aim of ensuring that its benefits reach all parts of the UK. it focuses on the role of local authorities in attracting new businesses by providing the right infrastructure including good access to international rail passenger services at regional railheads, and effective freight transhipment points linked to the road network.
At national level the Department of Transport and the Treasury are urged to review the present funding criteria for rail investment, and the Section 8 grants scheme.
Tourism is also a major concern of the local authorities and they have worked in close cooperation with the British Tourist Authority in developing strategies for the future.
In a paper to the Channel Tunnel conference Derek Bateman, the chair of the Inter-Association Public Transport Forum, urged authorities to remember that ‘Bath will be competing with Baden Baden’ and ‘Blackpool…with Benidorm’.
The BTA's July 1989 report on tourism and the Channel Tunnel identifies a number of issues needing attention including the provision of on-train Customs and immigration checks, the improvement of road links between the regions and the Tunnel, and the development of high speed services to the regions from the London terminals to the Channel Tunnel Rail Link.
The report also notes the large scale investment in tourist facilities on the other side of the Channel including the huge Eurodisney complex and its related transport infrastructure.
Scotland
The most remote regions of the United Kingdom have also been active in pressing for Tunnel-related investment.
The Convention of the Scottish Local Authorities in its submission to the British Rail Section 40 consultations called for dedicated through services for passengers and freight between Scotland and mainland Europe; and efficient cross-London link for passengers combined with on-train immigration checks; improved freight handling arrangements through a super-depot at Coatbridge, or better use of existing facilities; and the linkage of such a depot to the trunk road network.
Many businessmen and politicians in Scotland expect the effects of the Tunnel to be adverse but a recent analysis by economists from the Royal Bank of Scotland suggests that Scotland's high tech inward investment is unlikely to be threatened.
The Tunnel may also bring benefits of its own.
Freight delivery times to the Continent could be reduced substantially by using rail transport through the Tunnel rather than road haulage to one of the North Sea ports  although the degree of benefit is dependent on British Rail's as yet unannounced charges for its new Continental freight services.
There is also scope for the development of the Forth ports areas as an entrepôt to European destinations with deep sea cargoes offloaded for road or rail transport through the Tunnel.
However, this development would require public support in the form of a new East Coast motorway.
Wales
the impact of the Channel Tunnel on Wales has been subject of a recent House of Commons inquiry at which the Welsh Counties Committee argued that considerable benefits could accrue to the Principality if improved transport links with the Tunnel are provided.
Its specific demands include a second River Severn crossing to facilitate road access between London and Wales; improved rail connections with major interchanges such as Crewe, Birmingham and Reading; extra investment in regional freight terminals in addition to that already announced for Cardiff or Swansea; improvements in tourist facilities; and a strengthening of the Section 8 grant system.
The South Wales authorities have also joined forces with those in South West England to press for a through rail link with the Tunnel thus avoiding the need to cross London from Paddington to the Waterloo terminal, and for the electrification of the main lines from Paddington to Bristol and Penzance, Paddington to Swansea, and Waterloo to Exeter.
Like most of the peripheral regions Wales and the South West are acutely aware of the transport bottleneck represented by the need to cross London from the Channel Tunnel rail terminals to other major railway stations.
Ireland
The state of the Welsh road and rail infrastructure is of considerable interest to Northern Ireland given to Principality's role as its landbridge to the Channel Tunnel.
Recent research work at the University of Ulster's Centre for Research in Management suggests that poor transport links with the mainland could lead to a massive loss of business after 1993 as French companies capitalise on the Tunnel and move into British markets.
The researchers are particularly concerned at the impact on the food industry which currently exports a high proportion of its output to South East England and cannot possibly compete with the substantially improved delivery times open to French competitors once the Tunnel is opened.
Eire is planning to use its forthcoming Presidency of the European Commission to press Britain to embark on a major upgrading of road and rail links between North Wales and the Channel Tunnel, and the Shadow Irish Transport Minister Gay Mitchell has gone as far as proposing an Irish Sea Tunnel to be constructed using Channel Tunnel equipment and an allegedly largely Irish Channel Tunnel workforce.
The country exports between 75% and 85% of its output, much of it to Europe, and transport costs are a much larger element than for most of its competitors.
The combination of shipping across the Irish Sea and transport via fast Welsh road and tail links through the Channel Tunnel could cut delivery times substantially but Mr Mitchell believes that a fixed link is the best long-term answer despite sounding like an Irish joke or a policeman's nightmare.
(Reported in the Independent, 4 Sep 1989, p4)
Planning bodies and pressure groups
The Town and Country Planning Association has been in the forefront of plans to promote a change in government policy on the North-South Divide.
In its report of that name published in November 1987 it called for a full national strategy in cooperation with Eurotunnel, British Rail and regional interests to ensure that the potential benefits of the Tunnel are maximised; the support of necessary infrastructure projects which do not meet current criteria for approval; and a full technical study of the feasibility of a high speed rail link between Manchester and Continental Europe.
Its follow-up report, Bridging the North-South Divide, expands on these themes in a chapter entitled The Channel Tunnel Starts at Crewe!.
Steer Davies and Gleave's report for Transport 2000, The Right Tracks to Europe, focuses on the need to adopt the European loading gauge arguing that, without it, Britain's industrial centres may be seen as ‘out of date, poorly connected to other production units in other European Community countries and with substandard links for business travellers’.
DSG estimates that the cost of creating as core Berne Gauge route across Britain could be as little as 210m although British Rail has estimated costs of £500m to reach London and £2,000m to reach Scotland.
In addition to this investment SDG also recommends the electrification of lines to the West of England, North and South Wales, and parts of Scotland.
The Centre for Local Economic Strategies in its report Channel Tunnel: Vicious Circle is equally vociferous in calling for government measures to help the regions.
It argues that the direct employment effects of the Tunnel on the North are likely to be minor, and that indirect effects on the region's industries will be mixed.
However, the positive effects on, for example, tourism are likely to be outweighed by the negative effects on other industries such as textiles and metal manufacturing.
The limitations of road and rail infrastructures will reduce the North's ability to take advantage of the tunnel and include an inadequate network of freight depots and inland Customs clearance facilities; too few electrified rail links; and a lack of on-train Customs facilities.
In launching the report Labour Shadow Transport Minister, John Prescott, argued that it ‘shows clearly the need for more money to be spent on our rail infrastructure, and the need for more research into the long-term economic impact of the Tunnel.
But, above all else, it shows the need for this government to develop a responsible national economic strategy that will bring the full advantage of the Tunnel to all our regional economies’.
STOP PRESS
This section includes documents which came to light too late for inclusion in the main part of the review.
They are not covered by the indexes.
INDEXES
1.
Personal authors
2.
Corporate bodies
Numbers in brackets indicate that a corporate body or its activities are discussed in the document concerned.
This rule does not apply to Eurotunnel since most of the documents refer to it.
3.
Subjects/Places