

Talking Points
The Society is not responsible for individual opinions expressed in articles and reviews or in reports of any kind.
Editorials do not necessarily express the views of the Council.
Treasure hunt to high-tech
The American adventure movie Raiders of the lost ark and its sequels, in which actor Harrison Ford played Indiana Jones, an heroic archaeologist, have proved to be more than just financially successful productions.
These popular films encapsulated the very appealing elements of adventure, travel, intrigue and discovery — and of course romance — and helped transform the dusty image of archaeology into a infinitely more attractive package.
Today, interest in archaeology is booming, and for that some credit should surely go to Harrison Ford's popular archaeologist character.
Ford's bull-whip has played no mean role either — the whip raised £12,500 at an auction in aid of new archaeological science laboratories for the Institute of Archaeology at University College London.
The Wolfson Archaeological Science Laboratories, which were opened last year in the first phase of the institute's development plan, represent the latest advances in archaeology and incorporate modern developments in technology.
Professor David Harris, director of the Institute of Archaeology, explained to Chemistry in Britain that the design of the new laboratories reflects a move towards integration within scientific archaeology, as well as cross-fertilisation between archaeology and other sciences.
While, historically, archaeology departments have been organised according to material — pottery, bone and metals — the new laboratory is organised by processes.
There are, for example, two microscopy laboratories, a scanning electron microscopy laboratory, and instrumental analysis, wet chemistry, and sectioning laboratories.
The layout also reflects the sequence of scientific archaeology from one lab to the next from sorting and cleaning, to cold storage, rough sectioning and then thin sectioning and fine polishing, and finally to analysis and  interpretation .
‘This way is more efficient and more economical on resources’, observed Harris.
Students and researchers are mixing in a totally new way and ‘the intellectual spin-off is already beginning to show’.
The cross-fertilisation of information and technology from physics and chemistry, for example, can help to fill in some of archaeology's missing pieces by ‘bringing new techniques to bear on old major questions’, noted Harris.
High-tech tools
Archaeology has become significantly more scientific, with the result that science is helping it evolve from being something of a treasure hunt to a high tech study.
The new technology being incorporated into the Wolfson Laboratories includes optical and scanning electron microscopy, atomic absorption spectrometry, laser particle size analysis, X-radiography and assorted microscopes.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is becoming an increasingly useful tool for furthering archaeological knowledge, and it is beginning to be applied to various aspects of archaeological work.
Professor Harris uses SEM in his own long-standing research into the transition of early people from their hunter-gatherer way of life to the beginning of agriculture, between 10 000 and 9000 years ago.
One aspect of this momentous evolutionary change was its effect on people's diet, and this can be detected through the remains of organisms such as plants and animals.
Harris and his colleagues are looking specifically at the charred remains of cereal grains, identifying the different characteristics of wild and cultivated grains.
‘Previously, botanists have been morphologically identifying charred grains’, he said.
‘The traditional techniques have been to look at these under high power microscopes’.
This is extremely time consuming and it is not always easy to tell whether the grains are what you think if they are not well-preserved.
SEM has meant a great leap forward, allowing Harris to look for more ‘critical diagnostic characteristics’ on the grains.
Very ancient grains — carbonified by cooking and therefore preserved — are investigated individually.
The fracture zone between the individual grains on the stalk indicates its origin; if the fracture zone is smooth it is a wild grain, if it is rough it has been cultivated.
Domesticated grain contains less crude protein than its wild counterpart, and a higher percentage of carbohydrate.
This information fits logically with other known factors which occurred at about the time that people began this transition, observed Harris, including spreading village life and a rapid increase in the human population.
Research shows that cultivated grain provided more energy, in the form of carbohydrate, to feed more people.
Dr Richard Evershed (left) and a colleague analyse potsherds for food residues
Greater precision
Accurate technology has an added benefit for the field of archaeology.
‘Very often in archaeology there are some extravagant claims’ noted Harris — now there is an ‘independent method for checking some uncertain claims’.
Gordon Hillman, at the institute, is now developing chemical criteria for identifying ancient cereal remains using infrared spectroscopy.
Although a lot of work is still to be done in this area, this technique appears to offer a new, more precise, quicker and less laborious method of identifying grains.
Researchers are trying to develop ways of recognising domesticated pulses,eg rye, peas and chickpeas, which were very important in ancient nutrition, but up to now there has been no technique that readily identifies them.
Analytical chemistry is also helping archaeologists at Liverpool University to discover more about the diet of our ancestors.
Dr Richard Evershed and his colleagues there have applied gas chromatography, combined with mass spectrometry to identify  food residues in ancient pots, to determine what the vessels were used for and therefore what early societies ate and drank.
Over 100 Saxon potsherds from a site at West Cotton in Northamptonshire were analysed and the chemical ‘fingerprints’ of the lipids which had been absorbed into the vessels from foodstuffs were identified.
Among the results was a mixture close to the leaf waxes from cabbage (or possibly turnips), indicating what the Saxons ate.
Certain vegetables do not have seeds or go to seed so this method of determining ancient people's diet is an important source of historical information.
GC analysis distinguishes between solesterol (plants) and cholesterol (animals) to indicate whether a vessel has been used to prepare vegetables or meat.
This is a ‘nice method of identifying the exploitation of early man’ said Evershed.
Not all the residues found in the potsherds are cooking residues.
Also among Evershed's finds was a vessel with pottery bits stuck back on using an adhesive containing betulin — a major component of silver birch trees — indicating that birch bark tar was once used as glue.
Evershed is also using GC and GC-MS in a project aimed at learning more about ancient farming practices, diet and waste disposal within settlements.
He hopes to establish a reliable chemical fingerprint of faecal decomposition to analyse faecal remains in archaeological contexts.
FTIR and electron spin resonance (ESR) spectroscopy are being used in archaeology as a valuable complement to elemental analysis in the search to determine the provenance of raw materials, the place and date of manufacture, and how they have weathered over the centuries.
Dr Dafydd Griffiths, at the Institute of Archaeology, has been using these techniques to find answers to these questions, which could throw considerable light on past trading routes and cultural contacts.
ESR spectra act as fingerprints in distinguishing, for example, the country of origin of flint or marble, and even the particular quarry from whence it came.
Andesite rock, for example, used by ancient civilisations in Peru, has been matched to corresponding material in disused quarries by microscopic examination of rock made in the field.
ESR spectroscopy can also be used to date ‘heating events’ experienced by flint and chalcedonies.
FTIR analysis has been useful in identifying the provenance of ceramics, which is usually complicated by their processing from raw clay into the finished artefact.
Science digs deeper
The Institute's Geoarchaeological Service Facility (GSF), which was founded in 1990, specialises in the study of soils, sediments and stratigraphy from archaeological sites, and is unique as a facility within a UK university archaeology department.
Offering services to archaeological units, country archaeologists and planning departments, as well as geotechnical and engineering consultants, GSF employs laser analysis, X-radiography and chemical analysis, X-radiography and chemical analysis to secure its results.
SEM photograph of a pea (Pisum sativum) dating from 6000 BC
These techniques were used during recent excavation at sites on the north bank of the Thames, where deep sequences of mud, sand and gravel, overlying Roman and Saxon timber structures, have been revealed.
The sediments are well-preserved, enabling researchers to compare levels of water pollution with particular phases of the growth and decline of the City of London since Roman times, and in particular with pollution levels in the past 300 years.
Laser analysis rapidly determines variation in sediment particle size, indicating the frequency of flooding and longer term trends in the river's flow.
Dr Cyril Bloomfield, a chemist, is among the researchers on this project, offering his expertise in soil chemistry, and applying chemical tests to measure phosphate concentrations in 1cm slices of the mud.
The results have revealed that there were very high levels of pollution during the Roman and late Saxon periods.
The phosphate reaches concentrations six times higher than those of a well-manured agricultural field, probably reflecting the direct dumping of sewage, animal dung, and butchery effluent of blood and bones into the waterfront in late Saxon times.
Metal detecting
Dr John Merkel's work at the Institute is concerned with the development of ancient alloy metallurgy, for example copper-arsenic, copper-tin and copper-zinc alloys, and all the metals used in antiquity, such as lead, tin, gold, silver, iron and steel.
His interest is in the cultural and technological aspects of production — organisation of industry, scale of production and capability of the artisan.
At an ancient Peruvian excavation site, compositional analysis of the remains of smelting furnaces and related metallurgical debris from alloy production, has enabled researchers to reconstruct a small furnace.
The analytical investigation of materials has also helped evaluate the development of industrial organisation and technological capabilities — from unalloyed copper to copper alloyed with arsenic or tin (bronze) for example, which represented a major technological breakthrough.
At Oxford University, Dr Noel Gale, is using inorganic mass spectrometry to establish a copper trading route from 3000 BC to 1000 BC.
He is focusing particularly on artefacts of the Bronze Age in order to gain insights into the Minoan and Greek civilisations.
Old methods of producing metals such as silver, bronze and iron involved the use of lead.
Using inorganic MS, the isotopic component of the lead within the metal can be analysed.
This can then be compared to the isotopic composition of the material in nature, thus helping to determine the origin of the object.
‘If we can map the isotopic composition of lead in the region we are looking at,ie the Mediterranean,’ said Gail, ‘then we can build up a database of trade movement’.
The technique can also be used to confirm or refute current theories.
For example, gypsum was a common building material in Mycenae although  Mycenae did not have any gypsum deposits.
Samples from deposits in Greece and Crete revealed that Mycenae's gypsum came from Crete, not Greece.
When the lead isotopes of ancient copper ingots found in Sardinia were analysed, it was discovered that the ingots did not originate from Cyprus as had been thought.
Although Dr  Gale's project is largely concerned with metals, this technique can also be applied to ceramics and rocks, as well as corals, bones and molluscs.
In identifying the origin of ceramics, researchers may use neodymium, lead, sulphur or strontium isotopes, while oxygen, sulphur and nitrogen isotopes can be used to identify burned or cooked food residues.
Isotopic fingerprinting can also make an important contribution towards information about modern as well as ancient trade.
For example, the origin of ivory can be identified by its strontium isotopic composition, which reflects the diet of the elephant.
The diet and therefore the isotopic composition analyses vary from region to region as well as from country to country, and this has important implications for policing the current ivory trade bans.
Deborah Gaskell
At the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Chicago last month, recent developments in archaeological science were reviewed.
Thomas Loy, of the Australian National University, Canberra, revealed the results of his microscopic and biochemical analyses of blood residues on stone implements which sought to find out what the implements were used for.
A 200 000 year-old stone scraper from Iraq, now belonging to a museum in Chicago, revealed thick blood residues which still have cell structure, showing mammalian origin.
Elisa (enzyme-linked immuno selective assay) and radioimmunoassay indicated that the blood was human — perhaps the artisan cut himself while scraping wood?
Artefacts from Israel, examined by anion exchange HPLC and immunological  analysis showed traces of haemoglobin and serum albumin 90 000 years old.
Radiocarbon analysis and dating carried out on the yellow, red and white paintings of Australian aboriginal cave artists 23 000 years ago, indicate that the pigments were mixed with human blood.
Stone tools from NW Canada have been found to have traces of bison blood, by using polymerase chain reaction analysis.
Margaret Newman of California State University has used crossover electrophoresis on proteins to identify blood sources on artefacts.
This technique involves washing off the protein residues and then seeking an immunological reaction with commercial anti-sera for different animal species.
On one artefact from Nevada, for instance, Newman has identified big cat, sheep, bison and bear blood residues.
Richard Stevenson
Managing for a better environment
Companies are increasingly turning to environmental auditing to help them fulfil their responsibilities.
The concept of environmental auditing has broadened since its emergence in the US in the 1970s.
Originally developed as a means to ensure compliance with regulations, environmental auditing now has a much wider remit for many companies.
In essence it is an internal management tool to identify potential liabilities, to highlight whether environmental performance can be improved and to indicate where financial savings can be made.
The International Chamber of Commerce provides an independent definition of what an environmental audit is:
‘a management tool comprising a systematic, documented, periodic and objective evaluation of how well environmental organisation, management and equipment are performing with the aim of helping to safeguard the environment by:(i) facilitating management control of environmental practices; and (ii) assessing compliance with company policies, which would include meeting regulatory requirements’.
Many different types of audit have evolved to meet industry's varying needs.
1.)
Corporate audits, which look at a complete business and measure it against legislation and company environmental policy.
They will identify the impact of company operations on the environment and highlight improvements that can be made.
2.)
Individual site audits, which can involve spot checks on sites known, or likely, to have problems.
3.)
Activity audits that look at implementation of country-wide operations,eg transport.
4.)
Associate audits of companies that act as agents, suppliers or contractors.
The Chemical Industries Association recommends, for example, that companies seeking a waste contractor should check the relationship between the waste disposal contractor and the relevant authorities; the compatibility of the waste to be disposed of with other waste being received by the site; and the arrangements for disposal and documentation of wastes.
5.)
Issues audits, which monitor how a company deals with specific environmental issues — tropical rain forests, reducing the use of CFC's, for example— and re-evaluates policy, guidelines and operating procedures.
6.)
Compliance audits to ensure a company is complying with all relevant environmental regulations and company policy.
7.)
Investment audits or environmental impact assessment to assess the environmental impact of new projects.
8.)
Takeover audits, prior to a site or company takeover.
Financial environmental appraisal is used to estimate the potential costs and benefits of responding to shortfalls highlighted in other audits.
Some companies use environmental consultants to carry out their audits, while others use in-house staff.
However, it is increasingly common practice for companies to use a combination of in-house staff who have an in-depth knowledge of the company and external consultants to bring objectivity to the exercise.
A question that causes much debate is whether a report of an environmental audit's finding should be made available to the general public.
Norsk Hydro UK broke new ground in this country when it published an externally verified environmental report in October 1990.
Under its environmental assurance scheme Lloyd's Register assessed environmental practices and performance at the five Norsk Hydro sites: polymers at Newton Aycliffe, fertilisers at Immingham, Golden Sea Produce at Oban, Scotland, and aluminium metals and Alupres at Bedwas, Wales.
Norsk Hydro's openness concerning its environmental impact was recognised by the Campaign for Freedom of Information, which awarded the company one of its Freedom of Information Awards this year.
The EC is producing a regulation intended to be a management tool for the evaluation and improvement of environmental performance with the provision of relevant information to the public.
Participation by the manufacturing industry in the eco-audit scheme, as it is known, will be voluntary.
However, member states may enforce participation in certain cases and expand the scheme to include other sectors of industry on a trial basis.
Environmental auditing will be only one element of the proposed eco-audit scheme.
Companies who want to register will have to complete an initial environmental review of activities to collect baseline data, develop a formal environmental management system and periodically submit an externally verified environmental statement to be lodged with a competent body established by each member state.
Registration could be on a site or company basis and will allow companies to use a recognised logo.
Failure to carry out an audit and provide a verified environmental statement as specified in the company's environmental audit programme will lead to deregistration.
The question of frequency of environmental auditing will be left up to individual companies.
The indication so far is that companies will follow a comprehensive site audit with regular spot checks, but leave between two and four years before carrying out a further full audit.
Participation in a scheme with a performance award such as the eco-audit scheme will become increasingly important to business survival as consumers demand better environmental performance from industry.
Environmental issues can create commercial opportunities.
In the UK, the BSI expects to publish a standard to measure the quality of environmental management in April.
The proposed Standard on Environmental Management Systems will be voluntary but companies that comply will be able to demonstrate their environmental good health to customers.
The standard is designed to use established quality assurance tools and provide a management framework from within which companies could seek registration with the EC eco-audit scheme if they wished to.
There are those who remain unconvinced of the benefits of a good environmental audit, arguing that the process is nothing more than a shallow, expensive public relations exercise.
However, with backing and commitment at board level to change, along with involvement of the whole work force, the long term benefits of environmental auditing should outweigh the short term cost involved.
Kathryn Sims
Goodbye carbon tet
From 1997 chemistry laboratories will not be quite the same.
Bottles will disappear from stockroom shelves and many published analytical and synthetic methods will have to be changed.
If junior environment minister David Trippier has his way, it could happen even sooner.
The reason is that those old standbys, carbon tetrachloride and methyl chloroform (1,1,1-trichloroethane), will no longer be legally manufactured.
The Montreal Protocol of 1987 was a landmark — the first piece of global environmental legislation that actually led to products being banned.
Its aim was to protect the Earth's ozone layer by introducing internationally-agreed production limits on chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
At the London revision meeting of 1990 (see Chem.
Br .,
1990,26 , 731) the agreement was tightened: the list of controlled substances was extended, and the production caps turned into outright bans.
From the end of the century it will be illegal to manufacture CFCs and halons (except for essential firefighting uses) in countries that have signed the protocol (2010 in the case of developing countries).
The EC has gone further and adopted 1 January 1997 as the cut-off date for member states.
So far, so good.
Any intelligent newspaper reader will have gathered this much.
What has been overshadowed by all the hype about CFCs is that carbon tetrachloride (‘tetra’) and 1,1,1-trichloroethane (‘1,1,1’) were also included in the London revision of the protocol.
According to the terms of the agreement, production has to be frozen at 1989 levels from next year, cut by 85 per cent from 1995 in the case of tetra or 30 per cent by 2000 in the case of 1,1,1, and totally eliminated by 2000 (2005 for 1,1,1).
As in the case of CFCs, the EC wants to do it faster.
Under EC Regulation 595/91, carbon tetrachloride production and consumption (including imports and exports) has been reduced by 50 per cent this year, will be cut by 85 per cent from 1995, and phased out completely by the end of 1997, with exemptions until the end of 1999 for essential uses.
Laboratory chemists have only just begun to wake up to this change.
Some only found out when their supplier told them that they could no longer buy tetra unless they could certify that it was going to be used in a ‘non-dispersive manner’—ie not as a solvent even in a closed system.
Julian Driver, technical director of Vickers Laboratories, which has introduced this restriction, explained that ‘it must be used in a reaction which will result in a non-volatile product — and there are precious few of those’.
Driver explained that ‘we have effectively been prompted by our supplier, who has warned us that we had better wean people off it.
We have written to all our customers outlining the situation and telling them to contact us if they are unsure of the situation.
The majority have simply been using it as a solvent.
Many people were buying it for silly uses like bonding plastics — there are loads of alternatives for that’.
Mike Horne, stores manager in the school of chemistry at Hull University, was one of those contacted by Vickers.
He explained that ‘As far as laboratory chemists are concerned there are just a few specific uses [for tetra]— they have tended to avoid it because of the toxicity’.
Spectroscopy grade tetra is a slightly different case — not a great deal is used, Horne said, but spectroscopists have no direct alternative, so he has laid in a supply.
ICI's Genklene plant in Runcorn, Cheshire, is due to close before the end of 1995.
Alan Townshend, professor of analytical chemistry at Hull, agrees that phasing out  carbon tetrachloride is a minor worry.
It is still used for solvent extraction procedures such as extracting drugs to put them down a chromatography column, ‘but a lot of people have been replacing it because of its carcinogenicity’.
‘There is no particular reason for using it — many other things would do as well’, he commented.
So far the Department of the Environment has identified very few ‘essential uses’ for which there is no alternative to carbon tetrachloride.
One such use is oil-in-water analysis.
Driver of Vickers Laboratories explained the procedure: ‘You shake up the sample in carbon tet to extract the oil, dry it, and run an IR spectrum in the crucial region because it has no C-C bonds.
We are recommending 1,1,1-trichloro-2,2,2-trifluoroethane as an alternative that does a good job.
It costs an arm and a leg, but for the amount used this is not a problem’.
When it comes to use as a reagent, tetra only has a minor role.
Lynda Moss, editor of the RSC's journal Methods in Organic Synthesis , said that it does not often crop up in published syntheses, though it is sometimes used as a source of  in reactions as well as being a solvent.
Nigel Simpkins of Nottingham University, editor of the RSC book 100 Modern reagents , agreed that synthetic organic chemists ‘can live without carbon tetrachloride as a solvent — in an academic environment I don't think people are going to throw their hands up in horror.
It is used less and less as people have cracked down because of its toxicity — it used to be sloshed around.
If it were vital as a reagent — for example to introduce a carbene — we would generate it in situ and use it under a fume hood’.
ICI was the only UK-based manufacturer of carbon tetrachloride up until this month when it closed down its production plant.
Carbon tet's main use is as a feedstock for CFC production (and this is clearly going to dwindle away) but ICI does sell it to the laboratory suppliers for repackaging.
Bernard Whim, technical marketing manager in the solvents marketing department at ICI Chlor-Chemicals, said that ‘we are encouraging them to understand that carbon tet is being withdrawn and that their customers should find alternatives.
Whim confirmed that tetra is not a feedstock for ICI's CFC alternative compounds, even though such captive use would be  permissible under the protocol.
1,1,1 was brought in the Montreal Protocol negotiations later than tetra, but here, too, the UK government wants an early phaseout — by 1 January 1996 if possible.
Its biggest uses are in industrial cleaning for degreasing engineering parts and electronic circuit boards.
Whim said that ‘it is absolutely urgent — people have got to realise that it is being withdrawn’.
ICI, which sell 1,1,1 under the tradename Genklene, has developed low emission cleaning plants and new degreasers such as the semi-aqueous system that ICI has launched under the Evolve tradename.
Driver said that ‘Good old Genklene is still quite a big seller to laboratory customers’— Vickers still sells over 1000 litres a year.
But here, too, the applications are mainly in cleaning.
‘Our customers are photographic processors, schools, suppliers of dry-wipe boards, woollen processors, instrument manufacturers and so on.
The larger quantities tend to go to engineering firms — probably for degreasing in their test labs’.
As a stores manager, Horne finds that the quantity of 1,1,1 used in labs is small.
He gets through a couple of bottles a year for chromatography.
The chromatographer's favoured solvent now is dichloromethane, of which Hull gets through over 1000 bottles a year.
Lynda Moss agrees: ‘1,1,1-trichloroethane rarely crops up in published syntheses — a heck of a lot of syntheses use methylene chloride [dichloromethane]however’.
David Trippier put the UK's position on early phase out of CFCs, tetra and 1,1,1 to the EC Council of Ministers last December and ‘our European colleagues seem broadly in favour’ according to Maria Nolan of the Department of the Environment (DoE) Global Atmosphere Division.
There will be a number of further meetings before a concerted European position is tabled at the next Montreal Protocol revision meeting, due to be held in Copenhagen this autumn.
The likelihood is that a 1 January 1996 phase-out date will be agreed by the European nations.
In the meantime, the DoE is trying to gather information on essential uses of tetra and 1,1,1 for which exemptions should be issued.
‘We would like to hear from chemists about small scale uses for which no other chemical will do the job’, Nolan said.
DoE and the Department of Trade and Industry have asked the British Standards Institution to revise any analytical standards that lay down the use of either of these compounds.
Could the Montreal Protocol process make further inroads into laboratory shelves?
A list of 33 hydrochlorofluorocarbons was annexed to the protocol at the London meeting.
These are regarded as ‘transitional substances’ that could help wean the world off its dependence on CFCs, but since they have their ozone-depleting potential (albeit low) the protocol will probably be extended to ban them early next century.
The UN Environment Programme is gathering information about ozone depleters, and there are some fears that it might add further chlorinated solvents to the list.
‘We're not going to miss [tetra and 1,1,1]’, Simpkins said.
‘What would cause horror would be if chloroform or dichloromethane were added to the protocol.
These are very important staple solvents — for instance we use deuterochloroform for NMR and dichloromethane is one of the most widely used solvents in organic synthesis’.
However, Whim of ICI does not think this is particularly likely.
He said that dichloromethane, for instance, has a very short atmospheric lifetime, so it does not get into the stratosphere and cause the same problems as CFCs, carbon tetrachloride or 1,1,1-trichloroethane.
There is no need to panic yet.
Richard Stevenson 
PERSPECTIVES
Unblocking the ephedrine detector
There is a major obstacle to developing a practical sensor for measuring the enantiomeric purity of drugs or their metabolites in physiological samples.
Sodium, potassium and calcium ions, which are present in, for example, serum samples, swamp the sensor making it very difficult to detect a particular enantiomer of a drug at low concentration.
Dr David Parker's group at Durham University believe that they have found a way round the problem.
They have taken the innovative step of basing their enantioselective sensor on a modified cyclodextrin.
They say that their novel sensor can measure the concentration of the active (-) -isomer of ephedrine, the sympathomimetic decongestant and bronchodilator, down to a limit of 10 -5.3 mol dm -3 in the presence of common serum ions (J. Chem.
Soc.
Chem.
Comm .,
1992, 153).
Parker says that his sensor succeeds where others have failed in that it works under conditions resembling those found in physiological samples.
Work carried out during the 1970s and 1980s aimed to use chiral crown ethers as sensors.
According to Parker these compounds are such strong ionophores that they were ‘highly ineffective’ at detecting arylammonium ions, such as ephedrinium, in the presence of metal ions.
The preparation of the cyclodextrin-based sensor was carried out by Parker's colleague Paul Bates using commercially available α-cyclodextrin (α-CD).
He dioctylated α-CD at room temperature using bromooctane in the presence of NaOH, with dimethyl sulphoxide as solvent.
Treatment at 60°C with NaH in tetrahydrofuran then produced peroctylated α-CD.
Ritu Kataky, who is sponsored by the SERC under its Molecular Sensors program, then incorporated this compound into the membrane of a potentiometric ion-selective electrode.
The researchers found that (+) -ephedrinium hydrochloride,(+)-and (-) -pseudoephedrine gave nernstian responses at 37°C.
The results were affected very little by serum concentrations of Na + , K + , Ca 2+ (150, 4.3 and 1.26 mmol dm -3 , respectively), which the authors added to simulate a clinical background of cations.
By calibrating the electrode with solutions of predetermined enantiomeric purity Parker and his colleagues could then measure directly the enantiomeric purity of the fourth diastereoisomer, the biologically active (-) -ephedrinium salt.
The modified cyclodextrin distinguishes between (-) -ephedrine and the other three diastereoisomers so it is possible selectively to discern varying amounts of this isomer.
The electrode was found to be usable for at least months.
Parker adds that, ‘Changing the size of the cyclodextrin's hydrophobic binding pocket allows us to detect dopamine down to 10 -6 mol dm -3' .
This limit is within the concentration range of the metabolite found in the cerebrospinal fluid of Parkinson's disease patients on L-dopa therapy.
Parker emphasises that, ‘These results are preliminary and further work relies on securing funding’.
David Bradley 
peroctylated α-cyclodextrin
Gallium arsenide chips in
Gallium arsenide, long the bridesmaid to silicon in the electronic industries, has begun to make an impact after 30 years of comparative neglect.
In the UK, GaAs-based computer chips are now being marketed, and UK manufacturers are stepping up production of GaAs materials.
Scientists were aware of gallium's potential as a semiconductor 30 years ago but come the computer revolution it remained largely ignored.
In microchip territory, silicon has always been king because it remains so cheap and easy to use.
GaAs (known as a III-V material because of its group classification in the Periodic Table) has the same electronic structure as silicon, but displays its own unique semiconductive properties.
GaAs is an outstanding semiconductor by virtue of its electronic bands (or energy level separations) which govern the range of energies an electron is allowed in an individual atom.
They can be ‘engineered’ relatively easily.
In a pure semiconductor the valence band is essentially filled and the higher conduction band essentially empty.
The gap between the two is larger in GaAs than silicon but skilful doping with trace elements like aluminium can make the gap wider or narrower to an accurate specification.
Judicious use of this ‘band gap engineering’, which calls for sound physical chemistry, allows the exploitation of valence to conduction band switching of electrons.
In any semiconductor electrons move freely through a crystalline lattice and because the conduction electrons are shared by all the atoms the lattice takes on a tube-like character for easy passage of electrons.
In GaAs chips arrays of gallium and arsenic atoms provide a weaker attraction for moving electrons than in silicon chips — the electrons have a small effective mass, travel faster >10 6 cm s -1 , and go further between collisions than electrons in silicon.
The result is that GaAs based circuits work faster than silicon.
They also produce less waste heat, so complex and expensive cooling systems are not needed.
In the office environment this is a major plus.
Science imitates art?
A computer generated image of the molecule (S) -N N-di-methyl-2(1-phenylethyl benzamido) malonamide used for exploring the structural constraints in the folding of proteins.
The speed and efficiency of GaAs based computers will enable chemists and mathematicians to produce even more complex images like this and make important predictions about the properties of multi-atom systems.
GaAs was first used successfully in the 1960s for instrument applications such as light-emitting diodes, lasers, visual display units  and audio disc players.
Today, the world market in GaAs instruments is worth about US$1000m and is set to rise.
But computer designers are still divided over GaAs's tactical value in world of digital computers.
Some argue that the technological barriers to improving silicon chip performance could be overcome with a little effort and imagination without recourse to more esoteric elements.
Others are convinced that silicon is running out of steam.
It is a schism which may have contributed to the stalled development of GaAs as an alternative in digital technology.
It is clear that computer designers need the chemists' understanding of the physical and chemical properties of silicon and the III-Vs and the rules under which they seem to operate at the atomic and molecular levels.
In the meantime, sales of integrated circuits made from GaAs chips are increasing and GEC Marconi has unveiled plans to upgrade its GaAs wafer production system.
A 100-strong team of scientists has been picked to work at the company's laboratories at Caswell, Towcester, producing the first 3 inch diameter GaAs wafers in the UK.
To date only the 2 inch version has been made by GEC while its main foreign rivals have already made the important wafer size adjustment — many more electronic devices can be made from each wafer.
GEC is refurbishing 10 clean rooms at a cost of £7m, as the company bids to catapult itself to the forefront of GaAs wafer technology alongside US and Japanese rivals.
Although GEC has no plans to move into the growing marker for digital applications of GaAs chips the company sees itself as a major player in GaAs wafers for ‘simple’ analogue devices.
They can operate as field effect transistors, high electron mobility transistors and monolithic microwave integrated circuits (MMITs).
MMITs are the building blocks for microwave systems used in satellite TV dishes and cellular radio systems.
Inevitably the Americans hold most of the aces in this technology, controlling 85 per cent of the £100m worldwide market for GaAs integrated circuitry.
But GEC's interest lies only in use in instruments like lasers, VDUs and radar equipment.
Sales executive Pim Meaning said there no plans to move gallium capability into the digital computer market.
However, Convex Computer Corporation, which turned to gallium chips for its C3800 supercomputer, believes its faith and investment will be rewarded.
Since its launch last May Convex has received 25 firm orders for the C3800, which is the first computer to use GaAs instead of silicon chips.
The supercomputer is being used for weather prediction in Scandinavia, for defence uses by the Pentagon, and for molecular modelling (see photo ).
Convex, a US company with a European base in Leatherhead, Surrey, uses a system of 30 different GaAs chips in an effort to strike a balance between speed and energy consumption.
Fujitsu of Japan is Convex's main supplier of chips.
In Europe the first attempt to set up a GaAs digital chip production base in under way, inspired by the French company Thompson CSF.
Thompson has won financial backing from the EC to manufacture 4 inch wafers at a new plant in Grenoble under licence to Vitesse.
For MCP Wafer Technology of Milton Keynes the Thompson Vitesse deal is an opportunity to expand production.
MCP claims to be the only UK-based company making gallium wafers from raw gallium and arsenic.
The company, which only employs about 40 people on an annual turnover of £3m, stands to enhance its reputation and profitability if the Thompson Grenoble venture is a success.
Gary Needham, general manager, said MCP has been in preliminary talks with Thompson but remained tight lipped on the nature of any agreement.
The increase in world demand for refined gallium, which has no naturally occurring ore, is reflected in the market.
In the 90 years following its discovery in 1875 only 5 t was recovered.
Today it is drawn at the rate of 10 t pa.
In 1928 it cost £25 per gram, but by 1974 it was as low as £40 per kilogram.
Today MCP pays about £300 a kilo for impure gallium.
Dermot Martin 
news review
Networking environmental data
A network of eight regional sites has been set up to provide long term monitoring of environmental change and its impact on the ecology of the UK.
The Environmental Change Network (ECN) is the direct result of recommendations contained in the 1984 report of the House of Lords' Select Committee on Science and Technology, Agriculture and Environmental Research, chaired by Lord Adrian.
Although the government has assisted with organising the ECN, it will be managed by the Natural Environment Research Council and funding will be provided by nine sponsors.
There are eight sites situated in Grampian, Borders, northern Pennines, County Down, Warwickshire, Hertfordshire, Oxfordshire and Devon (above ), selected for their existing information and research strengths.
Each site will operate a uniform system of data collection on climate, air pollution, soil chemistry and water quality as well as vegetation and animal indicators of change.
Launching the network, David Trippier, minister of state for the environment and countryside noted that plenty of environmental data exists in isolation but that the ECN will ensure the collation of good quality compatible data to help develop a framework for future policies.
In the long term, Trippier hoped that the network would expand to cover Europe and provide international not just domestic data.
Dr Bernard Tinker, chairman of the Environmental Change Network steering committee, commented ‘It is only through long-term observation of sensitive indicators that we can begin to distinguish genuine trends from short-term fluctuations.
We must also ensure that we can identify local variations from the national pattern’.
A further 16 sites are planned, to include marine and freshwater environments and additional sponsors are being sought.
Du Pont incinerator rethink
Du Pont has abandoned plans to build a 20 000 t rotary kiln incinerator at its Maydown plant in Northern Ireland.
The company says that the proposals for the incinerator, which would have dealt with waste from all over Ireland, are not longer viable in the current competitive investment climate.
Instead Du Pont plans to develop an ‘internally focused project’ to dispose of the waste at the Maydown plant that cannot be recycled, reused or eliminated.
Any spare capacity would deal only with local waste — a policy that Du Pont believes is ‘aligned with the clearly expressed views or responsible political and community leaders’.
The proposed environmental impact assessment at the site will still take place for the new project and will include evaluation of high temperature and rotary kiln incineration, as well as new technologies.
One of the new technologies that will be evaluated is a catalytic extraction process developed by Molten Metal Technology, US.
This technique is based on material recovery technology, and although as yet commercially unproven, shows promise as a replacement for high temperature incineration.
US threat to BTG's future
Speculation has arisen that the government may be willing to sell a controlling interest in the British Technology Group (BTG) to its US rival Research Corporation Technology (RCT).
Although much information about the bidders involved remains secret, some of the consortia involved have been identified.
RCT is part of a consortium led by Dr John Ashworth, director of the London School of Economics, and a second consortium bidding is composed of the technology transfer company BTG's current management and staff, led by Ian Harvey the group's chief executive.
RCT, based in Arizona, is a non-profit making trust fund, and has much the same relationship with US academic institutions as BTG has with UK ones.
BTG fears that if the consortium including RCT offers the best price RCT may attempt to gain a majority share-holding and might shut BTG's US office.
Although no single investor is supposed to have more than a 15 per cent holding the government has indicated that it may waive this requirement.
The government accepted indicative bids for BTG and informed the consortia involved in the bidding which of them had got through to the second round at the end of January.
Each of the consortia bidding for BTG must have a minimum of seven members.
Bidding for BTG took place in secret and final bids had to be in by the middle of February.
BTG is expected to sell for between £30m and £50m, but could go for as much as £100m.
The maximum 15 per cent share was set as a form of protection of BTG's independence, other protection measures include the government's golden share and the right of UK universities to appoint a director to the BTG board.
Some universities and the Labour party have expressed concern that the privatisation of BTG might damage the exploitation of UK technology and harm academics, trust in the company.
Price Waterhouse, the government's adviser on the sale, has admitted that one of the reasons for the secrecy surrounding the sale was to ensure the highest possible price for BTG.
The sale is expected to be completed by the end of March.
Sweden faces uncertainty
Sweden is suffering from its worst recession for many years; with rising unemployment and economic uncertainty ahead, companies are restructuring to face the storms.
Nobel Industries, the Swedish chemical and defence group, is to divest a number of non-chemical business activities as part of its recently-announced restructuring operation.
In January, Nobel announced the sale of its consumer goods business to Henkel.
The business, which has a turnover of SKr2600m (£1=SKr10.42) in 1991, is Nobel's third largest chemical operation after Casco Nobel, the adhesive and paint business (with a turnover of SKr9500m), and Eka Nobel, the pulp[ and paper chemical business (with a turnover of SKr4000m).
Nobel's SKr17 000m chemical portfolio, which includes surfactants, biotechnology products, fine and speciality chemicals and pharmaceuticals, accounts for 80 per cent of group sales.
The move follows the severe financial crisis that Nobel suffered in 1991, caused by the near-collapse of its financial subsidiary, Gamlestaden.
Both companies were rescued by Sweden's state-owned bank, Nordbanken, which now holds a majority share in Nobel.
Nobel made a loss of SKr 1500m during the first 8 months of 1991, as a result of the troubles.
Nobel is now seeking repayment of the SKr19 200m capital contribution it was pressurised to make to a 14-bank consortium to save Gamlestaden.
The company also believes it should not have to pay a further SKr400m to Gamlestaden, which is now owned by the consortium, by the end of next year.
Nobel claims that the terms of an agreement between itself and the banks over its capital contribution are invalid because of the unlawful pressure applied by the banks on Nobel — including the curtailment of the company's credits.
The current strategy for a slimmer Nobel, through divestment and consolidation, follows a hectic expansion and investment programme by Nobel in recent years.
Since 1989 acquisitions have included paint companies Crown Berger and Trimestal, and the personal care product division of Gillette, as well as Neutromed, the ink maker G-Man and Albright & Wilson's paper chemical operations.
Today's objective is to focus on its core chemical operations groups such as adhesives and paints and to be among the leaders in each business in which it operates.
Further acquisitions in this direction are likely late this year if reconstruction plans progress satisfactorily.
The Henkel deal is worth $573m; income from  this and other sales will help to repay Nordbanken under the original agreement (if it is upheld).
Nobel has three years to reduce its assets and pay off Nordbanken.
•Also in Sweden, Kabi Pharmacia, the pharmaceutical arm of Procordia, is to acquire Fermenta's 84 per cent stake in Italian drugs company Pierrel, for SKr500m.
Joint sales will be SKr1100m.
At the same time, Kabi Pharmacia announced that it wanted to form a strategic alliance with Zambon, the Italian pharmaceutical group.
•Sweden's state-owned pharmaceutical and food group, Procordia, is facing increased uncertainty following a recent merger proposal from Volvo, the vehicle group.
The surprising proposal came days before the Swedish government was expected to place Procordia on the market in the first step towards privatisation.
The Swedish government has opposed the merger, which would create a European conglomerate with combined sales of SKr115 700m.
Silicone implant controversy
Despite a 45-day moratorium in the US, imposed in January, the UK government's chief medical officer, Fr Kenneth Calman, has given the go-ahead to continue using silicone breast implants.
The US decision came after the US Food And Drug Administration considered links between the use of implants and the incidence of cancer and auto-immune diseases.
Dow Corning, the biggest US manufacturer of implants had already stopped supplying implants in the US and Europe before the moratorium was imposed.
Investors fear that Dow Corning's role in developing the implant business could mean product liability lawsuits, and hence costly litigation.
The controversy over Dow  Corning's role in introducing silicone breast implants increased in January when some US newspapers, including the Wall Street Journal , published summaries of internal documents and claimed that they suggest that it may have rushed the product through without adequate testing.
Last year the British company Bristol-Myers Squibb withdrew its breast implant products from the US market and put its Surgitek subsidiary up for sale after approval problems for its SCC smooth-walled breast implants.
Earlier in 1991 BMS had suspended sales of polyurethane covered breast implants until the FDA received safety data.
BP job losses
BP Chemicals has announced a programme of cost cutting involving staff reductions.
Among the losses are 130 of 900 jobs at its Baglan Bay ethylene plant in South Wales.
There will also be a scheme of voluntary severance for staff at the company's London head office.
All areas of the company will come under review.
Chief executive, Bryan Sanderson, said that the ‘necessity for cost reduction has been accelerated by deteriorating petrochemicals environment’.
This was shown BP Chemicals' losses in the third and fourth quarter of 1991.
The company reported an operating loss of £7m last year, compared to a profit of £129m in 1990.
ICI chooses new SAR process
ICI has announced that it will pioneer a new sulphuric acid recovery (SAR) technology at its methyl methacrylate (MMA) plant at Billingham on Teesside.
Originally, ICI said that it would license a Rhône-Poulenc SAR technology and develop it further, but the new process has been developed in conjunction with Air Liquide.
ICI is spending £66m on the plant (Chem.
Br .,
1990,26 , 741), which will eliminate acid sulphate wastes currently being dumped in the North Sea.
Dumping will be prohibited from mid-1993 and the MMA plant is being doubled in capacity to 200 000 tonne pa producing some 600,000 tonnes of waste, all of which will be handled by the new plant.
In the new ICI-Air Liquide process, the ammonium will be reacted with oxygen instead of air, which will reduce emissions of carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides and sulphur dioxide compared with conventional SAR plants.
The plant has received an energy conservation grant under the EC's Thermie programme in recognition of the expected reduction in CO2 output.
The process was developed at Air Liquide's research centre at Versailles and the plant has been designed by Chemetics.
The oxygen based thermal decomposition technology cold be applied to refinery alkylation and to byproducts from synthesis of acrylonitrile, caprolactam, nitrobenzene, nitrotoluene and toluene di-isocyanate.
Air Liquide is licensing the process worldwide.
BP fire fatality
A fire at BP Chemicals' petrochemical complex at Grangemouth in Scotland killed one man and seriously injured three others.
The fire broke out one evening in mid-February in one of two storage tanks under construction in a tank farm area close to the docks.
It is believed to have involved flammable material, protective sheeting and scaffolding used to cover the tank, which was not in use, while building was going on.
It took emergency services three hours to bring the fire under control, but manufacturing operations at the site were unaffected.
BP Chemicals has set up an enquiry into the incident and the site has been visited by representatives of the Health and Safety Executive.
Upjohn issues writs
Upjohn has issued writs against a newspaper, a TV programme and an academic over criticism of Halcion, its sleeping pill.
Writs were issued at the end of January against the Sunday Express and Neville Hodgkinson, who wrote an article about Halcion and its possible side-effects, and the BBC's Panorama programme and its presenter Tom Mangold for a programme entitled The Halcion nightmare .
A writ has also been issued against Professor Ian Oswald.
A spokesman for Upjohn said that the writs were the result of allegations that the company was lying and had deliberately withheld information about Halcion from the authorities.
The company, he said, had offered not to sue Professor Oswald if he retracted his allegations.
Upjohn is awaiting the result of an appeal to the UK Medicines Commission against the ban on the use of Halcion, imposed by the Medicines Control agency last year.
Upjohn says that it expects to hear the result of the appeal towards the end of April.
IoM launched
The new Institute of Materials P a merger of the Institute of Ceramics, the Institute of Metals and the Plastics and Rubber Institute — was formally launched in London in January.
Its first president is Sir John Collyear, who explained that a single institute will provide greater support and services ‘for those members, drawn from many disciplines (including chemistry, physics and engineering as well as metallurgy and materials science) whose interests and activities remain centred principally in specific well-established materials, and also those whose main concern is in leading-edge technology and the exploitation of more advanced materials’.
The principal speaker at the launch was Robert Jackson, junior minister at the Department of Employment, who stressed the role of professional institutes in training and continuing education in industry.
The new institute will spend the next year merging the three existing committee and regional structures, and expects to be fully operational by 1 January 1993.
results
Air Products and Chemicals reported net profits of $64m (£1=$1.8) for the first quarter ended 31 December 1991, representing a 12 per cent increase on the year-ago quarter, which included an after-tax gain of $3m.
Turnover rose 5 per cent to $761m.
Union Carbide posted a preliminary net loss of $63m for Q4 of 1991, which included a pre-tax special charge of $70m.
For the full year 1991, the company reported a net loss of $28m, compared to a net income of $308m in 1990.
Turnover for the year was $4877m, 7 per cent lower than in 1990.
Evode Group turned in pre-tax profits of £7.3m for the year ended 28 September 1991, down 52 per cent on 1990.
Turnover rose 3 per cent to £279m, but after allowing for acquisitions and divestment sales, declined by 6 per cent.
Ares-Serono reported a 15 per cent increase in turnover during 1991, to SFr1071m (£1=SFr2.55), exceeding industry averages.
Sales of OTC drugs rose 32.6 per cent, while pharmaceutical sales rose 15.5 per cent , and sales in the diagnostic and therapeutic areas rose 9.8 per cent ant 20 per cent respectively.
Arco Chemical reported a 46 per cent decline in net profits during 1991 to $188m.
Turnover rose slightly from $2830m to $2837m.
Rohm and Haas announced a 21 per cent fall in profits during 1991 to $163m.
Sales fell 2 per cent to $2800m.
Performance Plastics, Plastics Additives and Ion Exchange Resins businesses struggled, while the company's largest business, Polymer, Resins and Monomers, held up quite well.
Neste reported an 11 per cent increase in turnover during 1991, to FlM 51 900m (£1= FlM 7.83).
Sales of chemicals were FlM 7 890m, down from FlM 8 696m in 1990, with particular growth in resins production.
Du Pont announced preliminary net profits for 1991 of $1403m, compared with $2310m in 1990.
Turnover was $38 700m, 3 per cent down on 1990, with sales lower across all segments.
Dow announced a 32 per cent fall in net profits in 1991, to $935m, including a non-taxable gain of $213m for the initial public sale of Destec Energy stock, but this was offset by a $370m special charge.
Turnover, fell 5 per cent to $18 800m, compared to the record $19 800m in 1990.
Applied Biosystems turned in net profits of $900 000m for the six months ended 27 December 1991, compared to a net loss of £5.4m in the same period in 1990.
Turnover rose 9 per cent to $86.1m.
Solvay showed a 40 per cent fall in net profits in 1991 compared to 1990.
Turnover was stable, while cash flow before extraordinary items was down by 16 per cent.
food
Fake fats
High intakes of fat are linked to increased risk of heart disease and gallstones and are associated with an increased risk of cancer of the breast, colon, pancreas and prostate.
In 1990 the World Health Organisation's (WHO) guidelines suggested that only 15–20 per cent of our food energy intake should be derived from fat, with saturated fats contributing less than 10 per cent.
Most people should be reducing their fat intake, but many do not want to sacrifice taste and texture in the search for a healthier diet.
The potential of replacing fat with a healthier product of similar taste and texture has not been lost on industry.
Several companies have fat substitutes under development or on the market.
In the US, National Starch and Chemical has introduced a line of starch-based fat substitutes, Hercules has introduced a substitute based on pectin and Procter and Gamble has developed Olestra, a combination of fatty acids and sugars.
Now a new fat substitute has appeared on the UK market in the form of Simplesse, made by NutraSweet.
Products containing NutraSweet's Simplesse have been available in the US market for over a year, but were only launched in the UK earlier this year.
Simplesse — the way forward for healthy eating?
There are currently two forms of Simplesse P one made from milk whey protein and another made from egg white and skimmed milk proteins.
Simplesse is composed of small protein particles that mimic the texture of fat.
This works because the tongue does not recognise particles under a certain size as individual particles, but collectively as a creamy fluid.
Simplesse consists of particles ranging in size from 0.1 to 3 μm and these feel, in the mouth, like a fluid with the richness and smoothness associated with fat.
The creamy fluid is made by simultaneously homogenising and heating food proteins at pasteurisation temperatures.
Proteins tend to coagulate and form large particles when heated, but this is controlled using a high shear process (intensive blending).
The combined process produces microparticulated proteins of uniform size.
The process produces no new proteins, it only causes physical changes to existing structures.
Simplesse is used in the US in both dairy-based and oil-based products.
So far in the UK only a low fat spread and a range of yogurts have been launched, both containing the milk whey protein form of Simplesse.
Because of its protein content Simplesse cannot be used for deep fat frying, although it can be used in some cooking applications — the cream can be used to make sauces or the cheese to make pizza or lasagne, but both these products are only available in the US at the moment.
Simplesse does not offer an alternative for people allergic to dairy products because it is made from milk whey and eggs, although tests have shown that the microparticulated proteins in Simplesse cause no greater allergic reaction than the component proteins.
Aspartame
The Holland Sweetener Company (HSC) has announced new investment and market strategies in preparation for the expiry of its rival NutraSweet's aspartame patent in the US.
HSC, a joint venture between DSM of the Netherlands and Tosoh of Japan, plans to spend $60m (£33m) to quadruple its present aspartame capacity to 2000 t pa by the end of 1993 in an attempt to capture a larger percentage of the fast growing aspartame market.
NutraSweet, currently the main player in the global aspartame market, holds patents in the US which expire in December this year.
HSC expects to begin exporting aspartame to the US market immediately the US patent expires.
The expansion will be at HSC's site in Geleen, the Netherlands, and HSC president, Winfried Vermijs, said in a recent statement, ‘Even though our expanded facility will only be on-line late in 1993, we believe the availability of a credible, alternative supplier of aspartame will lead to more uniform prices worldwide in the course of 1992’.
HSC and NutraSweet have already clashed over the aspartame market after HSC filed a complaint against NutraSweet with the European Community.
This resulted in an EC anti-dumping duty on aspartame imports from the US and Japan.
Dioxins in food report
A new report from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food estimates that the average intake of dioxins in the gut in the UK is less than one quarter of the World Health Organisation's (WHO) Tolerable Daily Intake (TDI).
The report,Dioxins in food , says that levels of dioxins in all samples of fruit, vegetables and eggs were extremely low and that levels in milk were also generally very low.
Levels of dioxins in foods such as meat, fish and oils were slightly higher than in other foods, explained by the fact that dioxins are known to accumulate in fatty tissue.
Intakes from such products were still less than 1/10th of the WHO TDI.
The report includes details of work carried out on milk from two farms near Bolsover, Derbyshire, which was found to contain high levels of dioxins (Chem.
Br .,
1191,27 , 1105).
Results from a special research programme on the Bolsover farms will be published as soon as the work has been completed.
industry
Far East
A number of new projects have been announced recently involving Western firms and companies or organisations in the Far East.
In China, Montecatini Technologie (a subsidiary of Ferruzzi-Montedison of Italy), which is involved in catalysis and polymerisation technologies, has signed a research cooperation agreement with the Beijing Research Institute of Chemical Industry (BRICI).
Both parties will collaborate on a series of research projects for the development of chemicals, petrochemicals and intermediates, plastic materials and other compounds, as well as in the field of environmentally friendly processes.
The research costs and ownership of the results will be shared.
Also in China, Tecnimont, another subsidiary of Ferruzzi-Montedison, in collaboration with the Spanish company Intecsa Uhde Industrial, is to build a 40 000 t pa polypropylene plant.
Based at Tianjin, the plant will be part of a new petrochemical complex.
The contract, which is valued at about $40m, calls for both Tecnimont and  Entecsa to provide engineering services, materials and technical assistance for the project, which will use Himont Spheripol technology.
These agreements are the latest in a series of steps which began with the visit made by Gu Xiu Lian, Minister of the Chinese Chemical Industry, to Montecatini's Italian headquarters.
Meanwhile, Himont, also a part of the Ferruzzi-Montedison group, signed a letter of intent with Showa Denko of Japan for a technological and production joint venture in Japan in the speciality polymer sector.
The JV will produce and market in Japan polymers and compounds using Himont's new Catalloy technology, as well as certain polypropylene-based advanced materials, currently manufactured and marketed by both companies.
Again in Japan, DSM Idemitsu, a 50–50 joint venture between DSM Elastomers of the Netherlands and Idemitsu Petrochemical, have officially opened a 40 000 t pa EPDM-rubber plant in Chiba.
The plant represents a 16 000m yen investment and the EPDM-rubber, which will be based on DSM technology, will be sold mainly to the Japanese automotive industry.
In South Korea, PQ Corporation, a US silicate manufacturer, is to produce synthetic zeolite in a joint venture with the Aekyung Group.
The Aekyung-PQ Advanced Materials plant is being built with government incentives.
Air Products has formed a joint venture with Union High Polymer for the manufacture of emulsion polymers in the Republic of Korea.
environment
Waste transport
Unhappy about EC proposals on waste transport, the European Parliament has voted to stall the Commission's draft legislation, with the aim of pressing Brussels into framing even tougher controls.
MEPs are particularly concerned about EC imports and exports of waste; they want introduction of deposits or bonding to guarantee that consignments will be properly handled, and they say that the system would be monitored by an EC inspectorate responsible to the (much delayed) European Environment Agency.
A study by the Parliament showed that UK companies export waste to at least 14 other countries, including nine in Africa, while Britain accepts imports from at least 26 other countries.
MEPs also want clearer rules on waste intended for recycling.
The Commission admits that the current situation is ‘disorderly and confused’.
In place of the 1984 Directive, the Commission proposes a Regulation, immediately binding in all 12 member states, by 1993 when controls at the EC's internal frontiers are abolished.
However, at their November sitting in Strasbourg MEPs demanded more than 80 amendments to the draft.
Environment Commissioner Carlo Ripa di Meana said he would accept no more than 45 of the changes demanded, so the assembly voted to delay the legislation for fresh negotiations with Brussels.
Under the proposals, all shipments of waste — including movements within a member state — would be subject to an obligatory notification procedure for all forms of waste except collection of household wastes and some non-contaminated wastes intended for further use, such as bottle banks.
This would allow local authorities, for instance, to object to consignments being sent to their area — a necessary measure because some member states have decentralised their waste disposal administration.
Specified entry and exit routes are envisaged for waste entering or leaving the Community.
The Regulation would meet the EC's international obligations under the Basle Convention on hazardous wastes and the Lomé Convention under which the Community has already agreed to ban export of hazardous and radioactive waste to 69 ACP (African, Caribbean and Pacific) states.
Strasbourg wants a ban on exports of waste, although there would be a 10-year exemption fro waste for further use in EFTA countries.
A ban on imports is also sought, again with exemptions for EFTA and ACP states.
Speaking for the Socialists, the largest single group in the assembly, British MEP David Bowe (Cleveland and Yorkshire North) said ‘We should all be conscious of the scandals which have taken place in the past, whether it be the dumping of waste in the Third World or the scandalous sham recycling of some waste so that it is disposed of in extremely environmentally unfriendly ways’.
His group backed in particular an immediate ban on exports to the Third World —‘while accepting our moral responsibility…to take back some of that waste so that it can be recycled or dealt with in an environmentally friendly way which is not possible in the Third World’.
The Socialists pressed for a phased ban on exports to other countries, notably those in the OECD.
They demanded that special consideration should be given to new OECD states, such as those in Eastern Europe, to ensure that these did not become a future dumping ground for EC waste.
Bowe stressed that no hazardous or toxic waste should be excluded from the strictest regulation, whether that waste was going for disposal or for future use.
‘We have seen the option of ‘further use’ being used in the past as a gateway to all sorts of possible bad and environmentally unfriendly methods of disposal and we want that loophole closed’.
Conservative MEP Caroline Jackson (Wiltshire) said the European Democratic Group fully supported moves toward a ban on export of waste for final disposal, but felt that it was vital to allow continued exports for further use — recovery or recycling — to OECD countries.
Irish MEP Neil Blaney was particularly concerned about a plan by Du Pont to create a hazardous waste incinerator in Londonderry to serve all Ireland, currently the subject of an environmental impact assessment study (see p. 215).
‘Transporting waste into Sellafield or Dounreay or into Derry from all over Ireland runs totally counter to the principle of proximity’ he said.
‘It also allows big profits to be made by taking in the dirty washing of other parts of the Community’.
TiO 2 pollution
A fresh attempt is being made by the European Commission to settle an EC institutional dispute over titanium dioxide pollution.
Last June, the European Court of Justice declared as void a 1989 directive on harmonisation of national programmes aimed at elimination of pollution caused by waste from the industry — a particular problem in the North Sea.
Brussels had framed the legislation under a section of the Treaty of Rome which authorises the Commission to aim for the highest possible levels of environmental protection and allows for majority voting in the Council of Ministers when member states are unable to agree.
When they gave the measure their final approval, ministers arbitrarily changed the legal basis of the legislation in such a way that unanimous voting would have been required for any further tightening of pollution standards.
The court's ruling in favour of the Commission created a legal vacuum which Brussels is not seeking to fill be re-tabling its proposals.
Meanwhile, members states have undertaken to apply the substance of the rules.
CFC alternatives update
Chemical companies continue to develop alternatives to CFCs.
BOC has launched a new aerosol propellant technology which it claims is ‘environmentally-friendly, non-flammable and deters solvent abuse’.
Bernard Frutin of ROCEP Pressure Packs, Scotland patented a system using a new propellant absorbed into a micro-sponge pellet.
When the button is pressed and pressure is released, the Polygas propellant desorbs from the sponge and operates a piston or compresses a bag of the product.
Thus the propellant remains in the can, cannot damage the environment and is unavailable for abuse.
Since Polygas comprises a small amount of acetone in carbon dioxide, the danger from an accidental release is low.
BOC has acquired exclusive distribution rights for the technology.
It will supply the CO2 propellant from recycled brewery gas or flue gas.
•ICI has announced that it will build a £4m pilot plant at Widnes, Cheshire, to produce HFC32 (CH 2 F 2 ).
The product will follow HFC134a, which was also piloted at Widnes and is now being made on a full scale plant at nearby Runcorn, with a second currently built in Louisiana, US.
While HFC134a is an almost direct replacement for CFC12, HFC32 will be more complex to introduce because of engineering problems.
It is intended to replace the low temperature refrigerant CFC502, and ultimately HCFC22, for which there is no single alternative.
ICI's Chris Tane said that this will be ‘much more complicated’ than replacing CFC11 with HFC134a.
Toxicity test on HFC32 have been started
NRA wants single agency
The National Rivers Authority (NRA) has told the government that it believes a single agency for land, air and water is the best way forward for the environment.
In a written response to the government's proposals for an environment agency, the NRA says that a single agency would be a ‘one-stop shop’ for industry when dealing with monitoring, regulation and enforcement and charging policies.
It also said that a single agency would give the public easier access to environmental information.
industry
BASF is planning to maintain its capital expenditure levels with investment of DM5000m (£1800m) in 1992.
Fifty five per cent of this will be spent outside Germany, with three quarters of this to be spent in Antwerp where BASF is building a steam cracker.
Elastogran Polyurethane's machine construction division, a subsidiary of BASF , has taken over the polyurethane technology product sector of Kloeckner Ferromatik Desma .
Elastogran will take over sales of spare parts and the service of all polyurethane processing machines and plants already supplied by Desma.
Rhône-Poulenc is to sell its 50 per cent interest in Gazechim , the French chemical distributor, to l'Union Chimique , the other 50 per cent owner.
Rhône-Poulenc is also to sell its wet phosphoric acid process, expertise and patent portfolio, to Speichim , the process engineering unit of Spie Batignolles .
The process was developed in 1953 and has been licensed out to more than 60 plants in numerous countries.
The city of Florence is to use the new vegetable oil-based fuel Diesel-Bi, developed by Novamont (Ferruzzi-Montedison Group ), in all its public transportation systems.
This fuel can be used in diesel engines without modification and Florence follows other European cities such as Zurich, Switzerland, in this step.
Tech-Sep , a subsidiary in the speciality chemical sector of Rhône-Poulenc , is acquiring the membranes business if Imeca , an engineering company for the food and wine industries.
The agreement calls for Imeca to distribute and development the sales of all Tech-Sep membranes for wine making applications.
Degussa (ceramic colours and special products division) is to form a joint venture with a leading Japanese manufacturer of printing inks and ceramic glass colours T&K Toka .
The new company T&D Ceratec has been set up for the manufacture, marketing and technical development of glass colours in Japan.
ICI Colours is to invest $25m (£14m) in expanding the textile dyes facility at Atic Industries , Valsad, India.
The investment is being committed with ICI's partner in the Atic joint venture,Atul Products , and the current vat dyes capacity should be doubled by 1994.
BASF is to buy the 290 000 t pa polystyrene business of Mobil Chemical .
Although a statement of intent has been signed, confirmation is needed from the boards of both companies and the acquisition is expected to be completed by the second quarter of this year.
UCB has started construction of a new factory in the US, where it is aiming to increase its investments, particularly in the chemical sector.
This first factory is to produce 12 000 t pa of UV/EBC curable resins.
environment
Pollution incidents rise
Water pollution incidents reported to the National Rivers Authority (NRA) reached a record high in 1990.
In a report,Water pollution incidents in England and Wales — 1990 , the NRA says that although a lack of previous data makes an assessment of overall trends difficult, there is no question that the number of incidents reported has risen.
The NRA estimates that oil and sewage sources each accounted for about 20 per cent of the total reported incidents with farm and industrial incidents accounting for about 10 per cent each.
Of the 28 143 water pollution incidents reported in 1990 only 658 were classified as major.
Of the 2802 pollution incidents from the industrial sources only four per cent were classified as major.
There was considerable regional variation in major incidents with the highest proportion occurring in the North West, where 41 of the 267 industrial incidents were major.
In 1990 the NRA carried out 76 prosecutions in the industrial sector.
The NRA noted ‘a welcome trend towards the reporting of incidents on industrial sites…but several regions indicated that complex water surface drainage systems, and wrong connections of foul sewage and industrial waste outlets into the surface water drainage system, have made the investigation of incidents on industrial estates very difficult’.
Dr Jan Pentreath, NRA chief scientist, said that the introduction of hand-held monitors for inspectors to carry with them is likely to result in a higher rate of prosecution.
•Companies are ‘reasonably happy’ with the NRA's plans for water quality  objectives according to Peter Chave, NRA's head of water quality.
At a recent NRA seminar for interested parties, speakers from the NRA brought out the key points of the plan and explained to delegates what the scheme is all about (Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 108).
One of the issues that delegates expressed reservations about was the potential cost of the scheme —‘putting standards on water will require investment by a wide variety of people’, said Chave.
After the consultation period has ended the NRA will submit its proposals to the secretary of state for the environment, who will set the standards and decide on necessary improvements.
Dr Alun Gee, NRA technical manager for the Welsh region, said, ‘We are not looking for any relaxation in current standards’ and the objectives will contain a ‘no deterioration’clause.
The NRA hopes to have the first standards in place by the end of this year and does not foresee any complications caused by the setting up of a single environment agency.
Warren Spring sorts it out
Warren Spring Laboratory (WSL), the government's specialist environmental research station at Stevenage, has changed its style markedly since 1988.
Now a contract research agency, its customers include government departments, international bodies and industry.
In this new arena, it has to be businesslike — late startups for some government contracts have meant cost cutting at the end this financial year, which led to newspaper reports of a ‘crisis’ at WSL.
The recession has also hit industrial research income.
However, despite the problems, WSL has recently inaugurated a new pilot plant for its contaminated land programme.
This is an area where WSL's long years of work on mineral handling and other processes give it an edge.
Contaminated land has become a major issue, and many companies have leapt in, touting biotechnological, chemical or physical processes as the panacea for clean-up.
But every site is different in soil type, degree and nature of the contamination — a solution suitable for a disused gasworks may not be appropriate for a leaking landfill.
There is also the question of whether it is better to treat on-site or to transport contaminated soil to a specialist plant.
WSL's pilot plant will also help researchers and contractors to answer some of these questions.
The key is to reduce the size of the problem, and the plant includes a whole battery of physical processes that can be used to divide soil into fractions and concentrate the contamination into just one or two of these.
Scrubbing, and classifying; air, gravity and magnetic separation; flotation and flocculation can all be brought to bear on a sample to reduce it to a number of fractions.
Clean fractions can go for re-use, metallics can be recycled, and soils can be cleaned or stabilised by biological, chemical, thermal or physical means.
All the volatiles, washings and fines are collected and dealt with appropriately.
Having developed a process on this flexible pilot rig, a contractor could decide which process steps are required on a particular site, and whether a custom-built on-site unit, a mobile unit, or a central facility will best solve the problem.
•Next year, new public registers or contaminated land under the Environmental Protection Act will be opened, and the Department of the Environment expects an increase in public pressure for sites to be cleaned up.
The department is reported to be formulating ideas for new mechanisms to raise money from the private sector to pay for clean-up.
Although public money is available under the Derelict Land Grants scheme and under supplementary credits to local authorities, this will not be sufficient to meet the increased demand.
DoE might be prepared to provide money for the initial cost of investigating polluted sites.
A major private sector scheme like the US Superfund would require major changes to UK legislation.
More SF 6 snags
Not only have health fears recently been raised over the insulating compound sulphur hexafluoride (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 1098), but now it appears to have environmental problems as well.
Results from the Norwegian Institute for Air Research indicate that the compound has a greenhouse effect 6800 times as potent as carbon dioxide.
SF 6 is widely used as a transformer fluid, but also finds use as a blanketing gas to prevent oxidation and fire in magnesium casting.
The technology was introduced in the US in the 1970s, replacing toxic SO2, and Norway's Norsk Hydro installed it at is Porsgrunn magnesium plant in 1978.
Only 90 t of SF 6 were used in Norwegian foundries last year, but this had an effect equivalent to 600 000 t of CO2.
Cost considerations have already led Hydro to reduce SF 6 use through an in-house development project.
‘Now that it has been shown that it adds to the greenhouse effect we will start a programme to further reduce the use of SF 6 and to study replacements in the foundries, said Sven Plahte of Hydro's magnesium division.
Incinerator report
Greenpeace has produced a report,Burning issues , which forms the basis of the evidence it has submitted to the Royal Commission on incineration.
The report says that the government allowed 37 035 tonnes of waste to be imported into the UK last year.
Greenpeace says that by 1995 the capacity of the proposed incinerators will exceed the estimated amount of UK waste for burning by about 70 000 tonnes per year.
Greenpeace says that this gap ‘will almost certainly have to be met by further ‘waste profiteering’ from other countries — a practice which guarantees profits for incineration companies and subsidises the incineration of UK-originated waste’.
According to Greenpeace, there are more applications for incinerators in the UK than anywhere else in Europe.
Greenpeace says that incineration is a proven technology and that all incinerators release ‘toxic, persistent and bio-accumulative chemicals’ through emissions, effluent and toxic ashes.
The report demands a ban on trade in all hazardous waste to and from the UK and an immediate moratorium on the construction of new incinerators and the expansion of existing ones.
Chlorine study
The Women's Environmental Network (WEN) has published a report entitled Chlorine, pollution and the parents of tomorrow .
The study includes a chapter on chlorine production and a section explaining what organochlorines are to introduce the lay person to the subject.
The report then goes on to discuss sources of dioxin-like compounds and the issues arising from dioxins, PCBs and similar compounds in the environment.
The report concludes with a discussion on the health effects of organochlorines and suggests ways in which individuals can limit their intake of dioxin-like compounds.
In the report WEN calls on the government to establish a public plan to ‘investigate and eliminate known and suspected sources of dioxins and similar compounds’.
WEN suggests a five year plan that includes action on incinerators; immediate withdrawal of some processes and chemicals; and long term action aimed at ‘an almost complete phase-out of elemental chlorine production and organochlorine processes’.
Copies of the report, ISBN 0 951 42978 7, are available, price £95, from WEN.
EC eco-label
EC environment ministers have finally chosen the design of the new EC eco-label, which, they hope, will soon identify environmentally-friendly products to consumers throughout Europe.
The eco-labelling scheme is voluntary and decentralised with the Commission setting standards through a regulatory committee made up of experts from members states.
europe
Dangerous substances
EC Environment Commissioner Carlo Ripa di Meana rejected demands for further changes to EC legislation on dangerous substances when a draft directive was tabled for second reading in the European Parliament.
The new directive covers classification, packaging and labelling and seeks to introduce Community-wide rules on notification of production or importation.
On classification, Brussels wanted to improve definitions of terms such as‘toxic’, ‘harmful’, ‘corrosive’ and ‘irritant’as indicated in safety symbols on labelling, and to introduce a new symbol indicating that a substance or preparation is ‘harmful to the environment’.
However, the bulk of the new directive is concerned with seeking to iron out differences in national systems of notification of new substances.
Common procedures will allow mutual acceptance, reducing the need for duplicated assessments.
This, it is hoped, will also help reduce the number of animals used in laboratory tests.
When the measure received its first reading in Strasbourg, MEPs secured a number of changes on, for instance, the definition of polymers, safety data sheets and compulsory use of child-proof containers for dangerous substances intended for domestic use.
However, MEPs are still unhappy about the directive.
They argue that notification of a new substance should take place at the moment it is developed, rather than in the run-up to marketing.
They also fear that exemptions granted for substances produced in small quantities could result in health and environmental risks.
But Commissioner Ripa di Meana argues that in its reworked form, the directive struck a good balance between the need to set high safety standards, while avoiding unjustifiable costs for Europe's chemical industry.
He therefore rejected all the re-tabled amendments to the directive, which will now go to the EC Council of Ministers for final approval.
Member states will them have 18 months to transfer the directive's requirements into national law.
Petroquimica
Portuguese subsidies to the state-owned petrochemical company Companhia Nacional de Petroquimica (CNP) have been condemned by the EC Commission.
The Commission says that the government's practice of propping up the company by waiving interest payments due on CNP's debts of ECU 1410m (£987m)— owed mainly to the state — serves to promote artificial preservation of the status quo, and to ‘postpone necessary adjustments’.
Brussels concedes that government pressure for payment might force CNP into receivership, but has nevertheless launched legal proceedings which may have the effect of forcing the government's hand.
The Commission's findings came after a 30-month investigation, originally prompted by a Lisbon plan to offer state subsidies of ECU 170m (£119m) to ease the privatisation of a CNP subsidiary, Portugal's sole polymer producer Empresa de Poliméros de Sines (EPSI).
When CNP started trading in 1981, it was initially planned to set up 12 downstream units using CNP's cracked products, but in the event only one, EPSI, was created.
Like CNP, EPSI ran into economic difficulties from the outset.
By 1988 EPSI debts had mounted to ECU 430m against a turnover of ECU 287m.
Under a deal signed the following year, EPSI was taken over by a consortium formed by the Finnish chemical company Neste with the Portuguese companies Cortesi and Quintas & Quintas.
Because it was not possible to privatise CNP itself, part of the EPSI deal involved a management contract under which the consortium would rent CNP production facilities.
In the Brussels ruling, the Commission has accepted the ‘central role’ of EPSI in the Portuguese economy, as the country's only producer of low- and high-density polyethylene and polypropylene and as a supplier to the country's plastic processing industry.
It concluded that there were grounds under EC rules on state aids to exempt Lisbon's decision to contribute 30 per cent toward the ECU 564.5m restructuring of EPSI.
However, the commission notes that the rental payments to be paid by EPSI's new owners are not sufficient to cover interest on CNP debts
In deciding to take action over the aids to CNP, the Commission points to the unfairness of state subsidies in the ‘fiercely competitive’ ECU 280 000m EC chemical industry, in which more than a third of all production is traded between the 12 member states.
Although the Portuguese chemical output amounted to only ECU 42000m the industry was active in intra-EC trade, exporting some 13 per cent of its production.
Montedison
EC Commission vice-president, Sir Leon Brittan, has promised the European Parliament that he will investigate claims that the Italian authorities have been using unfair means to acquire public control of the Italian chemical industry.
Italian ‘Green’ MEP Enrico Falqui quoted a judgement by the Italian Court of Auditors which found that the price fixed by the State-owned energy corporation ENI for the Montedison shares in the Enimont joint venture was ‘out of all proportion’to their average quoted value.
Sir Leon told the  assembly that although Brussels was aware of the dissolving of the Enimont joint venture, the Commission had not heard about the court ruling.
Full details would be demanded from Rome to establish whether the Italian authorities had breached EC rules on state aid.
Baltic chemicals
European Community plans to offer trading concessions to the newly-independent Baltic states have been endorsed by the European Parliament, even though the EC Commission admits it does not have reliable, up-to-date statistics on Baltic production and exports.
Although the population of the three states amounts to less than eight million, chemicals and plastics feature strongly in the industrial output of the two larger states, Lithuania and Latvia.
In 1989, Lithuania produced 512 000 t of sulphuric acid, 109 500 t of plastics and 14 400 t of chemical fibres and thread.
More recent figures for Latvia indicate that in 1990, chemical fibres and thread output totalled 57 950 t and plastics 31 300t.
The Commission nevertheless insists there are no grounds to expect a significant impact on Community markets.
The three states, now looking to the west for hard currency earnings, have the advantage of strategically vital port facilities and generous development support from Scandinavian neighbours on the Baltic.
The new republics also foresee themselves playing a key role as trading intermediaries between the new CIS and the West.
Neophane verdict
After a 12-month investigation, the EC Commission has withdrawn allegations that the Italian government paid illegal state aids to the Neophane group in subsidies for polypropylene film printing.
In announcing the formal closing of a procedure against the Italian authorities alleging a breach of EC rules on state subsidies, the Commission recalled that the action was prompted by the Rome government's failure to reply to an original request for information in July 1990.
A belated denial that any subsidies had been paid to Neophane did not materialise until June 1991, when the Italian government explained that extensive inquiries had been necessary because the original allegations lacked detail.
Rome confirmed that aid was being considered to one company — Vifas in Viggiano.
The Commission has reminded Rome that EC rules will have to be respected when a decision is made.
industry
Shell Chimie has started production at the new additives blending plant at its Berre manufacturing complex near Marseilles, France.
The environmental services company Fugro McClelland has bought Diverse Analyticals , the analytical and environmental consultancy based in Manchester.
The west German company Carl Zeiss and the east German company Carl Zeiss Jena have formed a single company.
Carl Zeiss has a 51 per cent controlling interest in the new company.
Roussel Uclaf is to buy Wellcome 's environmental health businesses for £43m.
Wellcome will provide services for up to one year to facilitate Roussel Uclaf's effective running of the business.
Perkin-Elmer and Hoffmann-La Roche have formed an alliance to market and develop polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technology used in the amplification of DNA.
This venture follows Hoffman-La Roche's purchase of Cetus ’ PCR technology.
Elf Atochem , the chemical subsidiary of Elf Aquitaine , has announced that it and Rohm and Haas are evaluating the formation of a joint venture in their acrylic sheet and granule businesses.
Currently the companies manufacture these products under the trade names of Altuglas and Plexiglas.
Courtaulds has relocated to 50 George Street, London W1A 2BB.
ICI has called off talks with Ferro concerning their proposed $200m pa (£120m) joint venture to manufacture and market powder coatings worldwide.
Elf Atochem UK , the polystyrene manufacturer, has started construction of a new technical centre at its Stalybridge, Cheshire, site.
This investment is part of an ongoing programme at the polymerisation and compounding site.
Air Products and Chemicals is to consolidate its manufacture of Dabco, Polycat and Surfynol at a new factory in Heijningen, The Netherlands.
Crosfield is to increase its production of granular sodium disilicate at its site in Eijsden, The Netherlands.
The new 20 000 t pa plant is scheduled for completion at the end of 1992.
Technimont , the engineering subsidiary of Ferruzzi-Montedison , has been awarded the contract to build a 130 000 t pa ethylene production plant in Canton, China.
This is one of 14 petrochemical plants to be built during the current Chinese five year plan.
Interox , jointly owned by Solvay and Laporte , has selected the east German town of Bernberg as the site for its new 50 000 t pa hydrogen peroxide plant.
This plan was dependent on the restitution to Solvay of its formerly sequestered site; an agreement on this has been reached see (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 1098),(Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 886).
safety
Carcinogen directive
The Health and Safety Commission has published a consultative document on proposals for implementing the EC directive on carcinogens in the UK.
The main change to current UK regulations suggested is the amendment of the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations 1988 (COSHH) to emphasise prevention of exposure to carcinogens at work by substitution and enclosed systems of work.
Other proposed changes to COSHH include a requirement for a regular review of COSHH assessments and increasing the period for which monitoring and health surveillance records should be kept from 30 to 40 years.
The directive must be implemented by 1 January 1993.
Copies of Draft control of substances hazardous to health (amendment) regulations 1992.
Draft amendments to ‘Control of carcinogenic substances hazardous to health’ approved code of practice are available from the Sir Robert Jones Memorial Workshops, Units 3 and 5–9.
Gas emission at Ciba-Geigy
A cloud of vapour was emitted from an overheating reaction vessel at Ciba-Geigy Chemicals, Pyewipe, near Grimsby, earlier this year.
The vapour, from a reaction kettle containing aniline and dichloronitrobenzene, was carried off-site, across the Humber estuary and out to sea by the prevailing wind.
Both the chemicals involved in the incident are classified as toxic and can be harmful, by inhalation, absorption through the skin or ingestion.
One person on site was taken to the local hospital complaining of eye irritation but was later discharged and the crew of a vessel in the Humber estuary reported exposure to an irritant cloud, but not ill effects were evident when the crew was checked by a doctor.
Investigations are under way and neither the equipment nor the process concerned will be restarted until the cause of the incident is determined.
Safety award
The Japanese Industrial Safety and Health Association has awarded its safety certificate to Eastern Petroleum (SHARQ) for reaching five million work-hours without accidents resulting in a lost-time injury.
SHARQ is a joint venture between SABIC and SPDC, a Japanese consortium led by Mitsubishi.
The award was the second international recognition of SHARQ's safety record in 1991 — in November SHARQ received the British Safety Council's Sword of Honour, an award bestowed on only 30 companies worldwide.
Radiation risk
A study on the risks of chronic occupational exposure to ionising radiation has established a statistically significant association between leukaemia mortality and radiation dose.
The [First analysis of the National Registry for Radiation Workers — occupational exposure to ionising radiation and mortality], published by the National Radiological Protection Board, includes over 95 000 workers from the Atomic Weapons Establishment at Aldermaston, British Nuclear Fuels, the Ministry of Defence, Nuclear Electric and the UK Atomic Energy Authority.
The study confirmed the ‘healthy worker effect’ death rates from all causes and all cancers were significantly below those in the general population and mortality rates for most types of cancer were also less than that in the general population.
However, when the study considered trends in mortality with radiation dose within the study population there was a significant positive association between death rates from all leukaemias and radiation dose and also a positive (although not significant) association between all cancer deaths and radiation dose.
The NRPB intends to carry out a second analysis in the next two years with a larger population and longer follow-up.
Accident guide
A special session of the OECD Environment Committee has agreed new international guidance for chemical accident prevention, preparedness and response.
The new set of ‘guiding principles’ are the result of a three year accident programme, begun in 1988, to strengthen national and international policies in this area.
As well as addressing the role and responsibilities of public, authorities, industry, the workforce and the general public, the principles detail prevention activities, including planning, construction, monitoring and assessment and mention the rights of the public to information concerning hazardous installations.
The committee supported the continuation of the Accidents Programme in 1992–94.
Further work under the programme will include performance reviews of OECD countries in accident prevention, increasing international cooperation on accident prevention and addressing transport accidents and the health aspects of chemical accidents.
Hazdata
The National Chemical Emergency Centre has published a new version of Hazdata , a computerised database of over 2700 chemical substances.
Hazdata III contains several new features including substance location search, substance report by hazard classification, selected page printing and phrase-file pick-lists for document creation.
Safety equipment
3M has launched a hazardous spill response kit for use with bench-top or floor spills.
The Lab Kit contains 10 Powersorb Universal Sorbent sheets and one Universal Sorbent pillow to contain and clean-up up to 5 litres of hazardous liquids.
The kit also contains a disposal instruction guide, temporary disposal bag and tie.
Circle 141 
A lightweight splash garment for chemical processing personnel who work in hot, humid environments and are exposed to corrosive chemicals is now available.
The NTN acid protective suit from NSA International consists of a coverall and a head-to-torso hood.
The coverall has a 25 inch nylon zipper protected by a storm flap secured with Velcro.
The suit also incorporates a ‘belt clip loop’ design for use with respiratory protective equipments Suit sizes range from extra small to extra-extra large.
Circle 142 
The NTN acid protective suit from MSA
The Industrial Central Atmosphere Monitoring System from Perkin Elmer has been designed to provide maximum security against toxic spills or releases.
Ambient air samples from 50 locations, up to 1000 feet away, are continuously analysed for up to 25 different chemical compounds chosen by the user, at concentrations as low as a few ppb.
The system can activate central alarms or shut down distribution systems in affected areas.
A search program compares unknown chemicals against records to identify chemicals not on the routine monitoring list.
Circle 143 
Skolnik Industries has designed a steel container to hold a variety of leaking or damaged drums.
Available in three sizes, RecoverAll containers are transportable by forklift and have optional wheel attachments.
Circle 144 
safety
Publications
Work equipment.
A consultative document containing proposals for regulations to implement the European directive on the provision and use of work equipment has been published by the Health and Safety Commission.
The proposed regulations will remove health and safety anomalies in the UK and replace many existing laws.
Copies of Provision and use of work equipment: draft proposals for regulations are available free from the Sir Robert Jones Memorial Workshops.
Chemical manufacturers.
The Health and Safety Executive has published three free guidance leaflets for chemical manufacturers.
The leaflets:Personal protective equipment ,Controlling contractors and Are you complying with COSHH?are the first in a series dealing with topics which require particular attention.
They can be obtained from HSE information centres.
Dangerous substances.
Hinton Safety Consultants has published a database containing classification and labelling information for all substances listed in the latest edition of Annex I (91/325/EEC) to the Dangerous substances directive.
Information on dangerous ‘new’ substances from ELINCS and occupational exposure levels that must be observed under COSHH are also given.
HAZUD, price £450 plus VAT, is designed for use on IBM PCs or compatibles.
Further information is available from Hinton Safety Consultants.
Radiation doses.
The radiation doses received by classified workers in the UK for 1986 are analysed in Central index of dose information , published by the National Radiological Protection Board and the Health and Safety Executive.
The first in a series of annual analyses, the document is available price £5 from HMSO and booksellers.
Chromium plating.
Advice on how to achieve the new tighter control limits required in plating, anodising and chromate pickling together with details of the new chromic acid mist test are contained in the Metal Finishing Association's Health and safety bulletin no 8 .
This four page leaflet is available, price £10 (to non-members), from the Metal Finishing Association.
Factories Act 1961.
A revised Guide to the Factories Act 1961 has been published by the Health and Safety Executive.
Many of the act's remaining provisions will be replaced by European directives in 1993, although some will be replaced in 1992 and the guide makes it clear where this is the case.
Guide to the Factories Act 1961 is available from HMSO and booksellers, price £1.
Toxicity review.
The Health & Safety Executive has published Toxicity review 25: cyclohexane, cumene, para-dichlorobenzene (p-DCB) and chlorodifluoromethane (CFC 22).
An addition to toxicity review series, the document is a critical summary of the international scientific and medical literature with animal studies, health surveys and epidemiological data also reviewed.
The review is available price £6 from HMSO or booksellers.
MELs and OESs.
Changes in occupational exposure limits effective from 1 January 1992 are included in the new edition of a Health and Safety Executive guidance booklet.
The booklet contains maximum exposure limits for hexavalent chromium compounds, nickel an d its inorganic compounds, crystalline silica and grain dust along with new or revised occupational exposure standards for acetone, chlorine, n-hexane and Sulfotep.
Proposals for further new or revised OESs are included and comments are invited before 30 April 1992 .
Copies of the booklet are available, price £5, from HMSO or booksellers.
Because new maximum exposure limits have come into force the Health and Safety Executive has also published guidance dealing specifically with chromium compounds and nickel and its organic compounds.
Aimed at the employer,Nickel and its inorganic compounds: health and safety precautions and Chromium and its inorganic compounds: health and safety precautions are available, price £2 each, from HMSO or booksellers.
Aimed at employees,Nickel and you and Chromium and you are available free from HSE public enquiry points.
Plant inspection.
An A3 size chart that lists plant to be inspected in 33 principal types of location has been produced by Plant Safety.
The chart provides the statutory requirements for in-service inspection and recommended inspections on safety, technical and financial grounds in addition to recommended periods for inspection and the relevant legislation at a glance.
Copies are available from the Marketing Department, Plant Safety, Parklands.
markets
Electronic chemicals
The Western European market for electronic chemicals is expected to grow from $1530m in 1990 to $2160m by 1995, according to a new report from Frost & Sullivan.
The single market should boost demand for electronic equipment and components and therefore the chemicals used in their production, says the report.
The market is divided into two major categories; those chemicals used in the fabrication of integrated circuits and those for printed circuit boards.
However, there is a growing list of other uses, such as chemicals used in optoelectronic devices or liquid crystal displays, and this category is forecast to expand by over 50 per cent to $396m in 1995.
The European market for electronic chemicals, Report E1385 is available, price $4900, from Customer Service, Frost & Sullivan, Sullivan House, London.
Italian fine chemicals
Italian fine chemicals brought in a L 3 500 000m turnover in 1990, according to Federchimica, the Italian chemical industry federation.
This gives Italy 9.7 per cent of European turnover for fine chemicals, not far behind the UK at 11.1 per cent, but very far behind Germany which has the lion's share at 44.7 per cent .
The gap arose due to a drive by the Italian government in the 1960s and 1970s to spread industrialisation to the south of the country, concentrating on bulk chemicals.
Meanwhile other European countries were pursuing more value added chemistry.
A new association within Federchimica has been formed to try close this gap; ACFIS (Association for Fine and Speciality Chemicals) intends to build an Italian fine chemical sector able to respond to requirements.
West European market for electronic chemicals by type, 1990 and 1995 ($m).
Source: Frost  $ Sullivan
US plastic additives
A new report from Frost & Sullivan predicts that the US plastic additive industry should enjoy moderate growth over the next five years as plastic consumption recovers from the recession, with light stabilisers showing the most dramatic increase.
The study, which includes flame retardants, antioxidants, heat stabilisers, light stabilisers, colorants and blowing agents, forecasts an 18 per cent growth over the five year period with sales rising from $1200m in 1991 to $1300m in 1996.
Frost & Sullivan believes that a major near-term challenge for the industry will be the development of additives suitable for the fast-growing engineering and speciality plastic segment.
For further information on The US market for plastics additives , contact Customer Service, Frost & Sullivan, Sullivan House, London.
 Sulphuric acid
The National Sulphuric Acid Association's quarterly summary of monthly returns in the UK showed production of new acid at 435 379 t form the beginning of July to the end of September 1991.
Home consumption for fertilisers and agricultural uses was 16 529 t and exports were 29 541 t.
Consumption of imported sulphur was 91 427 t and of indigenous and other sulphur bearing materials was 101 087 t.
new on the market
XPS.
The new AXIS HS, from Kratos Analytical , is one of the latest generation of high performance imaging XPS instruments.
It combines all XPS modes of operation in a single, compact package offering simple qualitative analysis, quantitative detail or depth information.
Applications include materials analysis in thin film, thick film, insulators, semiconductors, ceramics, metals and alloys.
Circle 121
Stirrer .
Lab-Plant has introduced a computer-controlled, electronic stirrer which can be programmed to perform a series of functions automatically and for long periods.
The Heidolph RZR 2103 electronic stirrer has an analogue interface for computer control and has indicators for both speed and viscosity.
Voltage and current signals can be used to pre-set speed or to call up the actual values for speed and torque, and the start/stop functions can be activated using the same method.
Circle 122 
Raman spectrometer .
The T64000 triple Raman spectrometer, manufactured by Jobin Yvon, is now available from Instruments S. A. It is based on triple 0.64 metre focal length spectrometers and gives outstanding stray light rejection even for close-in work with multichannel detectors.
A comprehensive software package allows almost complete software control of the instrument including the option of software controlled slits, grating turret, and control of the additive/subtractive option.
Circle 123 
Quadrupole MS.
Hiden Analytical has announced the HAL/3F PIC series quadrupole mass spectrometers for fast event UHV gas studies.
The instruments are designed for high precision scientific applications including single crystal calorimetry, laser induced desorption and flash temperature gas evolution.
The systems incorporate an ion counting detector to detection to .
The seven decade continuous dynamic range combined with fast data acquisition allow complete monitoring of the desorption profile.
Circle 124 
Parallel spectroscopy.
Optilas has introduced the Chromex 250IS and 500IS imaging spectrographs.
The instruments use proprietary toroidal mirrors which correct for astigmatism and are capable of real-time spatial as well as spectral analysis when used with CCD type 2-D detector arrays as well as in focus performance with linear diode arrays.
The convergence of a number of key technologies in the instruments makes possible the real-time simultaneous processing of multiple-source optical spectral information in a single imaging spectrograph.
This new spectroscopic method is called parallel spectroscopy.
Circle 125 
SFE-SFC system.
Roth Scientific has announced the Suprex MPS 22 SFE-SFC system.
It is a fully integrated, directly coupled SFE-SFC system using a cryogenic trap as the SFE-SFC interface.
The cryogenic trap collects and focuses all extracted analytes in a discrete narrow band which maintains chromatographic integrity and efficient peak shape.
The combination of cryogenic trap, programmable automation and precise pressure control provides quantitative and reproducible SFE and SFC in application areas that include polymer, petroleum, environmental, food and natural product analysis.
Circle 126 
Area containment.
Immediate Area Containment Systems (IACS) have been developed by Solotec to overcome many of the problems associated with handling powders in laboratories.
IACS is a range of low priced benchtop products, designed initially for use with balances.
They avoid the expense of large cabinets and wind and vibration problems are completely eliminated.
The balance is covered by an acrylic housing which gives normal visibility and access to all controls.
A motor extracts air through a  replaceable filter and powders are gently drifted away from the operator.
Circle 127 
Radio-HPLC monitor .
It is now possible to quantitate radioactivity in HPLC eluates at the lowest amounts practicable with the β- ram Flow-through monitor, available from Lablogic .
Beta emitters from 3 H to 32 P and soft gamma emitters such as 125 P21 can be measured at low backgrounds, typically less than 8 CPM, throughout the full energy spectrum.
Beta-ram is available in two configurations: Model A intended for use with solid scintillators or for Cerenkov counting; and Model B which is equipped with a pump/mixer module for handling liquid scintillators.
Circle 128 
Gas analyser .
A new gas analysis system fitted with a discharge ionisation detector and capable of detecting trace impurities in the ppb range has been introduced by Unicam .
It is particularly suitable for high-purity gas analysis in the industrial gas, semiconductor, nuclear and petrochemical markets measuring gases such as hydrogen, oxygen, argon, nitrogen, methane, carbon monoxide and others Circle 129 
Spill containment.
Whatman 's Spill Containment Pack is for dealing with accidental spillages in the laboratory.
Independent tests carries out on the packs, including representative chemicals from acids, alkalis and solvents, proved the broad chemical compatibility of the sorbent material used and it was noted that the pack can be applied to a wide range of chemical leakages.
The absorption capacity of the sorbent was often in excess of the specified 2.8 litres/metre length.
Circle 130 
in brief Specac , the spectroscopic and optical accessories company, has become Graseby-Specac to echo its parent company's name change from Cambridge Electronic Companies to Graseby , and is now part of the Electro-Optics group.
Bohlin Reologi UK has relocated its offices and labs to Love Lane, Cirencester, Gloucestershire.
Ciba-Geigy Plastics has appointed Plastic Technology Service as sole distributor for small lot quantities of its range of engineering plastics.
Cambridge Scientific Computing and Tripos Associates , the analysis systems and software companies, have announced a strategic partnership which will lead to Tripos distributing CSC 's ChemDraw software and joint development of future projects.
The gas detection instrumentation supplier Neotronics Technology is to acquire the instrument division of Solomat in the UK, France and US for $5.5m (£3.3m).
GP-Elliott has brought the analyser systems group of Realm Controls to add to its business in fire and gas detection.
Molcad , an interactive graphics program for the display and manipulation of molecular structures, is now available from Tripos Associates .
BASF has appointed Economatics (Education)as distributor for the Minilab, specifically aimed at schools.
The chromatography company J & W Scientific has introduced an upgraded column with increased sensitivity through lower chemical activity, the DB-5ms, for both GC and GC/MS systems.
Digitron Instrumentation has added the BT200 rubber protection to its range of instrumentation accessories.
An international consortium led by the Wigan-based company Carbon Link has acquired the East German Activated Carbon Company from the German  Truehandanstalt  .
The east German company operates from a modern factory with full laboratory and technical pilot plant facilities.
Oxford Instruments is to buy the Cambridge-based thin films group, which was part of the now defunct Cryogenic Consultants company.
The group researches technical and commercial applications of ultra high quality Josephson junction devices.
Compression cells to flatten soft specimens and hold samples flat, and hot stages to study micro samples at different temperatures are now available from Perkin-Elmer for its FT-IR microscope.
Chemical Design , the molecular modelling systems supplier, is to include a two dimensional drawing tool in the latest release of its Chem-X software, which will allow molecules to be drawn on screen in the same way as on paper.
Skin protection .
Derma Shield is a non-toxic, non-greasy, aerosol mousse which, when applied to any part of the skin, provides an invisible barrier against most skin irritants for up to four hours.
Manufactured by Kempton International Derma Shield bonds with to top layer of dead and dying cells sealing the skin against penetration without affecting the breathability and natural perspiration of the skin.
Circle 131 
Computer guard .
Intek has announced the latest Armagard unit for Tandon, Compaq, DEC and other large footprint computers.
It will protect computers used in harsh environments against dust, oil, water, rough handling, vibration and tampering.
The 56041 is made from epoxy powder-coated steel and incorporates a cooling fan, air filter, mains filter, splashproofing, dust seals, anti-vibration mounts and shock proof fixings.
Security features include a locking disk drive cover, locking lid and cable clamps.
Circle 132 
Emulsion formulator .
Stable and reproducible emulsions and microemulsions can be prepared and selected with the A2PL chemical formulator from the French company ISMP .
The unit automatically controls the injections of the various constituents into 5ml test-tubes, agitates them with a magnetic stirrer, and detects whether they are clear, cloudy or opaque in the near infra-red region over the whole length of the test-tube.
The software can load and save the results for a sample, characterised by the number of phrases and their depth and type, set up a continuous dialogue with the operator and update the database for tests in progress.
Circle 133 
UV scanning spectrophotometers .
The Series 3000 UV-Visible scanning spectrophotometers have been announced by Cecil Instruments .
The instruments have a narrow 2nm optical bandwidth over the wavelength range 190nm-1000nm.
Stray light and stability are 0.01 per cent at 220nm and 340nm and ±0.001A/hour respectively.
Wavelength reproducibility is ±0.02nm.
The Series 3000 incorporates automatic calibration of wavelength, transmission and absorbance zeros together with automatic programmes for absorbance ratioing and peak seeking.
Circle 134 
Emergency information system.
Columbia Scientific Industries (CSI)is now distributing the Emergency Information System (EIS) from Research Alternatives in the UK.
Designed to combine all the tools required for a real time emergency or training simulation, EIS provides full colour facility maps, data sheets, key personnel details and ensures effective communication between operation centres faces with a chemical release.
The EIS 2600+ chemical inventory is stored on a database which interacts with digital colour maps.
The maps may be of surrounding areas and zoomed right up to detailed floor-plan scale.
Circle 135 
X, Y digitiser software .
Ungraph is a software package for scientists, CAD specialists, financial analysts and other who want to know the numeric coordinates of graphs, charts and drawings with user-selected precision.
Ungraph vectorises raster graphics.
It incorporates an automatic line-follower, a paint tool to fill in any gaps or theoretical lines, an eraser and automatic grid-removal.
It accepts line-art (1-bit bilevel) TIFF and PCX files from external scanners and cameras.
Circle 136 
Wet chemistry analysers .
Alpkem, part of Perstorp Analytical , has introduced a new family of automated wet chemistry analysers for environmental, agricultural and food/beverage testing, called the Flow Solution.
It can perform flow injection analysis (FIA) and segmented continuous flow analysis (SFA) independently or can combine the techniques on a single test allowing automatic sample pretreatment such as dilution, concentration and/or filtration on-line, The Super Cartridge is a two part heater consisting of a spool of polymeric tubing which droops over a cone-shaped heater.
A powerful UV/Vis monochromator based detector allows wavelength selection by the turn of a dial and allows very low detection limits.
SoftPac Plus software controls the 300 cup random access sampler and the 511 automatic dilutor.
Circle 137 
FT-IR spectrometers.
Perkin Elmer has introduced the 1600 Series FT-IR spectrometers.
The Model 1605 is especially suited to the educational laboratory operating over the spectral range 4400–450 cm -1 .
The Model 1615 is designed for the quality control laboratory and uses the Advanced Spectroscopic Data Management software for data acquisition and manipulation.
The Model 1625 offers additional flexibility with an external beam facility suitable for microscopy or an additional sampling compartment and a disk drive for data storage.
Models 1650/1650(F) are available with a spectral range of 7800–350 cm -1 and 7800–200 cm -1 respectively.
The Model 16PC/16PC(F) is controlled by an industry-standard 386-based PC.
Circle 139 
Microdialysis probe.
CMA/Micro dialysis has recently launched a new generation of microdialysis probes, the CMA/20, which will be distributed exclusively by Biotech Instruments in the UK.
The new soft plastic probe is designed to take microdialysis samples from soft tissues or blood vessels.
It has potential applications in general metabolic studies, pharmacological studies and pharmacokinetics.
The probe can be easily implanted in muscle, liver, kidneys etc and even intravenously, without affecting blood pressure.
The biggest advantage of this new probe is that it now allows samples to be taken continuously from a conscious, living organism, and these samples can be analysed without further preparation.
Circle 140 
pH measurements.
CSP has launched the Unifet pH meter which uses a robust, all plastic probe.
A small field effect transistor, thermistor for temperature measurement and a reference cell are mounted in the tip of the probe and accurate measurements can be made on a single drop of sample.
The probe does not need to be kept moist making it suitable for all types of field work and the fact that there is no glass present makes it ideal for the food and drink pharmaceutical industries.
Circle 138
Chemicals
Air Products has developed two silicone surfactants for manufacturers of rigid polyurethane foam who are currently using HCFC blown foam systems.
The X2-5374 and X2-5454 surfactants are promising substitutes for the CFC blowing agents.
Vista Chemical , the American subsidiary of the German Company RWE-DEA has been given responsibility for the worldwide marketing of linear alkylbenzene.
Vista 's products will still be offered under the trade name of Nalkylene detergent alkylate.
J. T. Baker has added phosphoric, sulphuric and perchloric acids to its list of ultra high purity acids which are manufactured and packed under metal-free, clean room conditions.
Epryn Technology has introduced ZYMUL 100, a new synthetic oil, emulsions of which mimic those of crude oil in their response to oilfield demulsifiers.
The product is a convenient reference standard for demulsifier manufacturers and users as it overcomes the drawbacks of variability, opacity and flammability encountered with crude oil.
Humko Chemical , a division of Witco , is offering a group of oleochemical processing agents as aids in the processing of ethylene propylene diamine monomer (EPDM) elastomers.
The primary product is the MoldPro 616 internal processing agent which enhances mould flow in EPDM compounds.
Rhône-Poulenc is to introduce four new xanthan gum grades designed for the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries.
They will be marketed under the Rhodicare trade mark and all have controlled rheological features and the stabilising and thickening properties of xanthan gum.
Stadex Industries , of Wrexham has introduced a water-based copolymer emulsion adhesive, Stafix C5065, which gives good adhesion to UV varnished boards, eliminating the need to strip off varnish where adhesive is to be applied.
BASF has announced two new products for the paper and board industry.
They are Luredur AS 7, an aqueous, anionic solution of an acrylic copolymer used to improve internal bonding strength, and Afranil ST, an easily diluted stock deformer.
Dexco Polymers , a 50–50 partnership of Exxon Chemical and Dow Chemical , has commercialised seven new grades of Vector styrenic block copolymers for use in polymer modification.
These copolymers are characterised by their consistency and heat stability.
Coalite Chemicals ’ new 4-chloro resorcinol plant came on stream in January 1992.
The product is used as an intermediate in pharmaceuticals, photographic film processes, hair dyes and other personal care products.
conferences
Environment .
The National Economic Development Office has organised a specialised organics seminar,Chemistry for a better environment — environmental challenges and opportunities in the specialised organics sector , on 17 March 1992 in Manchester.
Details from G. Wiseman, NEDO.
Environmental consultants .
Identifying when and where to use environmental consultants will be held on 17–18 March 1992 in London.
Details from Profex, Buckingham House.
The Broadway, Stanmore, Middlesex.
Nanotechnology This conference organised by the National Physical Laboratory, will focus on the applications of nanotechnology in medicine and biosciences.
Nanotechnology will take place in London on 18 March 1992.
Details from Dr P. Hayes, National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, Middlesex.
Metal finishing .
Clean technology in metal finishing will take place in Slough on 18 March 1992 and Glasgow on 24 March 1992.
Details from J. Bennett, Metal Finishing Association.
Solid Waste .
The solid waste problem — issues in landfill management and sludge disposal will take place on 18–19 March 1992 in London.
Details from Sira Communications.
Environmental credibility .
The conference on Using effective communications to build environmental credibility will take place in London on 24–25 March 1992.
Details from IIR.
Cosmetic proteins .
This lecture, organised by the Society of Cosmetic Scientists, is subtitled Vegetable or animal and will be held in Derby on 26 March 1992.
Details from the general secretary, Society of Cosmetic Chemists.
Packaging .
The Pharmaceuticals, Toiletries and Cosmetics Subject Group of the Institution of Chemical Engineers is holding a seminar on Automation and control of packaging lines on 31 March 1992 at Loughborough University of Technology.
Details from M. Jones.
Heterogeneous catalysis .
The contact name for the Institution of Chemical Engineers' meeting,Electrical phenomena in heterogeneous catalysis (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 1112), on 2 April 1992 has changed.
Details now available from Dr I.S. Metcalfe, Department of Chemical Engineering, Imperial College, London.
Superconductivity .
A Department of Trade and Industry/Science and Engineering Research Council workshop on High temperature superconductor thin films and devices will take place on 2–3 April 1992 in Wembley.
Details from Meeting Point Conferences, London House, London.
Het instrument.
This instrumentation trade fair for health care, science and industry will take place on 4–10 April 1992.
Details from Cooperative Vereniging Het Instrument, The Netherlands.
203rd ACS national meeting will take place in San Francisco, California, US, on 5–10 April 1992 Details from ACS, Washington DC, US.
Communication .
A colloquium on Communicating science — the role of the press officer will be held on 7 April 1992 as part of the Biochemical Society's scientific meeting at the University of Southampton.
Details from D. Stilwell.
Technology updates .
A conference on New technology in gas monitoring will take place in Bromley, Kent, on 7 April 1992 and one on Calibration of gas and dust monitoring equipment will take place on 8 April 1992 at the same venue.
Details (see Solid Waste above).
Technology Japan 92.
This exhibition will take place in Tokyo, Japan, on 14–17 April 1992.
Details from Mesago, Stuttgart 10, Germany.
Cyclodextrins.
The sixth international symposium on cyclodextrins will be held on 21–24 April 1992 in Chicago, US.
Details from the symposium organising committee, Hammond, IN, US.
Biocatalysis .
Fundamental biocatalysis in non-conventional media will take place in Noorwijkerhout, the Netherlands, on 26–29 April 1992.
Details from Leeuwenhorst Congress Center, Langelaan 3, The Netherlands.
World water 92.
This conference and exhibition will take place at the Wembley Exhibition Centre, London, on 12–14 May 1992.
Details from C. Chin, Institution of Civil Engineers, London.
Anti-thrombotic therapy.
This conference, organised by the SCI Fine Chemicals Group will take place in London on 14 May 1992.
Details from SCI Conference Secretariat, London.
Surface layers.
This conference, which is subtitled Structure-property relations , will take place at Delft University of Technology on 14–15 May 1992.
Details from Prof J. Schoonman, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands.
Risk assessment .
The Commonwealth Institute, London, is the venue for a conference on Risk assessment of hazardous substances — chemical and microbiological on 19–20 May 1992.
Details from Bevan Gilpin Communications, Hackney Business Centre, London.
Receptors .
A symposium on Neuromedical chemistry G-protein coupled receptions will be held in Lund, Sweden, on 20–22 May 1992.
Details from Swedish Academy of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Stockholm, Sweden.
The expanding spectrum.
This conference and exhibition will focus on New technology and applications from X-ray to mm waves and will be held in London on 8–12 June 1992.
Details from Sira Communications, Chislehurst, Kent.
Chemical reactivity .
Theoretical modes of chemical reactivity: modelling organic reactivity in solution will take place in San Feliu de Guixols, Spain, on 12–16 June 1992.
Details from Dr J. Hendeković, European Science Foundation, Strasbourg, France.
Inorganic chemistry .
This conference on New developments in organometallic chemistry and homogenous catalysis will take place in Sheffield on 5–9 July 1992.
Details (see Chemical reactivity above).
Lithium.
The third British Lithium congress will take place at Wolverhampton Polytechnic on 6–10 September 1992.
A call for papers has been issued.
Details from N.J. Birch, Biomedical Research Laboratory, School of Health Sciences, Wolverhampton Polytechnic, Wolverhampton.
Fire retardant polymers.
The Freiburg Materials Research Centre will hold its fourth meeting on this subject at the University of Freiburg, Germany, on 9–11 September 1992.
Details from Prof R. Mulhaupt, Institut für Makromolekulare Chemie, Freiburg , Germany.
Plasma source mass spectrometry.
This conference will be held at the University of Durham on 13–18 September 1992.
Details from G. Holland, Department of Geological Sciences, The University Science Laboratories, Durham.
World chemical congress.
This congress, with the theme Chemicals — the challenge of 2000 , will take place in Newport Beach, California, on 13–16 September 1992.
Details from M. J. Carrick, c/o World Chemical Congress, Staten Island, New York, US.
Organometallic chemistry.
The seventh international conference on organometallic and coordination chemistry of germanium, tin and lead, will be held at Jurmala, near Riga, Latvia, on 20–25 September 1992.
Details from Prof E. Lukevics.
Institute of Organic Synthesis, Latvian Academy of Sciences, Riga, Latvia.
Machevo 92.
This international trade fair for the food, beverage, dairy and chemical industries will take place on 12–16 October 1992 at the Utrecht Jaarbeurs, Jaarsbeursplein 6, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Constructionplas 92.
This conference will be held on 20–22 October 1992 in Arlington, Virginia.
Details from Plastics Institute of America, Fairfield, NJ, US.
Electrochemical technology .
The sixth international forum on Environmental applications of electrochemical technology will take place in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, US, on 8–12 November 1992.
A call for papers has been issued and abstracts should be submitted as soon as possible.
Details from Dr N L Weinberg, The Electrosynthesis Company, East Amherst, New York, US.
Analysis .
The 31st annual Eastern analytical symposium will be held in Somerset, New Jersey, US, on 16–20 November 1992.
A call for papers has been issued and the deadline for abstracts is 15 April 1992 .
Details from K. Bratin, Groton, CT US.
CPhl 92.
An exhibition will be held alongside this conference on pharmaceutical ingredients and intermediates, which will be held in Wiesbaden, Germany on 18–20 November, 1992.
Details from C. Kalff, Expoconsult, Maarssen, The Netherlands.
LETTERS
Chemical explanation of Marah
From Dr Paul Day
It is more likely that the waters of Marah referred to in Exodus 15:23–25 were contaminated with iron rather than algae as Dr S. Fletcher suggest (Chem.
Br .,
1991,24 , 1114).
Though I have never tasted water contaminated with heavy algal growth, I can report that ferruginous water is decidedly bitter!
I have always thought that the sweetening of the waters of Marah resulted from the removal of the iron by the coagulation and flocculation of iron/tannin complexes, the tannin being derived from that tree — though I think that he [Moses]would have had to have bashed it up a bit first.
Thus, we have chemical control — albeit naturally derived — of a chemical contaminant not a biological one, and probably the first recorded instance.
Let's hear it for the farmer.
Benefits of environmental audits
From Dr P. R. J. Smith
Two recent letters have suggested that the drive toward environmental audits is being led by consultancies (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 702, 1115).
As a consultant specialising in environmental impact assessments and environmental audits I feel that this criticism is rather unfair.
Certainly there has been a rapid increase in the number of consultancies offering such services, but this is simply a response to the demand created by the draft EC legislation on environmental audits and the draft British Standard on Environmental Management Systems.
Environmental audits are being carried out by many large companies and some far-sighted smaller ones.
Although it is possible to use them cynically, simply to try to improve a company's environmental image, this is not an approach that I would recommend because pressure groups are very keen to identify these companies.
It would be better not to have an environmental audit if your management is not prepared to adopt even the less radical recommendations.
There is some agreement between my view and that of L. J. Fishwick, who suggests that training could be given to allow more environmental audits to be carried out in-house.
It is highly unlikely that any consultancy you appoint will know enough about a company to allow it to undertake the audit without considerable input from your senior management.
So why engage a consultancy at all you may wonder?
The best reasons are the objectivity and credibility of an independent audit.
This does not mean that you have to pay a whole team of specialists anything up to £600 a day each.
Why not use a single consultant to discuss what you want to achieve in the audit, how you can achieve it and how to alter your management systems so that your operations are more environmentally friendly?
Depending on the complexity of your operations this may only take a couple of man weeks and could be repeated at regular intervals to monitor progress.
There is no magic about environmental audits, they are simply another management technique.
If the recommendations of a good audit are adopted this can bring real benefits to your company in terms of reduced discharges, lower energy bills, improved market share due to product differentiation, and increased ability to attract and retain staff.
Although some of these financial benefits are hard to measure, it does not mean that they are not real.
If any readers would like to receive a free copy of an information sheet I have produced on the types of environmental audits and what they can achieve they should write to me at the address below:
Links scheme credit
From L. M. Miall
The obituary of Harry Barber (Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 55) gives a very good picture of him, both as a chemist and as a man with a broad range of interests.
But it omits what for members of the RSC may be his most significant contribution.
The Benevolent Fund had existed for many years, but it was Harry Barber who first inaugurated in the Essex Section the Links scheme in which elderly and retired members keep in touch with each other for mutual support if required.
This has since expanded into a professionally organised system covering the whole country, but we should not forget that it was Harry Barber who began it.
Room for EC improvement
From Dr Eric I. Hamilton
I was interested in the news item Research probity (Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 18).
Assuming that uniformity exists for research funding by the EC, as an example, the EC Nuclear Fission Safety 1991–94 programme states that in order to qualify for research support projects ‘your proposal must be transnational and involve at least two independent participants from different member States’,ie three in all.
Reasons given for transnational participation are: continuity of research to overcome shortfalls of younger scientists entering the field in view of the imminent retirement of many senior scientists and to provide advanced training.
The overheads in terms of costs and time for transnational programmes of research are often excessive and unproductive in relation to the limited and shrinking funds that are available from the EC.
Individual scientists are excluding from the EC research; if a scientist has a ‘good idea’ he is unlikely to favour involvement with other organisations, especially if the idea is marketable.
I would hope that the peer review system used by the EC is of sufficient quality to recognise research worthy of support irrespective of whether it originates from individuals or groups and then support it if funds are available.
Filippo Pandolfi, vice-president of the European Commission in charge of research, has further remarked that the adopted procedures may help to avoid errors and falsification of research, which in recent years has been a controversial issue in the US.
Has this occurred within the EC and if so does it reflect failure of the peer review system?
Today, a large proportion of the EC research budget is devoted to industrial projects, especially in the development of basic technology prior to it becoming marketable.
Since the end point can be associated with considerable financial profit to individuals and organisations, the temptation to engage in underhand tactics may be too attractive to ignore.
A rose by any other name
From T. R. Alexander
Dr R. D. Bagnall (Chem.
Br .,
1992,28 , 46) may be comforted to know that systematic names have yet to penetrate the realms of applied chemistry.
The current debate in the packaging industry concerns the environmental effects of polyvinyl chloride.
Very few in this sector — young as well as old — would know what polychlorethene was.
The same goes for polystyrene, the acrylic polymers, polyamides etc .
It is ethyl acetate and isopropanol, not their systematic equivalents, that are still used in coating or laminating flexible webs for numerous industrial applications.
Long live the tried and trusted trivial names!
From Sir Gordon Cox
Bagnall's story of godnose had evidently been rather badly mutilated before it reached him.
When, in 1928, vitamin C was first isolated by Albert Szent-Györgyi his studies showed that it must be related to the hexoses, but he was not able to determine its structure.
Having a mind untrammelled by convention he offered the names ignose or godnose, but  the editor of the Biochemical Journal would not accept either of them, so because the vitamin had the same empirical formula as glycuronic acid he called it hexuronic acid, leaving its structural chemistry to be determined later.
In 1933, when the Birmingham group led by W. N. Haworth had determined the structure and synthesised the vitamin, Szent-Györgyi and Haworth jointly proposed the change of name to ascorbic acid.
Do not ask me for its modern systematic name!
The story was well known in the early 1930s, and was retold in 1963 by Szent-Györgyi himself (Ann.
Rev. Biochem .,
1963,32 , 1).
Dr R. D. Bagnall replies : My student chemistry days were in fact spent at Birmingham in the 1960s, by which time Howarth had left, but there was still a thriving carbohydrate group.
It is not surprise therefore, that I heard the story there and I related it exactly as I remember hearing it.
I had no way of checking it and am grateful, therefore, that Sir Gordon Cox has provided the full version.
He is not the only person to have responded on this point, which just shows how powerful anecdotes can be as memory aids.
Perhaps the edges have indeed been knocked off with time and retelling, but the essential humour remains.
In any case, it does not detract from my central theme that ‘traditional’ chemistry is brought alive by anecdotes and can be great fun, a feat that modern chemistry simply cannot match except perhaps in the case of hydroxyethane (ethanol), after a few glasses of which, who cares anyway?
Commemorating Perkin
From Dr L. J. Rigby, secretary, Essex Section
The interesting contribution by Dr David Leaback (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 1151) failed to mention that the special exhibition on the work of Sir William Henry Perkin was in addition to a poster exhibition that had been touring Essex and east London over the previous six months.
This travelling exhibition, organised by the Essex Section, contained early photographs and records of the development of chemistry and the chemical industry in the area.
It was very appropriate that the 18th and last venue for the poster exhibition should be where a distinguished founding member of the Chemical Society lived and worked, and on behalf of the Essex Section Committee, I take this opportunity to thank Leaback and the Stepney Historical Trust for their most welcome contribution to this closing event.
Although the poster exhibition failed to capture the imagination of the local press, it did attract a large number of visitors and over 200 copies of the historical booklet that accompanied the exhibition were sold.
Our thanks also go to the RSC and to local industrial firms for financial support and to all those members who helped organise the poster exhibition and transport it around the countryside.
Scientist and boffin
From Prof Sydney Ross
The cover of the January 1992 issue of Chemistry in Britain depicts the comic-book character, Prof Jocelyn Peabody, indignantly rejecting the appellation ‘boffin’ in favour of‘scientist’.
One hundred year ago Prof Peabody might well have been equally indignant had she been called a scientist, and would have said (as did Faraday and Kelvin)‘I prefer to be called a natural philosopher’.
In 1894 T. H. Huxley wrote to the editor of Science-gossip ‘To any one who respects the English language, I think scientist must be about as pleasing a word as electrocution.
I sincerely trust you will not allow the pages of Science-gossip to be defiled by it’.
As for boffin, although the Oxford English Dictionary states that its etymology is unknown, I have conjectured that this same purist Huxley may inadvertently have been responsible for it.
While a young man in his early 20s, Huxley was assistant surgeon and unofficial naturalist on board HMS Rattlesnake on its survey voyage through Australasian waters, in 1846–50.
As the Rattlesnake beat across the seas, Huxley trawled for specimens of sea creatures using an improvised net.
The midshipmen — boys between the ages of 12 and 16 — were fascinated.
They took to calling his specimens ‘buffons’, their attention having been drawn to the word by the sight of Huxley's copy of Buffon's Natural history , which in a series of many volumes, displayed the name repeatedly in large gilt letters on a shelf in the chart room.
Huxley himself began to refer to his specimens as ‘my buffons’.
Having entered Royal Navy slang in this way the word could quite reasonably have been transferred from the specimen to the specimen collector, and, its origin forgotten, its vowels might equally reasonably have undergone a sea change making boffin out of buffon.
I suppose also the that the slang term was confined to the esoteric vocabulary of sailors for a hundred years, until the rise of the boffins in World War II brought it to the attention of the general public.
Reference
1.
S. ROSS,Nineteenth-century attitudes: Men of science .
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1991.
Clara Taylor remembered
From Edna Chapman,nee King
I was interested to read in Prof Ian D. Rae's article (Chem.
Br .,
1991,27 , 145) that nothing seems to be known about Clara Taylor during the years 1921–26, when she was headmistress of the Northampton School for Girls.
I was a pupil at the school from 1920 to 1924.
Among her achievements was writing the school song, which is now sung to a tune composed by Miss R. C. Evans, music mistress at the school from 1924 to 1949.
During Clara Taylor's time as headmistress, the school became too large to function as a single unit and a system of four houses was adopted.
She also introduced honours sheets and stars, and clubs and societies flourished within the school.
In 1922 members of the Science Society had a lesson in wireless!
Greek dancing was also taught in the school.
Clara Taylor was always very fair in dealing with the girls.
One felt that one had to do one's best.
The school certainly made good progress under her leadership — she was a dedicated headmistress.
The school celebrated its 75th anniversary on 22 September 1990; it was a lovely occasion.
Greek dancing: Edna Chapman is the group leader in the centre
Special issue
Biomaterials: the ultimate interface with man
The robotic replacement or adaptation of man has been the dream of inventors and film-makers for decades —eg the bionic man and other similar imaginative creations.
However, as we reach the end of the 20th century man's ability to reconstruct his own body by using machine-like structures, in order to enhance performance, is rather limited.
It is possible, however, under some circumstances and with very limited objectives, to place materials in the body to reconstruct or to restore, in part, some lost function.
Several devices that have been successful in modern surgery include hip replacements, contact and intraocular lenses, heart pacemakers and so on.
There are many reasons why the surgical reconstruction of man is so difficult, but the majority of these are encompassed within two broad conceptual problems.
The first of these concerns the difficulty of replacing or augmenting tissues that are living, highly organised but dynamically responsive and structurally complex materials with synthetic materials that are non-living and structurally naive and unresponsive.
Fortunately this does not seem to matter too much in some applications —eg amalgams are used to replace dentine, polymethylmethacrylate replaces the lens of the eye and titanium replaces the bone of the femur.
However, success will always be limited until we are able to provide materials that are far more like those they are replacing.
Because mature teeth are far less complex, biologically, than most tissues, restoration of their shape and function has been straightforward and David Watts discusses the use of certain polymers and composites for this purpose.
The second problem is that even if we are able to provide functionality with replacement materials, we have to place them within, and thereby create an interface with, the tissues of the body which are extremely aggressive to any invading agent but which are also exquisitely sensitive to their presence.
The fluid phase of the body is a superb electrolyte that contains many extremely active biological species, especially enzymes, and components that are able to produce free radicals and other reactive species.
As a result, there are very few materials which are inert in the body and indeed it may be argued that none are truly inert in this context.
On the other hand, as the presence of a  splinter of wood in the finger readily proves, tissues have very effective sensors for foreign objects, and defence mechanisms are readily activated.
Although the immunological rejection processes that occur with organ transplants do not occur with synthetic materials, a complex series of reactions are available to deal with any invading object and biomaterials can be treated in much the same way as invading bacteria, setting up inflammatory processes.
The science of biomaterials and the success of future applications depends upon the improved understanding of the various phenomena that are associated with these interfacial reactions, collectively described under the heading of biocompatibility.
To demonstrate the diverse nature of the subject, two articles are included here which represent opposite ends of the spectrum.
Brian Tighe discusses polymers in ophthalmology and Peter Marquis describes the application of high performance ceramics in bone and joint replacements.
To demonstrate that not all biomaterials are used in direct tissue replacement, but may be used for other functions, Pankaj Vadgama discusses some of the special problems encountered when using invasive biosensors to detect changes in physiological parameters such as blood-gas levels and pH levels, at specific sites.
Finally, as an indication of the way forward we must mention the hybrid approach.
Since it seems unlikely that we can generate in the foreseeable future materials that are structurally similar to natural tissue, while having the most appropriate functional properties, the possibility has emerged of using traditional or advanced materials as functional substrates and modifying their surfaces, with biological components or their analogues, to provide optimal biocompatibility. one of the most exciting possibilities here is using biomimetic surfaces as described in the article by Dennis Chapman and Stephen Charles.
This small selection of articles only covers a fraction of what is now a large field, but it does point the way towards more effective reconstruction of tissues and organs.
David F. Williams 
Filling the gaps
David C. Watts
We all know how uncomfortable it can be when dental fillings fall out and crowns become loose.
Now new synthetic polymers and composites may help to alleviate these vexing problems.
Synthetic polymers and polymer composites are used extensively in dentistry.
The major applications are in restorative dentistry which is concerned with the repair of teeth and oral structures damaged by disease or trauma.
Although all broad classes of materials (ceramics, metals, polymers and composites) are used in dentistry, a recent survey suggests that, as far as international research is concerned, the overwhelming interest is in polymeric restorative materials and the bonding of these materials to teeth or other restorative materials.
Dental materials are manufactured by a wide range of industries worldwide, including small specialist firms and large multinational companies.
Advances in dental polymers have generally originated in universities and government research institutions.
In the 1960s at Manchester University, where dental materials science was first established in the UK as an academic discipline, Dennis C. Smith developed the first adhesive dental cement, based on poly (acrylic acid).
Recently, novel polymer systems for use with denture bases have been developed by Michael Braden at the London Hospital.
The constraints upon dental materials are so severe that lengthy procedures to ensure the safety and efficacy of new products must be undertaken.
In particular, when it comes to the assessment of efficacy, there is often no single physicochemical parameter that is adequate to predict clinical performance.
Hence, many suitable properties must be considered, with extensive clinical trials.
Polymer types
Figure 1 shows a classification of the major types of dental polymers.
Some polymers are used clinically as oligomer- or monomer-based formulations that undergo polymerisation and/or cross-linking under the conditions of temperature and moisture in the mouth.
Others are supplied as polymers,per se , or are made as polymers in a dental laboratory, where elevated temperatures are used without any risk to the patient.
Fig. 1.
A classification of some types and applications of polymers in restorative dentistry
Impression materials are a good example of the former class.
these are used transiently in the mouth, setting within minutes of mixing and placement.
Their accuracy is crucial for producing indirect restorations and prosthetic appliances in the dental laboratory.
Most are derived from industrial sealants, such as polysulphide rubbers and silicone elastomers.
Of these, addition-cured compounds are generally superior to condensation polymers, because the latter can lose accuracy through diffusional loss of byproducts.
The difunctional polyether monomer used as the basis of one type of impression material
One type of polymer developed specifically for dentistry is the imine-terminated polyether.
The starting material is a polyether comprising a random copolymer of ethylene oxide and tetrahydrofuran — a copolymer is used to avoid the crystallinity that would result from homopolymer.
This polymer has terminal hydroxyl groups, which are esterified with an unsaturated acid, and an aziridine (ethylene imine) ring is added to the double bond.
Hence the polymer paste used for the impression material  contains this imine-terminated polyether, with a filler and plasticiser.
The cross-linking paste contains a material capable of donating carbonium ions, and cross-linking takes place at chain ends via a ring opening polymerisation.
This impression material is rapid setting; is clean and easy to handle; is hydrophilic, hence readily wets the oral tissues; and has excellent dimensional stability.
The largest group of laboratory made dental polymers are those used as denture bases.
These are made using a dough moulding process, rather than injection moulding, in which powdered poly-(methylmethacrylate), obtained by emulsion polymerisation, is mixed with the methyl methacrylate monomer and cross-linking agents.
Following swelling of the polymer beads, free-radical addition polymerisation is activated by using heat, with benzoyl peroxide as the initiator.
(A similar autocuring system is used in orthopaedic surgery for fixing hip-joints.)
Soft linings for dentures, which are required or at least desired by many patients, are a challenging research problem.
A complaint and/or elastomeric material is required that is non-toxic and non-irritant; has low water absorption; must nor support the growth of micro-organisms; must bond to the poly(methylmethacrylate) denture base; and can be made by available dental technology.
Parker and Braden have developed soft acrylic materials where the plasticiser does not leach out, but these have other problems.
Contrary to expectations, immersion in water results in very high prolonged uptake, without equilibrium after many years.
This was found to be a general feature of elastomers because of the presence in most polymers of water soluble impurities.
When water diffuses into an elastomer the water droplets form impurity sites.
These grow in size until osmotic and elastic forces balance or, in weak polymers, until fractures occur.
Alternatives to amalgam
The direct placement of a filling material is a common dental procedure.
Silver amalgam is still used in teeth in the rear of the mouth, but even then there are aesthetic considerations favouring the use of tooth-coloured polymer-ceramic composites that are now routinely used to repair front teeth.
These materials are based on difunctional methacrylate monomers and silane, or graft-coated ceramic fillers.
They have been extensively researched and a wide range of sophisticated techniques have been used.
One major feature of these products is the use of visible blue light for activating polymerisation in situ in the tooth cavity.
This frees the dentist from working with materials that have already begun to set before they are adequately placed and shaped.
The chemistry of these visible light-cured (VLC) materials was developed in the UK and is based on a camphoroquinone-tertiary amine system.
These materials are cured at oral temperatures (37°C) and are rapidly transformed from a plastic paste-like consistency to the glassy state.
Polymerisation thus becomes a self-limiting process.
The degree of monomer conversion is typically 50–70 per cent and there is a limited amount of localised segmental motion.
This process is particularly interesting because it involves two types of irreversible physicochemical changes (problems in a general subject area that has recently seen the award of the Nobel Prize for physics to Pierre-Gilles de Gennes).
First, there is the conversion of a sol (a colloidal solution) to a gel (or an infinitely connected network of polymer chains), which is approximately described as formally similar to a critical phenomenon, and for which the formalism of scaling theories is applicable and secondly, the conversion of the gel to a much less compliant, rigid glass, which is governed by diffusion processes.
These processes determine the probability of two components being close enough together to allow covalent bonding by addition reaction.
Fig. 2. (a ) Experimental set-up for measuring of cuspal deformation in teeth during light-activated polymerisation of a polymer-composite restorative material.
(b ) Experimental record of rapid cuspal deformation.
Associated with these processes is polymerisation shrinkage.
This can lead to clinical problems including the deformation of the bonded cusps of teeth (Fig. 2 ) or to interfacial debonding and the production of microscopic gaps between restorative material and natural tooth tissue, and thus the development of dental monomers with zero polymerisation contraction would represent a significant advance.
There is some evidence that a decrease in free volume (ie shrinkage) may be delayed in the glassy state and thus may occur gradually with polymer ageing.
Where free volume is unrelaxed, this allows segmental mobility that, in turn, is a prerequisite for further monomer conversion (Fig. 3 ).
These views are consistent with the fact that both the isothermal segmental mobility and shrinkage-time  behaviour can be characterised by ,— the Kohlrausch-Williams-Watts relaxation function.
One way to exploit and overcome the problem of unreacted monomer groups in clinical polymers is to make so-called composite inlays in the laboratory that are subsequently bonded into the dental cavities with an adhesive.
The extra-oral treatment requires processing at temperatures closer to the glass transition temperature where segmental mobility allows additional polymerisation.
Fig. 3.
The distinct processes of monomer conversion and free volume shrinkage, in glassy, crosslinked dental polymers are coupled together through polymer chain segmental mobility, μ (t ,T ), a function of time and temperature.
Glass ionomers
Another important class of dental material used for several applications, including selected fillings, is glass ionomer cement, invented by Wilson and Kent and further developed by Wilson and co-workers at the Laboratory of the Government Chemist.
Increasingly these fluoride-releasing materials are being renamed glass-polyalkenoate cement.
In their simplest form, they consist of an ion-leachable glass that undergoes a setting reaction with aqueous solutions of polymers or copolymers of acrylic acid (Fig. 4 ).
The material is adhesive to dental tissues and is biocompatible.
Fig. 4.
The setting process is glass ionomer (polyalkenoate) cements gives a complex heterogeneous structure.
Recently, hybrid glass ionomers have been made that cure partly by light-activated polymerisation, besides the normal acid-base setting reaction.
The advantage of these ionomers is that the initial setting process, by photochemical polymerisation, gives the cement good early protection against attack by moisture.
Light-cured glass ionomers consist of a complex mixture of components.
These include a polyelectrolyte, such as polyacrylic acid, often with grafted photocurable sidechains; water; a photocurable comonomer and cosolvent such as hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA); and an ion-leachable glass.
Consequently, these ionomers set by several competing reactions to give complex structures.
The initial setting reaction is photochemical polymerisation.
Depending on the precise details of the formulation, this process is either a copolymerisation of the HEMA with the polymer side chains, or homopolymerisation of the functional groups in the side chains.
Subsequently, the acid-base reactions typical of glass ionomers take place.
Adhesion problems
One great challenge in producing new dental materials is the achievement and maintenance of adhesion of these biomaterials to vital tissues.
The tooth, for example, is a living organ, at equilibrium with a complex biological environment and set in the mouth close to blood vessels, nerves, sense organs and salivary glands.
Enamel, though a fossilised shell of hydroxyapatite, is coated with a gelatinous layer of protein, polysaccharides and microorganisms — a good repellant for any adhesive.
Bonding to enamel has been done successfully by etching the surface with orthophosphoric acid and subsequently infiltrating with resin monomers.
The dentine that forms the tough inner core of the tooth is a vital tissue, made of a composite of collagen and hydroxylapatite, and containing tubules that radiate from the pulp cavity at the centre of the tooth.
The tubules exude fluid when cut and contain living cells, as well as nerves.
The first bonding systems for dentine that were reproducible enough to eliminate the need for mechanically retentive cavities were first seen in the late 1970s.
Nakabayashi and coworkers reported the first system based on methyl methacrylate, with tributyl borane as initiator and 4-META as bonding comonomer.
Methyl methacrylate is placed on the cut dentine surface, and the monomer diffuses through the layer of smeared and denatured collagen and into the dentine.
The tributyl borane, in the presence of water, splits into butyl radicals that graft onto the collagen molecules and initiate the polymerisation of the methyl methacrylate.
The 4-META is a methacryl-substituted mellitic anhydride that is hydrolysed to mellitic acid and chelates calcium.
This chelation adds to the binding between the growing methyl methacrylate chains, increasing both grafting and the crosslink density of the final acrylic-dentine composite layer.
Several different types of these monomer bonding systems have recently been made.
The successful dentine bonding agents have one thing in common: they are more like welds than the simple bonds between two substrates in which the adhesive is present only as an almost monomolecular layer.
The bond region between the composite restorative material and dentine may be 50–300 μm thick, with gradients of intimately mixed components that have originated in either the substrate or the bonding agent, extending throughout the bond.
Conclusion
Despite the severe constraints upon functional dental polymers, research is continuing, especially in the relationships between polymer structure and properties.
The next decade may well see the introduction of more designer polymers and composites, such as adhesive liquid crystalline systems and biocompatible monomers with reduced polymerisation shrinkage.
Glossary
Critical phenomenon:a change of physical property associated with the critical point of a phase change.
Dough moulding:a low temperature process that begins with mixing powdered solid polymer and the corresponding liquid monomer.
The polymer swells into a dough-like consistency which is then packed into a mould.
Graft-coated:ceramic composites that are formed by using reagents that generate free radical sites on the ceramic surface.
These sites then propagate reactions of the di-methacrylate polymerisation by forming hydrolytically stable covalent bonds between the graft sites on the ceramic particles and the polymer matrix.
Injection moulding:the injection of molten polymer into a heated mould.
Ionomers:synthetic polymers containing ionisable groups, either covalently bound to polymer chains or in the polymer matrix.
Scaling:the relaxation (time-correlation) functions (which characterise a material's response to changes in an applied mechanical or electromagnetic field), measured at different temperatures , may be made to coincide on a single ‘master’ curve  by scaling the time axis with a temperature-dependent characteristic time .
Eye Contact
B. Tighe
The eye is one of the most delicate and complex organs in the body.
As a result, synthetic materials that are to be used in the eye need to have very special properties.
The eye (Fig. 1 ) holds a special place in biomaterial research because of its ready accessibility and the deceptive complexity of tears.
This has been particularly so in the development of hydrophilic (water soluble) biomaterials.
For the first decade in which hydrogels were used as biomaterials, it was only poly (2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)— polyHEMA — that found any widespread application, whereas in the eye a relatively wide variety of compounds were examined.
Since then, however, few new hydrogels have become routinely available for contact lens work, whereas the wider exploration of hydrogels in other biomedical applications has increased.
This is because of the decision of the US Food and Drugs Administration some 20 years ago to classify contact lenses as drugs.
Fig. 1.
Simplified anatomy of the eye.
Contact lens work, and the ready accessibility of the eye can also help to study the early stages of the interaction of biological components with synthetic materials.
The problem of deposits on soft contact lenses is not a recent or unique phenomenon.
The underlying processes that govern this interaction are common to many areas where certain materials come into contact with biological solutions.
Thus the deposition of tear fluid debris, the clotting of blood on foreign surfaces, the formation of dental plaque, marine fouling and the fouling of membranes used in biochemical separations are all examples of the same fundamental phenomenon.
This phenomenon frequently begins with the adsorption of protein at an interface and is followed rapidly by the competitive adsorption of other biochemicals.
The initiating processes in all these interactions are referred to as biological interface conversion processes and can be easily studied in the eye because contact lenses can be removed and analysed after only a few minutes' wear.
It is difficult to conceive of a surgical technique that would allow implantation and removal, with equal rapidity, in a blood contact situation.
Thus the eye presents a real opportunity for in vivo studies of some aspects of biocompatibility.
This is especially true for hydrogels.
The structures of some biomedically useful polymers.
Hydrogels
A well-known technique for converting glassy polymers into flexible materials is to incorporate ‘plasticiser’.
This is a mobile component, often a high boiling organic liquid, that will act as an ‘internal lubricant’.
This principle has been used in an ingenious way in hydrogels.
The simplest hydrogel is poly (2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate) known as polyHEMA.
This polymer was developed by the Czechoslovakian chemist, Otto Wichterle, and its basic structure is very similar to that of poly (methyl methacrylate)(PMMA).
The most significant difference is that every unit of the poly-HEMA chain contains a hydroxyl group.
Most ophthalmic research stems from these two carbon backbone polymers and an elastomer, silicone rubber, which is based on the poly (dimethyl siloxane) heterochain structure.
In the absence of water both PMMA and polyHEMA are hard, clear and glassy.
When in contact with water, however, the materials behave quite differently.
Whereas PMMA remains hard and glassy, the hydroxyl groups in poly-HEMA take up water, converting it to a clear, flexible elastomeric gel.
The properties of the hydrogel are influenced both by the structure of the polymer network and by the water, which acts just like a conventional plasticiser.
More significantly, however, the water performs two other functions.
It acts as a bridge between the natural and the synthetic systems giving greater biocompatibility, or perhaps more properly biotolerance, and confers membrane properties on the hydrogel, allowing transport of oxygen and water soluble metabolites through the polymer matrix.
Fig. 2.
Cross-sectional structure of the cornea.
Scleral buckling agents
Hydrogels have considerable potential in various ophthalmic applications.
For example, a detached retina can be reattached to the underlying choria, its source of nutrition, by using a procedure known as scleral buckling.
This is normally done by using an implant that causes the indentation of the sclera — the firm white fibrous membrane that forms the outer covering of the eyeball.
The implant material has traditionally been made of silicone rubber but the potential advantages of a poly (methyl acrylate- co -hydroxethyl acrylate) hydrogel implant are now recognised.
Not only is this material soft and elastic but unlike its silicone rubber analogue, it can be impregnated with a hydrophilic antibiotic which is then locally released.
This can help prevent infection during the immediate post-operative period.
The swelling characteristics of the hydrogel can be exploited in a number of ways, depending on how it is pre-conditioned before being inserted.
For example, it can be conditioned in a hypertonic saline solution so that on absorbing body fluids it increases in size, thus achieving a higher buckle than is possible with a non-swelling implant.
Alternatively, by conditioning in a physiologically isotonic saline solution, it can remain at a constant size.
Finally, it can be inserted into the eye in a swollen state, higher than its equilibrium value in the body, so that it gradually decreases in size, thus reducing the degree of scleral buckling after chorioretinal adhesion.
Intraocular lenses
Intraocular lenses (IOLs) are now used extensively to restore sharp sight following the removal of cataracts.
For many years IOLs were made from PMMA, with polypropylene or poly(ethylene) terephthalate) haptics (fixation loops).
However, problems arise because these lenses can damage the corneal endothelium if they come into contact with it during surgery.
To overcome the problem PMMA lenses have been surface modified with a radiation grafted hydrogel coating of poly (vinyl pyrrolidone) which appears to improve biocompatibility and reduces endothelium damage.
This material shows the potential advantages of hydrogel IOLs, which are now used extensively in ocular applications.
The flexibility of hydrogels means that the lenses can be folded and inserted through a smaller incision than conventional ‘hard’ lens, or even inserted while dehydrated and allowed to hydrate in the eye.
However, hydrogels do have some disadvantages including their low mechanical strength (which may cause problems during manipulation for implantation) and their relatively low refractive index, which may mean using thicker lenses to achieve a given optical power.
Ocular drug delivery
Another area of interest is that of using synthetic polymers for sustained ocular drug delivery.
This has distinct advantages over using eye drops.
In fact the bulk of an eye drop has a halftime of residence ranging from 10 s to 4 min, depending on the size of the drop.
This is because of the reactions induced by instillation —ie reflex tearing, blinking and lacrymal drainage, all of which lead to dilution and elimination of the foreign substance.
The residence time of the instilled drug can be increased by mimicking the interactions that normally occur between the mucoid component of the tear film and the corneal surface.
The knowledge obtained from solutions that are put into the eye for other purposes is considerably valuable.
Amongst these are contact lens wetting solutions, comfort drops and artificial tears, which, perhaps surprisingly, have similar compositions.
Wetting solutions and artificial tears are particularly important.
They are used to increase the comfort of dry eye sufferers and contact lens wearers.
The ideal tear substitute should promote the formation of a functional tear film which would preserve visual sharpness and restore and maintain the health of the cornea (Fig. 2 ).
These artificial tear solutions are based on viscous polymers, most commonly containing methyl cellulose, hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose or polyvinyl alcohol.
The high viscosity of these solutions keeps them in the eye longer, while the polymer itself is intended to mimic the ocular mucins (glycoproteins), a deficiency of which is often the cause of dry eye symptoms, and promote tear film stability.
The use of polymers such as hydroxypropylmethyl cellulose and polyvinyl alcohol as tear replacements and as vehicles for instilled substances increases their residence time within the tear film.
There are three contributory mechanisms:
increasing the volume of fluid available in the marginal tear strip;
adsorption of polymers at the corneal surface; and
creating a polymer film at the air-tear interface which supports or drags a layer of water along with it as it spreads out over the ocular surface with each blink.
The concentration and duration of exposure of a medication in the eye are determined by the character and dynamics of the preocular tear film.
Retention of the medication depends upon tear flow.
New drug delivery systems could make use of the interactive facility of the ocular glycoproteins and the corneal surface to prolong the retention of, and thereby the bioavailability of, drugs.
The glycoprotein appears to transform the low-energy corneal epithelial surface into a higher energy surface, via adsorption.
This effect, combined with increased affinity toward water and the lowering of the surface tension of the tears, is sufficient to wet the hydrophobic  surface of the cornea in the eye completely.
Another approach to ocular drug delivery is to insert a solid polymer device beneath the lid.
Hydrogel contact lenses, for example, can be used for the controlled release of antibiotics to patients waiting for cataract surgery.
Other ocular devices have been used to deliver medication, such as pilocarpine, used in glaucoma to reduce the intraocular pressure, and tetracycline, directly onto the eye.
Although using hydrogel lenses to administer medication increases the bioavailability of the drug and thus allows a lower dose to be given, the treatment is expensive and problems may arise if long periods of extended wear are necessary.
The potential for improving ocular drug delivery by using a ‘smart’ soluble polymer, which can interact with the corneal glycocalyx and prolong drug retention, is considerable.
Structures of typical monomers used in hydrogel synthesis
Contact lenses
Various scientists have pioneered contact lens research but a sketch by Leonardo da Vinci is widely believed to be the earliest known reference to the principle of a contact lens (Fig. 3 ).
However, it was not until the mid-19th century that the clinical implications of such a device were envisaged, and only recently that contact lenses became part of the routine armoury of medical corrective devices.
It is not immediately obvious that using polymers for contact lenses represents an example of the biomedical application of synthetic materials.
Using similar materials in joint replacements, heart valves, membrane oxygenators and haemodialysis membranes presents specific problems associated with, for example, their biocompatibility, strength and permeability that might seem to be absent in contact lenses.
This certainly not the case, however, and the general biomedical principle of designing the material to give a balance of properties appropriate to the particular environment is very important.
The situation is less critical in lenses used for daily wear only, than in extended war lenses.
However, in both cases similar properties to those in other biomedical applications are involved.
Fig. 3.
An early representation of the principle of a contact lens as drawn by Leonardo da Vinci in 1508.
The current scene
The history of the development of contact lens materials is interesting.
Glass was used exclusively for many years and the lenses were normally ground individually.
PMMA began to replace glass in the 1940s because of its toughness, its optical properties and its physiological inactivity — also it was easily processed by using existing turning techniques.
PMMA's biocompatibility is said to have been deduced from the fact that World War II fighter pilots were found to tolerate splinters of the polymer which had become embedded in their eyes following damage to their cockpits in aerial combat.
It was not, therefore, a purpose designed polymer and yet it did not have any serious competitor until hydrogels emerged as  potential contact lens materials some years later.
The potential use of hydrogels in the manufacture of soft contact lenses provided the commercial incentive for much of the continued effort in the field.
This in turn stimulated interest in the development of improved hard lens materials to replace PMMA.
These materials are predominantly based on siloxy methacrylates, which contain branched dimethyl siloxane substituents on a methacrylate stem.
As a result they combine, to a degree, the high oxygen permeability of silicone rubber and the convenience of free radical polymerisation.
An extensive range of materials is now available in addition to PMMA, which is now little used.
The increased interest of larger companies in the contact lens industry has had several effects, including a move away from lenses made by lathe cutting in prescription houses from polymer blanks, to the in-house control of material manufacture, lens fabrication and the supply of finished lenses by a smaller number of larger concerns.
These two distinct types of lens source have always coexisted; it is the balance between they that has changed.
One effect of this has been the interest of larger companies in cheaper methods of lens fabrication (such as direct-cast polymerisation of lenses) and the economics of scale.
This has led to a strong marketing campaign for the concept of disposable lenses, which are replaced monthly, weekly or even (in principle) daily.
Ocular environment
The cornea governs the permeability requirements of the material used in contact lenses.
Because the cornea is avascular, it needs to respire directly from the atmosphere.
In cases where the oxygen supply is curtailed, the Krebs cycle is disturbed and causes corneal oedema (an excessive accumulation of fluid).
In the closed environment of the eye the oxygen concentration in the tears is maintained, although at a reduced level, form various peripheral blood vessels.
Because the lens acts as a relatively immobile membrane at night, it is not difficult to calculate the level of permeability required.
In hydrogels, the transport processes are governed by the water content of the hydrogel and, as a rule of thumb, a polymer containing 70 per cent water is required while wearing a lens when sleeping.
Most commercial contact lens materials in this category are simple cross-linked copolymers of vinyl pyrrolidone with 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate or methyl methacrylate.
The presence of this amount of water in the polymer also affects its mechanical properties.
Here the balance of properties is governed by the eyelid.
Although soft materials are, in general, more comfortable to the eyelid, there is a lower limit to the stiffness that can be tolerated.
This is because the eyelid exerts a fairly considerable deforming force during blinking.
It is here that the polymer scientist needs to manipulate the cross-link and backbone structure, while maintaining the same water content, to limit deformation under eyelid load to around 5 per cent, with good elastic recovery.
Table 1.
Some properties of the cornea and its environment.
Although it is easy to appreciate that the polymer must be sufficiently wettable to sustain a coherent layer of tear fluid, it might be thought that all problems associated with wettability would be overcome by the presence of water in the material.
Unfortunately this is not the case.
The surface chemistry of the hydrogel governs the complex series of events that lead to a variety of possible deposits on the surface when the lenses are worn.
Here, as in blood contact devices, the phenomenon of protein adsorption is an important first step but subsequent deposits are complex and contain calcium, mucopolysaccharides and lipids, in addition to the major tear fluid proteins.
The most widely accepted model for the tear film is a three layered structure consisting of a superficial lipid layer, a middle aqueous layer, and an inner mucin layer adsorbed to the corneal and conjunctival epithelia.
The combined complexity of the chemistry, the physical structure and the involvement of the lid present problems in achieving biocompatibility.
It is partially because of the need to overcome the problems of ocular compatibility that the concept of disposable lenses has found such ready acceptance.
They are, however, only a partial solution to the problem.
Consideration of the properties of biological environments that are to be interfaced with synthetic polymers is very important.
However, making a synthetic equivalent to the cornea is difficult because the surface and bulk properties are governed separately by the epithelium and stroma (the supportive tissue of an organ), and their natures are quite different.
However, the information is valuable in providing a basic understanding of the way in which hydrogels behave in the eye — particularly in extended wear.
The appropriate data, which are summarised in Table 1, provide the basis for the more detailed considerations of mechanical properties, oxygen permeability and surface properties, oxygen permeability and surface properties that are essential for the successful design of new materials.
In contrast to the surface of a synthetic polymer, however, the epithelial cell surface is highly complex and organised.
Although the chemical nature of some of the major cell surface components are known, little detailed information is known about the in vivo organisation of these components on the other cell surface.
Even so, to understand the chemistry of the corneal glycocalyx would be one thing, but to produce a truly biomimetic surface is quite another.
Contact lens research allows many interesting interactions of biomaterials to be studied, and one sobering outcome of the experimental work done in this area can be summarised in the statement ‘you can affect the rate but not the fate’.
In essence, changes to material chemistry within the hydrogel family produce changes in the rate at which the various spoiling processes occur, but do not inhibit them.
It is a relatively easy matter to achieve dramatic reductions in protein deposition but much more difficult to combine this with the prevention of lipid penetration.
There is clearly a great deal to be done in understanding the initiating steps in order to effect more marked changes in  spoilation resistance.
Conclusion
The work done at Aston focuses on the problem of tear interactions with polymers.
To do this we have developed an in vitro tear model in which the role of lipids and carbohydrate derivatives, such as mucin, can be studied, as well as the range of tear proteins.
(This work goes on in parallel with in vivo studies.)
The effect of extrinsic factors such as skin lipids, care solutions and cosmetics all play an important part.
Not all enzyme cleaners behave identically and, in leaving some tear proteins virtually untouched on the lens surface, they alter the course of subsequent tear interactions.
Similarly, surfactant cleaners differ quite dramatically in their efficiency and partial cleaning produces a partially modified lens surface.
At the heart of the work lies the development of techniques that can be used to analyse individually worn lenses for all tear components — preferably non-destructively.
Excellent progress is being made, but there are still many problems to solve and a great deal of blood, sweat, and tears ahead!
High performance bioceramics
Peter M. Marquis
Performance materials are becoming increasingly important in clinical applications and ceramics have provided some significant advances in medical and dental research.
The conventional image of a ceramic is of a hard brittle material used to make items such as crockery and tiles.
While this view may have been valid a century ago, the situation has changed over the past two decades and ceramics are now widely used in many engineering applications, including wear components, seals, bearing surfaces and engine components.
These high performance ceramics are also finding an increasing range of applications in medicine.
In clinical applications the materials used must combine good mechanical properties with chemical characteristics which do not cause adverse reactions in the body.
A biomaterial may also have to function for long periods of time in the body.
Failure of a biomaterial can at best cause discomfort to the patient and at worst can be fatal.
Ceramics are valuable clinical materials because they invoke either a neutral or positive biological response in the body.
However, their use is limited because they are brittle and perform poorly in tensile loading situations.
Although developments in engineering ceramics are producing ceramic composites with excellent properties, the major current interest is focused on mechanical properties liked to tissue responses.
Although an increasing range of clinical applications are being found, the range of actual ceramics used is still limited (Table 1).
Artificial hips
One of the first ceramics to be used in medicine was alumina; normally used for constructing the heads of artificial hips.
It is the excellent wear characteristics of alumina which are the principal advantage in artificial hip systems.
The wear of an alumina-alumina interface is an order of magnitude lower than the metal-polyethylene combination used in conventional artificial, metal-hip systems.
In addition, the coefficient of friction of the bioceramic combination of the natural joint, while the coefficient of metal based systems increases, crating debris.
This level of performance demands a very fine grained alumina with a grain size of below 4 μm.
Larger grains are liable to be pulled out during polishing, destroying the fine surface needed to maximise the function of the artificial hip.
Fine grain size also improves the mechanical strength and toughness of the alumina.
However, care must be taken when using sintering aids and impurities, both of which can lead to a degradation of properties in the body and premature failure of the prosthesis.
An additional problem when using alumina in load bearing situations is that its elastic modulus (380 GPa) is significantly higher than that of the cortical bone (72.5 GPa) with which it is in contact.
As a result, an alumina implant can shield the surrounding bone from the stresses generated by normal activity, and the bone loses the stimulation which is necessary for it to remain healthy.
In older patients this effect can cause bone loss and loosening of alumina based implants.
A further restriction on the clinical use of alumina is the response of tissues to its implantation.
Common to most ceramics, alumina does not cause adverse reactions on implantation and is generally classified as being inert, or nearly inert.
The body responds to an alumina implant by surrounding it with a fibrous capsule which can be several micrometres thick.
This fibrous layer stops any chemical or biological bonding between the implant and the surrounding tissue.
Provided the fibrous interfacial layer is compressively loaded there is no problem, but if movement is possible the layer increases in thickness and can lead to a breakdown of the interface and failure of the implant.
Despite its limitations, alumina is a valuable clinical bioceramic, although metal prostheses remain the most popular choice.
Table 1.
Examples of the clinical uses of bioceramics.
Dental crowns
A significant clinical limitation of alumina is the response of tissues to the presence of the ceramic.
In many dental applications the biomaterials which are used are only in contact with fluids, such as saliva, and thus mechanical properties are important.
A classic example of this is the dental crown where diseased or damaged material is removed from the tooth and is repaired by placing a restorative cap over the remaining tooth.
In this case the materials which are used must be strong enough to withstand placement of the crown by the dentist and the subsequent stresses created during eating.
For many years a mixture of alumina and glass was used because the glass gave a good visual approximation to a natural tooth while the alumina was sufficiently strong to cope with biting loads.
Unfortunately the strength of these aluminous porcelains was only sufficient to allow the system to be used at the front of the mouth and less aesthetic materials had to be used for molar teeth.
However, a recent innovation looks capable of being used throughout the mouth.
This new approach produces a very high alumina content — 85 per cent compared with 40–60 per cent in conventional dental ceramics.
The basic approach is to apply a slurry of fine alumina powder to a model of the tooth stub.
When the moisture is removed from the slurry the powder compact is sintered, producing a lightly bonded microporous ceramic.
Strength is then introduced by infiltrating a glass into the compact.
Capillary forces assist this process and a dense, high strength material is produced.
Indeed the manufacturers claim strengths of around 600 Mpa, which is comparable to many commercial dense aluminas.
Their strength probably comes from a combination of partial sintering and concentration of the glass phase at the grain boundaries, as is shown in the typical scanning electron micrograph of the structure (Fig. 1 ).
Fig. 1.
Scanning electron micrograph showing the distribution of the angular grains of alumina in Inceram.
Skeletal bone fillers
Not all clinical applications demand the high mechanical strengths that are needed in dental crowns.
In many cases the key requirement is that the bioceramic should become an intimate part of the tissue it is replacing.
Areas where this need can arise usually occur when a surgical procedure or accident has resulted in loss of bone.
Traditionally the damaged bone was either left to repair and replace itself as best it could or bone was harvested from elsewhere in the body and used to augment the lost bone.
This approach tends to produce either a weakened bone or subjects the patient to a second operation.
Over the past decade many synthetic bone fillers have been made, almost all of which are calcium phosphate or carbonate-based ceramics.
The design target for these materials is that they should mimic the traebecular (interconnected strand) structure of natural bone which is very similar to that of a sponge.
A natural material that has this type of structure is coral, which has been used to produce a range of implant ceramics.
Although coral is a calcium carbonate, it has an open porosity which allows bone to grow into it after implantation promoting a mechanical fixation with the natural bone.
While simple coral beads have been clinically successful, there is some uncertainty over the long-term stability of pure corals.
To overcome this problem corals can be hydrothermally converted to calcium phosphate, producing an implant material with a chemical composition closer to natural bone while retaining the open porosity of the original coral.
There are also alternative routes for producing macroporous hydroxyapatite powder which will create macroporosity during firing of the mixture.
However, it is difficult to control pore size and distribution.
A more consistent structure can be produced by forming a reticulated foam structure from an hydroxyapatite ceramic (Fig. 2 ).
Although all of the materials described have very similar chemical structures and composition, their bioactivity can differ.
Fig. 2.
Reticulated hydroxyapatite structure with a more open pore structure which more closely mimics that of natural traebecular bone.
A key factor to consider when using an implant ceramic to replace bone, is the nature of the bone formed adjacent to the implant.
Normal bone is continually being reformed and recreated.
In the early stages after implantation the structure of the new bone next to the implant ceramic is disorganised but as implantation time is increased the arrangement of the bone structure becomes more mature and closer to that of normal bone (Fig. 3 ).
Hydroxyapatites processed from coral achieve a more organised bone structure earlier than totally synthetic materials.
The reason for this is not clear but it is believed to be related to surface characteristics such as defect chemistry.
However, bioceramics based on calcium phosphates show excellent reactions with bone and there is normally little or no fibrous layer at the bone ceramic interface.
This group of ceramics is therefore the focus of substantial interest.
Bioceramic coatings
Although macroporous bioceramics show excellent biocompatibility, they are inherently brittle and lack the mechanical strength or toughness needed for high stress use —eg in hip replacements.
In these situations metals are preferred for mechanical reasons but problems can arise owing to toxic reactions to either the metal, or wear debris.
This can be overcome by combining the mechanical strength of the metal with the biocompatibility of hydroxyapatite by coating a metal with this ceramic — the coating is usually deposited using plasma spraying.
In this process particulate hydroxyapatite is projected at high velocity through a high temperature plasma flame (ca 10 000°C).
AS the powder passes through the flame, particles can become molten or partly molten depending on the conditions of the process.
As the particles impact on the substrate being sprayed they normally become flattened as they rapidly cool, creating a laminated microstructure as shown in (Fig. 4 ).
The rapid cooling creates a range of microstructures, often including glass phases.
When hydroxyapatite is sprayed onto a surface the coating is principally still hydroxyapatite, although a range of other phases are also usually present, including calcium phosphate glasses.
At the metal substrate-coating interface, calcium titanate and tricalcium phosphate have been identified, and within the bulk of the coating a combination of calcium phosphate phases are found.
Fig. 3.
Backscattered electron micrograph of hydroxyapatite after implantation, showing bone growing up to the implant.
(Light phase = implanted hydroxyapatite, grey phase = new bone.)
Fig. 4.
Cross-section of a plasma sprayed hydroxyapatite structure showing a typical laminated structure.
The significance of these phases, in addition to hydroxyapatite, is their variable bioactivity and solubility after implantation.
Some of these phases may dissolve and the coatings will break down by a combination of solution and particle attrition as less soluble particles break free and migrate into the body.
If this happens then the coatings' ability to act as a barrier between the metal implant and the body can be lost.
However, dissolution does not occur for some time and the excellent tissue reactions of the hydroxyapatite coatings have a very positive role.
With these coatings, bone bonding is accelerated and it is possible to eliminate the use of bone cements in fixing artificial hips into the femur.
The cements that are used in orthopaedic surgery generate heat during setting and do not have the same level of biocompatibility as bioceramics.
As a result, bone at the cement body interface can die and in the longer term can result in loosening of the artificial hip and the need for a second operation.
Where hydroxyapatite coatings are used without cement, the bone bonds directly to the implanted artificial hip and a good quality, healthy interface is created.
Indeed the strength of the bond makes it difficult to remove the so called cementless hips if a second operation is needed.
While there are still reservations among orthopaedic surgeons about the problems of removing the artificial hip and the long-term stability of the coatings, many believe that using these coatings offers the potential for much longer lifetimes of the artificial joint and their use in younger patients.
Bone tumours
The previous examples of the use of bioceramics have all included some dependence on mechanical strength and uses have focused on replacing diseased or damaged tissues.
Although not yet in clinical use there is now some highly innovative potential in the treatment of disease.
An example of this is in the treatment of tumours.
It is well known that heat can be used to kill malignant cells but this approach cannot normally be used where the tumour cells are deeply seated in the body, as can be the case in bone tumours.
The problem is that to get sufficient heating at the site of the tumour from an external source generates unacceptable levels of heat in the healthy soft tissues surrounding the tumour.
A novel approach has recently been developed by a Japanese group.
The Japanese researchers have implanted a ferromagnetic glass ceramic into the bone cavity close to the tumour site.
Applying an external alternating magnetic field then causes the implanted ceramic to heat up.
(Temperatures of up to 40°C can be attained.)
However, the heating effect is now at the site of the tumour and can be controlled, localising the impact on other cells.
The glass ceramic that is used, contains a mixture of iron oxide and calcium silicate contained in a glass matrix which has a good tissue response.
It is claimed that not only does the implant allow local treatment of the tumour but also acts as a bone filling bioceramic.
The future
In this short article it has been impossible to give a full account of the increasing impact of bioceramic research in medicine and dentistry.
As in other areas of materials science, the capacity of biological systems to manufacture materials with good properties is attracting attention.
For example, biological systems can produce complex shapes of defined chemical composition (Fig. 5 ).
Fig. 5.
Scanning electron micrograph of a diatom.
Tough strong ceramics can be collected on the sea-shore in the form of shells.
Studies of the production of shells and coral are no longer solely for zoologists: materials engineers are now becoming interested.
It may not be too long before bioceramics are grown at room temperature in a test tube rather than by an involved combination of crushing, pressing and firing at extremely high temperatures.
Further reading
Biomedical materials, MRS bulletin , vol 16, no 9, September 1991.
Designing biosensors
P. Vadgama
Biosensors already provide an attractive means of biochemical measurement.
Now with current research into new materials more efficient devices with higher specificities can be produced.
Alter almost three decades of escalating research effort, punctuated by occasional headline reports in the lay press, biosensors have become an integral part of analytical biochemistry.
However, a precise description has been hard to come by.
Like biotechnology, while there is a core definition that is generally accepted, some relevant topic areas have been neglected and some unrelated topics (eg NMR) have been suggested.
The core definition of a biosensor is where a self-contained probe-like device is used with a biologically derived recognition layer directly apposed to a transducer element.
The two compartments should behave as a single, functional unit, with the underlying transducer element achieving an extended analyte response through the selective analyte recognition capability of the ‘value added’ biolayer.
The problem with this definition is that it neglects other chemically and biochemically responsive sensors which lack a biolayer but which share not only similar functional principles, but offer equivalent analytical advantages.
They may also be subject to similar constraints and failures.
An additional consequence of this narrow definition has been an emphasis and preoccupation with the chemical and reactive sequences leading to signal generation, with little or no attention given to the materials that make up a biosensor.
The materials used to construct biosensors, and their covering layers, are important in determining the practical success of the biosensor.
The response to a ‘foreign’ device in the body depends largely upon its composition, which determines the performance in the biological matrix.
It can be argued that, at least over longer timescales, device composition and the reaction of the biological environment to it, both contribute to biosensor failure.
It is worthwhile stating the obvious, that biosensors do not function forever and will fail eventually.
The challenge in designing and using materials is how to delay the moment of ultimate failure.
There are two major weaknesses in biosensors.
The metastable biolayer — in some cases, a highly vulnerable entity — and an underlying transducer element that is subject to the inevitable signal drift of any physicochemical detector.
Linking the biolayer and the transducer for direct ‘biotransduction’ in the basic definition is simple in concept, and potentially easy to achieve (Fig. 1 ).
Thus analysis can be simplified by using reagentless biochemical transduction.
These systems are useful practically because they can be easily miniaturised, they can generate a direct electrical output, can give continuous readouts, and they can be used in biofeedback systems.
As a responsive composite ‘biomaterial’, a biosensor is rather special, not only in the complex, multiple alliance of the materials in any individual device, but also in the wide range of materials that must be considered for the many types of transduction systems.
The base materials of the underlying transducer are metallic — elemental or simple inorganic in nature (Fig. 2 ).
Choosing the transduction strategy is initially governed by the simplest, most direct route to reversible monitoring of biorecognition events in the biolayer.
However, failure of materials in ionically, enzymically and cellularly hostile biological solutions, caused by surface attack, material leaching, corrosion, electrofouling and mechanical break-up, can mean a complete change in transduction strategy — at the very least, modified materials or covering barrier layers may be necessary.
Transducer recognisable changes occurring in the biolayer are illustrated in (Fig. 3 ), and are the basic menu available to analytical biochemists.
The correct materials must be used for the underlying transducer element (Fig. 2 ), depending on the specific use of the biosensor.
If the make-up of the device is not appropriate to its application then it must be changed at an early stage.
Hence the need for biosensor research to be multidisciplinary, and the end-user must be involved as early as possible.
Fig. 1.
A schematic diagram of a biosensor as a dip-in probe for reagentless analysis.
Continuous transduction allows artificial biofeedback, process control, effluent treatment, and bioalarm systems for environmental hazards.
The biolayer
In most analytical methods, biologically derived reagents (enzymes, antibodies) are  exploited as simply a specialist, and rather labile, form of chemical reagent.
In a biosensor, the biolayer is a true material component in the device, and can be thought of as an intelligent biomaterial.
Creating this stable biolayer requires  immobilisation methods, similar to those used in chemical polymerisation, the difference being the need to take account of the intrinsic lability of biomolecules.
Generally, the molecule used is a protein, so classical protein immobilisation methods can be used.
These include physical adsorption (eg on controlled pore glass or alumina), chemical attachment to a surface (eg on carbon, Pt or, glass electrodes) physical entrapment in hydrophilic gels (eg polyacrylamide, polyvinyl alcohol or gelatin), chemical crosslinking (eg to albumin) and retention in protective microvesicles (eg liposomes or red cell membranes).
Reproducible immobilisation is difficult because of problems of variable denaturation of the protein during retention.
However, adequate specific activity can normally be retained within the biolayer itself.
Fig. 2.
Transducer elements commonly used in biosensors, and their major components.
Probably the most studied biolayer is where an enzyme layer is used over an electrochemical transducer, producing an enzyme electrode.
In this biolayer the operating mechanism involves enzymic conversion of the substrate (analyte) to a product which the transducer responds to.
For oxidoreductase enzymes, where the substrate is oxidised or reduced, some insoluble electron mediator may form whole or part of the working electrode to aid electron transfer and generate the current.
This scenario is purely chemical and omits any material engineering, as well as functional aspects such as enzyme layer permeability which affects the eventual rate of analyte conversion.
As a result, the signal size and speed of response may be crucially modified by the latter.
Thus mass transport is equally important to any transport phenomena in immobilised reactors and functionalised polymers.
With careful modification of materials (exploiting, for example, steric hindrance, charge effects, hydrophobic groups), it may be possible to control both solute partitioning and diffusion into a biolayer and to gain greater control over the behaviour of the biolayer.
In any case, mass transport in a protein biolayer is distorted to a greater extent than generally appreciated, and will be further affected where intact tissue, whole cells or organelle based biolayers are used.
Thus, if the enzymic component is sequestered in a cellular-subcellular location, access to substrate can only take place via lipid bilayers.
Fig. 3.
The biolayer as a recognition layer for the analyte.
Its stability needs and signalling capability are shown.
While mass transport hindrances at cellular-subcellular lipid bilayers slow response times, the advantages of an enzyme ‘immobilised’ in its natural site are that its in situ regeneration may be possible, natural multienzyme metabolic pathways may be exploited, and even the generation of coenzyme and intermediate reagents may occur.
Additionally, if mammalian tissues are used intact they can exhibit anisotropic solute diffusion —ie different in different directions.
This is well known for oxygen, and can be due to a specific cellular orientation, and a spatial orientation of connective tissue of glycoproteins, collagen and other biopolymers.
The extracellular matrix laid down by microbial cells in microbial biosensors will show a more random orientation of structural components, but these can also have a dominant influence on the flux of the product and the substrate.
Intact cellular biolayers that have been used so far have lacked the organisational structure for a rapid, coordinated, amplified response that exists in natural intact biosensors such as retinal rods and cones and olfactory receptors.
Recently an intact chemoreceptor system has shown a rapid response to amino acids in a biosensor, using the olfactory organ of the blue crab.
Analyte affinity constants of antibodies are at least an order of magnitude greater than those of enzymes, so much higher sensitivity is possible, but it is difficult to extract a detectable signal from the binding event.
Initially, conventional solution immunoassay was used; exploiting an electrochemical-enzymic label.
Now, however, in optically based biosensors, antibodies can form an integral part of the sensing device.
Industrial research has reflected this, and the earlier use of antibodies, based on electrochemical detection and a reformatted conventional immunoassay, has given way to antibodies being used as part of optical waveguides (eg flexible optical fibres, prisms and glass plates).
Here, with a surface immobilisation of an antibody binding of analyte (antigen) and antibody can generate a direct change in a surface optical property which can then be examined by the evanescent (decaying) wave from the waveguide surface.
The antibody surface concentration, orientation and surrounding microenvironment all dictate the immunosensing performance.
Unfortunately, only minimal control over this basic aspect of construction has been possible with these devices.
The appropriate design of the underlying surface (substrate) on which the antibody is immobilised is crucial in achieving greater control.
This, together with the antibody, provides the composite surface for capturing of the antigen from the sample (Fig. 4 ).
The surface microenvironment could not only influence initial immobilisation and orientation, but also antibody conformation and effectiveness.
Furthermore, specific surface active groups, van der Waals' forces, electric field gradients, steric effects etc are bound to modify the approach of an analyte to the surface.
Direct, independent control of this important interface currently lags behind a basic chemical and physical understanding of waveguide behaviour in solution.
The slow kinetics of antigen-antibody dissociation, unfortunately, precludes using antibodies in reversible sensors for continuous monitoring.
New technology for fusing antibody producing cells with ‘immortal’ cancer cells now allows the formation of hybridoma cells.
These cells can then produce large amounts of individualised antibodies.
Such monoclonal ‘designer’ antibodies from hybridoma cell lines have not yielded antibodies with acceptable binding reversibility, but these could be ‘tailored’by using chemically modified antibodies, antibody subcomponents and synthetic polypeptides.
Mammalian cell receptors can have high solute binding affinity, but also allow for rapid on/off binding kinetics.
These may eventually be harnessed as biosensor recognition components, although the structural lability of most receptors when separated from their lipid membrane environment is a serious problem.
The transducer element
Inevitability, it is easier to control the ‘man-made’ component (Fig. 1 ) of a biosensor.
It is often feasible to choose from more than one material or composite which is capable of selective transduction of the biolayer reaction (Fig. 2 ).
Factors that determine the choice of materials include ease of fabrication and miniaturisation, physical robustness and response stability.
For implantable devices the toxicity of the materials, immunogenicity, thrombogenicity and resistance to biodegradation are extremely important.
Fig. 4.
A schematic diagram of an optical waveguide with a surface-immobilised antibody, designed for the competitive immunoassay of an antigen.
Competing labelled antigen may be an enzyme or an optically active label.
Modifications to the waveguide that could influence biosurface immunoefficiency are listed.
Transducer elements based on standard electrochemical principles have dominated biosensor research, and much more is known about their make-up than for almost any other transducer system.
Glass membrane potentiometric electrodes were one of the first to be used as part of enzyme electrodes, typically for monitoring of pH in hydrolase catalysed reactions —eg urea assays.
Despite work on glass melts and composition, this technology has failed to provide membranes of equivalent value for other ions, at least in enzyme catalysed reactions.
Coupled with this has been the inevitable problem of glass fragility.
Liquid membranes that use a plasticised PVC, designed to hold ion exchanger or some selective ionophore for ionic recognition, offer some improvements.
However, even with careful recognition molecule design, selective recognition of quite simple organic solutes, and solutes involved in enzyme reactions has proved difficult.
Amperometric transducers have generally been more successful than their potentiometric counterparts, allowing detection of many organic solutes.
This is because, at appropriately applied voltages, many organic compounds are reduced or oxidised at the electrode surface, thus producing a current.
There is often little need to control the detector electrode composition with a redox reaction simply driven by an appropriate polarising voltage.
However, competing electrode surface reactions and surface film formation can disrupt the surface reaction and reproducible electrochemical transduction may be compromised.
Selectivity is quite a different issue.
Polarising windows are inadequate to give selectivity for most practical purposes, and barrier membranes must be used.
Recently, emphasis has been placed on electrode surface modification with lipids, polymeric films with functional groups and attachment of various dielectrics to help to discriminate between solute molecules.
Both fundamental electrochemistry and applied biosensors have benefited from these investigations, and modified electrodes of this type, together with newer electrode composites, will be increasingly important in constructing biosensors.
This approach has a precedent in the use of non-metallics as working electrode materials (eg polypyrrole and tetracyanoquinodimethane complex).
The adaptation of microelectronic fabrication techniques has allowed development of solid state ion-selective field effect transistors (ISFETs).
The ion-selective surface of an ISFET can modify current flow through surface changes, in the presence of solution ions.
Here, current rather than potential is the estimated parameter.
These use the principle of metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFET — a current transmitting semiconductor where resistance to current can be modulated by surface charge at the metal gate), but with the metal gate replaced by an ion-selective membrane.
(One benefit is the generation of a low impedance signal.)
These techniques have also allowed the formation of amperometric arrays for multianalyte sensing.
Reduced costs and ease of manufacture are obvious benefits, but with in situ signal processing ‘smart’ biosensors may also be possible.
Light transmitting waveguides and fibres have undergone intense development for the telecommunications industry.
As a result, new transducing mechanisms and probe designs have become available for biosensors.
A wide choice of spectrophotometric methods (absorbance, reflectance, fluorescence, luminescence) and geometry (single optical fibre, bundle, bifurcated fibre) is feasible; all that is needed is that the biolayer modulates the light path.
More detailed consideration of material requirements should allow multiplexing (the use of one channel for several messages) of such devices.
In addition to surface modification (Fig. 4 ), developing new biosensor waveguide materials could increase sensitivity.
Tailored materials could also help simplify bioreagent immobilisation and the replacement of unresponsive layers, protect surface biomolecules, and stop surface fouling.
Oscillating piezoelectric crystals can operate as microgravimetric sensors and can detect mass changes in a surface captured analyte — often a macromolecule.
These devices work on the principle that the oscillating frequency of a crystal under an applied voltage changes with crystal mass.
A selective recognition layer is required for viable measurements, but as with any directly contacting device, non-specific surface binding can lead to a high background signal.
Here too, surface coatings that modify interfacial properties are needed for more reliable operation in the liquid phase.
Packaging
Normally a biosensor cannot be used for practical biofluid measurements without some degree of protection from background interference and biofouling.
Until devices can be made with an intrinsic immunity from these problems, it is necessary to ‘package’ a device with specialist membranes and membrane laminates.
Membranes are used both at the interface with the bulk sample and between the biolayer and the transducer (Fig. 1 ).
For the former, the outer layer can improve biocompatibility; in this way the tendency for surface coagulation, complement activation and an immunological response are much less.
The outer membrane can also be used to further manipulate diffusion/partitioning of the analyte into the biolayer so that the influence of external physical and chemical variables is diminished.
This has been a problem in metabolite measurements when using enzyme electrodes.
Figure 5(a) shows enzyme entrapped in liposomes for undiluted blood glucose measurement.
The liposome bilayer reduces glucose access to the enzyme relative to that of the oxygen co-substrate, ensuring an adequate O2 supply at high blood glucose levels.
The stable liquid bilayer is also sufficiently biomimetic to minimise fouling.
Other strategies for controlling relative substrate are O2 diffusion-porous membranes and mosaic membranes where the effective ‘aperture’ for O2 diffusion into the enzyme layer is different to that for glucose (Fig. 5b ).
Inner membranes protect the underlying transducer element directly, but can also achieve selectivity.
Thus, selectivity for the H2O2 product is attained (Fig. 5b ) with low molecular weight cut-off or ionomeric membrane that rejects interferent anion transport (eg ascorbate and urate).
Fig. 5.
Enzyme electrode barrier membranes.
(a ) Biomimetic, liposomal lipid membrane. (b ) Composite diffusion barrier membrane with lipophilic pores for high O2 permeability.
The H2O2 selective membrane is also known.
Conclusion
Biosensors remain an important, and attractive means of biochemical measurement.
Existing biolayer/transducer combinations have all achieved ‘proof of principle’ capability, and look promising in bioanalysis.
However, to build on the past achievements of chemistry, it is now time to look at the material and constructional requirements of biosensors.
This needs materials scientists, whose contribution is likely to be as decisive for biosensor research as it has been for mainstream biomaterials research.
A coat of many lipids — in the clinic
D. Chapman and Stephen A. Charles
New phospholipid polymer coating may help to eliminate the adverse reactions that can take place between blood and certain material surfaces.
The clinical application of devices or materials which contact blood is of major importance in modern medicine.
Adverse reactions between foreign or prosthetic surfaces and blood components are the pre-eminent factors restricting the use of certain biomaterials.
Typical examples of this are the inability to have biosensors that can operate effectively for any length of time in blood and the need for anticoagulants during extracorporeal procedures such as dialysis and heart-lung bypass operations.
It was as long ago as 1863 that Lister pointed out, ‘the real cause of the coagulation of blood is the influence exerted on it by ordinary matter…the contact of which effects a disposition to coagulate’.
Fig. 1.
Illustration of a membrane, showing the phospholipid bilayer structure with associated proteins and carbohydrates.
There have been many attempts to understand why certain materials cause blood coagulation and many suggestions have been made as to how to overcome the problem.
Andrade has commented that, ‘virtually every physical and chemical characteristic of materials has been suggested as being important in blood coagulation and thrombosis’.
Over the past few decades, considerable research effort and capital has been directed towards developing materials that do not cause thrombus formation when exposed to blood.
However, because of the complexity and interdependence of the many parameters that govern platelet activation and coagulation, few, if any, satisfactory thromboresistant materials have been reported.
Attempted solutions
There have been many attempts to produce haemocompatible materials and some researchers have suggested that the key to producing such materials is to have a negatively charged surface.
Others have suggested that an appropriate interfacial free energy is necessary, or that a hydrophobic surface would be useful, or that an albumin coated surface would solve the problem.
A recent approach towards the elimination of surface-induced thrombosis has been the preadsorption of anti-thrombotic moieties, such as heparin (an anticoagulant produced in liver cells), or their inclusion in a copolymer lattice.
However, the clinical applications may be limited by the gradual erosion, or desorption, of the antithrombotic group or, as is the case for heparin, haemolysis and the strong interaction of platelets with the modified interface.
A new approach .
An alternative approach is to mimic biologically inert interfaces.
Recently, the development, characterisation and application of polymeric phospholipids which mimic the lipid surfaces of blood cells has been made.
The development of these compounds has arisen from many studies of the structure and function of biological membranes.
The specific application of these stable, membrane-mimicking polymers is based upon recent studies of the role of natural phospholipids in haemostasis (the arrest of bleeding) and thrombosis.
The plasma membrane is the medium through which all cells interact with their environment.
Researchers have done studies on the structure and dynamics of biological membranes.
The picture that emerges is one of a fluid matrix of bilayer lipid in, or upon, which proteins and glycoproteins are located (Fig. 1 ).
Proteins, which generally comprise about half the total mass of biomembranes, determine the specific membrane functions.
Similarly, homeostatic mechanisms that regulate the extracellular environment may be affected by characteristics of the  cell surface.
Mammalian membranes have an enormously diverse composition and may contain over 100 distinctly different lipids.
This diversity comes from variations in the hydrophobic (acyl chain) and hydrophilic (polar head group) portions of these lipids.
The acyl substituents of phospholipids provide the hydrophobic environment that is necessary for the function of intrinsic membrane proteins.
Each phospholipid series is characterised by a phase transition, below which its fatty acyl chains are in a quasi-crystalline array and above which the chains are in a more fluid state.
Some intrinsic proteins require a fluid environment for their activity, while others operate in a fixed, immobile, condition.
Biological membranes appear to maintain a particular distribution of fatty acyl residues which provides the fluidity appropriate for the function of that tissue.
The polar head groups are in contact with water and therefore contribute largely to the interfacial properties of cell surfaces.
The predominant head group present in biological membranes is phosphorylcholine.
The best studied models of biological membranes are those based upon aqueous dispersions of phosphatidylcholine, also known as lecithin (one of a group of phospholipids that are important constituents of cell membranes and are involved in the metabolism of fat by the liver).
Membrane lipid asymmetries .
Functional and compositional asymmetry is a characteristic of all membranes, and membrane proteins show asymmetry in their homeostatic maintenance of the cytoplasm.
Proteins are asymmetric in an absolute sense in that every copy of the polypeptide chain has the same orientation.
Lipid asymmetries have been described in various cell types, but their biological functions and frequencies of occurrence are, as yet, uncertain.
Lipid asymmetries may stem from the fact that biological membranes need to have asymmetric protein distributions across the bilayer.
In contrast to protein distributions, lipid asymmetries are not absolute.
The thermodynamic constraints against their transverse diffusion across the bilayer are less that those of membrane proteins.
In all of the cells for which lipid compositional asymmetries have been described the negatively charged phospholipids are predominantly located in the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, while the zwitterionic phospholipids, containing the phosphorylcholine headgroup, are found in the outer leaflet.
Research has suggested that for blood cells, this lipid asymmetry may help to maintain the delicate balance between haemostasis and thrombosis.
The distributional asymmetries of phospholipids in the plasma membrane of erythrocytes and platelets are shown in Fig. 2.
Despite the contrast in their biological functions, these cells show similarities in their phospholipid orientation.
The choline-containing phospholipids make up the major fraction of the lipid exposed at the cell surface, while the negatively charged phospholipids are confined to the cytoplasmic surface of the bilayer.
A minor fraction of phosphatidylserine may be present at the outer surface of platelets, but this cannot usually be detected.
Fig. 2.
A schematic representation of the vertical asymmetry in the distribution of the major phospholipids within the plasma membranes of human platelets and erythrocytes.
(PC = phosphatidylcholine; AM = sphingomyelin; PE = phosphatidylethanolamine; PS = phosphatidylserine; PI phosphatidylinositol.)
The cytoplasmic inner leaflets of the plasma membranes of erythrocytes and quiescent platelets have high procoagulant activities when they are assayed in vitro .
However, the outer surfaces are inactive in coagulation tests.
Similarly, no significant prothrombin-converting activity can be detected with intact endothelial cells or leucocytes, but is observed in cell homogenates, and in lipid extracts.
The procoagulant activity of the lipids in the cytoplasmic leaflets of these cells may be substituted, at least in part, by liposomes (concentric layers of lipid separated by water) composed of phosphatidylserine.
The increase in coagulation that results from adding specific lipid mixtures to plasma indicates that a number of haemostatic components has evolved which interact with a lipid-water interface of very restricted specificity.
This specificity does not include the surfaces of blood cells, which are clearly non-thrombogenic.
In new biomaterials it may be possible to imitate the natural surfaces of these cells.
The simplest common feature among the non-reactive cellular and model membranes is the high proportion of electrically neutral phospholipids, which contain the phosphorylcholine head group.
This is also the case for low density lipoproteins (LDL particles) which have a high proportion of the phosphorylcholine group on their outer surface (ca 90 per cent).
Polymeric phosphatidylcholines have been prepared in which the polar head group forms the interface, and which mimic the interfacial characteristics of the lipid of these natural cell and lipoprotein surfaces.
Scheme 1.
Formation of the polyconjugated phospholipid polymer from the diacetylenic monomer.
Phospholipid polymers .
Phospholipids which contain diacetylenic groups in their acyl chains can be synthesised.
These phospholipids form polymers when they are irradiated with ultraviolet light (Scheme 1).
C-NMR and Raman spectroscopic studies have shown that ultraviolet irradiation causes the two conjugated triple bonds of the monomer to be replaced in the polymer by an alternating double-bonded and triple-bonded conjugated structure.
Phosphatidylcholine molecules have been synthesised which contain diacetylenic groups in one (mixed-chain polymers) or both acyl chains (identical-chain polymers), and studies have been done on the physical properties  and biological applications of these phospholipid polymers.
Diacetylene polymerisation occurs in the solid state.
Thus reactivity is a function of the preservation of the structural order in the monomeric lattice —ie polymerisation proceeds most rapidly when the crystalline phase of the polymer most closely resembles that of the monomer.
All of the diacetylenic phospholipids that we have examined polymerise at 4°C by using a hand-held ultraviolet light and by using γ-irradiation.
Polymerisation may be induced when the phospholipids are in the solid state, dispersed in aqueous solutions to form vesicles, arranged as a monolayer at an air-water interface, deposited as multilayers on a suitable support —eg a hydrophobic biomaterial such as polyvinylchloride or polyethylene, or following the biosynthetic incorporation of diacetylenic fatty acids into the membranes of living cells.
Recent developments
The phospholipid structure of phosphatidylcholine is not essential for biocompatibility, but rather it is the phosphorylcholine headgroup that is important.
Phosphorylcholine headgroups can be attached in a number of different ways to many surfaces, and large improvements in biocompatibility have been observed.
For example, we have synthesised film physisorbable phosphorylcholine containing polymers for coating hydrophobic surfaces such as PVC, polyethylene, polypropylene etc .
These polymers, based on methacrylate chemistry, have high molecular weights and therefore form very stable coatings owing to their multipoint attachment.
In addition, a variety of surface modifications have been used, such as plasma discharge and chemical procedures, to make hydrophilic surfaces hydrophobic.
Materials such as celluloses and stainless steel have been successfully coated.
In addition, functionally active phosphorylcholine derivatives have been synthesised, either as individual functionally active headgroups or as methacrylate based polymers, and these molecules have been chemically attached to a variety of hydrophilic surfaces.
Various surface modifications have been made to introduce partner functional groups where these groups are not already present —eg introducing acid groups into stainless steel for the subsequent reaction of aminophosphorylcholine derivatives.
Other new materials have been made either by introducing phosphorylcholine derivatives as plasticisers into polymers such as PVC and polyurethane, or by copolymerising phosphorylcholine monomers into the polymer backbone of polyurethanes and polyesters.
Table 1.
Events occurring on biomaterials leading to abnormalities in blood function.
Table 2.
Biocompatibility of PC-coated surfaces in vitro .
Biocompatibility testing
When biological fluids come into contact with synthetic surfaces such as glass, polymers or stainless steel, a layer of protein is deposited onto these surfaces.
The nature and quantity of protein adsorbed depends upon the fluid in question, and varies according to the type of surface.
It also determines the course of subsequent events occurring at the surface, such as platelet adhesion-activation for blood contacting devices, or bacterial adhesion, encrustation and blockage for urinary catheters.
While certain proteins cause these effects to a less extent than others, it is generally considered that uncontrolled adsorption of protein on surfaces in large amounts is undesirable if the surface is to be biocompatible.
As a first stage in vitro screen for biocompatibility of materials, a protein adsorption test is therefore important.
For materials which come into contact with blood, a specific test for fibrinogen adsorption is particularly important because this protein binds in large quantities to synthetic surfaces and is a major platelet-binding protein.
Other proteins of interest are human serum albumin, immunoglobulin G, and C-reactive protein (Table 1).
Glossary 
Albumin:a protein that is soluble in water and coagulated by heat.
Complement:a substance in the blood, consisting of nine different fractions, that aids the body's defences when antibodies combine with invading antigens.
C-reactive protein:a β-globulin that binds strongly to certain lipids.
It is an acute phase reactant and its concentration increases (10–100 fold) in a disorder where there is tissue damage.
Fibrinogen:a substance present in blood plasma that is acted upon by the enzyme thrombin to produce the insoluble protein fibrin in the final stage of blood coagulation.
Haemolysis:the destruction of red blood cells.
Heparin:an anticoagulant produced in liver cells, some white blood cells, and certain other sites which acts by inhibiting the action of thrombin in the final stage of blood coagulation.
Homeostasis:the physiological process by which the internal systems of the body are maintained at equilibrium, despite variations in the external conditions.
Lymphocyte:a variety of white blood cell.
Macrophage:a large scavenger cell present in connective tissue and in many major organs and tissues.
Neutrophils:a variety of white blood cell that is capable of ingesting and killing bacteria and providing an important defence against infection.
Sphingomyelin:a phospholipid that contains sphingosine, a fatty acid, phosphoric acid and choline.
Sphingomyelin is found in large amounts in brain and nerve tissue.
In addition to deposition, events such as activation of components of the complement or clotting factor cascades can occur, which lead to generation of moieties which interact with other cell types —eg neutrophils, lymphocytes and macrophages — involved in inflammatory processes.
Thus, for blood-contacting devices, tests for platelet adhesion and activation, complement activation, and activation of the intrinsic clotting pathway are important (Table 1).
The principle of the immunological detection of activated platelets is shown in Fig .
3.
Typical adsorption and platelet adhesion-activation results for phosphorylcholine treated biomaterials are shown in Table 2.
Phosphorylcholine treated surfaces show essentially no complement or contact activation.
Applications
The results in Table 2 show that phosphorylcholine treatments have been successfully applied to a wide range of biomaterials.
In addition, a wide range of medical devices, such as intravascular catheters, drainage catheters, indwelling biosensors, extracorporeal circuits, clinical diagnostic kits and filtration membranes has been treated successfully.
A variety of phosphorylcholine treatments have been tested and shown to be non-cytotoxic.
Recently, these in vitro observations have been substantiated by results from early animal and human clinical tests, and phosphorylcholine technology has now become established in a wide range of medical services.
Acknowledgements:We thank the  Fundaccon de Banco Bilbao Vizcaya for support to visit the University of Bilbao and the SERC for supporting some of this research.
Fig. 3.
Principle of the anti-GMP 140 assay for the immunodetection of activated platelets on biomaterial surfaces.
BOOKS
Biosensors with fiberoptics
D.L. Wise and L.B. Wingard, Jr (eds)
There is a price to be paid for compiling a book-length multiauthor status report of a relatively young field.
In this case the price is extracted from the reader who must periodically adjust to inhomogeneities in the interpretation of key terms; subject areas; and the depth of coverage.
If all the chapters legitimately belong under the book title, the term ‘biosensors’ must be interpreted as signalling systems which are either biological themselves, or which respond to species present (at least potentially) in biological contexts.
The issue of interpretation arises again, because many systems considered have not been examined with fibre optics, through they have this potential.
The term ‘sensor’ needs to be considered to include various degrees of irreversibility in the sensor-analyte interaction, all the way to single use reagents.
Such variations in the meanings of key terms detracts from the value of this book as a reference text.
The subject areas of individual chapters range from evanescent wave theory to fluorescence properties of selected molecules.
This breadth of coverage is a good thing and would be useful for those requiring a single-book introduction to this research.
The depth of treatment varies enormously with some chapters reading like research articles in a primary journal, and others offering a gentle but thorough introduction to an interested outsider.
I get the feeling that the target readership has not been defined clearly enough.
A.P.
DE SILVA
Microbial polyesters
Y. Doi Weinheim: VCH 1990 
Although microbial polyesters were discovered in the 1920s, it is only in the past decade that there has been an explosion of international research interest in all aspects of their production, formulation and use.
This interest is undoubtedly driven by the search for plastic materials derived from sustainable carbon sources and which biodegrade naturally upon disposal.
Against this background, the first book devoted exclusively to this exciting and topical subject should be a significant landmark.
Sadly this is not the case.
The author sets himself the lofty task of presenting the reader with a balanced description of the entire field through fermentation, microbial metabolism, copolymer composition control, to solid state physical properties and biodegradation.
This approach is necessary because the study of these polymers as materials is in its infancy and the precise details of their biosynthesis strongly affects their composition and physical properties.
To succeed, the book would have required greater impartiality, a more critical appraisal of the work described and more attention to the balance between topics.
Inexperienced readers must be cautioned against some of the author's conclusions which are scientifically premature —eg ‘enzymic degradation of microbial polyesters is unaffected by crystallinity’— and some which are not precise —eg ‘P (3HB- co -3HV) copolymers become very soft in the 30–60 per cent 3HV composition range’.
Similarly, the discussion of fermentation and metabolism is not for the unwary —eg the suggestion that the low selectivity of P(HB3) conversion from butyric acid in alcaligenes is mainly due to concomitant polyphosphate formation.
The balance of topics in the book is rather weak in its treatment of copolymer crystallisation behaviour and the various methods now available for polymer extraction.
In summary, this book is a worthy attempt to satisfy an important need but the serious reader probably better served by reading some of the excellent reviews and a selection of key papers from the recent literature.
J.F. STAGEMAN
Chemical inhibitors for corrosion control
B. G. Clubley (ed)
This monograph consists of the nine papers presented at a two day international symposium held at the University of Manchester in April 1988.
It is inevitable that in such a wide and varied subject as corrosion some aspects were left out.
consequently, chemists and production engineers working in the manufacturing engineering industry, looking for quick solutions to immediate problems such as corrosion protection of engineering parts, will not find a list of suitable chemicals and products in this book.
However, they will be interested in the chapter on Corrosion control by surface coatings which deals with a number of systems including the principles of phosphating, and the use of chromates and lead and zinc based primers.
This book is particularly useful as a reminder of areas where the reader may have become rusty, and as an update of the very good ongoing R&D work in the field of corrosion inhibition.
However, workers in the main fields covered, viz oil field applications, heating and cooling systems, stream raising and lubrication, will find this monograph valuable.
I liked the way that all the papers explained the reasoning behind the decisions taken by the authors during their research.
This is a very useful book, and I hope that the organisers can be persuaded to hold other symposia covering areas they were not able to cover this time —eg corrosion inhibition in manufacturing engineering.
J.K. COSSLETT
Chemistry of organosulfur compounds: general problems
L.K. Belen'kii
This book is a translation of a Russian text completed in 1986 which has been partially revised, rearranged and updated.
The contributors are all active researchers in Russian institutes and are authorities in their respective fields.
The first eight chapters are devoted to the synthesis of organosulphur compounds and cover the direct introduction of sulphur into organic compounds and selected transformations of organosulphur compounds involving radical, ionic and catalytic processes; there is also a review of desulphurisation.
The remainder of the book is concerned with the application of a variety of chemical and physical methods of value in structural investigations of sulphur compounds.
These are mainly spectroscopic, but the use of radioactive sulphur to investigate reaction mechanisms and quantum chemical calculations on sulphur compounds are also discussed.
The whole book is extensively referenced and this aspect is particularly valuable  because the majority of the citations are to Russian work published during the past 20 years, much of which has not previously been translated.
The book is well produced and unlike many multiauthor books, uses standard typeface and structures.
On the whole the translation reads well.
There are some typographical and factual errors but these are minor blemishes.
It is therefore a useful source of information which supplements the books already available, but it does seem to be over-priced.
J.D. HEPWORTH
Surface analysis techniques and applications
D.R. Randell and W. Neagle (eds)
This book consists of the texts of 12 papers presented at a symposium held at UMIST in September 1989.
Camera-ready copy has been used, hence the wide range of typographical styles.
As an ‘up-to-date overview of modern surface analysis techniques’(to quote the publishers), it suffers from the inevitable deficiencies of this genre: lack of cohesion and consistency between chapters; variable standard; a element of repetition; and few cross-references.
The index goes some way to overcoming these problems.
There are full papers devoted to surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy, ellipsometry and SIMS.
Other papers illustrate the application of wider range of techniques to problems in corrosion, glass and brittle fracture of metals.
The editors speak of a ‘need for information for non-experts on methodology and application of [surface analysis]techniques’.
Two chapters which I liked were R. Greef's on ellipsometry and R.K. Wild's on corrosion studies, and these were well directed to this need.
After discussing the basis of ellipsometry and its qualitative and quantitative interpretations, Greef describes applications for anodising aluminium and polymerisation on electrode surfaces.
Wild illustrates the characterisation of complex films on alloys by XPS and Auger spectroscopy.
Different parts of this book will appeal to different readers.
Undergraduates will certainly find some interesting material, and researchers will also find enough examples to whet their appetite.
D.E.
PACKHAM
Prediction of the environmental fate of chemicals
Y. Samiullah
On the routes between sources and receptors, many environmental processes work to eliminate, modify to more or less harmful substances, or transfer chemicals between land, sea and air.
These processes are both complex and variable, and form the content of this book.
There is an increasing need to predict the environmental hazards of chemicals before they reach the marketplace, and this demands methods to support the often limited experimental data.
Thus, a stated aim of this book is to provide a significant bibliographic resource on empirical and theoretical approaches for predicting the fate of chemicals.
It achieves this by citing over 600 references up to 1988.
Early chapters deal with fundamental properties of chemicals such as molecular connectivity, which is commended as a way of predicting unknown properties from known data.
Partition coefficients are also considered, in detail.
The subsequent examination of potential releases from processes or waste disposal, together with environmental pathways is brief.
In modelling strategies, however, the concept of fugacity is given a whole section.
Three further chapters deal with soil, water and the air, with summaries of transfers, degradation and models.
Clearly, in 228 pages the coverage is selective and concentrated.
Among the audience cited in the introduction are the ‘environmentally concerned general public, but I fear that this growing band will be lost within the first 20  pages.
The book, resulting from a commission by BP, is more likely to meet the needs of ecotoxicologists.
Researchers in this area are likely to find it a useful entry to the literature, and a source of ideas on research needs.
R.S. BARRATT
Safety in the process industries
R. King
Ralph King must be a very active 70 year old to attempt such an ambitious project, namely to cover the broad field of safety in the process industry in one volume without assistance from other experts.
He has produced a very readable text, with many case studies, which I enjoyed dipping into.
However, as a chemist, I have reservations about recommending the book to chemists, because it is written from an engineering viewpoint.
As a result, the chemical formulae (trivalent carbons, ancient representations for aromatic rings, azide drawn as a three-membered ring) are atrocious in a volume of otherwise high production quality.
Batch processes and multipurpose plants are virtually ignored.
Toxicity is treated archaically, with criteria for toxicity listed in one table as ‘between one ounce and a pint is lethal to a 70kg human’ by oral ingestion.
Dust inhalation is hardly mentioned.
This book, however, has virtues of readability, wide coverage and excellent references to important works, and could be useful to non-chemists such as safety advisers, who need a broad coverage of the subject, or to chemists in petrochemical plants.
The section on hardware hazards, instrumentation, reliability of process equipment, maintenance, commissioning, permits to work, training, management of safety etc , covers topics that are not adequately dealt with elsewhere and the author shows that this is where his expertise lies.
The latter half of the book should be essential reading for all chemists and engineers working on chemical plants.
T. LAIRD
Pore size engineering in zeolites
E.F.
Vansant
Zeolites are one of the most exciting classes of advanced inorganic materials, with applications in ion exchange, in shape selective catalysis and gas separation.
These properties result from the unique microporous structure of zeolites, which allows molecules to diffuse in and out of the pores.
Diffusion is controlled by matching molecular shape with pore size.
One of the most important issues in zeolite science is therefore the modification of diffusivity by changing pore geometry or by chemically changing the effective pore diameters.
This book concentrates on the latter; discussing the ways in which both adsorption isotherms and sorption kinetics are modified by cation exchange, and sorption of strongly bound polar molecules, which may limit and block pores.
The book also includes a comprehensive discussion of the interesting effects of silanation and boronation.
The ability to ‘fine tune’ pore structures by using a combination of boronation and treatment with alkylamines, is particularly interesting.
Within the deliberately narrow focus of this book the treatment is detailed and full, with accounts of the catalytic implication of modifying pore size.
In some places, however, there is insufficient discussion of large amounts of experimental data.
The book could have been better presented, especially with regard to the diagrams, many of which are of indifferent quality.
This is a useful monograph.
It represents a relatively small (but important) area of zeolite science for which it provides a useful survey and compilation of data.
C.R.A. CATLOW
Computer methods in UV, visible and IR spectroscopy
W.O.
George and H.A.
Willis (eds)
This book contains the texts of lectures given at the RSC residential school at the Polytechnic of Wales in March 1989.
The topics covered include identifying materials from infrared spectra, data manipulation, computer methods in quantitative analysis, and user written software.
The authors are from both the manufacturer and user communities.
The book is well produced, the text commendably free from errors, and the diagrams and spectral reproductions are clear and comprehensible.
What one understands to be the use of computers in spectroscopy is very much a matter of personal prejudice, and care must be taken to avoid being misled by a general title such as this.
Nonetheless, there is material of interest here, both to users of spectroscopy in the area of analysis or identification, and to research spectroscopists.
One topic of particular practical significance is a description of the development (and a practical demonstration) of a standard for exchanging infrared data between FTIR spectrometers (JCAMP-DX).
However, the major items of value are undoubtedly those providing a clear introduction to the whole area of computer-based interpretation and analysis of infrared spectra, whether for identification, quantitative analysis, or for automatic control.
While some contributions amount to little more than a description of manufacturers' software, others delve into the concepts and methodologies.
Some chapters contain helpful bibliographies, and, although the book may be a useful introduction to computer methods in spectroscopy, anyone seriously contemplating work in these areas would probably benefit more from consulting the original papers.
D.K. RUSSELL
ACS symposium series no 442: Immunochemical methods for environmental analysis
J.M. Van Emon and R.O. Mumma (eds)
This book is a collection of papers on immunochemical (immunoassay) methods and has three main parts — immunoassay evaluation guidelines, academic advances in technology, and the uses of immunoassay in industry.
Despite the emphasis on important environmental analytes such as pesticide residues, the general principles of immunoassay development and validation outlined in these chapters can be applied to all immunoassays.
An introduction and overview of antibodies as analytical tools to study environmental compounds, makes both a comprehensive and readable opening to the subject.
The subsequent chapters deal with the development of immunoassays for various specific analytical tasks such as their use in the inspection of meat and poultry and other food safety programmes.
Using polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies for developing immunoassays is also covered in relation to the development of radioimmunoassays (RIAs) and enzyme immunoassays (EIAs), and assays for a number of different analytes such as trinitrotoluene and the avermectin family of macrocyclic lactones are covered in specific chapters.
However, two of the most important chapters in this book address the area of immunochemical technology, its benefits and pitfalls, and the barriers to be overcome if immunoassays are to be adopted in the analytical laboratory.
Both chapters warrant inclusion as overviews at the start of the book rather than being buried in the middle of text.
Other topics include evaluation of the whole spectrum of immunoassay technology and tackling the sorts of questions that non-biologists and the regulatory authorities would ask (because most of these assays need to be fully validated).
The final section deals with using immunoassay techniques in the agrochemical industry, and applying different immunoassay formats to a variety of analytical problems, with specific examples.
I would recommend this book as a useful reference to students and those working in environmental analysis, and to anyone looking for an introduction to immunochemical assays and their applications.
M.R. DEWJI
Publications received
Recent IUPAC recommendations
Graphite intercalation compounds
IUPAC has recently made available for public review a draft document on nomenclature and terminology of graphite intercalation compounds.
Its contents may be summarised as follows.
Covalent graphite compounds (eg graphite fluoride and graphite oxide) should be distinguished from graphite intercalation compounds in which layers of the intercalated substance are inserted between planar carbon sheets of the graphite structure with concomitant charge transfer.
Particular to graphite intercalation compounds is their tendency to form periodically stacked high-stage compounds in which only a fraction of the interlayer spaces of the graphite host lattice is filled with intercalated layers.
The stage number is defined by the ratio of the total number of interlayer spaces to the number of filled layer spaces.
Donor and acceptor compounds are differentiated by the direction of the electron transfer to or from the carbon layers.
When naming a graphite intercalation compound, the intercalated element or compound precedes the word graphite, while the electropositive constituent is written first in the formula.
The stage number is added in parentheses to the name or formula.
Often, the space between intercalated ions is filled with solvent molecules; in this case the name or formula of the solvent compound is inserted after that of the electropositive constituent, otherwise it is added after that of the intercalated species.
Graphite intercalation compounds are non-stoichiometric; this fact should be taken into account in their formulation.
Binary (ternary etc ) intercalation compounds contain one (two etc ) chemical species in addition to graphite; free acids and their anions are taken as one chemical species.
In bi-intercalation compounds two different chemical species are inserted in separate interlayer spaces.
Rules for structural notation follow those used in the description of polytypes of metal dichalcogenides.
Suggestions are presented for the symbols to be used for interlayer spacings, and thicknesses of intercalated layers etc .
IUPAC welcomes comments on these recommendations, prior to the production of a definitive version for publication in Pure Appl.
Chem.
Copies of the text may be obtained from Dr A.D. McNaught, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge, CB4, 4WF.
Comments should be received by 31 August 1992.
Thomas McLachlan 1894–1991
Thomas McLachlan, DCM, MChemA, CChem, FRSC, was educated at Haberdasher Askes School and Finsbury College.
During World War I McLachlan served in the Special Brigade involved in gas warfare, for which he was awarded a DCM.
McLachlan then had a brief spell working in the pharmaceutical industry before taking over the practice of Cecil H. Cribb, public analyst and consultant.
He was appointed public analyst for the City of Westminster and the Boroughs of Chelsea and Fulham.
During World War II McLachlan's laboratory in central London was badly damaged but he moved to various locations, including the Pharmaceutical Society in Bloomsbury Square.
He showed great fortitude and tenacity in carrying on his professional work in spite of adversity resulting from enemy action.
In 1942 McLachlan was appointed public analyst for Berkshire and the City of Oxford, and in partnership with F.A.
Lyne opened a laboratory in Reading, in addition to his London laboratory.
McLachlan was a founder member of the Association of Public Analysts and one of the early presidents of that body.
He was a man of strong and independent views.
Apart from his official work as public analyst, McLachlan had a wide range of other scientific interests.
He published papers on the blackening of stonework of old buildings, which he showed was not entirely due to the deposition of soot and grime, but was also due to the growth of a black mould that contributed to decay.
McLachlan also served as an examiner for the Royal Society of Chemistry's Branch examination, the qualification for appointment of public analysts.
F.A. Lyne 
RSC news
Evening party
The RSC evening party in Burlington House will be held on Wednesday 15 July 1992.
A champagne reception and private view of the Summer Exhibition will be held in the galleries of the Royal Academy of Arts, and afterwards in the rooms of the Society, commending at 19.00.
Application forms will be circulated as an insert in the May edition of Chemistry in Britain .
Early application is advisable because attendance is limited to 500.
Sir John Cornforth
To celebrate Sir John Cornforth's 75th birthday, a half-day meeting will be held in Oxford on Wednesday 2 December 1992.
Lectures will be given by Prof J. E. Baldwin, Prof C. T. Walsh and Prof D. Arigoni.
Further details will be announced in due course.
A question of food
Don't forget to tell family, friends and colleagues about this public symposium at UMIST, Manchester, on 13 April 1992 at 18.00.
Details from I. Topping.
Lecturers and lectureships
For details of 1992–93 endowed lecturers and medallists, and nominations for 1993–94 endowed lectureships, see page 272.
RSC wins ad award
The first advertisement in the Not all chemists wear white coats campaign run by the RSC's Careers Through Chemistry Committee has won a national award.
The advert, featuring a dolphin swimming with a diver, won the science and technology section of the British Recruitment Advertising Awards organised by Personnel Today and The Independent .
Created for the RSC by MSL Advertising, the advert was sponsored by Glaxo Group Research.
The advert was run in New Scientist as part of a campaign to raise awareness of the applicability of a chemistry education to many fields of employment, ‘from accountancy to zoology’(hence the dolphin).
The design is also being used on an A2 size poster being distributed to all secondary schools with the RSC's magazine Education in Chemistry : Future posters in the series will feature a chemical engineer, a patent lawyer and a wine taster.
CiB Marriott studentship
Concerns over the public image of the profession and science of chemistry are growing.
The RSC is keen that as many chemists as possible are familiar with communication techniques and that the profession is well represented in the ranks of the media.
For the past two years the trustees of the Marriott Bequest have funded a scheme aimed at giving young members of the RSC a taste of scientific publishing.
The prime aim of the Marriott fellowship is not to turn chemists into budding journalists, but to give them the chance to see some of the opportunities available in scientific publishing without committing themselves.
The fellowship scheme will operate again this summer.
The ideal candidate will be a young member who has not yet completed his or her education (probably between the second and third year of a degree course).
The person selected will spend approximately eight weeks with the RSC's news publications department in London, working with the team that produces Chemistry in Britain and Education in Chemistry .
The Marriott Bequest trustees have provided a bursary of £1300 to support the summer fellowship.
Those who would like to be considered for the 1992 placement should send their curriculum vitae , together with a covering letter explaining why they feel they would benefit from the scheme, and enclosing samples of written work, to Chemistry in Britain at the RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London W1V 0BN.
The closing date is 10 April and shortlisted candidates will be interviewed shortly after Easter (please provide both home and term time contact addresses and telephone numbers.
Environmental Consultancy
Consulting opportunities in environmental management will be the subject of an all-day meeting of the Chemical Consultancy Forum to be held at the  Scientific Societies' Lecture Theatre, London, on 7 April 1992.
Speakers at the meeting will consider different approaches to environmental audits, what protecting the environment will mean in practice, and the needs, difficulties and dangers for consultants in this field.
Details from Dr D. Simpson, Analysis For Industry.
Reproductive toxicology
The Toxicology Subject Group, in association with the Health, Safety and Environment Committee and the Women Chemists Committee, is holding a one-day symposium,Reproductive toxicology , at the Scientific Societies' Lecture Theatre, London, on Tuesday 28 April 1992.
This symposium will address the question of effects of chemical substances on reproductive systems to both females and males.
The keynote lecture will be given by Prof Violetta N. Fomenko (Ministry of Health, Moscow).
Details from M. L. Richardson, Rickmansworth.
Organic swapshop
The North-East England Region of the Education Division is to hold the 1992 one-day chemistry swapshop for university and polytechnic teachers on 9 April at Newcastle Polytechnic with the theme Organic chemistry and biochemistry .
This will embrace applied (including pharmaceutical and food chemistry) as well as mainstream organic chemistry up to degree level.
As at previous swapshops, there will be an exhibition of novel approaches to tertiary level chemistry teaching.
There will also be short talks by academic and industrial speakers on assessing and tackling some of the educational problems and it is proposed to distribute a compilation of laboratory scripts from participants.
Further information form Dr J. Newham or Dr A. M. Jones, RSC NEERED, Department of Life and Chemical Sciences, Newcastle Polytechnic.
Josef Loschmidt prize
This new prize of £2000 has been founded by an endowment from Dr Alfred Bader.
It is awarded biennially for excellence in physical organic chemistry embracing the relationship between structure and reactivity.
In making the award, the adjudicating panel will take into account the age of the nominees and the work published by them during the past five years.
Those who hold or have held a professorship in the British Isles are not eligible, and any publications cited or listed in connection with a previous successful candidature for an RSC award will not considered by the assessors.
The major part of the nominee's work must have been carried out in an academic institution in the UK or Republic of Ireland and the person must currently work in such an institution.
Applications or nominations for the first award should be sent to the international affairs officer, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London, to arrive no later than Friday 29 May 1992 .
Bader award
This award has been founded by an endowment from Dr Alfred Bader.
It is made annually for eminence in organic chemistry and includes a monetary prize of £2000.
There is no restriction on age, but nominees must not hold or have held professorships in the British Isles.
The major part of the nominee's work must have been carried out in an academic institution in the UK or Republic of Ireland and the person must currently work in such an institution.
Applications or nominations for the next Bader award should be sent to the international affairs officer, RSC, Burlington House, Piccadilly, London, to arrive not later than Friday 29 May 1992 .
Vacuum congress bursaries
The British Vacuum Council (of which the RSC is a member) will provide bursaries (up to £250) for postgraduate students in the UK and Republic of Ireland attending the XII international Vacuum congress to be held in the Hague, the Netherlands, from 12 to 16 October 1992.
Applications must be made on an appropriate form which can be obtained from the secretary, The British Vacuum Council, London.
The deadline for receipt of completed application forms is 1 May 1992 .
Preference will be given to those presenting papers at the congress.
Faraday symposium 29
Faraday symposium 29 on Potential energy surfaces and organic reaction paths will be held on 15–17 December 1993 in London The determination of reaction paths and the structure and nature of transition states is a fundamental problem in the study of organic reactivity.
This is a rapidly developing field which poses great challenges for both experimentalists and theoreticians.
An equally important objective is to gain insight into the mechanisms of reactions in order to formulate useful models which are able to rationalise known results and predict new phenomena.
The purpose of this symposium is to bring together experimentalists and theoreticians to survey the latest results, examine new ideas and concepts and to indicate important future directions of research.
The meeting will consist of three broad sections: methodology; applications to organic reactivity; and understanding organic reactivity.
Contributions for consideration by the organising committee are invited.
Abstracts of  about 300 words should be submitted by 30 October 1992 to Dr J. Gerratt, Department of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Cantock's Close, Bristol.
Full papers for publication in Faraday Transactions will be required by August 1993.
Faraday discussion 95
Faraday discussion 95 on Crystal growth, equilibrium structure, interface kinetics, lattice defects and their interrelationships will be held on 14–16 April 1993 at Strathclyde University.
Faraday discussion 5 on Crystal growth held in Bristol in 1949 proved to be a seminal meeting in the area of crystal growth and crystallisation.
Coupled with the publication of the BCF theory in 1951, it set the scene for many important developments in the theory and practice of crystallisation.
Spurred on by these developments, the intervening 40 years have seen theoretical, technical and experimental advances in both the study of the growth process and its structural dependence.
These have resulted in the better definition of defect dependent growth, morphological control by physical and chemical means and the influence of structure in both the surface and the dispersed phase on the growth process.
These advances, which have had an impact in both basic and applied research, are again spread widely among the disciplines.
Contributions for consideration by the organising committee are invited and abstracts of about 300 words should be sent by 31 May 1992 to Prof J. N. Sherwood, Department of Pure and Applied Chemistry, University of Strathclyde, Thomas Graham Building, Glasgow.
Full papers for publication in the discussion volume will be required by December 1992.
A-level prize
Jonathan Tan, a sixthform student at Manchester Grammar School, won the 1991 RSC award for the highest mark in the GCE A-level chemistry examination set by the JMB.
Jonathan was presented with a certificate, cheque and various prizes at a ceremony at Magnesium Elektron, Swinton.
The technical director of Magnesium Elektron and chairman of the Manchester Section, Frank Farnworth, made the presentation on behalf of the Society and this was followed by a tour of the Zirconium Chemicals Plant and lunch.
Atomic spectroscopy
The Atomic Spectroscopy Group will be holding the sixth Biennial national atomic spectroscopy symposium (BNASS) on 22–24 July at Polytechnic South West, Plymouth.
Plenary lecturers at the symposium include Prof M. W. Blades (British Columbia); Prof M.S. Cresser (Aberdeen); Prof B.V. L'vov (St Petersburg); Dr J. W. McLaren (National Research Council of Canada); Dr K. Niemax (IFAS, Germany); and Dr B.L.
Sharp (Loughborough).
Younger scientists are particularly welcome at BNASS meetings and a number of bursaries will be offered to research students.
Contributions for consideration by the organising committee are invited.
Abstracts of about 200 words should be sent to Dr S. Hill, Department of Environmental Sciences, Polytechnic South West, Drake Circus, Plymouth, Devon by 31 March 1992 .
Intellectual property
The Biotechnology Group has organised a conference on Intellectual Property and confidentiality in biotechnology research , which will be held on 30 April 1992 at the Scientific Society, Savile Row, London.
The meeting will discuss both researchers' and industrialists' views and will also consider the specific sectors of agricultural and bio-medical research.
Details from Dr A. Webster, Science and Technology Studies Unit, Anglia Polytechnic, Cambridge.
C Yorks Section
The first lecture of the season for Central Yorkshire Section,Confessions of a flavour chemist by Dr David A. Baines of Lucas Ingredients, was given at Bradford University in October.
Baines discussed the primary flavours, their perception, their relation with odours and the analysis of common flavours such as raspberry and meat.
He told delegates that monosodium glutamate, though maligned, occurs in blood and human milk and has important reactions in the body.
Some synthetic flavours are safer than natural ones, he noted, adding that some natural toxins occur where preservatives and  antoxidants are excluded by consumer demand.
Recent outbreaks of food poisoning are not unconnected with this and the danger of cancer from aflotoxin free radicals is a possibility.
•Some of the above themes recurred in the lecture Chemistry, food and man , held in November at Nestlé Yorkreco in York.
Nestlé sponsored the lecture and supplied the speaker, Professor Erik von Sydow, chief scientific advisor to the chairman of R&D at Nestlé.
From the premise that both man and his food are chemical, von Sydow discussed nutritional, sensory and social aspects of food and the implications of distribution systems.
He reviewed warnings and advice issued to the public over recent years and concluded with a plea for interdisciplinary research on food.
•The sixthform lecture, given by Fr T.L. Gilchrist (Liverpool) at Leeds University in November, dealt with the A-level coverage of Organic reaction mechanisms .
Starting with halogen attack on simple hydrocarbons, Gilchrist used various models to show that the shape and flexibility of molecules affect the type of attack.
After establishing that saturated hydrocarbons require free radical attack, initiated by UV light, and that multiple bonds and substituents open possibilities of nucelophilic and electrophilic attack, he reviewed the main classes of reaction, extending his scope to other compounds such as aldehydes, ketones and acid chlorides.
E. Sharratt 
US Section
The US Section will meet at the Ramada Inn, Chadd's Ford, Brandywine Valley, PA, on 8 May 1992 at 18.00.
Following a social hour and dinner, Dr Suzanne Lomax (National Gallery, Washington DC) will speak on The application of chemistry to the examination of works of art .
The following morning there will be an opportunity to tour some of the local cultural attractions in informal groups.
All members, spouses and friends are cordially invited.
Further details from Dr P. W. R. Corfield, honorary secretary, Chemistry Department, The King's College, Briarcliff Manor, NY.
Rideal travel bursaries
The Sir Eric Rideal Trust annually offers financial assistance to promising academic research workers, including research students, in the general field of colloid and surface science to attend conferences and to visit  relevant research institutions.
Applications are now invited from scientists under 40 years of age for travel during the period 1 June 1992 to 31 May 1993.
Awards of up to £400 will be made, on a competitive basis, to assist with travel, subsistence and conference registration.
Applications must be submitted on forms available from Rideal Trust, SCI Member Services, London, by 20 March 1991 .
Schools' lecture
Nearly 800 schoolchildren from all over Fife and Tayside attended the 1991 schools' Christmas lecture organised by the Tayside Section, which was given in St Andrews University chemistry department on 16 December and Dundee Institute of Technology on 17 December 1991.
The lecture, entitled Fun and games with liquid air , was given by Dr David Nicholls (Liverpool), who is shown (above) with pupils from Kinross High School and Whitfield High School, Dundee.
Mid-Scotland magic
In the Logic Lecture Theatre at the University of Stirling last December, Dr Brian Iddon (University of Salford) delivered his much acclaimed lecture,The magic of chemistry , to over 200 pupils from schools in the central region of Scotland.
With boundless enthusiasm, topics ranging from chemiluminescence to polymerisation, and from dyeing to Tyndall scattering were explained, with vivid demonstrations and fascinating anecdotes to an audience held captivated for over 90 minutes.
Although Brian claims not to be a ‘whiz-bang merchant’, his build-up to the grand finale, the combustion of a mixture of nitric oxide and carbon disulphide (which allegedly came close to killing von Liebig when an explosion caused the glass tube containing the mixture, to send shards of glass flying in all directions), instilled some trepidation into the audience.
However, being the ‘magician’ that he is, the demonstration proved to be a truly amazing spectacle — one which will undoubtedly be discussed in school staff common-rooms for some time to come.
A.E.A. Porter 
Basket chemistry
Chemistry from a shopping basket was the title of two schools' lectures given last November by Dr John Nicholson of the Centre for Science Education, UEA, to packed audiences of 12–14 year old pupils from Norfolk and Suffolk schools.
The lectures were part of the East Anglia local section's effort to mark the 150th anniversary of the RSC.
With numerous demonstration experiments, Dr. Nicholson enthusiastically illustrated aspects of the chemistry of everyday life.
He and his assistants unpacked the shopping trolley to have a closer look at what liver enzymes can do, how bleach works, how to make coke or why cabbage juice is a good indicator.
Practical examples called for willing audience participation to drive the message home: Chemistry is everywhere — and it's fun.
Materials for teachers
Unbreakable cups and space shuttles were among the uses of new engineering materials cited by an enthusiastic Dr Ian McColm (Bradford) at the NE Region Education Division (NERED) teacher's conference at Sheffield Polytechnic in November.
According to McColm, they illustrate the chemical basis of ‘the second industrial revolution’.
With its emphasis on solids and their imperfections, high technology industry needs chemists for processes such as making sols and gels, freeze-drying, fibre spinning and drawing, and forming ultra-fine particles.
Affirming that the national curriculum contains significant chemistry, John Holman (Watford GS) felt that GCSE balanced science (close to Key Stage (KS) 4) enabled more students to experience enough of each science to be able to tackle A-level, though the limited depth and wide range presented problems to sixth form colleges.
Early trials suggested that Salters' A-level chemistry application-linked material could provide both a foundation for the future and a complete course and that improved motivation and more autonomous learning styles reduced drop-outs.
Continuing the conference theme of New developments, pre- and post-16 , organiser Dr Bill Harrison and Dave Sant (Sheffield Polytechnic) emphasised the extensive industrial advice incorporated in, respectively, the 20 Chemistry Plus (KS 3 and 4) and the Problem solving with industry (KS 2 and 3) topics, while Diane Stead and Dave Marsden (York) engaged the 70 participants in an active learning demonstration of Exciting science and engineering project (KS 2 and 3).
Dr Ken Gadd (Yeovil College) considered that academic and vocational qualifications 16–19 could be taught together, with students managing their learning (motivated by linking chemical skills and problems in society) so as to become skilled, adaptable, collaborative chemists.
D.W. Jones 
Kent Top of the bench 
The team from the King's School, Canterbury, proved to be local masters of chemistry in the Top of the bench tournament organised by the Kent Section in November.
In addition to receiving prizes donated by Shell Research and the Wellcome Foundation, the team will go on to represent Kent in the national competition to be held this month.
The later stages of the tournament were held at Shell's Sittingbourne Research Centre and attracted teams from St Dunstan's College, Catford, London, the Judd School, Tonbridge, and St Lawrence College, Ramsgate, in addition to King's.
St Dunstan's emerged from the play-offs to challenge the King's School in the final contest but had to be satisfied with the runners-up spot.
All four schools were awarded prizes for reaching the semi-final stages that were presented afterwards by Lyn Davies, head of the computing and information department at Sittingbourne.
Public image
Public and media attitudes to chemicals are often negative and the chemical industry regularly attracts bad publicity and criticism, at least some of which is undeserved.
With this in mind the Chemical Information Group is holding a one-day meeting entitled Public misunderstanding of chemicals .
The meeting will take place on Wednesday 25 March 1992 at Schering Agrochemicals, Saffron Walden.
The aim of the meeting it to provide a wide awareness of the problems industry faces and to illustrate how these can be dealt with positively.
Invited speakers include G. Liardet (CIA), C. White (Schering), Dr. B. Thomas (BAA), M. Williams (Civil Protection Office) and I. Garner (Schering).
For details contact D. Snow, Schering Agrochemicals, Chesterford Park Research Station, Saffron Walden.
Thermal group
A meeting of those concerned in educating both undergraduates and new graduates in industry and research in the techniques and applications of thermal methods has been organised by the Thermal Methods Group.
The meeting,Thermal analysis and education will take place on 7 April 1992 at Leeds Polytechnic.
Methods used for distance learning, for special groups in industry and for individual researchers will be considered and there will be opportunities to exchange views and ideas and involve the manufacturers of thermal analysis equipment in informal discussion.
Further details from Dr C. J. Keattch, Lyme Regis, Dorset.
Food irradiation
Dr J. C. Sherlock of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food addressed a joint meeting of the Chilterns and Middlesex Section and the Students Chemical Society of the Polytechnic  of North London on the advantages and limitations of Irradiation of food .
He told delegates that while it has been established that the process helps to control disease, spoilage and infestation, it has its limitations.
The nutrient value of foods is known to be affected by higher doses, Sherlock added, although the loss is not much different from other preservation process.
The mechanism of the process is brought about by the initial ionisation of water and the subsequent production of free radicals.
The bacteriocidal effect is achieved by the breakdown of the double helix DNA strand which cannot be mended.
Dr Sherlock concluded that irradiation has a useful role to play in the preservation of foods in conjunction with other currently employed processes.
Public awareness of its advantages and more importantly its acceptance as a safe process will promote its use as a common place preservation process as pasteurisation was almost a century ago.
M. Rodé 
Fine chemical project prize
The winner of the first Fine Chemicals and Medicinals Group schools project prize was Godalming College, Surrey, which received a cheque for £2000 from Dr Norman Rogers of the group.
The project, carried out in collaboration with the nearby Institute of Oceanographic Sciences, set out to determine the levels affecting aluminium levels in the local river system.
The prize is intended for use in the school to further interest in chemistry.
The Godalming College entry was marked particularly high for clarity and student participation.
The money will be put towards the purchase of personal computers for running chemistry software applications.
In view of the rather disappointing number of entries for this substantial prize the committee is reconsidering whether to run the competition in the same format again this year.
A notice will appear following the March committee meeting.
The Fine Chemicals and Medicinals Groups continues to provide money to schools under the Small Grants Scheme (up to the value of £500) for the purchase of equipment to carry out chemistry-related projects in schools.
Applications should be made to 
Bristol celebration
The Bristol and District Section marked the RSC's 150th anniversary with the inauguration of a chain of office for the chairman.
The chain was presented to the current chairman, Colin Chapman, by one of the guests of honour, Trevor McCombie, at a dinner held at the University of Bristol.
The date of the dinner also marked the 70th anniversary of the founding of the section in Bristol.
R. Hyne 
Macro-molecules 92
Macromolecules 92 , the third Euro-American conference on functional polymers and biopolymers, organised by the RSC/SCI Macro Group UK and the ACS Division of Polymer Chemistry, will be held on 7–11 September 1992 at the University of Kent, Canterbury.
Details from Dr A. Amass, Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, Aston University, Aston Triangle, Birmingham.