

THE JADE COCKATOO
The narrow High Street of Chetwynd Magna was thronged with Christmas shoppers on this damp and cheerless December evening.
There were people, people everywhere — huddled inside doorways trying to keep dry, crowding into the small, old-fashioned shops, and buying fruit and vegetables at bargain prices from the swarthy hawkers whose barrows were drawn up close to the kerb.
Rain was falling steadily.
The lamplight, reflected on the wet pavements, lay in shining golden pools.
This little Hampshire market town had not been designed for crowds such as these, and everyone kept on getting in everyone else's way.
But the Christmas spirit was abroad, and so the unwonted congestion gave rise to much merriment and good-natured chaff.
‘Wot a night!’ wheezed an old farmer, with a guffaw that shook the raindrops from his whiskers.
‘Granted before asked, missie,’ he added graciously, as a girl accidentally trod on his foot.
She smiled at him, and he smiled back.
She had inwardly echoed his words —‘What a night!’
It was a landmark in her life.
She would always remember it, she thought, as the night when the Three Musketeers had grown up.
The crowds were getting worse every minute!
Breeze O'Brien, laden with parcels of all shapes and sizes, and further hampered by an enormous umbrella, came into violent collision, not once but many times, during her headlong dash up the hill.
She was late.
A clock had just struck seven.
Gay and Flick would be waiting for her — and she hated keeping people waiting.
She would far rather be the one who had to do it, though that wasn't very nice, either.
She gasped, swallowed a mouthful of rain, and gave an involuntary chuckle.
What would Miss Henry say if she could see her now — Miss Henry, who only an hour ago had been exhorting her to cultivate dignity and repose!
She was nearly there now.
She could see the sign already, because the café was flood-lit tonight.
There was the jade-green cockatoo on his orange perch, gazing pensively down the street.
What a lot those painted eyes must have seen!
So many meetings and partings must have taken place beneath his roof, so many dark plots hatched between his hospitable walls.
Breeze, who had hatched a good many herself, quickened her steps to a run, for her two friends were waiting.
She saw them just as they saw her, and waved to them — with disastrous results.
When she had picked up all her parcels and disentangled the umbrella from the bonnet of a fierce-looking old lady, she went up to them at a more decorous pace, and joined in their unfeeling laughter.
Several of the passers-by turned to look at her, for although she was — as she herself would have expressed it —‘no Helen of Troy’ when it came to looks, there was some thing very engaging about Breeze.
This was particularly noticeable tonight, for her cheeks were deeply flushed and her hazel eyes were dancing with excitement.
‘At last!’ said Felicity Grant dramatically.
‘We'd almost given you up.’
She was a tall girl, slender and graceful, and as straight as a young pine-tree.
Despite her eighteen years, there was something about the petulant droop of her mouth that reminded one of a spoilt child; but even so she was strikingly lovely, with her big dark eyes and mass of golden hair, which she wore in a coil at the nape of her neck.
Gaynor Smith, small, thin, and pale, seemed quite insignificant — at first glance.
But no one thought Gay insignificant for long.
‘I got held up,’ Breeze breathlessly explained, ‘in the Cash Stores first of all.
I had to hold the door open for a woman with a pram, and then the whole population of Chetwynd poured out in a body, and I was still holding it.
Then someone asked me where the station was, and she was deaf, and I had to trumpet like an elephant for about ten minutes….
And then I  left my brolly at the chemist's, and had to go back for it…’
‘What on earth did you have to go to the chemist's for?’
Felicity wanted to know.
‘No wonder you're late!
Well, let's go in, shall we?
Gay's bagged our usual table.’
So they entered the cheerful portals of the Jade Cockatoo, the only cafe to be found in Chetwynd, and threaded their way through a maze of small tables to an alcove by the fire, where they took off their soaking mackintoshes and warmed their hands.
Breeze was glad to reach this haven of refuge, for she had an uneasy conviction that there were holes in the heels of both her stockings.
Oh dear, she did need some new ones!
Perhaps she would get some for Christmas….
Gay took off her hat, the shapeless school felt that would soon be discarded for ever, and tossed the short straight hair from her broad, clever forehead.
She picked up the menu and scanned it with the air of a gourmet.
‘As it's so late, we'd better have supper instead of tea.
What would you two like?’ she enquired.
‘I'm having coffee, welsh rarebit, and a meringue.’
‘Just what the doctor ordered!’ laughed Breeze.
‘I'll have that too.
And ices afterwards, I should think, as it's the first time we've ever had supper together, away from school.’
‘It may be the last, what's more,’ said Felicity ghoulishly.
‘I was waiting for that!’
Gay said with a chuckle, for Felicity loved to pose as a Cassandra, and could generally be relied upon to make a remark of that kind.
‘Ogle the waitress, will you, Breeze?
Yes, the nice one.
Let's test the power of the human eye.’
Breeze complied, and they talked of trivial matters until her fixed regard took effect.
They always had a great deal to say, for they knew one another so well.
They had been friends for eight long years, and now they had reached the parting of the ways.
They had finished their last term at school.
‘Decent of Miss Henry to let us stay out late tonight,’ Felicity remarked, when the order had been given.
‘But then, she's been topping to us lately.
By the way, what sort of farewell lecture did she give you, Breeze?
Mine was all about Strong-mindedness, and Gay's, as far as I can gather, was on Undue Levity, its cause and cure…’
Breeze, who had been deep in thought, came back with a start to her present surroundings.
During the headmistress's speech she had realized for the first time how little she knew of the world that lay beyond the school gates.
It seemed to her now that she had lived in a dream.
Even her father's death a month ago hadn't really affected her, because he had been ill for such a long time that nobody could be sorry that the end had come.
Poor Daddy — and poor Susan, who had nursed him all through his illness.
‘My lecture?
Oh, it was the usual kind,’ she said slowly.
‘You know, in some ways I'm most frightfully sorry to leave.
Of course, it's fun to be grown-up…’
‘Fun?
It's thrilling!’ said Felicity, tackling her Welsh rarebit with enthusiasm.
‘Think of all the people we shall meet, and the places we'll go to, and the things we shall do! we've had some good times at Pinehurst, I know, but think of being free !’
She was barely seventeen, the youngest of the Three Musketeers, as they had styled themselves long ago; yet in everything except appearance she might have been at least ten years older.
There were occasions when Felicity was almost afraid of her, and even Breeze, who had never been afraid of anyone, felt that Gay was sometimes beyond her ken.
‘Well — doing the things one likes.
Choosing for oneself.
Making one's own life,’ said Felicity largely.
‘But does one — ever?’ mused Gay.
‘I wonder.’
‘Look here,’ said Felicity half-resentfully, ‘are you trying to depress us, or what?
Are you afraid of life?’
Gay laughed.
‘I don't mean that.
But there are so many problems, such an awful lot to learn….
It will be interesting to see what becomes of us all.’
‘Life's like a patchwork quilt,’ said Breeze reflectively.
‘Has that been said before?
I expect so — most things have!
But I was thinking of the ones you see in cottages.
The women make them, you know, bit by bit.
There are some lovely pieces as a rule — silks and satins that people have given them; and some hideous bits that scream at the rest.
But most of them are just ordinary — cotton or print, and drab coloured…’
She broke off, hearing Gay sigh.
Breeze had often wondered whether, in her heart of hearts, Gay was dreading leaving Pinehurst.
She had never said so, certainly, because she hated to admit that she minded anything, but she had seemed evasive about the future, and had shown no great enthusiasm over the journalistic course she was going to take.
She had wanted to go on the stage; acting had always been her forte, and although she might be insignificant to look at, she had a beautiful voice and perfect diction.
But she was an orphan, and the uncle and aunt with whom she lived were not at all well off.
They had left her at school as long as they could, because they didn't know what to do with her; but now she was to take this course and later get a job on a newspaper.
‘I hope the chemist will send up the things tonight,’ Breeze said, to change the subject.
‘Matron will go up in smoke if he doesn't.’
‘Oh, Breeze, Matron is the limit!
Did she send you in with an order tonight — when she knew we were going to do our Christmas shopping and have a meal together?
No wonder you were late, dashing across the town like that!
You ought to have told her you were too busy,’ Felicity said reproachfully.
‘I couldn't.
She'd just lent me her umbrella,’ laughed Breeze.
‘Besides, I didn't mind.’
‘But you should mind.
You'll be trampled on by everybody if you don't look out.
And fancy borrowing her ghastly old umbrella, when you could have had anyone else's for the asking!’
Felicity glanced disdainfully at the battered warrior, a frown on her pretty face.
She couldn't bear ugly things.
‘But Matron offered it to me!
And you know she treasures it because it was given her by a grateful patient centuries ago.
Here come the ices.
Good!’ said Breeze, and attacked hers without delay.
But she was thinking hard all the time, and as she chased the last milky drops round her saucer she went on dreamily: ‘I wonder what will happen to us all.
In ourselves, I mean.
I shan't be trampled on, Flick, don't you worry — but at the same time I shan't go through life as gracefully as you, or with a flourish of trumpets like Gay.
I don't even know what I'm going to do!’
‘Paris is definitely off, then?’ asked Gay.
‘Oh yes, I think so.
It can't be helped.
I always wanted to  study art there, but it'll have to be London now, I suppose — if it's anywhere!
It all depends on Susan.
I haven't seen her, as you know, since Daddy died, and I don't know what she wants to do.’
‘Well, but that doesn't affect you,’ Felicity pointed out.
‘She wouldn't stand in your way, would she?’
‘Of course not.
But she's sure to have some ideas about my future, and — and, well, she's been so marvellous all this time, running the house and looking after poor Daddy, that of course I must consider her now.
I want to,’ Breeze said warmly.
There was the most profound admiration mingled with her affection for the elder sister who had brought her up ever since their mother's death, twelve years ago.
‘Ye-es, I know, but…’
Felicity shrugged and said no more.
Her own future had been mapped out for her by wealthy and adoring parents, newly returned from India, and because it was so much to her liking she did not rebel against their edicts.
An only child, she had always been petted and spoilt.
Only the fact that she was so happy at Pinehurst had persuaded them to leave her there so long.
It had been their intention to send her to a finishing school in France or Germany, but she had begged so hard to be allowed to stay where she was, with Breeze and Gay.
Now her parents had come home for good, and had taken a beautiful house in Buckinghamshire, where Mrs Grant meant to entertain on a large scale.
Felicity was to take up dancing as a hobby, not as a profession; she was to learn to be a good bridge player and to wear her clothes well.
She had carte blancheto bring home as many friends as she liked.
She was to have a car.
She looked at Gay, who was an only child too, but who had nobody to give her a good time, and then her glance travelled to Breeze, who had just admitted in her light-hearted fashion that she had no idea of what the future would hold for her.
‘You must both come and stay,’ she said impulsively, ‘as soon as ever you can.’
‘My dear deluded child,’ said Gay, who had a disconcerting habit of answering, not one's words so much as the thought which had prompted them, ‘you don't imagine we're wrestling with the torments of jealousy, do you?
Your life will suit you, but it wouldn't suit Breeze or me.
It would be hard to  find three individuals more unalike than we are, which is probably why we've stuck together all these years!
You want a good time, don't you — with the flesh-pots of Egypt thrown in!
Well, you'll have it, my dear.
You'll be a huge success.
You're decorative, you've got the right manner — everything.
I can just see you floating into your box at the Opera, all svelte and soignée…’
‘That ice has gone to your head,’’ Felicity said severely, but she was smiling.
The picture Gay had just painted was a very attractive one.
‘And you?’ she asked curiously.
‘What do you want?’
‘Me?
Experience, mostly.
I want to know things,’ said Gay.
Her eyes, which were very blue, burned for a moment like sapphire lamps.
‘Some people are born with silver spoons in their mouths, but I had a question-mark in mine.
I want to find the answers to certain whys and wherefores which have puzzled me all my life.’
‘And will you find them, do you think?’ asked Felicity, who was quite content to accept the world as it was.
‘Perhaps.
I'll have a good look, anyway!’ laughed Gay.
‘But what about Breeze?
What are you out for, Bridget O'Brien?’
‘Fun!’ said Breeze promptly.
‘Adventures!
And a jolly home to come back to, when they're over.
A real home with animals, and a huge fire where you can roast chestnuts on winter evenings, and a studio with lockers built in, so that I'd never have to tidy up!’
They all laughed, for Breeze's untidiness had been a school joke for years.
Like most happy-go-lucky people, she had a good many minor misfortunes, which amused her as much as everyone else.
She spilt liquid things and broke hard ones; she slipped on banana-skins in the street, and even in places she knew quite well she frequently lost her way.
And of course her misdeeds were always found out.
Other people might get off scot-free, but not she.
‘Knowing you,’ said Gay, ‘you'll never stop having adventures — and probably landing yourself in one dreadful pickle after another!’
Breeze grinned.
‘That, more or less, is what Miss Henry  told me this afternoon,’ she admitted.
‘Never mind,’ said Felicity.
‘She's not responsible for us any more.
Everyone else has gone home, except the poor wretches who are spending the hols at school, and we three are independent citizens whom she invited to spend an extra day.
It was to get in those lectures, of course,’ she added, flushing a little as she recalled some of the pointed remarks the headmistress had made to her, about lack of initiative and weakness of will.
‘It was principally to let us say goodbye to each other in peace, said Gay.
‘Miss Henry's like that.
Besides, she doesn't lose three musketeers every day.
She told me she was sorry we were going, and we'd been a credit to the school.
‘She must be sickening for something,’ Breeze declared, after a moment of stunned silence.
‘But, well, when you come to think of it, it will seem a bit flat without us next term.
Half the Sixth Form gone!
Funny, we never thought we'd be Sixth, did we?
I — somehow I can't believe even now that we really are grown up.
Gay, do you think that in time we shall forget our old selves, and the things we used to do?’
Gay smiled.
‘What did we talk about when we were in Three A?’ she countered, and all three racked their brains in vain.
‘It's like one of those dreams,’ said Breeze, ‘that are so vivid that you think you couldn't possibly forget the slightest detail; yet when you try to describe them, they simply disappear.
I like that Harrow School Song the kids sang yesterday at the breaking-up stunt, don't you?’
‘’ Forty Years On’?
Yes, I do,’ said Gay; ‘I've heard it before, lots of times.’
And slowly in her quiet, beautiful voice, she repeated one of the verses:
‘Oh, the great days, in the distance enchanted,
Days of fresh air, in the rain and the sun.
How we rejoiced as we struggled and panted!
Hardly believable, forty years on!’’
‘Forty years on!’
Felicity gave an exaggerated shudder.
‘We shall all be dead, I hope!
Imagine being fifty-eight!’
‘We may feel younger than we do now,’ said Gay seriously.
‘I wish one could stand apart from one's own life and watch its development as one would watch a play.
The trouble is, one becomes too deeply involved to notice what's going on…’
‘I've had a brain-wave!’ cried Breeze, and the other two groaned, being only too well acquainted with her usually disastrous inspirations.
‘I read in the paper the other day that two people had met on the steps of St Paul's Cathedral after fifty years or something.
They'd made a vow, you see, all that time ago…
‘Reunited after half a century!
Friendship renewed on sacred soil!
Touching scene in heart of city!
Many pigeons in tears…’
‘Oh shut up, Gay!
You're not a journalist yet.
I know it sounds a bit potty, but why shouldn't we do that?
I don't mean wait fifty years — but let's meet here, in the Jade Cockatoo, in a year's time, and have a sort of celebration!
We could compare notes,’ Breeze explained, ‘and mark the ravages of time.’
‘Not a bad idea,’ said Felicity.
‘Only — I shall be in Switzerland then.
Mummy said we were going to spend next Christmas there — it's a thing they've been meaning to do for ages.’
‘Switzerland!’ breathed Gay.
They saw her face light up.
She had always longed to go abroad.
‘Perhaps you could come,’ said Felicity lamely, and she laughed.
‘Thanks — but I didn't mean that, you know!
I'll be busy, and besides…
Oh, I'll get there some time, I expect.
How marvellous for you, Flick.
But what about the year after?
We might have our celebration then.’
‘We could,’ said Felicity, ‘as far as I'm concerned.
If the family want to go abroad again, I shouldn't mind leaving them another year; but I couldn't the very first time.
Let's fix it now.
Today is — let me see — December the eighteenth.
We'll meet here, on the same day, in two years' time, at seven o'clock, and we'll have exactly the same things to eat, and tell each other quite frankly in what ways we've changed.
It will be fun!’
‘’ No,’said Breeze, ‘it won't be fun, exactly.
But we'll do it if we possibly can — You and I will be twenty, Flick!
And Gay'll  be nineteen.’
‘A solemn thought!’ said Gay.
‘Of course we'll meet in the meanwhile — lots and lots of times, but that will be a special tryst.
And now we'd better go, I think, because time's getting on and we've still tons of packing to do.
Yes, please’— to the hovering waitress —‘we should like to have our bill.’
They were well known at the Jade Cockatoo, for the seniors at Pinehurst were allowed to have tea in the town now and then.
The waitress added up the modest sum, and then asked them regretfully if they were leaving the district for good.
‘Yes, but we've arranged to meet here — two years today,’ said Breeze.
‘I hope you'll still be here.’
‘If I am, miss, I'll keep your table for you.’
She smiled.
‘My, but you'll look different then, and feel different, too, I'll be bound!
Well, Chetwynd won't seem the same without you three young ladies, and that's a fact.
I'm sure I wish you all the best of luck.’
‘Thanks most awfully.
We wish you luck, too.
Bags of it!
Goodbye,’ and Breeze held out her hand.
The other girls followed suit, and the waitress, after a moment's hesitation, wrung in turn the outstretched hands before hurrying off to attend to the needs of a customer who, to judge by his impatience, was in the last stages of starvation.
‘We can't tip her after that,’ said Felicity.
‘I should think she'd rather have had sixpence instead of the fond farewell.
Still, never mind.
Got your brolly, Breeze?’ she asked as they neared the door.
‘Gosh, no!’
Breeze flew back for it, and joined them in the street.
The rain had stopped now, and the stars were very bright.
The air was amazingly clear, as it often is after a wet day, and as they climbed the hill which would take them back to Pinehurst they could see, far ahead, the lights of several villages and one big town.
‘I love watching lights twinkling a long way away.
They give one such a lovely tip-toe feeling,’ said Breeze, ‘as if they were beckoning one on and on.
And I suppose it is like that, because if we walked up to those, we should see more — and more…’
‘Till we came to the sea, and then there'd be lighted ships  ready to take us across the world.’
Gay was quick to seize the idea.
She said:
‘I'd like to sail the Amazon
Some day, before I'm old.’’
They were at the top of the hill now, and by common consent they came to a standstill.
Breeze had been gazing at the lights for so long that she was quite dazzled.
They danced before her eyes like golden stars.
‘And this time tomorrow,’ she said, ‘we'll be there!’
‘Where?
In Winchester?’ asked the literal Felicity.
‘No.
In the distance enchanted,’ said Gay.
SUSAN
Breeze, wedged in a corner of the crowded third-class compartment, cautiously massaged her left arm, which was cramped, and tried to wriggle away from her portly neighbour, whose big fur collar had been tickling her neck for the last half-hour.
Vaguely she wondered who had coined the phrase ‘packed like sardines’.
Sardines, she thought, travelled in luxury compared with human beings forced to use the railways at Christmas time.
But she had been battling against these odds for five hours, so perhaps her judgement was a little warped.
It might have been worse, she told herself.
She might have had to stand.
She had left Chetwynd Magna at ten o'clock, having seen both Gay and Felicity off by the London train; and now it was nearly three, and her feet were cold; she had eaten the sandwiches Matron had cut for her, and of course she had read all her papers hours and hours ago.
Moreover she had changed trains three times, because it is an awkward, cross-country journey from Chetwynd Magna to St Petrock's-on-Sea, where the O'Briens had lived for the past six years.
Not without difficulty she glanced at her watch, and would have sighed with relief if she had been less squashed.
She was nearly there now.
In less than an hour's time they would be at St Petrock's, and Susan would be on the platform to meet her, with dear old Sambo, the Airedale, barking his head off with glee.
She smiled involuntarily as she pictured the scene.
That their father's death must be a relief to her elder sister was obvious, for Major O'Brien had been hopelessly paralysed for years, and during the last few months of his life had been unable to speak.
Susan had nursed him tirelessly, and no one had  ever heard her complain; but she would have been more than human if she had not been thankful that her long and exhausting task had come to an end.
All the same, Breeze felt worried about Susan.
Her letters had been so short of late, and almost devoid of news.
Perhaps she was tired out now that the strain was over.
That must be it.
But Breeze still had an uneasy feeling that it was something more.
The train stopped at some wayside station.
Two people got out of her compartment, but three more got in, so things were worse instead of better.
‘It's a shime, that's what it is!’ said a shrill Cockney voice.
‘'Ere we are, packed like sardines, when there's a coupl'a gents next door but one, wiv a first-class kerridge fer themselves.
Mikes me see red!’
The owner of the voice, an aggressive youth with a cigarette stuck behind one ear, was sitting in the opposite corner, very much at his ease.
Breeze wondered why his righteous indignation did not prompt him to offer his seat to one of the women who had just got in, clutching a shopping-basket with one hand and a baby with the other.
Surely somebody would stand up and let her sit down?
But the train started off again, and she nearly lost her balance; and still nobody moved.
Breeze stood up.
‘Would you like my place?
It's rather a tight fit,’ she said apologetically, and the woman beamed at her.
‘Thanks ever so, miss, I do call that kind,’ she said breathlessly.
‘I wish there was more like you, that I do!’
And she glared at the Cockney youth, who gave an elaborate yawn.
Breeze, scarlet-cheeked by this time — for she hated being made conspicuous — edged her way into the corridor.
Despite the cold, the atmosphere in the carriage was very stuffy, and it was more interesting to stand out here, even if people were pressing against the windows and sitting about on boxes and suitcases.
But she was more tired than she knew, and soon she began to wish that she had a suitcase to sit on; but hers was on the rack in that tightly packed carriage, and she couldn't go back for it.
She leaned against the wooden wall, and tried to flatten herself as a tall thin man came out of an adjacent door and turned in her direction.
He did not pass her, however, as she had expected; but  stopped in front of her and touched his hat.
‘Excuse me, miss,’ he said respectfully, ‘but my master has sent me to ask you if you would care to take a seat in our carriage.
He saw you from the window just now.’
‘It's very kind of him,’ said Breeze.
‘but really…’
‘There's plenty of room, miss.
We had it reserved because my master is such an invalid.
You'd be quite comfortable, I assure you,’ the man went on, and by his pleading tone Breeze guessed that his employer was used to having his own way — and raised Cain when he didn't get it.
‘Thank you,’ she said, ‘I'll come.’
The man's relief was patent.
He held the door open and she passed through, followed by many curious glances.
It was well for Breeze that all the holidays she had spent in St Petrock's had accustomed her to invalids — but even so, she had never seen anybody who looked as ill as the old, old man who lay propped up on cushions in the corner facing the engine.
His face had wasted away till it was a mere mask of yellow wrinkled skin, with a curved Napoleonic nose and a crooked rat-trap of a mouth.
A pair of keen black eyes burned fiercely in their sunken sockets, and as she met their sardonic gaze she drew back and would have fled, had not the servant been close behind her.
‘Sit down, sit down,’ said the old man peevishly.
‘And let Chignell shut the door.
These trains — nothing but draughts and crowds — disgraceful, I say, disgraceful!
What are your parents thinking of, letting you travel alone?’
‘Oh I'm all right, thank you,’ said Breeze.
‘I'm eighteen…’
‘And I'm eighty-eight, and I object to draughts and crowds as strongly as ever.
Cold?’ he snapped at her.
‘No, not really…’
‘Yes, you are.
Chignell!
Rugs!
Good heavens, man, do I pay you to stand about like a tailor's dummy?
Sandwiches!
Coffee!
Or do you prefer whisky-and-soda, madam?
We have both,’ said this extraordinary old man, looking at a hamper on the seat beside him.
‘No thank you, I'd rather have coffee — at least, I don't want anything — I'm not a bit hungry…’
‘Yes, you are.
Open the hamper, Chignell.
There, a conglomeration of indigestible rubbish!
Take your choice, young lady.’
‘But I'm not at all hungry, really,’ said Breeze, who couldn't have swallowed a mouthful at that moment.
‘Besides,’ she went on, trying to placate her host, ‘I'm getting out quite soon — at St Petrock's.’
‘St Petrock's, hey?
And what are you doing there?’ snarled the old man.
‘I live there,’ said Breeze, in surprise.
‘Huh!
I thought it was a place for the aged and moribund — St Cemetery's-on-Sea!’
He chuckled at his grim little joke.
‘What's your name?’ he rapped out suddenly.
‘Breeze O'Brien.’
‘Breeze!
That isn't a name.
Is it, Chignell?’
‘It's Bridget really,’ she explained, catching a glance from the patient servant which said quite plainly: ‘Please bear with him.’
Poor old man, she thought, having by now recovered from the shock of his appearance; he was so ill that one couldn't mind what he said or did.
‘My father called me Breeze,’ she added, as he seemed interested; and as she said that her mind went back to the hot summer's day when her father had given her the nickname which had been adopted by everyone.
It was quite soon after the terrible motor accident that had crippled him for life, and she had just come in from the garden with a bunch of flowers for him.
‘You're like a breath of fresh air ,’ he had said; ‘a little summer breeze.
I think I shall call you Breeze.’
To her horror she felt her eyes fill with tears.
She hadn't missed him at all when he died, but now she realized for the first time that she had lost her father.
Strange that something as solemn as death should make so little impression on her, while this trivial memory should pierce her through and through.
‘This weather makes me want to sneeze,’ she said, and blew her nose vigorously.
She did not look at the old man, so she failed to see the shrewd yet kindly glance he gave her.
‘We're going to St Petrock's too,’ he announced.
‘Aren't we, Chignell?’
‘Are you staying long?’ asked Breeze politely.
‘No,’ he said with significance, ‘not long.’
And he closed his eyes and seemed to sleep.
Breeze looked at Chignell, who was unobtrusively arranging cushions for his employer.
He was a quaint-looking man, very tall and thin, with enormous hands, feet and ears.
His face was quite startlingly ugly, but it was also very kind, and she decided that she liked him.
She turned to the window, and her heart leapt as she saw the grey line of the sea.
‘Nearly there now,’ she said softly, and the fierce dark eyes opened for a moment.
‘Chignell, you will collect Miss O'Brien's luggage and find her a porter before you do anything else,’ said the autocrat; and then the train slowed down.
‘Goodbye,’ said Breeze, ‘and thanks most awfully.
And — I hope you'll like St Petrock's.
The water's supposed to be good, you know, as well as the air.’
‘Ah,’ he said, smiling, ‘only the waters of Lethe can cure me, Breeze O'Brien.
Goodbye.’
He held out his hand and she took it, though his touch made her want to shudder.
Its clammy coldness had nothing to do with the coldness of the day.
As the train stopped she rushed to the window, though she dared not open it.
Where were Susan and Sambo?
She scanned the small platform for those two familiar figures, but they were not there.
She could scarcely believe it.
Never before had they failed to meet her, and now, when she had left school for good, they had not come.
Of course it was just possible that something had delayed them; they might even now be hurrying up the steep incline to the station.
She soon persuaded herself that this must be the case, so that when the old man asked if anyone were meeting her, she answered with confidence:
‘Yes, my sister and the dog.
I expect they're outside.’
The faithful Chignell had collected the luggage by this time, and secured two porters — one for Breeze and the other to cope with his employer's paraphernalia.
In the general confusion Breeze managed to escape.
There was still no sign of Susan and Sambo.
With a sinking heart she arranged for her things to come up by an  outside porter, and then set off for home.
Dorchester Terrace, where she lived, was a turning off the sea-front, and about a quarter of a mile from the station.
She had to cross the High Street, the only live spot in the sleepy little town, and even this was deserted, for the weather was too cold for many of the residents to be abroad.
St Petrock's, like so many South Coast resorts, was roughly divided into two classes — invalids, and the people who looked after them.
In the summer it had, of course, its share of visitors, but during the winter months, when half the cafés and shops were closed, most of the people one met were in bath chairs, or leaning heavily on some supporting arm.
The sea was glorious this afternoon.
It was high tide; the wild, white-crested waves were dashing against the parade, sending clouds of spray into the street.
Breeze stood for a moment, listening to its savage, eternal music, watching the grey-green water swirling round the half-submerged rocks.
‘So you've come back!’ said the sea.
‘Yes, I've come back,’ she answered silently; ‘I'll always come back to you.’
And then, cheered by this welcome from her mighty friend, she went on her way.
Dorchester Terrace was a row of tall red houses with sloping slate roofs.
The gardens were at the back.
Each house had an iron gate and a short tiled path up to the front door.
Every time she returned to it, Breeze was struck by the uncompromising ugliness of her home.
This afternoon, however, she was too much perturbed in her mind to trouble about such things, and she rounded the corner at a run which would have spelt disaster had anyone been coming in the opposite direction.
Number nine, where the O'Briens lived, looked different from the other houses, for Susan loved beautiful colours, and her curtains were always a cheerful oasis amidst the Nottingham lace of the conventional neighbours.
As she caught sight of the house, Breeze came to an abrupt standstill, nearly falling over her own feet.
For there was a large notice outside it: ‘To be let or sold.’
To be let or sold…
But Susan hadn't said a word about leaving St Petrock's.
More than ever convinced that something was wrong, Breeze hurried up the street.
As she opened the gate, some people came out of the front door — an elderly couple with Susan behind them.
But what a changed Susan!
She was as white as a ghost, and her eyes were shadowed as if she hadn't slept properly for weeks.
‘Well, we'll let you know,’ said one of the visitors.
‘Good afternoon.’
Breeze held the gate open for them, and they scuttled out.
The sisters looked at one another.
Neither spoke.
Then Breeze ran forwards and hugged Susan, who presently drew her into the hall.
‘Breeze, I'm so sorry.
I meant to be at the station, but these people came to look over the house and I couldn't get away.’
‘It's all right.
I was afraid you were ill.
You're not ill, Susan darling?’
The elder sister shook her head.
‘You're cold,’ she said; ‘come to the fire.’
‘It's all so queer.
Where's Sambo?’
Breeze cried sharply, and her eyes travelled to the hook by the hat-stand where his lead always hung.
But today his collar was there as well.
Susan said nothing.
Breeze swallowed a sob.
‘What happened?’ she whispered.
‘He was very old and he got ill.
Just when Daddy was dying.
I couldn't look after them both, so…’
‘I understand,’ Breeze said gently.
She slipped her arm through her sister's, and they went into the dining-room, where a small fire was burning.
In silence they sat down, Susan in a worn armchair and Breeze on the rug at her feet.
They did not look like sisters.
Susan was dark, with a clear pale skin and real Irish blue eyes, while Breeze had a mop of wild brown hair, and a perennial crop of freckles.
Susan was beautiful in a grave, withdrawn way; but Breeze wasn't beautiful at all.
Her face was too square and her features were too irregular, though most people thought that these defects were more than compensated by her radiant smile and long-lashed hazel eyes.
Breeze looked much younger than her age, but Susan, worn out by nursing and worry, seemed a good deal older than  her twenty-six years.
As they sat by the fire without speaking, Breeze felt the gulf of a generation between them.
‘How's Gay?’
Susan asked at last.
‘Oh, all right, thanks.
She's gone to Dulwich, to her aunt and uncle.
She's taking up journalism, you know,’
‘I believe you told me.
And how's Felicity?’
‘Flourishing.
She's going to have a ripping time.
Her people are giving her a car for Christmas — Susan, you're not listening!’
‘No…
I'm sorry, Breeze.
I was thinking…’
Susan broke off and leaned back, looking so tired that Breeze could not ask her any of the things she naturally wanted to know, about their father's last weeks of life.
The room was growing very dark, yet Breeze did not like to put on the light.
She glanced at her watch, which was luminous, and saw that it was past teatime.
Vaguely she wondered why the daily woman who had been with them for years had not put in an appearance before now, and listened in vain for the cheerful clatter of tea-cups in the passage outside.
‘How's Mrs Dibdin?’ she asked, and Susan started.
‘Mrs Dibdin — oh, I've had to get rid of her.
I've done without her for two months now.’
‘Susan!
You mean to say you've been doing  everything ?’ gasped Breeze.
‘No wonder you're worn to a shadow!
But why get rid of poor old Dibbie?
Had she designs on the family plate?’
Susan laughed.
‘It wouldn't have been much use if she had.
The family plate is no more.
I've had to sell it all.
We're…we're pretty hard up.
Things have been getting steadily worse — all our investments are down — and long before this last attack of Daddy's, it was almost impossible to make both ends meet.
Thank goodness he never knew.’
Breeze caught her sister's hand.
‘Why didn't you tell me?’
‘I wanted your last term at Pinehurst to be happy.
I knew you'd have to know soon enough.
For a long time now we've called ourselves poor, but we've managed to get along.
But now…
‘Is that why you're selling the house?
To get money?
‘Well, we'll have that anyway,’ said Breeze, trying not to sound as alarmed as she felt.
Again Susan laughed.
‘Oh dear no!’ she said.
‘The money we'll get for the house, if we're lucky enough to sell it at a good price, will just about pay the bills.’
Her voice broke suddenly.
‘Oh, Breeze, what a home-coming for you!
Daddy gone, Sambo gone, Mrs Dibdin gone — and the few relics we had left from the olden days all sold, and the house up for sale…’
‘Oh Susan, don't!
Don't worry.
Things will work out somehow.
When Jack comes home…’
‘Jack won't come home.
Or if he does, we shan't see him.
That's finished, Breeze.
Please don't speak of him again.’
Breeze was thunderstruck.
Jack Carey, an old friend of the family, had wanted to marry Susan years ago; but she, of course, could not leave her father.
Jack had gone to India soon afterwards, and although Susan wore no ring they were definitely engaged, and everyone took it for granted that they would marry as soon as circumstances would permit.
And now Susan said it was finished!
‘It seems like a nightmare,’ said Breeze in bewilderment; ‘but it's much, much worse for you than it is for me.
You've had all these months of worry and — and everything.’
She dared not mention Jack's name.
‘Still, things will be better now I've come home.
I'm going to look after you — it's time someone did — and we'll think of some ways and means.
After all, we have got each other.’
‘No,’ said Susan.
‘We can't stay together, Breeze.
We'll have to take jobs.
Don't you understand what I've been trying to tell you?
When all our debts are paid, we shan't have a penny in the world.’
OUT OF THE BLUE
Breeze sat as if she had been turned to stone.
She tried to speak, but no words came — and after all, what was there to say?
She had read of this sort of thing often enough; she had heard of its happening to other people — even to people she knew — but she had never for one moment imagined that it could happen to her.
By an effort of memory she could just recall a time when money had been plentiful, and her father — then strong and well — had spent it with a gay extravagance which had delighted her as a small child.
Then had come his accident, and they were forced to leave their London house and come to St Petrock's in the hope of his regaining his strength.
She had been sent away to school soon after this, so she had not noticed the beginning of the gradual retrenchment which had resulted in extreme economy.
But it was only during the past year that she had realized that they were — in the eyes of people like Felicity, at any rate — very badly off.
She had always loved painting.
It was the thing she did best, and she had decided long ago that she would study in earnest as soon as she left school.
When it dawned on her that she would have to earn her own living, she made up her mind to work for a diploma and then teach, and do some book-illustrating while she cast about for her real métier.
Well, that was knocked on the head.
Susan had said that they would both have to find jobs, and one couldn't do much in the art line without proper training.
And Breeze's heart sank still lower as she reflected that if they were really penniless, an artistic career with its inevitable ups and downs would be quite out of the question.
She must think of something else to do.
But what?
She racked her brains, staring unseeingly into the  glowing embers of the fire.
‘You must be tired out,’ she said at last, forgetting her own thwarted career in her concern for her sister.
‘You talk about getting a job — but what you need is a good long rest.
I do wish we had some nice relations you could go and stay with.
We're quite exceptional, aren't we, having none at all?’
Susan shrugged.
‘Both our parents were only children; that's why.
I suppose we must have a few cousins several times removed floating about somewhere or other, but I've never heard of them.
You haven't asked what your job's going to be.’
‘Why, is it all fixed up already?’
Breeze tried to hide her dismay.
She was glad now that she hadn't put up the lights.
‘More or less.
Doctor Andrews was so kind all the time Daddy was so terribly ill, and when I realized the desperate state of our financial affairs I told him about it, and asked his advice.
And it appears that his wife has a cousin in Edinburgh who wants a nursery governess for her little boy…’
Susan broke off.
A coal fell out of the fire, making them both start, and Breeze replaced it with the exaggerated care with which we perform these trivial tasks, when our thoughts are far away.
A nursery governess!
She gave a gulp.
Was that to be her fate — the end of all her dreams?
And in Scotland, too; hundreds of miles away from everyone she knew.
‘It will be an experience,’ she said valiantly, ‘and I believe Edinburgh's a most exciting place.
But what about you, Susan?
Are you fixed up, too?’
‘Oh yes!’ said Susan, with a dreadful false brightness that sent a shiver down her sister's spine.
‘I've been very lucky.
I've heard of an old lady in Penzance who wants a companion…’
‘A companion?
You?
And in Penzance of all places!
We'll never be able to see each other, if I'm in Edinburgh!
Susan, you can't!’ gasped Breeze.
‘I must.
You see, it isn't easy to get this kind of job without having had previous experience, and it's the only thing I can do, because I've no qualifications.
I'm very lucky,’ Susan repeated sternly, as though she were daring Breeze to disagree with her.
‘Is she a nice old lady?’
Breeze faltered.
‘They're usually rather grim — at least.
they are in books.
Will you have to read to  her, and wind wool, and all that?
I only hope she won't keep a pug!’
Susan actually laughed.
‘You needn't worry,’ she said dryly.
‘There won't be anything like that.
My old lady's nearly ninety, and stone-deaf, and her mind wanders now and then…’
Breeze felt herself stiffen with horror.
‘You mean — she's bats?
Oh, Susan!’
‘Darling, you really mustn't use such awful expressions.
Bats!
What would Miss Henry say?
But — yes, the poor old thing is rather queer — in fact, she's been mad for years, so you see now why I needed no special qualifications.
I've just got to look after her and see that she doesn't hurt herself.’
‘This will take a long time to sink in,’ said Breeze.
‘Let me get it straight.
I'm to be governess to a little boy in Edinburgh, and you're to take charge of an antique loony in Penzance.
The money we shall earn will just about keep us in clothes and stamps, so that we'll never be able to afford holidays together because of the huge train fares.
We're to live our lives amongst strangers, drifting from post to post, growing a little shabbier and more disheartened every year.
Oh, I know some people like doing things like that, but not people like us.
Not people who want fun and adventures!
Think of all the things we meant to do when…’
She checked herself, for she had been going to say: ‘When you and Jack were married.’
jack Carey, who was an explorer as well as a student of Oriental languages, had promised to take them to the most remote corners of the earth some day, and they had often pictured themselves camping in the silent desert, or following some ancient track to a ruined city which had once been great.
‘Oh, Susan!’ she cried in sudden anguish.
‘I can stick it for myself, but I can't bear it for you.
Why should you have to sacrifice yourself — you who've been such a brick all your life?
It's so cruel — so unfair!’
‘My dear,’ said Susan slowly, ‘I honestly don't mind.
I've reached the stage when I really don't care what happens to me.
I should like to have found you something nicer to do, but I couldn't let you go to people we know nothing about, and Mrs Andrews says that her cousin is sure to take care of you.
And — one never knows — it might lead to something better.’
Breeze got up suddenly.
She couldn't stand this dark room another moment.
‘I'm going to get tea,’ she said.
‘No, don't move.
Susan, when do we start?
Not — not away?’
‘Oh, no — not until after the New Year,’ was the reply.
‘'You're to go at the beginning of January, but I shall have to wait till all this house business is finished.
I do hope those people will buy it!
So many of them have come to look at it and gone away promising to let me know — and then, not another word.’
‘Beasts!’ said Breeze fiercely.
‘How I loathe people who raise one's hopes, only to dash them to the ground!’
She had revelled in old-fashioned melodramatic stories in days gone by, and had a stock of these expressions which she used in all sincerity.
‘Well, anyhow,’ she went on, as she fumbled for the matches and lit the gas lights, ‘we'll have Christmas together in peace, and — and in case it's the last we have for some time, we'll make it as nice as possible.
It needn't cost much.
But let's have one day we can look back upon in the lean years to come.’
‘Lean years…’
Susan shuddered.
‘All right,’ she said.
‘And now let's change the subject.
I want to hear all about Pinehurst.’
She didn't, of course.
Breeze talked away for all she was worth as she cut bread-and-butter in the draughty old kitchen, but she knew that her sister wasn't really listening.
She herself felt curiously unreal, as though she were in the midst of a dream.
It seemed to her that years had passed since she had left school and said goodbye to all her friends and associates.
She thought of Gay and Felicity, and their conversation the previous evening.
She thought of the tryst they’ had made….
A large tear trickled down her nose, but she fielded it neatly before Susan saw.
It was the knowledge that she must leave Susan that hurt most of all.
Susan and Gay were the people she liked best in the world, and when her father died she had made a mental vow that she would do everything in her power to make life happy for this sister of hers who had worked so hard and shown such courage.
And now she was powerless; she could do nothing.
After tea she unpacked her shabby and much-mended  clothes (no chance of getting stockings for Christmas now, unless Felicity had a practical fit and sent her some!) and wrote two letters: a polite little note to Miss Henry, thanking her for past kindness, and a lengthy epistle to Gay, telling her the gloomy news.
She would tell Felicity later on, for the Three Musketeers had no secrets from one another; but Gay must be told at once .
‘Have a chocolate?’ said Susan, offering her some in a little dish.
Breeze saw that they were her favourite kind, and remembered then that this had always been a little ritual — chocolates on the first night of the holidays.
‘Oh Susan, how lovely!
Aren't you going to have one?’ she asked, but her sister shook her head.
‘Well, have a mint humbug, then!’
Breeze flew to fetch the tin, but it was empty.
She put it back again without a word, carefully avoiding Susan's eyes.
When, a little later, she ran out to the post, she took sixpence with her, and went into the confectioner's at the corner of the road to buy some mint humbugs.
A tall thin man was already inside, choosing cigars, and although his figure seemed vaguely familiar, she did not recognize him until he turned to go.
Then she saw that he was Chignell, and said good evening to him.
He beamed all over his nice, ugly face.
‘Good evening, miss.
I hope you got 'ome all right?
Mr Fennell was worried because he thought nobody came to meet you,’ he said, and she knew by his expression that the ancient tyrant had been upbraiding him on this account.
‘Oh, it was quite all right, thank you.
I hope,’ she said politely, ‘you've found a nice hotel?’
‘Yes, thank you, miss, we're stopping at the Royal, and I may say it  seems fairly comfortable.
Good night, miss, and I wish you the compliments of the season, I'm sure!’
And with a smiling salute Chignell melted into the darkness.
Fairly comfortable — what a way to describe the Royal, the most exclusive hotel in St Petrock's!
Breeze, hastening home under a sky full of stars and swift, transparent clouds, remembered the few occasions on which she had passed through its impressive portals.
Old friends of her father had sometimes  stayed there, and invited the two girls to dinner.
Jack had taken Susan to a ball there, to celebrate her twenty-first birthday; and Breeze, a round-eyed thirteen-year old, had been allowed to go and watch.
She could still remember how lovely Susan had looked that night, in her white and silver dress.
If she closed her eyes she could see again those glittering lights and hear the gay, entrancing music.
But what was the good of remembering such things?
They were over now; they belonged to the past.
Nursery governesses and companions didn't go to balls.
She told Susan about her encounter when she gave her the humbugs, and the elder sister seemed interested for the first time that evening.
‘Fennell?
I wonder if he can be Cornelius Fennell, the art collector.
You wouldn't have heard of him, of course, but I used to read his articles to Daddy at one time, and I remember seeing in the papers that he had been very ill.
Poor old man!
It's true, what they say — money isn't much good unless you've the health to enjoy it.’
‘Well, health without money isn't much catch either,’ Breeze muttered rebelliously, and then looked up in swift contrition.
‘What a horrible,cavilling thing to say!
I didn't mean it.
Of course one wouldn't change places with that poor old thing even if one had to look after fifteen small boys and a loony or so thrown in!
I hope he'll have a nice Christmas.
By the way, have you made out your list yet — or aren't we giving any presents this year?’
‘Oh, I've managed to make most of mine,’ said Susan.
‘Of course we're giving them!
I'd rather cut down expenses in other ways than stop sending presents.
Besides, we don't want everybody to know, do we?
I suppose you've come home bankrupt as usual, but never mind, I can let you have enough to buy your Christmas things.
I put aside some of the money I got for the silver, because Daddy meant to divide his things between us both.’
‘But I'm not bankrupt,’ said Breeze triumphantly.
‘I've enough pocket-money left to see me through Christmas, and the silver money will do for clothes and so on.
Let's put it in the post office tomorrow.’
Susan smiled uncertainly, and laid one thin hand on  Breeze's shoulder.
‘It's so nice to have you back,’ she said, ‘and to be ordered about like this!
I wish…’
Her voice died away as if she were too tired to speak.
Next morning she seemed so ill that Breeze telephoned Doctor Andrews.
He came round at once, and said that it was nothing to worry about; Susan was worn out, that was all, and must stay in bed for a few days.
Breeze expected her to refuse, for she had always hated enforced idleness; but she was so tired that she was glad to stay where she was, lying quite still and doing nothing.
So Breeze did her Christmas shopping alone, and looked after the house, and did the cooking.
She had had no experience of domestic affairs, but she managed well enough, and had the satisfaction of knowing that she was doing something for Susan, after all.
The people who thought of buying the house were still hovering, unable to make up their minds, and this entailed some dreary visits to the estate agents.
But although there was so much to be done, the indefatigable Breeze found time to collect holly and evergreens from the lanes inland, and made all sorts of decorations out of odd scraps of coloured paper.
And, with great secrecy, she bought a Christmas tree, and decorated it herself when Susan was asleep.
It was lucky for her that she was so busy just then, as she had little time to think during the day, and at night she was so tired that she fell asleep directly she got into bed.
But of course there were bad moments now and then, when full realization swooped down upon her, and she had to face the thought of a joyless future for Susan and herself.
She never spoke of it, though.
By tacit consent both sisters behaved as if this were just like any ordinary Christmas, and they avoided discussions which might lead to the subject that was naturally uppermost in their minds.
Susan came downstairs for the first time on Christmas Eve, and was genuinely delighted to see how pretty Breeze had made the sombre old dining-room.
A lovely fire was glowing in the grate, and the dark oil-paintings — cherished but valueless heirlooms from their father's family — were gaily decorated.
All the cards and calendars which had come to the house were  arranged on the mantelpiece, and amongst them were little boxes of sweets and candied fruit and brightly hued crackers.
Since the evergreen boughs were so dark and gloomy, Breeze had tied on some red beads as berries, and gummed the leaves before sprinkling them lightly with powdered ‘frost’.
‘But, Breeze, it's beautiful!
You've a gift for this sort of thing,’ declared Susan, as she sat down by the fire and gazed appreciatively round the room.
‘You ought to be an interior decorator, or…’
She broke off abruptly, as they always did when they felt themselves nearing the forbidden topic.
‘You look very pale,’ she went on; ‘you've been doing too much, my dear.
Why don't you go down to the sea and get a blow before tea?’
Breeze's face lit up.
She had been so terrifically busy lately that she had scarcely had time to go near the beach, except for odd moments snatched while she was shopping.
It was a lovely afternoon, too; cold but bright, with a frolicsome wind and pale, clear sunshine.
‘Well, if you're sure you don't mind…’ she began.
‘Mind?
I shall be asleep in two minutes!
Run along and don't hurry back,’ said Susan; so Breeze tucked her up in the manner she thought befitting to an invalid, and ran up to put on her coat.
It seemed so strange to find no Sambo waiting for her in the hall.
Every time she went out she missed his pleading eyes and thumping tail; but today it seemed worse than ever, somehow, to set forth quite alone.
She had to blink back her tears before she opened the front door, and then she ran down the short tiled path, and, throwing back her shoulders and digging her hands into her pockets, strode down to the parade.
Almost at once she began to feel better.
The lovely blue of the clear winter sky and the deep, changing colours of the sparkling water drove all depression from her mind.
She wore no hat, and the wind blew her hair this way and that, and brought a warm glow to her cheeks.
The tide was going out, she saw; if she walked along the parade as far as the pier, she would be able to come back along the sands.
The wind was against her now.
It buffeted her fiercely, like an overgrown puppy who does not know his strength, and she  had to fight her way.
But she enjoyed it.
Panting and breathless, she forged ahead, looking now at the cliffs of North Foreland, which looked within walking distance today, and now at some fishing-boats far out at sea.
And all at one her ‘tip-toe’ feeling came over her — a sudden joyous expectancy of she knew not what.
She had tried to explain this feeling to Gay and Felicity, when they had come out of the Jade Cockatoo on their last night together; but she had known all the time that it wasn't a thing that could be explained.
Gay understood, because she sometimes had it herself, but Felicity had only looked bewildered.
Most fervently Breeze wished that Gay were with her now, to share this walk and the exciting afternoon.
With her thoughts far away and her eyes fixed on the distant horizon, she did not notice where she was going — and as the tall, broad-shouldered man who was coming from the opposite direction was too deeply absorbed in his own reflections to be aware of his surroundings, there was a sudden abrupt collision.
‘I'm sorry!’ they gasped simultaneously, when they had recovered their breath, for they had walked full tilt into one another and both felt somewhat dazed.
Breeze tenderly massaged the tip of her nose which had made contact with a button, while the man stooped to pick up his pipe.
‘Are you hurt?’ he asked anxiously, as he stood up.
He had such a nice voice that she looked up with a smile, expecting to see a nice, kind face to match.
What she did see, however, was a countenance dark with anger, and her smile died away.
He  raised his  hat formally, and walked on.
The encounter had lasted no longer than one minute at the outside, yet she took away with her a vivid memory of that thin handsome face, with its grimly set lips and smouldering brown eyes.
She had come to the beginning of the shelters now, which meant that she was drawing near the pier.
How ramshackle seaside places looked in winter-time!
She glanced at the blistered woodwork and peeling paint, and noticed in a desultory fashion that the first shelter had had its windows broken, and the railings between the parade and the beach looked in need of repair.
Perhaps they had been staved in by a bath chair which  had run amok!
This was a favourite place for parking, she knew.
She walked on, lost in thought.
Would Gay like the bedroom slippers she had sent her for Christmas?
And would the picture she had chosen for Felicity ‘go’ well with her new room?
She'd got stockings for Susan — only one pair, but nice ones.
And of course there would be other things on the Christmas tree…
She had reached the pier now, and, still fighting against the wind, made for the flight of iron steps leading down to the beach.
As she set her foot on the first one she turned involuntarily and gave one last look at the parade — and started uncomfortably at what she saw.
A bath chair had been wheeled down to the shelter with the broken windows, and the man in charge of-it had propped it outside and was walking away.
There was no reason on earth why anything should happen.
The man had made it secure, and the occupant would be quite safe till he returned.
But — the railings hadgiven way at this point, and the parade sloped a little.
If the chair should slip its moorings, it would almost certainly go over the edge — and there was a thirty-foot drop.
Breeze sighed.
She would have to go and make sure that everything was all right— and that meant goodbye to walking home along the sands.
The shelter was quite a long way away, and there wouldn't be time to come back to the steps.
She wished she hadn't seen the broken railings, or that whoever was in the bath chair had not elected to come out just then.
Perhaps it was silly of her to bother.
Officious…horrible word!
Nevertheless, she went back.
The wind was behind her now, blowing her hair forward, so that she could not see properly unless she pushed it to one side.
Thus she was quite close to the bath chair before she realized that its waxen-faced occupant was none other than the old man who, in his eerie fashion, had been so kind in the train.
Would he recognize her?
Dared she stop and wish him a happy Christmas?
He was trying to read a newspaper, but although he was out of the wind the pages kept on fluttering.
She saw him crumple them up in a sudden burst of impatience, and fling them across the parade.
That sudden movement, slight as it was, jerked away the  stone which Chignell had placed behind one of the wheels.
With the horror of one who sees a nightmare come true, Breeze watched the chair slip backwards and glide with gathering momentum towards the broken railings.
A FOURPENNY CIGAR
Breeze sprang forward.
She seized the handle, but the impetus was too great, and it was wrenched from her convulsive grasp.
She caught it again, however, and this time she was borne swiftly backwards.
Losing her balance, she fell to the ground, and one of the wheels passed over her.
Dimly she could hear the sound of voices.
The old man was shouting hoarsely, and someone a long way off was answering — and running, too, for she could feel the vibration of rapid footsteps.
But whoever it was could not get there in time.
The chair was slipping, although its first speed had been checked by the fact that she had fallen in front of the wheels.
Gritting her teeth, she put out her right hand and gripped the hub of the near wheel, driving her fingers amongst the spokes.
The pain was excruciating, but in her terror she barely noticed it.
The chair was stopping — had stopped!
No, it was moving again.
Her fingers still clung to the spokes, keeping one wheel out of action.
But the others were moving, slowly but surely.
The chair was rolling towards the railings, and in another moment or two it would strike them and go over.
With a sickening lurch of the heart she realized that unless she freed her tortured hand, she must go with it.
Was this what it meant, then — that tip-toe feeling?
Did it lead, not to life, but to death?
She would fall thirty feet to the beach below, and they would find her, crushed and broken, beneath what was left of the chair.
She was being dragged along the asphalt.
Now her fear left her, and her whole being was flooded with pain.
There was nothing left in the world save the searing anguish of her  imprisoned fingers, and the hot fierce throb of straining muscles.
She couldn't hold on.
Nobody could.
She must let go.
And then her head struck an iron post.
The chair had reached the railings, then — and they were giving way.
But that one post seemed firm enough.
Making one last supreme effort, she put her free arm round it, bracing herself to hang on until that, too, collapsed.
The shouting was much nearer now, but she no longer heard it.
Her senses were mercifully dulled, and when the strain was suddenly eased, the world went black.
when she opened her eyes she was lying on one of the seats inside the shelter, and — horror of horrors!— a huge crowd had collected.
A very large policeman was trying to keep them back, but they were pressing closer and closer, determined to have a good look at the two people who had so nearly lost their lives.
For Breeze was not alone in her glory.
Beside her sat old Mr Fennell, deathly white but fully conscious, while the distracted Chignell was trying to minister to them both at once.
He looked so like a frog, being literally green with fright, with his eyes nearly popping out of his head, that Breeze wanted to laugh; but she didn't, because she knew that this curious, gaping crowd of people would think she was hysterical.
Blood was dripping from her right hand, The sight of it gave her a funny cold feeling inside, and the thought flashed through her mind: ‘Shall I be able to paint again?’
But perhaps it wasn't as bad as it looked, and in any case one couldn't go on sitting here, being stared at by the whole of St Petrock's-on-Sea while Chignell waved smelling salts under one's nose.
She stood up and grinned at the old man who owed her his life.
‘Excuse me,’ she said, ‘but I must go.
And you will remember, won't you, that the railings aren't really safe?’
He raised one hand imperiously.
‘Stay, if you please.
I should be glad if you would come with me to my hotel.
Chignell, my chair!
Look alive, man!
I think we've provided enough free amusement for one afternoon!’
Abashed by this sarcasm, the crowd hung back while the dazed Chignell fetched the bath chair which had caused all the trouble, and lifted his master into it.
Breeze took a step and sat  down again, being very unsteady on her feet.
The invalid's sharp eyes saw this.
‘Take Miss O'Brien's arm, Chignell, and help her across the road.
The constable will wheel me,’ he rapped out; and Breeze was grateful to him for suggesting this arrangement.
To be led through the streets of St  Petrick's by a policeman would have been the last straw!
Fortunately the Royal Hotel was on the front, and they had not far to go.
Breeze soon began to feel better, and asked Chignell what had happened.
‘Well, you see, miss, Mr Fennell wanted some shopping done and told me to leave him there, out of the wind.
We didn't know the railings was dicky.
So off I goes — and then I hears him hollerin'…’
The man broke off with a shudder.
‘Two workmen saw it, luckily, and we all three got there just as you went off, like.
My word, miss, you're an 'eroine, that's what you are.
‘Indeed I'm not!’ said Breeze indignantly.
‘I was terrified, if you want to know.
And — if Mr Fennell thinks he's got to thank me, or anything like that, I'm going home!’
‘Oh, miss, you can't do that!
Mr Fennell would never forgive me.’
Chignell tightened his grip on her arm as though he expected her to run away.
‘We're nearly there,’ he said soothingly, and a few moments later he escorted her through the elaborate palm Court which was the entrance to the Royal Hotel.
Breeze had now recovered herself sufficiently to ask if she might ring up Susan, which she did — explaining where she was, but reserving the details till later.
While she was thus engaged Chignell had summoned the hotel doctor, who presently ushered her into his sanctum and gave her something to drink, which tasted horrible but made her feel much better.
Then he washed and dressed her hand.
It had been badly lacerated, he said, but it would heal up well.
At last, with her right arm in a sling and a large piece of plaster on her forehead, which she had knocked against the post, she was taken up to Mr Fennell's suite.
If the old man had looked ill in the train, he looked ghastly now.
His face seemed more emaciated than ever, and the fierce black eyes were curiously dulled.
The shaking hand he held out  to her felt as dry and brittle as rice-paper.
‘But why did you do it?’ he said.
‘You are so young; you are strong; you have your life before you.
Child, your hand — is it badly hurt?’
She shook her head.
She couldn't speak.
She felt so dreadfully sorry for him that if she had tried to utter a word she would have broken down.
It seemed so terrible to see this old, old man amidst these beautiful surroundings, when nothing, she felt sure, could give him any pleasure now.
‘Chignell tells me that you want no thanks,’ he resumed, and she caught at that eagerly.
‘Oh no — definitely not!
And I'm awfully glad I happened to be passing.
Because — even if you areill and can't get much fun out of life — it would have been a messy kind of end.
Besides, St Petrock's may do you heaps of good.
Perhaps you'll be better soon, and able to enjoy things again.’
He laughed.
It was a queer, cracked sound.
‘I have never,’ he said deliberately, ‘enjoyed anything in all my life.
I have been successful, I have owned many beautiful things…’
(’’ Then he must be Cornelius!’thought Breeze.)
‘…but always there has been a hidden canker, which has grown with the years until it is stifling me.’
The claw-like hands opened and shut.
‘Yet this is discourteous of me,’ he said, ‘when you have saved me from a ‘messy end’.
Believe me, I am grateful.’
‘I — I think I'd better go,’ said Breeze, feeling horribly out of her depth.
‘You must be tired.
And in spite of what you say,’ she added firmly, ‘I wish you a happy Christmas.
The decorations looked pretty downstairs.’
‘I shall stay up here,’ he said.
‘I have had enough of Yuletide festivities in hotels.
Bah!
Poisonous food, and balloons.
and a lot of gibbering idiots wearing paper caps!’
Breeze laughed, for this petulant little outburst made him seem more human.
To her surprise an answering smile dawned in his eyes and finally reached his thin, sardonic lips — and it was then that the idea came into her head.
Should she?
Dared she?
Oh, but it would spoil Christmas — the last Christmas Day she and Susan would have together.
She couldn't !
And yet — so ran her disjointed thoughts — hadn't one always been taught that Christmas  was the time when one should give up things for other people?
Wasn't it possible that in years to come she and Susan, doomed to loneliness themselves, might feel very glad that they had done their best to make someone else less lonely?
‘Why don't you come to us?’ she said.
‘We'd like to have you — honestly!
I don't know about the food, because I'll have to cook it myself, but I promise you we won't gibber or wear paper caps.
It'll be very quiet, of course.
There's only my sister and myself…’
The old man was staring at her in a most disconcerting way.
He went on staring, too, until her cheeks grew crimson and she began to stammer.
‘It was only an idea.
B-but I dare say you wouldn't like it.
And the cake I've made feels awfully bullety, so you might get indigestion…’
‘Would three o'clock be too early?’ he asked crisply, and, as she shook her head: ‘Three o'clock, then, Chignell!
And get your pad and pencil, and take down the address.’
Breeze, whizzing home in the taxi that the obliging Chignell had procured for her, found herself wondering whether the whole thing could have been a dream.
Yet the cushioned seat was solid enough, and the pain in her hand was almost too real.
It was no dream, this fantastic adventure; it had actually happened, and she wondered with some misgivings how Susan would receive the news.
She dismissed the taxi at the corner of Dorchester Terrace, thinking that the sight of it might alarm her sister.
Besides, she had some shopping to do.
She had hung some foolish little things on the Christmas tree for Susan and herself, and now she must get some for her guest.
She had her purse with her, luckily, but there wasn't much in it.
Elevenpence-halfpenny…
She frowned.
It didn't give one much scope.
She bought a threepenny pencil — a lucky one with cats and horseshoes on it, and a fairly respectable handkerchief for fourpence-halfpenny.
Then in a tobacconist's window she saw ‘cigars’ marked fourpence and thought that they looked something like the kind she had seen Chignell buying the other night.
She flew in and got one, and hurried home, penniless but content.
Susan turned white when she saw the bandaged hand, and Breeze had some difficulty in reassuring her.
But perhaps it was just as well that she had this shock, for in her relief at finding the injury comparatively slight, she  forbore to say very much about the unexpected guest.
‘Of course I don't mind your inviting him.
I'm glad you did, if you think he'll enjoy it.
It'll seem strange to us,’ she observed, with the first hint of bitterness Breeze had heard from her, ‘to live in other people's houses on sufferance, as it were, and not to be able to invite our friends, or go out, even, except at certain times.
Still, it's no use moaning.’
‘Mustn't grumble!’ chanted Breeze, quoting the late charwoman's favourite phrase.
‘But if only we could have a cottage somewhere!’ she went on wistfully.
‘A tiny little place we could run ourselves, and have our own things with us, and where we could do what we liked.
A cottage in the country, with a garden!
Oh Susan, wouldn't it be heavenly?’
Susan smiled.
‘And what do you propose to live on, impractical one?’
‘Oh, we could do odd jobs!
Distempering houses, and stepping into the breach when somebody's cook has lumbago, and exercising people's dogs.
We'd make a fortune as factotums!’ laughed Breeze, who was talking at random to keep her sister's thoughts from turning towards melancholy things.
‘Factota, dear,’ murmured Susan.
She had an accurate mind.
‘Factota, then — though it does sound like a new kind of vacuum cleaner!
Never mind,’ said Breeze valiantly, ‘perhaps if we're awfully careful and cheese-paring for the next forty years or so, we may end our days in some sweet little cottage with roses round the door…’
‘And spiders in the larder, and no bath,’ Susan finished cynically.
She rose, and began collecting her belongings, preparatory to going to bed.
‘But keep on building your castles, she said, ‘just as long as ever you can.’,
It was evident from her tone that she herself had given up that delightful if unprofitable occupation.
Breeze looked up, meaning to expostulate, but was silenced by what she saw in her sister's face.
For Susan wasn't there at all; she was miles and  miles away.
Left alone, Breeze crouched over the dying embers and tried to realize that this was Christmas Eve.
It didn't feel like it, in spite of the decorations she had put up with such care, and the pile of letters and parcels waiting on the table to be opened tomorrow morning.
Always, in the past, it had been such a jolly day.
Even last year, when her father was so ill, she and Susan had filled stockings for each other, and had such fun over the wonderful box of curios that Jack had sent from India.
And dear old Sambo had provided more amusement by purloining the turkey, so that they had to eat the bread-sauce and chestnut stuffing without their raison d'être !
How they had laughed.
Even Daddy, restricted to beef-tea himself, had appreciated the joke…
Now he and Sambo were gone; thee had vanished into the unknown, and soon everything else would be gone as well, and there would be nothing left.
Nothing?
She threw back her shoulders and swallowed the hard, hot lump in her throat.
There was Susan.
Even if they were to be separated, one would know that Susan was somewhere .
And then there was Gay.
She thought with a rush of gratitude of the letter she had had from Gay, in answer to the one she had written on the first night of the holidays.
Beneath that cool, aloof manner of hers, Gay was the most understanding person on earth, and she never made the mistake of saying too much.
‘Aren't you coming to bed?’ called Susan, from the top of the stairs.
‘You've a strenuous day ahead of you, you know!’
Breeze was glad that she had mastered her momentary depression, as she was now able to run up and say goodnight quite cheerfully.
‘And, look here,’ said Susan, ‘I've been thinking — we mustn't let this old friend of yours know we're poor and down on our luck.
You see, he's taken a fancy to you, and it would be awful if he thought…’
‘That we wanted him to give us things?
Jehoshaphat!’
Breeze turned quite pale.
‘That would be ghastly.
We must be careful.
Oh Susan, whatever happens to us, we won't get Heepish, will we?
Because I'd rather die.’
Susan did not answer at once; in fact, she was silent for such a long time that Breeze, who could not see her face, wondered if she had fallen asleep.
Then suddenly Susan sat up in bed, and regarded her sister with an odd little smile.
‘No,’ she said, ‘your self-respect is about the only thing that nobody can take away.
Nobody, that is, except yourself.
Always remember that.
There are two kinds of pride; one's chiefly arrogance, which is wrong and silly, but the other — the true pride…’
She faltered for a moment.
‘Hold on to that for dear life, because once you've lost it, you've lost everything.’
Involuntarily, it seemed, her glance strayed across the room to her dressing-table, and Breeze, following the direction of her eyes, remembered that a photograph of Jack Carey used to stand there.
It had disappeared now, as had everything else he had ever given Susan.
The room seemed lonely, somehow, without that smiling face.
Breeze gave a little shiver.
‘Cold?’
‘No, not a bit, thanks,’ she answered truthfully, for the chill she felt had come from within.
She said goodnight a second time, and ran downstairs again, to wrestle with all her preparations for the morrow.
There was a terrific amount to do, and her bandaged hand hampered her, but she worked away doggedly until it was all done.
‘we'll have a happy Christmas,’ she told herself grimly, ‘or perish in the attempt!’
At last, worn out, she tiptoed up to bed, but she was too tired to sleep.
For a long time she lay, wide-eyed in the darkness, living over again the strange events of the day, until these thoughts and impressions gradually merged into dreams.
Now she was walking along the parade and came upon old Cornelius Fennell in his bath chair, with Gay beside him, wearing a paper hat.
They were singing ‘Forty Years On’ as a duet, which surprised her so much that she stepped backwards and trod on the toe of the cross young man with whom she had collided that afternoon.
Only he wasn't cross now.
He was smiling as if he recognized her, and she had a queer, uncanny feeling that she knew him very well…
And then the church bells began to ring, and she woke up to find it was Christmas morning.
Susan came down for breakfast today, and they had an  exciting time opening their parcels, for their father's illness had prevented their making friends in the neighbourhood; but there  was plenty to do and talk about, and they steadfastly refused to give way to the depression that naturally overcame them at times.
They had their midday meal fairly early, so as to have it out of the way before their peculiar visitor arrived.
Three o'clock found them ready and waiting, arrayed in their most festive attire.
Susan wore blue, and Breeze moss-green — a colour that suited her extraordinarily well.
The Christmas tree was already ensconced in the drawing-room, so they had arranged to have tea in the dining-room, where a lovely fire was blazing.
Breeze's cake looked very inviting, as she had iced it carefully and written ‘Good Luck’ on it, in pink.
True, it was astonishingly heavy when one came to lift it, but — as the philosophical cook observed — that was all to the good, as one slice would be enough!
‘Or perhaps too much,’ laughed Susan, who was looking beautiful despite her pallor and the fact that her blue frock was practically in its dotage.
‘He'll come on the very tick,’ Breeze prophesied, as the clock struck three — and sure enough, there was the bath chair at the gate!
‘Now for it,’ she said apprehensively, as she ran to open the door.
Chignell was helping his master up the steps.
Breeze saw with surprise that the fierce old man looked almost genial, and actually sported a gardenia in his button-hole.
‘That'll do, Chignell,’ he said.
‘Come back in a couple of hours.’
‘Very good, sir.’
The man was just turning away when Breeze stopped him.
It had suddenly struck her that he was a stranger in the town, and might have nowhere to go.
‘Oh, please — can't he stay if he'd like to?
There's a nice fire in the kitchen, and we've heaps of puzzles and magazines…’
‘That's very kind of you,’ the old despot said dryly.
‘Chignell, you're in luck.
Careful, you jackass!
If you drop my chair down the area…
No, I do not require your help!
If Miss O'Brien will give me her arm…’
Breeze was surprised to find how light he was.
He might have been cut out of cardboard, she thought, as she led him across the hall and into the  dining -room, where she introduced him to Susan.
Then she ran back to Chignell, and ushered him  into the kitchen.
His eyes lit up when he saw the fire, for his hands were blue with cold.
‘Thank you, miss, I'm sure,’ he said, as she unearthed a pile of the fearsome periodicals beloved by the lamented Mrs Dibdin.
‘This is a much 'appier Christmas than we thought for.
But if I may make so bold — will you be careful of my master?
It's his 'eart, you know, miss, so he shouldn't strain himself in any way.
The doctors say he might go off sudden-like, so I thought I better warn you.’
‘I'm glad you did.
Oh, dear, I hope he won't go off here!
I'll be as careful as I can,’ she promised, then hastened back to the dining-room.
What a Christmas party she thought, with a wry little smile.
Still, she had brought it upon herself, and must go through with it as cheerfully as possible.
But, as it turned out, that party was a huge success.
Susan, like Breeze, possessed the golden gift of putting people at their ease, and old Cornelius Fennell — for he wasthe world-famed art collector — proved to be far more amenable than one would have supposed.
The three found so much to talk about that they did not think of tea till nearly five o'clock.
Then Breeze rushed out to the kitchen to find that Chignell had ‘taken the liberty’ of putting the kettle on.
He asked permission to make the tea, which he did — and brought it in to them with the air of an old family retainer.
Now Breeze produced some crackers, which they pulled with much laughter — and when a pink ‘Glengarry’ fell to the old man's share, he did not spurn it after all, but actually put it on!
When the time came for the cake to be cut, Breeze handed the knife to Susan — but her wrists were not strong enough to saw through the solid mass.
Breeze tried next, but failed, so Chignell had to be called to the rescue.
He succeeded in cutting four small slices, which they all nibbled gingerly.
‘An excellent cake, miss, but perhaps a trifle overbaked,’ Chignell said delicately, when Breeze remarked with a sigh that it might have been almond rock.
He looked at his master rather anxiously as he spoke, and Cornelius Fennell, catching that warning eye, perversely asked for another piece.
After tea Susan played the piano for a little while.
She had played beautifully once upon a time, and even now, although she had been compelled to give it up almost entirely, it was a joy to listen to her.
Tonight she played simple, lovely things — the  Kinderscenen  , several of Bach's choral preludes, and a haunting Chopin nocturne.
Breeze, curled up on the hearthrug in her favourite attitude, watched her and wondered when, if ever, she would hear her play again.
It seemed so dreadful, when one looked at Susan, to think how much of her life had been wasted already, and to know that the rest of it would be spent in bondage.
as if she felt her sister's gaze, Susan swung round on the piano-stool and asked her to sing come carols.
But Breeze shook her head, thinking that perhaps her voice might wobble, and the old man came to her rescue by asking suddenly: ‘Well, and when do you take up your duties in Edinburgh?’
’ In the New Year.
But how…?’ stammered Breeze.
‘How do I know?
I called in Doctor Andrews last night — I felt a little shaken and I don't like that hotel fellow — and he supplied me with the information,’ was the reply.
Susan and Breeze exchanged smiles.
They knew Doctor Andrews of old.
Like so many kindly, amiable people, he was a confirmed gossip and loved to prattle about his friends' affairs.
‘Yes, we're both taking jobs next month,’ Breeze said, a little defiantly.
‘we did mean to live together, of course, but it can't be helped.
We're going to have a cottage, though, later on — right in the country somewhere.
At least, I hope we shall,’ she added, rather lamely.
Then, thinking that he had heard enough about their future plans, she ran into the drawing-room and lit all the candles on the Christmas tree.
‘Ready!’ she called, and the others came in.
The little tree stood by itself on a table in the centre of the room.
The dancing firelight, mingled with the glow of the tiny coloured candles, played upon the sparkling ornaments and tinsel stars.
The old man who had spent his life acquiring beautiful costly things drew a deep breath, and stood as if transfixed.
‘It's perfect,’ he said.
‘The first Christmas tree I have ever seen, except through windows…
Never had time for 'em, and I hate the smell of candle-grease!’
‘They're beginning to gutter already,’ said Susan.
‘Blow them out, Breeze, and put on the light.’
But that broke the spell, of course, and the lovely fairy tree became just an ordinary baby fir.
Still, it was fun taking off the presents, which Breeze had wrapped in coloured papers, and Mr Fennell liked his pencil and the handkerchief, and examined the cigar with flattering interest.
‘But I wouldn't smoke it just yet,’ advised Breeze.
‘Have a chocolate instead!
I'm thinking of the cake — it was like a cannon-ball, wasn't it?
And this can't be a very digestible cigar, because it was only four-pence.’
Susan exclaimed in horror, but the old man laughed as he slipped it into his pocket.
‘well…’
He glanced at his watch.
‘It's time for me to go.
May I thank you both for the most delightful afternoon I've had for many years?’
They were sorry to see him go.
They stood on the steps and waved, as Chignell wheeled him away, and Breeze called out, ‘Happy New Year!’
His voice came back faintly.
‘You'll hear from me before then!’
‘Well, that's that,’ said Breeze, and closed the door on the starry night.
Now that the party was over, she set to work to remove all traces of it, because she couldn't bear the aftermath of revelry.
They had supper by the fire, and went to bed.
And that was the end of Christmas Day.
Boxing Day seemed rather an anti-climax.
It rained hard, so that Breeze, whose shoes were all what she called ‘well ventilated’, could not go out.
Nothing happened, and nobody came near the house.
The next day, too, was dreary and uneventful.
It was while they were having breakfast on the following morning that they saw a car pull up outside.
‘It's Doctor Andrews,’ said Susan.
‘What can hewant?’
Breeze ran to the door and let him in.
His cheerful rubicund face was graver than usual, and when she had ushered him into the dining-room he began without preliminary:
‘I've a piece of news that will surprise you both very much.
Er —two pieces of news.
Mr Fennell died in his sleep early  this morning.’
‘Died!’ they said.
It seemed incredible.
Then Breeze remembered her cake and turned white.
‘Was it —.
acute indigestion?’ she faltered.
‘No.
Heart,’ he said briefly.
‘The miracle is that he lived so long.
In the normal course of events he would have died years ago.
He had an attack about midnight, and that man of his sent for me.
He was very weak, but able to talk.
He told me he'd made a codicil to his will — the man showed it to me, and it's all in order.’
The doctor turned to Breeze.
‘He has left you a cottage in Devonshire, and he said: ‘Tell her it's not because she saved my life, but because she gave me a fourpenny cigar.'’
PASTURES NEW
‘I still can't believe it,’ said Breeze.
Susan laid down the paper she had been reading, and with one gloved hand made a little peep-hole on the steamy window of the railway carriage.
‘Neither can I,’ she admitted, gazing at the flying landscape which, blurred with rain and heavy mist, presented a uniform greyness.
‘Yet it's over a month since we had the news.
Those probate people always take ages to get things settled.’
‘Over a month!
So it is.
And what a month it's been,’ mused Breeze, and she made a peep-hole too, and looked out at the sodden fields where leggy lambs were standing in groups, obviously wondering what had become of the lovely sunshine their mothers had told them about.
‘Not a cheery outlook, is it?’ she added.
‘I suppose we're in Devon now.’
Susan glanced at her watch.
‘Yes, we must be.
We have to change at Exeter in half an hour.
Funny, isn't it, that neither of Country at all?’
‘And funnier still that Chignell has got a job in Plymouth!
I wonder if we shall ever run into him.
I'd like to see him again.’
‘Yes, and for two pins you'd ask him to tea!
Breeze darling, you really must try to grow up.
I've been meaning to say this for a long time,’ said Susan, with an assumption of severity which moved her sister to ribald mirth.
‘Your free and easy ways were all very well when you were a little girl — though Daddy did spank you, if you remember, for letting the sweep try on his medals, and you got some terrible bruises that time you rescued the kitten from those rough boys.
But you're not a child any more, you see, and it's high time you…’
‘Cultivated dignity and repose!
I know.
Miss Henry said the same thing.
I will try, Susan, I will really.
I do hope I shan't drop any bricks in Overclyst, and disgrace you for life.’
Breeze said gloomily.
Then she brightened.
‘Isn't it exciting, not knowing in the least what the place is like, or anything?
We haven't even seen a photograph of the cottage.
We don't know how many inhabitants there are, or which is early closing day, or whether we can see the sea from the windows.
Wasn't it wonderful of old Cornelius to leave it to me like that?
Lock, stock, and barrel!’,
‘Doctor Andrews told me that he kept on saying how much he wished he could have left you enough money to live on; but, as you know, nearly everything he possessed he'd already bequeathed to that French museum which he started himself.
But you're amazingly lucky to have that fifty pounds a year!
I wonder what he'd intended doing with the cottage.’
‘I hope my getting it doesn't mean that someone else has been disappointed.
Isn't it awful,’ said Breeze, ‘that so many of the nice things that happen to one person have a sort of reflex action on another?
I do think life is complicated!’
‘Have you only just discovered that?’
Susan smiled, but soon grew grave.
‘To return to what we were saying, you must remember that you're grown up now, and act accordingly.
Of course I don't want you to be stiff — don't think that — but just restrain yourself, that's all, when you want to ask people like Chignell to tea.’
Breeze chuckled, as she unwrapped a piece of nut-milk chocolate for her sister.
‘All right, I'll remember.
But I'm a wage-earner myself, you know, now,’ she said, and her thoughts travelled back to the past month, when she had eked out their very slender resources by taking out a couple of children every afternoon.
This was not a lucrative job, but she had had so much to do at home that she couldn't undertake anything else.
Susan, once the excitement of Christmas was over, had completely collapsed, and it was Breeze who had to make the final arrangements for selling 9 Dorchester Terrace, and the auctioning of the furniture.
With the exception of a few books and some china, everything had had to go; for there were those bills to be paid, and besides, they needed every penny they could get.
Looking back, they could neither of them understand how they had managed to rub along; yet they had.
It had been a great relief to learn from the lawyers that Sunset Cottage, Overclyst, their new home, was already furnished.
Thanks to what Breeze had earned, they were able to rake up the fares — and now here they were, on their way to a remote Devonshire village with just enough money to keep them going for a fortnight or so.
Cornelius Fennel had left her fifty pounds a year for life, but she could not touch the capital.
An incurable optimist, she was sure that they would find some way of making their living, but she knew that her sister was afraid they wouldn't — and in that case, of course, they would have to let the cottage, and separate after all.
Susan had really been very ill.
She couldn't do much yet, and was certainly not fit to take a job — otherwise she would have made Breeze go to Edinburgh, and gone down to Penzance herself.
Breeze, knowing her sister, guessed this, and daily thanked her lucky stars for making Susan ill.
‘Being a wage-earner has nothing to do with it,’ Susan was beginning, when the train slowed down and slid to a standstill in Exeter Central station.
Here they had to change, and board a smaller train.
It was only just after midday, though it felt like late afternoon, and both girls were very hungry when, after much meandering through moorland villages, the little train stopped with a triumphant snort at Clyst St George, for Overclyst.
Susan and Breeze seized their meagre luggage and stepped out on to the tiny wooden platform.
There was no shelter anywhere, and the rain was coming down in torrents, while the mist was rolling here and there in thick white clouds.
It was piercingly cold, too — much colder than it had been in Kent.
‘’ Devon, the garden of England!’' said Breeze, quoting from the brightly coloured placards she had seen in various stations en route.
‘’ Come to the Sunny west — the English Riviera!’'
‘Eh?’ said the one deaf old porter in charge.
‘That bain't on this line, missie.’
He saw that Susan was saying something, and put a horny hand as an ear-trumpet.
‘Ah, it's Overclyst ye're wantin'?
Three mile it be, along the high road — a babby  couldn't miss it.’
‘Is there anywhere near here where we could get some bread and cheese?’ asked Breeze, thinking that at this moment she could eat a dog-biscuit with gusto.
‘There's the Goat and Compasses, down the street,’ said the veteran, ‘an' the Jolly Farmer, acrost the way.
But neither of them's fit for ladies like yourselves.
If I was you, I'd walk on a bit till ye gets to the Half Moon — it's along the Overclyst road, so…’
‘A babby couldn't miss it!’
Breeze murmured, as they thanked their garrulous guide and made their escape.
They left their luggage in the booking-office — which looked more like a chickencoop than anything else — and set off down the muddy track that the ancient porter had indicated.
The wind was fitful, but very strong, and Susan's umbrella soon blew inside out.
Breeze hadn't got one, but Fate had no intention of passing her by.
A sudden gust caught the hat she was wearing — which was, incidentally, the only hat she possessed — and sent it careering wildly down the road.
Breeze laughed and ran after it.
She was a beautiful runner, swift and straight.
Running like this, with the mad south-west wind behind her, gave her a glorious sense of freedom, for her exercise had been terribly limited for the past five weeks.
She thought of cross-country runs at Pinehurst, when she and Gay and Flick had led the field.
‘How we rejoiced as we struggled and panted —
Hardly believable, forty years on!’’
Bump!
She had run full tilt into somebody.
Butted him, like an angry goat.
And in doing so she had nearly lost her balance, and he was heaping coals of fire on her head by holding her up.
‘Oh, I'm sorry!’ she gasped, as she righted herself and looked up into the victim's face.
Then she gave a low cry of astonishment, for this was the dark young man she had cannoned into on the parade at St Petrock's, on that momentous Christmas Eve.
She had dreamt about him that night, she remembered, and in her dream he had looked at her with a smile of  recognition.
And now it was coming true, because he wassmiling…and she decided there and then that it was one of the nicest smiles she had ever seen.
‘You again!’ he said.
‘Yes, it's me.
But it doesn't seem possible,’ she said, feeling dazed.
‘Coincidences simply don'thappen in real life…’
‘Oh, don't they!’ he said, with a laugh.
‘But it's certainly the most extraordinary…’
‘My dear!’
Susan had come up to them, and stood still in horror at the sight of her sister apparently embracing a total stranger.
‘Oh, Susan, isn't it funny?
I was chasing my hat and crashed into him — and we've already had a collision at St Petrock's!
I haven't hurt you, have I?’
Breeze asked remorsefully.
‘Not a bit, thank you,’ he assured her.
‘Did you say you'd lost your hat?’
He glanced round.
‘Is that it, do you think?’
The doubt in his tone was understandable, for the sodden object that was reposing in the middle of a puddle bore small resemblance to any form of headgear.
‘I'm afraid it is,’ said Breeze, and he rescued it from its watery grave, and shook it before handing it to her.
‘It may recover with careful treatment.
Isn't this frightful weather?’ he said, turning to Susan.
‘My name, by the way, is Roger Kenyon, and I live at Upmeadow Farm.’
‘We've only just arrived,’ said Susan, with her charming smile, ‘so we don't know where that is.
Our name is O'Brien and we're on our way to Overclyst.’
‘We've come to live there!’
Breeze chimed in.
Roger Kenyon started slightly, but he did not speak for a moment.
Then he turned his head slowly.
‘May I ask where you are going?’
There was a certain constraint in his manner now which made them both ill-at-ease.
‘To Sunset Cottage.’
It was Breeze who answered.
‘Do you know it?’ she went on, and he nodded.
‘Oh, yes, I know it.
As a matter of fact, one of my pastures abuts your garden…’
Again he hesitated, as if he wanted to say something more; but he evidently decided against it.
‘Well, goodbye,’ he finished conventionally; ‘I wish you'd had a better day.’
He raised his cap and walked on.
He had said and done nothing that was not polite, yet he left them with an inexplicably awkward feeling, as though something unpleasant had taken place.
Breeze looked at Susan.
‘Queer, isn't he?
I liked him at first, but…’
‘I know.
He seemed to change.
Oh well, it doesn't matter,’ said Susan, and Breeze agreed.
But it did.
They walked on through the driving rain.
The countryside was so blurred that they could form only the vaguest idea of how it must look when the sun was shining.
There was a certain beauty about the shrouded hills, grey fields, and straight, silver rain; but they were too cold and wet and hungry to appreciate things like that.
They were anxious, too.
After all, they were going to live in a village they had never even seen, and during the next hour or so they would discover what manner of place their new home was.
That it was a fairly remote spot was evident by the absence of traffic on the road.
They saw a few workmen on bicycles, and perhaps four cars; and that was all.
‘I'm sure we've done more than three miles…’
Susan was beginning, when just ahead of them they saw a little thatched inn and outside it a big wooden board on which was painted a half-moon.
‘Do we go into the Saloon, Bar, or Bottle and Jug department?’ asked Breeze, surveying each door in turn.
‘Goodness knows!
Try the Saloon,’ advised Susan, and they forthwith entered the dingiest and most depressing room they had ever been inside.
Yellow wallpaper, adorned with large magenta roses, formed a background for a series of hideous reproductions, most of which were spotted with mildew.
The furniture was of the kind one sees standing in dismal groups outside cheap second-hand shops, and the floor was covered with strips of worn linoleum.
In one corner stood a case of stuffed fish whose glassy eyes seemed to gaze with malevolence at the newcomers.
And there was no fire!
An anaemic aspidistra stood in the grate instead.
‘The Bottle and jug might be better than this,’ Breeze  suggested, but Susan shook her head.
‘It may be full of Oldest Inhabitants who'd want to tell us all the local history for the past hundred years, and I really couldn't stand that!
No, we'll get them to light the fire.
Is there a bell?’
There wasn't.
But there was an inner door, and Breeze opened it cautiously.
A moment later she gave an exclamation of relief.
‘There's another room through here, with a lovely fire!
Oh.
Yes, of course we can go in — the table's laid for lunch, so they evidently do provide meals.
Come along, and let's get warm.
Somebody'll come in a minute; they must have heard us come in.’
Susan followed her down a short, dark passage and into the second sitting-room, which, ugly and over-full as it was, looked comparatively cheerful with its blazing fire.
They joyfully peeled off their dripping mackintoshes and put their hats, gloves and scarves to dry.
Breeze got out her handkerchief and began to rub her hair.
‘We've taken possession of the place, haven't we?’ said Susan laughing.
‘I hope mine host won't mind when he finds we're only going to have coffee and bread and cheese — because we really oughtn't to have a banquet!’
‘I don't want one,’ Breeze said stoutly, though she doubted if bread and cheese could fill the void within.
‘I wonder why nobody comes?
Oh, listen, I hear footsteps now, I think.’
They both listened.
Yes, somebody was coming along the passage — a man.
Two men, as they realized a moment later, when they heard the sound of voices.
‘And they're moving in today, you say?’ one asked, in deep, rasping tones.
‘Yes, my lord — beg pardon, Mr Smith!
I'd 'a let yu know afore, if yu'd left us your address…’
‘Yes, yes, man, but the point is that I didn't leave it, and now these confounded women have taken possession of the cottage.
How the deuce,’ demanded that rasping voice, ‘are we going to get them out?’
‘They mean us!’ gasped Breeze, and at that very instant  the door opened, and they had a glimpse of two figures, one large and one small.
Only a glimpse though, for the large figure darted back as soon as he saw them.
The small one, who was fat and bald and wore a green baize apron, looked positively livid with fury as he came into the room.
‘This — this is private!’'he spluttered.
‘Private?
Oh!’
Breeze turned crimson.
‘I'm so sorry — I saw the fire, and thought it was the dining-room.
We want some bread and cheese…’
He peered at her with little beady eyes, as though trying to guess from her expression how much she and her companion had heard.
‘This is my private sitting-room,’ he reiterated.
‘I — I'm expectin' a guest…’
His voice shook, but not with anger.
Breeze saw that the man was desperately afraid, and suddenly she felt sorry for him.
‘We'll go,’ she said, ‘of course.
We'd no idea!
I'm afraid our macs have dripped a little, but that's the only damage we've done.’
Susan, an unwonted flush on her pale cheeks, was picking up the wet things out of the grate.
The man looked from one to the other, and his manner changed.
‘Beg pardon, ladies, I'm sure.
I was took by surprise, as yu might say.
Bread and cheese did yu fancy?
Well, if yu'd just step into the Saloon, I'll have a fire lit in no time.’
Susan and Breeze exchanged glances.
Their one desire was to get out of this place; but perhaps flight in the present circumstances might seem ungracious.
‘Thank you,’ said Susan.
‘we'd like some coffee, too — in a jug.
Is it very far to Overclyst?’
‘Oh no, madam, you're nearly there,’ he answered.
‘If yu keep straight on and take the first turnin' on your left, yu'll be at Sunset Cottage in quarter of an hour.’
They were ready now, and he led them back to the Saloon.
He himself removed the aspidistra and put a match to the fire before departing to see about their frugal meal.
‘So they were talking about us!’ said Breeze.
‘He didn't realize he'd dropped a brick when he admitted that he knew where we were going.
I hope ‘my lord — Mr Smith’ wasn't  listening through a secret panel!’
‘My dear, do be quiet — he may be listening now!’
Susan glanced round nervously.
‘It's all so extraordinary,’ she said.
‘I don't like it, Breeze.
Still, we won't discuss it now.’
The bread, when it came, was stale, the cheese hard and shiny, and the coffee had only one point in its favour.
It was hot!
So they drank it, and ate what they could of the unprepossessing fare, conscious of the hostile gaze of the stuffed fish in the corner.
‘Our first meal in Devonshire!’ thought Breeze.
It was scarcely an auspicious beginning.
She looked at Susan, and saw with a pang how tired and frail she seemed.
What lay in store for them both?
How were they going to live?
Suddenly she felt appalled by her own youth and inexperience.
From some dim recess of her mind came the words of a Breton fisherman's prayer, which she had read in some book.
‘Dear God, be good to me.
The sea is so wide, and my boat is so small.’
They paid their modest bill and set forth once more.
The rain had stopped now.
The earth smelt clean and sweet, and the sun was trying to pierce its way through the ragged dark clouds.
Twilight was coming early tonight, as it often does in wet weather, and although the mist had cleared away, dusk was spreading across the hills.
They trudged along the Overclyst road for perhaps half a mile, and then turned down a lane on the left.
It was a pretty lane, winding its way between two meadows, sheltered on either side by tall hazel hedges, which shook their bunches of catkins in a friendly, welcoming way.
‘Soon we shall know every inch of this,’ thought Breeze, ‘and next October I shall pick nuts here.
But there's spring to come first, with the violets and primroses, and then the summer.’
She smiled to herself and felt happy again.
They saw a house ahead of them — a rambling, red-brick place.
‘That must be it!’ they said with one voice, and hurried forward.
But they were wrong.
The big wooden gate bore the words: ‘Upmeadow Farm.’
‘So that's Roger's abode!’ said Breeze.
‘I like it, don't you?
Oh !’
She clutched Susan's arm for a moment.
‘Sorry!’ she laughed, and let her hand fall.
‘I thought I saw a face in one  of the windows — a queer, white face…
It scared me — I don't know why.
But it's only natural that one should see things after eating mousetrap cheese!’
‘How lovely,’ said Susan; ‘the sun's coming out.’
The clouds had parted at last, and the western sky was flooded with shining gold.
With it came a sudden clarity of atmosphere, so that the trees and haystacks stood out in high relief, and the distant hills seemed to come nearer now that their outline was sharply etched on the horizon.
A hush fell, intensifying the magic feeling in the air.
Breeze drew a long breath.
She felt on tip-toe — on the verge of discovering some forgotten secret…
Then a calf mooed nearby, and its mother answered in a deep contralto; a dog barked, and a cock began to crow, and with a sudden rush of wings, a company of rooks rose from the ground and flew away, making a neat cross-stitch pattern in the sky.
The spell was broken — but the sun was still there.
It was shining brilliantly when, a little farther down the lane, they came to their new home.
THE WALLET
Sunset Cottage stood well back from the lane, on rising ground.
A winding flagged path led up to the door.
It was built of the usual Devonshire ‘cob’ and painted a lovely creamy colour.
It had a thatched roof and tall chimneys, and a green waterbutt at each corner.
‘Susan!
It's perfect.
The sort of cottage one dreams about…
And the garden!
It'll be lovely later on.
You've got the key out, haven't you?
Oh, do let's go in and explore.’
Breeze, fairly dancing with excitement, held open the wrought-iron gate which was so exactly in keeping with the rest of the cottage.
It faced due west, and now its front windows were all ablaze with reflected light from the setting sun.
It was double-fronted, with a large window on either side of the oaken door, four in a row above, and a little round attic one on top, amongst the eaves.
‘I love it.
I love its expression!’ said Breeze, and Susan quite saw what she meant.
Some houses frown; some look indignant, prim or shy; but this one looked you straight in the face and greeted you with a smile.
‘You must open the door yourself.
It's your house,’ said Susan, but Breeze corrected her.
‘It's ours.
We've never had any of that ‘mine’ and ‘yours’nonsense, and we're not going to start now.
Open it quickly, or I warn you I shall burst!’
To avoid this calamity Susan did as she was told.
The oak door opened easily, and swung back to reveal a wide hall.
Eastern rugs, woven of deep, glowing colours, lay on the floor, and the stairs which faced the door were carpeted in a lovely  shade of red.
There was a huge fireplace in one corner, simply crying aloud for masses of logs, and near it was an old settle.
Against the opposite wall was a large chest, above which hung the picture of a dark, strong-featured woman, long past her youth.
She wasn't beautiful — in fact, she was quite plain — but Breeze liked her.
There was a humorous light in her keen black eyes that seemed somehow warm and welcoming.
‘Susan!’
This isn't a cottage at all!
I'd pictured something poky and tiny, with about four rooms and holes in the roof.
It's taken my breath away!’
‘Well, your vocal chords are working all right, anyhow,’ said Susan dryly.
She was secretly distressed by the size of the house, for she couldn't imagine how they were going to keep it up.
Of course they could always let it, but that seemed a mean and ungrateful way out.
‘Let's have a look at the rest of it,’ she said, lest Breeze should read her thoughts and feel dashed.
‘This is the dining-room, I expect.’
She pushed open the door on the right.
The dining-room, for such it was, was square in shape, and simply furnished.
The walls were half-panelled in oak, and the plain brown carpet matched them perfectly.
All the colour in the room was concentrated in the curtains, and the girls exclaimed when they saw them.
They were of some hand-made material, loosely woven, and containing all the colours of — not the rainbow, but the sunset.
They ranged from deep night-purple through the varying shades of blue, orange, flame, and yellow to that pale, pure green seen on calm summer evenings.
Breeze ran to the windows and threw them open, leaning out to drink in the cold, moist air.
‘Susan!
Susan!
Look, there's the sea!’
There it was, straight ahead of them.
While they were walking they had not been able to see it, because there were hills in the way; but now they saw that the cottage was really built on a cliff, and down below them was a small bay.
It was twilight now, and they could not see whether it was a rocky coast or not, but they didn't mind.
The sea was there!
Listening intently, they could hear the low swish-swish of the waves, and on the horizon twinkled the lights of a fishing fleet.
They explored the drawing-room next — or perhaps that is too formal a name for the large and very cheerful room on the  other side of the hall.
This, too, faced west, and had sunset curtains across its wide windows.
It was furnished simply and graciously, with deep armchairs and divans.
A low bookcase ran along one wall, full of the kind of books one really loves to read, and on the opposite side from the fireplace stood a beautiful Blüthner Grand.
Susan, of course, made a bee-line for that.
She forgot that she was tired and cold, that there was neither food nor fuel in the house, and that her only respectable pair of shoes had sprung a leak.
Peeling off her wet gloves, she sat down and began to play Carnival .
Breeze was fond of Schumann, but not so fond that she could listen to him now !
There was still so much to be seen.
Who, she wondered, as she went to look at the kitchen, had kept the house in such perfect order?
The lawyers had told her vaguely that a woman from the village came in to clean — but she had quite expected to find the furniture shrouded in dust-sheets, and a general air of cheerlessness such as is usually associated with empty houses.
And she had found —this!
The kitchen was lovely, with an enormous range and an old-fashioned red-brick floor.
She was thankful to see both main water and electric light.
Two rooms led out of it — the scullery, and a long, low barn of a place that was absolutely bare.
What it had been, Breeze could not determine, but she knew what it was going to be.
A games room!
They could have badminton here, and table tennis, and darts, and — not billiards; the equipment was too expensive, but certainly bagatelle!
‘If only Gay and Flick were here!’ she thought, as she tried a few dancing steps.
‘Oh, I wish — hallo, what's that?’
A small brown object was lying on the ground near the larger of the two windows.
She went and picked it up.
It was a man's wallet, and bore the initial, R.K.
She could tell by the feel of it that it had some papers inside, but she did not look at them.
There was no need.
Although there might be several more R. K.'s in Overclyst, she felt certain that this was Roger Kenyon's property.
But how had it got in here?
She heard Susan's footsteps, and obeying a sudden impulse, thrust the wallet inside her coat.
‘Breeze, where are you?’ called her sister.
‘It's a lovely piano, and not so very much out of tune.
It only wants to be played on.
If people don't mind my having no degrees, I could give a few music lessons!
Small children, you know.’
‘And I could teach them drawing, and Gay could come and take English and history, and we'd have a school in no time!
We could say we're a new society who don't believe in degrees.
Parents will simply queue up!’ said Breeze.
Although she spoke lightly, she realized that out of this fantastic scheme they might evolve some means of making a livelihood, and her spirits rose, so that she forgot her disturbing discovery.
She remembered it later on, after they had inspected the three pretty bedrooms and the wonderful bathroom with its big bath and tiled frieze of mermaids; and she debated within herself whether or not she had better tell Susan.
At length she decided that there was nothing to be gained by worrying her.
Probably there was some quite innocent explanation, which Roger Kenyon would give her when she returned the wallet — if, indeed, it were his.
And yet, why had his manner changed so abruptly when he learned that the girl whose hat he had rescued was going to live at Sunset Cottage?
Was it possible that he was connected with ‘my lord — Mr Smith’, who had seemed so anxious to get rid of them?
A loud thump on the front door startled her, but it was only the luggage.
They were glad to see it, as they had packed some food in one of the suitcases, and directly the porter had gone they set about preparing a meal.
Everything was in perfect order, and although there was no coal in the house, the water was running from the taps, and there was a small electric cooker that proved most efficient.
It was while they were finishing their belated tea that Mrs Blunt arrived.
She was a large, beefy creature, with wisps of hair just freed from curlpapers writhing round her moon-like face.
She told them that she had ‘done’ the house for the past five years, and hoped she could go on doing it.
Susan explained as well as she could that at present they wouldn't want any help, whereupon the visitor bristled and announced that she was ‘Blunt by name, and blunt by nature’, and knew better than to  push herself in where she wasn't wanted!
Susan replied with her usual gentle dignity, but a soft answer does not invariably turn away wrath.
In this case it seemed to increase it, and the kitchen rang with Mrs Blunt's vituperations before she finally took her leave.
‘Well,’ said Breeze, ‘that's that!
Exit char, foaming at the mouth.
Let's hope all the inhabitants aren't quite so temperamental.’
Susan gave a wry smile, then clicked her tongue.
‘Oh, bother,’ she said, ‘I promised to send Mrs Andrews a postcard to say we'd arrived safely.
I'd quite forgotten till now.
Yes, I've got the card already stamped, but I don't know where the post-box is.’
‘I do — it's at the corner of the lane.
I spotted it as we came along.
Write your card and I'll post it — of course I don't mind the dark!
Besides, I've got the torch that Flick sent me for Christmas.’
Breeze was rather glad of the excuse to go out without Susan, because she could take this opportunity of returning Roger Kenyon's wallet.
Susan scribbled the postcard and gave it to her with a sigh.
‘There you are.
Queer, isn't it, that the Andrews are the only people in St Petrock's who care what becomes of us?
We've very few friends, Breeze.
I didn't even trouble to give the post-office people our new address, because everybody who knows us, knows where we've gone.
We've no acquaintances.
I hadn't time to keep up with them while Daddy was so ill…’
‘Who wants acquaintances?
Give me friends every time — and the friends we've got may be few, but they're jolly good ones,’ said Breeze.
‘I wonder what sort of people they are down here.
They can't all be’ blunt by name and nature'!’
‘I wonder what sort of a person that Roger Kenyon is,’ said Susan thoughtfully, and Breeze felt mean.
Her fingers touched the wallet, now tucked away in her inner pocket, and she made up her mind to confide in Susan.
But before she could speak, her sister went upstairs to unpack, and the opportunity was lost.
Breeze picked up her torch and went out into the night.
She found her way up the lane quite well, for it wasn't very dark.
The moon was making gallant attempts to shine: every  now and then it peeped through a chink in the scurrying clouds, and turned the puddles into little lakes of quicksilver.
In order to reach the post-box she had, of course, to pass Upmeadow Farm, and she saw that there was a light in one of the downstairs rooms.
He was at home, then — he or someone else.
She thought of that queer white face she had seen, and a little shudder passed through her.
She had had the barest glimpse of it, for it had vanished at once, but somehow it had left her with an uncanny impression that was not particularly pleasant.
It was with some trepidation, therefore, that on her way back she pushed open the gate and walked up the drive.
The sound of strange footsteps upset all the animals, who gave tongue in their various ways, and a deafening concert was in full swing by the time she reached the door and rang the bell.
Another dog began to bark, this time inside the house.
She heard a man's voice say, ‘Quiet, James!’ and then the door was opened by Roger himself.
He had slipped one hand through the dog's collar.
The dog, a beautiful Airedale, looked up at Breeze and wagged his tail.
He was so like Sambo in his younger days that she laid her hand on his head, as if they were old friends.
The man was regarding her with natural surprise.
‘Is anything wrong?’ he asked.
‘If I can help…’
‘Oh no,’ she said.
‘No, thank you.
We're getting on all right.
But I found this in our house, and I thought it might be yours’.
She held out the wallet as she spoke.
There was a short pause.
Then he took it with a brief word of thanks.
She saw that he had changed colour, and, always affected by other people's feelings, she now experienced some of his embarrassment and wished she had not put him in this position.
‘Good night,’ she said, turning to go.
‘Oh, please, Miss O'Brien, won't you let me…’
He hesitated.
‘No, I can't explain,’ he said quietly.
‘I can only assure you that I did not break into your house with any harmful intent.
Won't you come in for a minute?
My housekeeper will make you some tea.’
‘That I will!’ said a hearty voice from within, and a little bright-eyed woman came up to them.
Roger Kenyon  introduced her as Mrs Westaway.
Imagine a robin with white hair and spectacles, wearing a black silk dress and frilled apron, and you have a picture of the housekeeper at Upmeadow Farm.
‘Well, I really can't stay,’ said Breeze.
‘Thanks very much, but my sister…’
‘A glass of cowslip wine, then,’ he suggested.
‘That won't take a second.’
And feeling rather as if she were in a dream, she found herself sitting on a sofa in a quaint old-fashioned parlour, with Roger Kenyon, housebreaker, beside her.
‘Does your sister know about this?’ he asked, tapping the wallet.
‘Not yet,’ said Breeze guardedly.
‘But I suppose you'll tell her, won't you?’
‘I don't know.
She's been ill, and I don't want to worry her.
Of course, if you do it again I shall have to tell her.’
‘I shan't do it again.
I — well, I don't know what you must be thinking of me.
But some day perhaps I'll be able to tell you…’
He broke off as Mrs Westaway came in with the cowslip wine and a large slice of seed cake.
Breeze partook of this refreshment wondering if she had stepped into the pages of Cranford .
When the robin had hopped away again, she turned to her host with a smile.
‘It's all right,’ she said.
‘I don't want you to explain.
You've told me you weren't doing any harm, and I believe you.
Let's leave it at that.’
He gave a short laugh.
‘Are you always so trusting?’
‘Well, I loathe mysteries, and suspecting people,’ she said with truth.
‘I say, I must go now.’
‘I'll come with you.
There are no lights in Catkin Lane.
If I can be of any service to you, at any time, I do hope you'll let me know.
By the way, will you and your sister come to tea tomorrow, if I call and ask her properly:’
Breeze accepted this invitation.
Going out to tea always seemed to her a waste of time, but to refuse might have seemed churlish, and she knew that in the country one ought to be friends with one's neighbours.
‘What sort of a place is Overclyst?’ she asked, as she rose  to take her leave.
‘Clyst St George didn't look very inviting, when we passed through it this afternoon.’
He laughed.
‘Overclyst's a much prettier village.
Very small, of course.
They never have many visitors, even in the summer, because it's a three-mile walk to the sea, unless you climb down the cliffs, and — from the trippers’ point of view — there's absolutely nothing to do.
They have a few artists now and then.’
She realized by his use of the word ‘they’ instead of‘we’that he was not a native of the place, and wondered how long he had lived there.
She wasn't good at ages, but she judged him to be about twenty-four.
He had looked older when she had seen him at St Petrock's; but he had been scowling then, and now he was looking quite friendly and interested — rather like James, who sat in front of them regarding them both with faithful brown eyes.
Roger's eyes were darker than the Airedale's, but their expression was very much the same.
Breeze liked studying people's eyes, and she was quite a good judge of character.
Roger was clever, she told herself, though in a thoughtful rather than a brilliant way.
He had also a strong sense of humour, which was to her mind a great asset.
At this point she became aware that he was returning her scrutiny, and her cheeks grew hot.
‘I'm sorry.
Susan says it's dreadful to stare, and I do try not to, but I can't always remember,’ she said candidly, and drank what was left of her cowslip wine.
‘I say, I mustgo now!’
He made no attempt to detain her, but walked with her down the dark drive and took her as far as her own front door.
‘Well, good night,’ he said.
‘I'll look in tomorrow if I may — I know you're very busy this evening.
I do hope you'll be happy here.
You'll like the village, I'm sure, and there are some awfully decent people scattered about.
Mr Dare — he's the vicar — has started a campaign for livening things up, so he'll welcome you with open arms.
He's one of the best, and Mrs Dare gives the most marvellous picnics.
‘Then there are the Paigntons, and the  Rossiters , and, of course, the Blessington-Dalrymples.
They're your nearest neighbours, with the exception of myself.’
‘Susan and I have never been social butterflies,’ Breeze explained with dignity, ‘and I don't think we shall be able to  entertain much.
In fact’— she hesitated —‘we're pretty nearly broke, and we shan't have time to frivol.
But I'm glad to know there are several families living near, because it gives one more scope, doesn't it?’
‘Well, remember what I told you.
If there's anything I can do, you've only got to say the word.
Good night once more, Miss O'Brien.’
‘Good night.
But Susan's ‘Miss O'Brien’.
I'm Bridget.’
He smiled.
‘Good night, Bridget.
And — thank you.’
He walked away, with James, who had accompanied him, close at his side.
Breeze watched them till the darkness swallowed them up, and went light-heartedly into the house.
She felt she had found two friends.
‘Hallo!’ she called.
‘Hi!
Su-san!’
There was no answer.
She called her sister's name again, and her voice echoed through the silent house.
‘THE NAME IS SMITH’
Breeze was not a nervous person in the ordinary way, but she had undergone many strange experiences that day, and this additional shock seemed to rob her of all her courage.
For a moment she stood still, fighting an impulse to turn and run after Roger Kenyon; then she conquered herself, and began to search for Susan.
No sign of her in the dining-room.
The lounge, too, was empty, and Breeze's heart started a series of somersaults.
What could have happened?
Horribly frightened by this time, for she could not believe that Susan would have gone out of the house, she ran into the kitchen, and stopped short at the sight of the familiar figure sitting crouched in front of the fire.
‘Susan!’ she said, but there was no reply.
Then she saw a thin trail of smoke rising from her sister's clothing, and smelt the dry odour of smouldering cloth.
She darted forward and saw at a glance what had happened.
Susan had evidently found some coal and sticks and had lit the range; then the heat had overcome her, and she had toppled over — and her jumper had caught fire.
Breeze snatched up the first thing she could find — her own mackintosh, which she had been wearing earlier in the day — and with one swift movement covered that smouldering sleeve with the thick material.
As she dragged Susan's limp form away from the fire, she noticed with one part of her brain that a sheet of paper had just begun to burn.
She saw that it was covered with badly printed words, amongst which ‘Wellwisher’ stood out.
Just for an instant she saw it, and then the fire devoured it hungrily.
She drew the mackintosh away.
The room smelt horribly of burnt rubber, but it had done the trick.
There was a big hole in Susan's woollen sleeve, through which the skin showed red and blistered, but at least there was no smoke.
The next thing was to bring Susan round.
She rushed into the scullery and fetched some water.
Coming back, she saw for the first time that a letter addressed to herself lay on the kitchen table.
It was from Gay, and she felt a rush of gratitude.
Gay wrote such cheerful, amusing letters.
She would save it up to read in bed.
Susan was already opening her eyes.
She sipped some of the water, and allowed Breeze to bathe her head with the rest, before putting butter on the burnt arm.
‘I can't think what happened,’ she murmured.
‘I'd got the fire to go — I found some coal and stuff outside — and then the post came, and brought a letter for me — nothing important — which I tried to burn.
And I must have turned faint, or something.
If you hadn't come in when you did…’
Breeze shuddered.
‘You'd better go to bed,’ she said.
‘I'll boil some water for your bottle.
Susan, that letter — I saw it in the fire.
It was written in printed capitals.
Was it an anonymous one?’
Susan, white and shaken, sighed.
‘So I haven't even succeeded in keeping that from you!
I didn't want you to know.
Yes, it was.
A terse request, advising us to’ clear out before it's too late' and signed ‘Wellwisher’.
What do you make of that?’
‘I hope there's a duckpond in the village,’ Breeze said darkly.
‘A nice oozy one, with green weed all over it!
That's the best cure for people who write anonymous letters.
Oh well, don't let's worry about it now.
We've got to think about your arm.’
Susan protested that it was all right; but it was very painful, and grew worse as the evening wore on.
However, she fell asleep at last, and Breeze took this to mean that the burn must be less serious than it appeared.
So, worn out and aching in every limb, she had her first bath in the marvellous bathroom, and retired to her own bed.
She and Susan had rooms adjoining, so she had none of the creepy feelings one often gets in a strange house.
The bath had invigorated her, and she got into bed in  better spirits, and opened Gay's letter, anticipating a good laugh.
No sooner had she started it, however, than she guessed that something was wrong.
Gay had begun, characteristically, by wishing Susan and Breeze luck in their new home, and it was not until near the end of the letter that she mentioned her own affairs.
‘Breeze, I hate being here.
School holidays were bad enough, but now it's past bearing.
I have begun my classes, as you know, but Aunt Millicent always grouses when I go to them, because they are in the evening, and that means she has to cook the supper.
(She always used to, of course, when I wasn't here, but she seems to forget that.
And she makes it very plain that she doesn't see the fun of cooking for me!
I offered to get coffee and a bun at a café on those evenings, but that wasn't right, either —‘wasting good money !’)
‘And I never get time to read, or think, or do anything worthwhile, and I'm always so sleepy when I do get to the classes that I can't take in very much .
‘Can you suggest anything?
I've got some money of my own,— at least, Aunt Millicent has it now, for my keep.
But I'm sure she'd let me have it, if only she could get rid of me.
It's only £50 a year — less than a Pound a week — but living's cheaper in the country.
Do you think you could find anyone in your village who'd take me in for that?
It isn't as if I ate much.
I'm sorry to write like this when you are so hard up yourself — Please don't think I'm bemoaning — but honestly this house is insupportable.
Aunt M. nags and nags, and Uncle John said outright that he didn't see why they should have to be responsible for me, when Mother was only half-sister to Aunt Millicent.
And there's nowhere to be alone, except my bedroom, and if I try to write there my fingers die with the cold .
‘Flick wrote last week and asked me to stay with them at Gerrards Cross.
But I can't.
I've no clothes fit to be seen, and I know her Parents wouldn't approve .
‘I've begun a novel!!!
If you could find me a garret somewhere near you, where I could live for the next three months, I could finish it, and perhaps get it Published.
But cooped up here there's no chance at all…
Oh, Breeze, do think of something.
Funny, isn't it, how people in tight corners always turn to you?’
Breeze read this through three times, and then put out the light.
She could think better in the darkness, and Gay's letter  had effectively banished all desire to sleep.
Was it true, she wondered.
Did people in tight corners always turn to her?
If so, what a terrible responsibility was hers!
Gay, she knew, must be desperate to write a letter like that, for never before had she lowered her flag to such an extent.
Her friend's small figure rose before her, and she saw again those vivid blue eyes, the broad forehead, and the gallant tilt of the pointed chin.
Life must be cruel, she thought with a sudden rush of anger, to allow a fine person like Gay to start her career with so many handicaps.
‘And here I am, absolutely on the rocks,’ she thought in despair.
‘I can do nothing —nothing .’
Then suddenly she remembered the third bedroom, and sat up, hugging her knees.
Why shouldn't Gay come to Sunset Cottage, and sink or swim with them?
Susan wouldn't mind.
Susan had met her several times, and had always said she'd like to know her better.
On went the light again, and Breeze leapt out of bed to find a pen and a scrap of paper.
‘Gay — why not come here ?’ she wrote.
‘You couldn't get board and lodging for £50 a year, but we've heaps of room, and you could write to your heart's content.
You'd have to pay for your own food, because — unless things look up for us — we shall have to live on grass like Nebuchadnezzar; but that wouldn't cost you £1 a week, so you could manage the fare, couldn't you?
Do come!
It would be such fun.
You can't write all day long, and in intervals of composing deathless prose you could help us in our schemes — and we've got lots, seething in our brains.
A murrain on Aunt Millicent!
Still, she will do as ‘copy’ for a villainess in your novel, won't she?
Write by return and say you'll come!
Stay as long as you like, of course .’
As she curled up in bed once more she reflected that it would be very nice to have a third person in the house, quite apart from the fact that Gay was her best friend.
Susan, in this queer, run-down state, was really not fit to be left alone.
Tonight's adventure with the kitchen fire was sufficient proof of that.
If Gay came, she would be indoors a good deal, and would be company for Susan while Breeze the Breadwinner was out.
‘But how does one breadwin?’ she asked herself drowsily, and was asleep before she could think of an answer.
Susan's arm was so painful next morning and looked so inflamed that Breeze, as soon as she had foraged for some  breakfast, went down to the village to find the doctor.
She posted Gay's letter on the way, but was too worried now to think much about it.
A passing labourer directed her, and it was in this anxious, preoccupied state of mind that she made her first appearance in Overclyst.
It was a beautiful village.
The sight of its timbered cottages, built haphazard round an oblong green, delighted her even then; and she noticed with an inward smile that there was a duckpond — with weed on it, too!
The church stood on one side of the narrow street, a lovely old building of dark grey stone, and opposite it was the Vicarage, a tumbledown house which in summer would be completely hidden by tall trees.
Doctor Rossitter lived on the green; Breeze saw the brass plate from afar, and hurried up the path.
She felt very nervous, but she remembered that Roger Kenyon had implied that the Rossitters were nice people, and it buoyed her up.
A pleasant-faced maid showed her into the surgery.
A moment later Doctor Rossitter himself appeared, and Breeze liked him instantly, from the top of his shaggy white leonine head to the toes of his saddle-brown boots.
He was a real old country doctor, of a type that is fast dying out, and she knew that if she had been a few years younger he would have patted her on the cheek.
‘If you please,’ she said, ‘I've come to ask you something.
My sister's burnt her arm, but before you come and dress it, I must tell you that we're frightfully hard up.
We're going to get jobs, of course, but we may have to keep you waiting for ages before we can settle your account.’
Some girls — Felicity Grant, for instance— would have found it impossible to make a speech like that, but Breeze, frank in all her undertakings, said it so naturally that the old doctor took it quite as a matter of course .
‘Thank you for telling me,’ he said, ‘but I think your sister's burnt arm is of primary importance.
I take it that you are one of our new neighbours, from Sunset Cottage?
Well, if you'll wait one moment, my car will be ready.’
Five minutes later Breeze was escorting him up the winding flagged path.
Susan, still in bed, had no idea that she had gone to fetch a doctor, but her arm was so painful that she raised  no objections.
Doctor Rossitter said it was a nasty burn, and when he came downstairs after dressing it, he talked to Breeze very seriously, saying that Susan was suffering from strain and must have a light but nourishing diet, including plenty of poultry and fresh fruit — and a daily glass of champagne!
When he saw her horrified expression, however, he stopped being a doctor and became quite fatherly instead.
‘I was forgetting what you told me in my surgery.
Of course, things must be very difficult for you,’ he said kindly.
‘This job you are going to take — do you know what it's going to be?’
Breeze shook her head.
‘Not yet,’ she admitted, ‘but I'll find something.
Only — until I do — we can't rise to champagne!’
‘My dear young lady, I quite understand.
Well, if my wife can be of any assistance to you, I am sure she'd be delighted to see you any day you care to call.
She is an invalid, unfortunately, or she would call on your sister.’
Then, giving her further instructions about her patient, the doctor drove away.
Susan didn't get up that day, so Breeze had a great deal to do.
She explored the cottage all over again, because it looked quite different — and even more attractive — in the clear light of a sunny February morning, and she found to her joy that there was a large garden at the back where they could grow vegetables.
A hawthorn hedge divided them on the left from the field belonging to Upmeadow Farm, while on the right-hand side their territory was bounded by a swift little stream.
She judged the garden to be about two acres in extent, and rejoiced anew at her amazing luck.
There was a little food left over from yesterday, so she managed to achieve a meagre lunch; but in the afternoon she was forced to go to the village again to buy some provisions.
Susan was downstairs now, with her arm in a sling, and before leaving the house Breeze made her promise not to go near the fire.
‘All right, I won't move from this chair.
You sound like a distracted mother of ten,’ laughed Susan, and added a moment later: ‘Poor Breeze, it's very hard on you, having all these burdens thrust on your shoulders.
Only two months ago you  were a schoolgirl, and now…!’
The sharpness of the contrast had not struck Breeze before, but as she walked down to Overclyst village she pondered over it.
Yes, two months ago she had been just one of the Pinehurst girls, and today she was the owner of a house and faced with the double problem of looking after her sister and providing a means of livelihood for them both.
Vaguely she remembered a conversation she and Susan had had on Christmas Eve.
She had suggested their earning their living by doing odd jobs —‘as factotums’, she had said, and Susan, always particular about such things, had corrected her.
Factota?
A ridiculous word in itself, but it had a certain swing about it.
‘Messrs Factota and Co.,’ she mused, but that sounded cumbersome.
‘Factota Limited.’
That was better!
She visualized it written in scarlet on a square grey board, and a glorious idea began to take shape in her brain.
The last time she had walked down this lane she had been too anxious about Susan to notice very much.
Now, however, she had leisure to take in her surroundings, and she had a good look at an enormous house that she had barely glanced at before.
It belonged to a period of architecture that was both ugly and ornate, and it was fairly covered with scrolls and  plaques and turrets and totally unnecessary little balconies.
It was called, unbelievably, ‘Mon  Ré ’.
As she passed it a car swung through the big yellow gates; a cream-coloured car driven by a girl of about Breeze's own age, or perhaps older.
Beside her sat a tousled youth, enveloped in a woolly scarf.
Both glanced at her curiously, and she guessed that they were brother and sister, with the same large, rather vacant brown eyes, and amiable bovine faces.
A little farther on she came to a small white cottage, in the porch of which stood a nutcrackery old woman whom Breeze mentally dubbed the Witch of Endor.
Here the lane ended, and she found herself by the Green, facing the tiny weather-beaten church.
She went inside for a moment, because she loved old things — and St Peter's, Overclyst, was very old indeed.
She thought it was empty at first, but someone was putting fresh flowers on the altar, and turned quickly when she heard the door close.
Breeze saw that she was quite young — not much  older than Susan — and liked her merry face, and the quick, deft way she arranged the vases.
She did not go near her, however, for fear of being thought ‘pushy’.
The little church was very interesting.
Looking round its walls, Breeze realized that the sea must be nearer than she had thought, for there were so many little tablets to people who had been drowned off this coast.
There were some lovely old brasses, too, which fascinated her; and when she had finished looking at these she found that she was alone.
But when she went out, she saw the girl who had been doing the flowers waiting in the porch, and guessed that she must be the Vicar's wife.
The stranger smiled at her, and spoke impulsively.
‘Excuse me, but aren't you Miss O'Brien — from Sunset Cottage?’
‘Yes, I'm Bridget O'Brien,’ said Breeze, ‘and I think you must be Mrs Dare.’
‘I am!
But how did you know?’
The merry dark eyes scanned her face enquiringly.
‘Well, Mr Kenyon mentioned you last night.
He said you gave marvellous picnics — and you look as if you would!’
‘Do I really?’ laughed Mrs Dare.
‘How lovely!
I don't know about’ marvellous', but you must come to one directly the weather gets warmer.
Let me see — which way are going?’
‘To the shops,’ said Breeze.
‘we've run out of everything.
They're on the other side of the Green, aren't they?’
‘They !
This isn't Oxford Street, you know!
It is over there, by that giant elm.
May I walk along with you?’ asked Mrs Dare, and fell into step beside her.
She was about twenty-seven or -eight, straight and slim and full of vitality.
In appearance she was rather like a gipsy, and her quick, eager speech had a slightly foreign intonation.
‘I saw Doctor Rossitter this morning,’ she said abruptly, ‘and he told me about you both, and your — dilemma.
Are you fond of children?’
‘I like some,’ Breeze said cautiously.
‘Good, I'm glad you don't gush.
I've got three, and I really think you'd like them.
I do — I mean, I should even if they were not my own.
Patrick's nearly nine, Christopher's seven, and Nancy's three.
The boys go to school every day — there's a tiny place in Clyst St George — but they're at large all the  afternoon, and they're getting a bit too obstreperous to have about the place.
If you could take them for a walk every day, from three to half-past four or something like that, I'd be terribly grateful.
But,’ said Mrs Dare seriously, ‘would ten shillings a week be too little?
Because I can't…’
‘Too little? just for going for walks?
It's too much,’ said Breeze, in all good faith.
‘Besides, schools make a reduction for two, don't they?
So let's make it seven-and-six!’
Mrs Dare laughed; but it was not mocking laughter, and her voice, when she spoke, was very kind.
‘Ten shillings, please.
Believe me, you'll earn every penny of it!
Will you begin tomorrow?
And come back to the Vicarage and have tea with me.
Oh dear, I've forgotten again!
I must first of all call on your sister.’
‘Oh no,’ said Breeze, ‘we're not a bit conventional, and I can see you're not, either.
Besides, Susan's not well enough to see people yet.
I'd love to come if I may, and — I'd like to ask you about something.
An idea.’
‘Lovely!
Ideas are my hobby — and my husband's, too.
That's the shop, facing you.
And now I must fly,’ said Mrs Dare, glancing at an ancient silver watch.
‘I've got to speak at the women's Institute.
About spring-cleaning,’ she added mournfully.
‘Well, see you tomorrow at three.’
And off she went, her slim grey figure crossing the Green at a terrific speed.
Breeze, greatly cheered, entered the shop.
The proprietor's name, printed over the door, was Ebenezer Arkwright; and he looked just like it.
He was a tall, bony old man, with a long melancholy face and little bushy whiskers —‘lamb cutlets,’ thought Breeze, for they were too small to be called ordinary mutton chops.
He sold everything, it appeared, from postage stamps and plimsolls to mousetraps and ham.
Like everyone else in the village, he knew who she was and where she came from.
‘I hope you'll like the Clyst, miss, and soon feel quite at 'ome,’ he said sepulchrally.
‘What is the Clyst exactly?’
Breeze enquired, stuffing her numerous purchases into her basket.
‘To be sure, that's just our name for these two villages,’ he explained.
‘Because, right speaking, they bain't two at all.
The land used to belong to Lord Linkhaven, up at the Hall; to the present lord's great-grandfer, I should say, but he had to sell a bit here and there — and that's how the two villages came.
A clyst is a cleft, missie.
Maybe you've seen the gorge in the cliffs?
That's what give this districk the name.’
‘I haven't been down to the sea yet.
There hasn't been time,’ she said.
‘Is there much of a beach?’
‘There's never much sand, and the bathing's tricky, if that's what you mean,’ he replied; ‘but there's caves and rocks a-plenty, pretty as a picture.
The only thing is, you got to watch the tide, because — Good afternoon, sir!
Is Firefly better?’
Breeze turned to glance at the man who had just entered the shop, and saw that it was Roger Kenyon.
He looked white and tired, and the smile he gave her in greeting was strained.
‘Yes, thanks,’ he said, in answer to Arkwright's question; ‘I think the vet's pulled her through.
Are you just going home, Miss O'Brien?
May I walk along with you?’
He had come in for a book of stamps, and when he had got it he joined Breeze, who was waiting on the Green.
He took the heavy basket from her, and they turned their steps towards Sunset Cottage.
‘I must apologize,’ he began, ‘for not coming in to see you this morning, as I said I would.
One of my horses, Firefly, has had a nasty cough, and it was so much worse today that 1 had to send for the vet; and I simply hadn't a moment.’
‘It's perfectly all right,’ said Breeze.
‘As a matter of fact, I'd forgotten you were coming — and we couldn't have had tea with you in any case, because Susan's ill.
She had an anonymous letter last night, and tried to burn it before I could see it.
And her sleeve caught fire.’
She watched his face as she spoke.
Although she had never allowed herself to consider it a possibility, the thought had crossed her mind that he might know something about that letter.
But when she saw his look of mingled amazement and indignation, she knew beyond a doubt that he had nothing to do with it.
‘An anonymous letter!
Good heavens!
Of all despicable things…’
He checked himself.
‘I'm sorry to hear about your sister.
Is there anything I can do?’
‘Nothing yet , thanks most awfully.
But one day I may take you at your word,’ she said darkly.
‘By the way, I've met Doctor Rossitter and Mrs Dare, and they both seemed very nice.
Mrs Dare's given me a job already.’
And she told him about it.
He was a very easy person to talk to, and long before they reached home she felt as if she had known him for years.
What was more, she had an idea that he must feel the same, because he in his turn talked to her quite naturally, without the slightest attempt to entertain or amuse her.
She liked him for that.
As they passed Mon Ré, the cream-coloured car was just turning into the drive; and again the two bovine occupants stared at Breeze.
The girl who was driving smiled at Roger and pulled up, and she and her brother got out of the car.
‘Hallo!’ said Roger, and performed the necessary introductions.
‘Miss Breeze O'Brien, Miss Cynthia Blessington-Dalrymple.
And this is Basil Blessington-Dalrymple.’
‘How do you do?’ murmured three polite voices, and Breeze found herself shaking two podgy paws.
‘So you've cub to live dext door to us?
How dice!’ said Cynthia, who had either a very bad cold or else adenoids.
‘Yes — ha ha!— rather!’ said Basil boisterously.
‘I 'ope — hope — we'll see a lot of each other, Miss O'Brien.
We're at a loose end, Cynthie and me — I'm up at Trinity, you know, but I've been ill — ha ha!— and have to stay down this term.
Perhaps we'll have some tennis, if old Rodge here can spare the time from his blessed cows.’
‘You've a hard court, then?’ asked Breeze, wondering at his exuberance.
There was a moment's pause.
‘We've three,’ said Cynthia, and blushed.
‘How lovely!’
‘Dot so lovely as you might thick, whed there's dobody to play od theb!’
Cynthia spoke rather bitterly, and Breeze saw then why they were ‘all over’ her.
Apparently they had no friends, with the possible exception of Roger — and she had seen him stiffen slightly when referred to as ‘old Rodge’.
‘I'm very keen on tennis,’ she assured them earnestly, and their rather heavy faces brightened visibly.
‘So those are the Blessington-Dalrymples,’ she mused aloud, as she and Roger walked on.
‘who is that fierce old lady who lives in the white cottage?’
‘Oh, that's Miss Martindale,’ he said.
‘She's a recluse, and you won't find her very agreeable.
But Cynthia and Basil are awfully good sorts.
You're frowning.
Is anything worrying you?’
‘Was I?
No, thank you,’ said Breeze hastily; but as a matter of fact she felt very much perturbed.
Last night she had told Roger that her name was Bridget; yet to the Blessington-Dalrymples he had introduced her as Breeze.
‘Another mystery!’ she thought wearily.
‘How on earth did he know?’
This new complication revived all the old doubts that she had successfully conquered, and she parted from him at her gate with very mixed feelings.
Part of her trusted him still, but the voice of reason whispered that he could not be the frank and open person he appeared.
He realized her change of mood without understanding its cause and was obviously loath to let her go.
But she said goodbye firmly, and ran into the house.
‘Any adventures or encounters?’ asked Susan languidly, and Breeze told her all about Mrs Dare, and Ebenezer Arkwright, and the Blessington-Dalrymples.
But she skimmed over her meeting with Roger, because it had suddenly become rather difficult to speak of him.
He seemed so nice and dependable — just the sort of person one would like for a brother — and it hurt her to think that he might be double-faced.
Early next morning a telegram arrived.
It ran as follows:
‘Coming as soon as Possible.
GAY .’
‘Does she mean today, do you think, or some time next week?’ asked Susan.
‘Goodness knows!
I expect she was so excited that she didn't stop to look up trains.
Anyway, she's coming, and that's the main thing!’ said Breeze exultantly.
Doctor Rossitter came and dressed Susan's arm, which he said was much better; and in the afternoon Breeze left her sister safely tucked up and she was knocking at the Vicarage door on the stroke of three.
Patrick and Christopher were ready for her.
They were sturdy boys, dark like their mother, and full of spirit.
Breeze  liked them at once, and they liked her.
They offered to take her down to the sea, so off they went — accompanied by the Dares' three dogs, hideous mongrels with hearts of gold.
It was a lovely walk to the cliffs.
They went down a narrow lane called Smugglers' Gully, which led them on to a wild rocky headland.
From here Breeze could see the ‘clyst’— a huge gorge which was evidently the result of some ancient landslide.
It was glorious to stand on this lonely cliff and hear the strange cries of the wheeling gulls, and watch the green waves curling in and out of the caves far below.
Breeze, with a small boy on either side of her, drew in breath after breath of the wonderful air, and looked across at the horizon, where sky and water met.
‘So once again you've come back!’ said the sea.
‘Yes, I've come back,’ she said in her heart, and for a moment she and those tossing green waters were one.
‘What would you give me if I stood on that boulder on one leg?’ asked Christopher, eyeing a small rock on the extreme edge of the cliff.
‘The biggest spanking you've ever had,’ she answered promptly, coming down to earth; and they proceeded down a steep zigzag path to the shore.
The tide was high, so they could not climb on the rocks and breakwaters, or explore the caves.
It was a beautiful beach, and Breeze's fingers itched for a paintbrush.
Patrick showed her Spar Cove, which was their favourite haunt — a fascinating little bay, formed by the clyst itself.
‘I'm so glad you've come,’ he said.
‘Mother won't let us come here alone, and being with you is almost as good as being by ourselves!’
And Breeze took this ambiguous remark as the compliment for which it was intended.
She enjoyed having tea at the Vicarage, though she was not the only visitor.
Sir Eric and Lady Paignton were there, a kindly, elderly couple, who lived on the other side of the village, and one or two people from Clyst St George; and a fat, over-dressed little woman who turned out to be Mrs Blessington-Dalrymple.
Breeze now met the Vicar for the first time, and thought he was one of the most unconventional people she had ever seen.
Tall and thin, he had a wide mouth, humorous grey eyes, and a shock of bright red hair.
Like herself, he was Irish, and spoke with a rolling brogue.
Cynthia called for her mother with the car, and insisted on driving Breeze home.
They were a well-meaning but overwhelming family, and it was with difficulty that their prey escaped.
It was quite dark when Breeze let herself into the house, and for a second she was dazzled by the electric light, and failed to see the suitcases in the hall.
Then, with a warwhoop, Gay rushed out of the dining-room, and the two did a mad Highland fling.
‘Gay, how marvellous!
Oh, stop, I'm getting giddy!
Let's sit down and talk,’ said Breeze, and dragged her friend to the settle.
‘Tell me everything.
How are you?
How did you escape from Aunt Millicent?
Have you been here long?
And have you come for keeps?’
‘Yes, if you'll have me.’
Gay answered the last question first.
‘I'm all right.
She was jolly glad to get rid of me.
I got here about half an hour ago, and your sister gave me some tea.’
She smiled at Susan, who was sitting opposite them.
‘But I had the most extraordinary adventure,’ she went on, her blue eyes sparkling at the recollection.
‘Breeze, do you know that man at the farm?
Because I think he's a dangerous lunatic.
Or a criminal,’ she added pensively.
Breeze turned cold.
‘What — what do you mean?’ she faltered.
‘My dear, Gay's had such a queer experience,’ said Susan.
‘Coming down the lane just now — yes, she walked from the station — she mistook Upmeadow Farm for this cottage; just as we did, you remember.
And she went to the front door and knocked, and a little bent-up man appeared…’
‘With an evil, dead-white face,’ put in Gay; ‘and he said to me: ‘What is the name?’
And I — wishing I could say something really imposing, like Montmorency or Fitzpomeroy — said trenchantly: ‘The name is Smith.’
And then …’
She paused dramatically.
‘What happened next,’ she went on, ‘was a phantasmagoria of horror and mystery combined.
Sheer Grand Guignol!
The human ape laid one skinny hand on my arm and hissed in my ear: ‘So he sent you with a message, eh?’
All this time he was propelling me into a little room near the  front door, and I was absolutely stiff with fright.
‘Nobody's sent me,’ I gasped.
‘I've come to see Miss O'Brien.’
He stood and glared at me like a mad dog.
’What ?’ he croaked; and just then another man — young, and tall and dark…
‘Mr Kenyon, of course,’ said Susan.
‘…burst upon the scene, and, do you know, he looked so angry that I was more frightened of him than I was of his grisly companion.
’ Let her go,’he said.
‘Can't you see you're making a mistake?’
And the old man cringed most horribly, and sort of crawled away.
Then the other one, whom your sister thinks must be the owner of the farm, apologized for a ‘case of mistaken identity’, as he called it, and got rid of me as quickly as possible.
He brought me as far as your gate, which was decent of him — and then bolted as if the bears were after him.
What do you make of it, Breeze?’
‘I don't know.
But the name ‘Smith’ might be a clue.
Don't you remember, Susan?’
Breeze turned to her sister, realizing that she could not shield Roger much longer.
‘In the Half Moon, the day before yesterday, the man who seemed so fed up about our having this cottage was called ‘My lord — Mr Smith’.
A false name, of course.
Well, this creature — Gay's ‘human ape’— must have thought she was an emissary from him.
Which means…’
‘Which means that Roger Kenyon's in the plot against us, whatever it may be,’ Susan said, and then, with a shrug, she tried to laugh it off.
‘How ridiculous that sounds!
Plot!’
To Gay the word was like corn to a cart-horse.
She leaned forward, with parted lips and shining eyes.
‘This is marvellous!
Like walking straight into the middle of a thriller.
‘The Overclyst Plot, or How Many Bodies?’
Do tell me all about it!’ she begged; and Breeze enlightened her as far as she could, without referring to the business of the wallet.
Susan went to bed early, and Breeze and Gay made themselves toast and welsh rarebit, and settled down for a long evening by the fire.
‘Aunt Millicent's going to write to your sister, to ‘arrange terms’, as she calls it,’ said Gay.
‘She says you must both be insane to want to have me here, when I can pay so little and have no means of making more.
But I am going to peg away with  this novel, and if by any chance it should get published — well, you're to go shares in the boodle!’
Breeze knew, though she did not say so, that a first novel doesn't usually bring in much ‘boodle’; but she thanked Gay all the same.
‘All right, then we'll make it a partnership and pool the profits!
You and Susan and I. I've got a job already — exercising two kids for ten bob a week.
And there must be heaps of things we could do.
How about calling ourselves ‘Factota Limited’, and offering our services in any capacity?
I've been playing with that idea all day.
We could mend people's stockings, for one thing…’
‘which of us?’ asked Gay.
‘Your darns are just like hedgehogs…’
‘I know!
And yours aren't much better, and Susan's burnt arm knocks her out.
Well, there are other things.’
Breeze refused to be daunted.
‘Cooking, for instance.
We could turn this into a teashop…’
‘No go,’ said the iconoclast; ‘we're off the beaten track.
We could put a ‘Teas’ notice up, in case any stray hikers came along this way; but we mustn't bank on it.
I tell you what we could do, though.
Cook meals for people.
In the village, I mean.
There must be lots of people who'd like a lunch cooked once a week, or..’
‘Gay, you're a genius!
We will.
I can cook, as it happens — I've had to do it ever since I left Pinehurst, and I can tackle most ordinary things.
Then what about a spot of interior decorating?
Advising people how to arrange their belongings and how their rooms ought to be done?
And helping them to do it,’ said Breeze zealously; but Gay shook her head.
‘Sorry to be a wet-blanket, but people in the country are so conservative.
We could try it, of course, but only as a side-line.
What about housing animals while their owners go away?
And so they went on, making suggestions and turning them down, and the evening passed with incredible speed.
‘Let's make a slogan,’ said Gay.
‘’ Factota Limited' is good.
You could paint that on a board, and underneath we could have a rhyming couplet.
Let's see!
How's this?
‘We'll do anything for you — at any time!
We stick at nothing from Cooking to Crime!’
It would have to be polished up, of course.’
‘Yes, and we'd have the village policeman on our tracks, thinking we meant it literally,’ said Breeze.
‘What about —
‘We'll do anything — any time;
Be it ridiculous or sublime!’’
‘Not bad,’ Gay conceded, and went on with the good work.
‘We ask no questions, and do our best
When we are into service pressed.
Three heads, three hearts, three pairs of hands
Are here, awaiting your commands!’’
‘Sounds a bit like a butcher's shop, with all those heads and hearts,’ said Breeze doubtfully; ‘but the idea might catch on.
Gay, we'll do it!
But we'll talk to Mrs Dare first.
She's the Vicar's wife, and awfully nice.
I meant to ask her about it this afternoon, but she'd lots of other people there.
She'll help us, I know.
Susan meant to give music lessons, but she can't till she's better.
Did she show you that huge room off the kitchen?
No?
Well, come on and see it now.’
Gay was delighted with the games room-to-be, and had a valuable suggestions to make.
‘Dancing classes, Breeze!
Oh, I know we've no certificates, but we're both quite good — you really dance jolly well, and it isn't likely that there's anyone else at the game.
And then we could have dances — grown-up ones, for the yokels and their sweethearts.
They could pay a shilling each to come in, and sixpence for refreshments.
Don't look like that — I know it's horrid, having to take people's money, but we've got to live, and what we're going to do is absolutely honest and above-board.’
‘Gay, you're a brick,’ said Breeze, ‘joining forces with us like this.
Of course, you mustn't ‘factote’ as much as Susan and myself, because you've got your writing.
What's the book going  to be about, or would you rather not tell me?’
‘I don't mind telling you, though I couldn't tell anyone else.
It's going to be called He Jests at Scars .’
‘’ He jests at scars that never felt a wound?’
That's from Romeo and Juliet , isn't it?’
‘Yes, we did it in the Fourth.
That bit made me think even then.
You see, one's brought up to believe that Shakespeare's always right; but he wasn't, when he said that.
It's true in some cases, naturally; but very often it's the people who have felt wounds that jest most at scars, because they don't want the whole world to know.
And my story's about someone like that.’
‘Gay,you've always been rather like that, haven't you?’
Breeze studied her friend thoughtfully.
‘So the character part won't be so difficult for you.
But the other part?
The descriptions, the conversation — real grown-up conversation, about real grown-up things?
How will you get on there?’
Gay's sensitive face flushed.
‘Touchée ,’ she admitted; ‘but that's where imagination comes in.
Oh, I'll do it somehow!
But some day — some day I'll travel, and meet people, and know things, and then I shall write a true book — a book of experience.’
‘You'll be famous, Gay.’
‘I wonder!
I don't care about that.
What does fame mean, after all, except that one's privacy is invaded?
You know how I longed — and long still, for that matter — to be an actress.
It's not  because I want applause, or paragraphs in the paper, or my name in coloured lights in Shaftesbury Avenue.
It's the knowledge that I've got something tremendous inside me, and it's got to come out.
And that something, whatever it is,can come out on the stage.
If you act a part properly you don't act it at all; you are it, and you make it — you.
Oh, Breeze, what tosh I'm talking!’
Gay was a schoolgirl again, embarrassed by her own fervour.
‘We'd better go to bed.’
‘FACTOTA LIMITED’
At breakfast the following morning Breeze and Gay told Susan about their new project.
Breeze had expected opposition in this quarter, but Susan said that ‘Factota Limited’ was an inspiration, and promised for her part to do the housekeeping and give lessons to small children, if any could be found.
She could teach music perfectly well, she said, sling or no sling — and, in any case, her arm would soon be all right.
Like Breeze, she insisted that before anything was settled, Mrs Dare should be consulted.
‘I've never had much to do with village life, but I believe one has to be very careful,’ she explained; ‘and we don't want to set the place by the ears the moment we've arrived.
We…
There's the front-door bell.
Who can it be?’
The caller was Roger Kenyon, as Breeze discovered when she rushed downstairs and unbolted the door.
He had a bottle of milk, a jug of cream, and two pats of lovely golden butter in a basket.
‘I thought you might like some home produce,’ he said.
‘How lovely!
Real milk!
We had tinned stuff all yesterday because we didn't know where to get the other.’
‘Tinned milk!’ he repeated in horror.
‘And you live next door to a farm!
I wish I'd thought…
But Firefly kept me busy all morning, as I told you.
May I speak to you for a moment?’ he asked in a lower tone.
‘Of course.
Do come in,’ she said, and led him into the dining-room.
It was empty; they had breakfasted upstairs in Susan's room.
‘Would you like an apple, Mr Kenyon?’
‘Yes, please.
Won't you call me Roger?
You've told me your Christian name.’
Breeze tossed him one of Mr Arkwright's apples and began to munch one herself.
‘What is my Christian name?’ she asked.
He looked surprised.
‘Why — Breeze, isn't it?’
‘I'm called Breeze, but I never told you that.
I gave you my real baptismal name, which is Bridget.’
The laughing hazel eyes were serious now.
He shifted uneasily before their clear regard.
‘Now how did I get hold of Breeze?
I must have heard it,’ he began, but she cut him short.
‘'Oh yes, you heard it all right.
But where?
And when?’
Then, as he made no answer, she went on: ‘Mr Kenyon — well, Roger, then; it does sound nicer — what is all this mystery?
Why did you turn — different — as soon as you knew we were coming to live here?
How did your wallet get into this house?
And last night…’
‘Ah, last night,’ he broke in.
‘That's what I want to talk to you about.
I do hope your friend wasn't frightened?
The fact is that old Uncle Dan, who lives with me, is a bit queer in the head, and I'm afraid he talked a lot of nonsense.
Mrs Westaway is usually very good at keeping him under control, but he must have given her the slip somehow.
He's perfectly harmless, of course, but he — looks rather strange, and talks wildly at times.’
‘But I think he was quite rational last night,’ said Breeze, marvelling at her own coolness.
‘My friend gave her name, which is Smith, and he — your uncle — assumed that she'd come from ‘my lord — Mr Smith,’ so…’
‘From whom ?’
Roger's sunburnt face had lost some of its colour.
‘You know well enough,’ said Breeze severely.
‘There's some sort of a plot, and you're in it.
Possibly you're merely a cat's-paw of older and cleverer men…’
‘In other words, more fool than knave.
Thank you!
Well, if you'll convey my apologies to Miss Smith, I think we've said all we need say.
I'm sorry to appear in such a very bad light…’
‘Please don't be angry,’ said Breeze.
‘I'm not in the least angry!’ said the infuriated young man.
‘Oh, no, I forgot,’ said Breeze soothingly.
‘People never are angry; they're always hurt, or surprised, or — when they're simply boiling with rage —‘merely amused’.
Well, I'm glad to have afforded you some amusement.
And now, as we've quarrelled like this, I can't very well take your milk and butter, can I?
But I do thank you very much for bringing them, all the same.
He came and stood beside her, and looked her straight in the face.
Anyone entering the room just then would have thought what a very handsome couple they were.
Roger in his farm attire — leather jerkin and gaiters, and well-cut riding breeches — held himself like a soldier, unwittingly displaying his strength of nerve and muscle.
His dark hair and eyes made a good foil for Breeze, whose skin was very fair, and whose short brown curls gleamed like raw silk in the strong morning sunshine.
She was wearing an ancient jumper of her favourite moss-green, and her skirt had lost its shape long ago; but her whole being expressed an intense joy of living, and vitality such as hers lends an ‘air’ to the shabbiest of clothes.
In spite of the anxiety she had recently undergone, she was the picture of health, and Roger's heart warmed — as everyone's did — when she gave him her radiant smile.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘I was hateful just now.’
‘No, you weren't.
I was rude,’ he declared, ‘and very unreasonable, what's more.
Of course all this business must seem mysterious to you, and I only wish I could tell you…’
He broke off.
‘But it's no good,’ he said, ‘I can't.
And that's that.’
‘It's so awkward, though,’ Breeze objected, closing the door.
‘Now that Susan and Gay know there's something queer going on, they'll be on the look-out — naturally.
And supposing Susan thinks you're a crook, and goes to the police?’,
He shrugged his shoulders.
‘Does she think that?’
‘Not yet,’ said Breeze darkly.
‘Do you?’ he shot at her.
She hesitated.
‘No-o.
Not exactly.
But…’
‘I see.’
He flushed and bit his lip.
‘Well, it's not to be wondered at.
I hate asking favours of anyone, especially you, but if it does come to that — if your sister gets the police on my trail, do you think you could let me know?
It's asking a good deal, but rather a lot depends on it.’
‘You mean, you'd want to get out of the country and go to — Spain, isn't it?
Or Mexico?— where there's no extradition.
But I can't do that,’ said Breeze.
‘I couldn't aid and abet you against Susan.’
‘But, hang it all!’ he almost shouted.
‘I'm not a crook!
I'm a farmer — and if I do happen to be mixed up in other people’ s extraordinary affairs, it's no fault of mine.
I don't want to leave the country.
I give you my word that I won't attempt to get away if you let me know when the police are called in.’
‘All right,’ Breeze conceded, after a moment's thought.
‘I'll promise that.
Only I'll have to tell Susan, of course.
Oh, not now, but when the time comes — if it does come.
I hope it won't.’
She sighed.
‘I wish I knew more about things.
Am I compounding a felony, or acting as an accessory before the fact?’
‘Neither,’ he answered decisively.
‘Do you really think I'd let you in for anything like that?’
She met his gaze, and for fully thirty seconds they looked at each other in silence.
‘No,’ she said at last, ‘I don't believe you would.’
‘Thank you,’ he said briefly.
‘Now I must go.
And — since the quarrel's over — I hope you'll keep the produce!
By the way, why not get your eggs and butter and milk from us?
You could talk to Mrs Westaway on the subject.’
Breeze accompanied him to the door.
As they passed through the hall, she saw him glance at the picture that was hanging there, and asked him on an impulse if he knew who the original was.
‘It's a portrait of Mr Fennell's mother,’ he told her.
‘She died when he was quite young.’
Breeze studied it anew, trying to trace a likeness to the fierce old invalid.
It was strange to think that he had once been young.
‘It's the only picture in the house,’ she said, and realized that Roger probably knew this already.
‘But we don't miss them, because there are so many windows.
You knew Mr Fennell, I suppose?’
‘By sight.
But he didn't spend much time here.’
‘How long have you lived in Overclyst?’
‘Oh — for about four years, on and off,’ he said vaguely.
‘Why?’
‘No reason at all.
I was just making conversation,’ she answered with dignity; and he tried to look chastened.
But she saw a twinkle in his eyes, and her lips twitched.
A moment later they were laughing together.
‘I'd better be off before we quarrel a second time,’ he said.
Goodbye, Breeze.
‘Goodbye, Roger.
Oh, will you come to supper tonight?’
What prompted her to invite him she could not have explained, but there was something about him — an air of loneliness, perhaps, though it was more than that — which made her suddenly want to tell him that he could rely on her friendship.
And asking him to supper was the only way she could do this.
‘May I really?’ he said eagerly.
‘Thanks awfully!
About seven?’
He waved to her and was gone.
‘What ages you've been!’ said Susan, when Breeze rushed upstairs.
‘It was Roger, wasn't it?
Has he explained about last night?’
‘Oh, that!’ said Breeze airily.
‘Yes.
He's got a potty old uncle living with him, who's generally kept under lock and key.
But he escaped last night, and mistook Gay for someone else.
Roger's brought us some milk and butter and cream, and he's coming to supper this evening.’
‘Isn't that a little precipitate?’ asked Susan mildly.
‘Remember the lecture I gave you in the train.
Oh well, there's no harm done in this case, only you really must be more chary of giving invitations to people we know nothing about.’
‘But Roger isn't ‘people’,’ said Breeze, obscurely hurt.
‘I thought, as a matter of fact,’ said Gay, ‘that he looked rather nice.’
The two girls went down to the village that morning to secure a piece of board and some paint.
The former they ran to earth at last at the smithy, a tiny Black Hole of Calcutta where Matthew Grimble, the blacksmith, lived with his portly wife and ten portly children.
How they all fitted into their little house was one of those unsolved mysteries that come under  discussion whenever there is a lull in the conversation.
Breeze had already heard the family mentioned the day before, at the Vicarage, and was interested to see them in the flesh.
This village blacksmith was not a ‘mighty man’ at all; in fact, he was much smaller than Micky, his twelve-year-old son, who would have made a good model for the Fat Boy in the Pickwick Papers .
They were a friendly family and very helpful when Breeze, seeing them take so much trouble over finding a suitable board, told them what she hoped to do with it.
‘My!’ said Mrs Grimble, with beefy arms akimbo.
‘Then you mean to stay here, miss?’
‘Stay here?’
Breeze was surprised.
‘But of course!
We've come here to live.’
Then an idea struck her, and she asked: ‘Why — is Sunset Cottage haunted, or anything like that?’
‘Lor bless 'ee, missie!
Whatever next?’ chuckled the gnome-like Grimble.
‘I'd like to see any sperrit hidin' there, with Mrs Blunt comin' in to clean faithful and reg'lar for the last seven years.
No, there's nothin' of that nature, but there are tales.
You know how it is, when a place has been empty for long.
And it's lonely for two young ladies — or three, as the case may be.
You wouldn't care for a pup, now?
We got 'un you can have, and welcome.’
‘I'd love it, of course, but…’
Breeze hesitated.
A puppy, even if he were, so to speak, given away with a pound of tea, must cost a certain amount to maintain.
There was his food, to begin with, and later on there would be his licence…
She shook her head.
‘Ah, well,’ said the blacksmith, ‘seems a pity — nice little chap, he is, but nobody wants him — he's no breed, you see.
We got to 'ave him done away with, afore the licence is due.
And he's close on six months now.’
Well, of course, that settled it.
When the two girls left the smithy, Gay was carrying the wooden board — a rough affair that was all that could be obtained — and Breeze was leading on the end of a knotted string a small and ill-favoured specimen of doghood.
He had a round face, large furry ears, a long curly tail and huge paws, and his thick yellow coat was decorated with large black spots.
But notwithstanding these shortcomings, he had lovely brown eyes and a whimsical expression, and Breeze  was delighted with him.
‘We can't go on calling him Fido,’ she said, that being the Grimbles' choice.
‘What about Cerberus?’
‘No,’ said Gay, ‘he's not classical, whatever else he is; besides, people always argue about whether it's a hard or soft C. He's rather a mystery dog, isn't he?
What about Sausage?’
‘Sausage!’ said Breeze, and her peculiar pet looked up and winked.
Then he wagged his plume-like tail to indicate approval; so ‘Sausage’ he remained.
Now a new difficulty presented itself.
Ebenezer Arkwright had no paint in stock, and doubted if there would be any to be found in Clyst St George, either.
Breeze and Gay were turning their steps towards Sunset Cottage when a terrific hoot made them look round; and there was the Blessington-Dalrymples' car, with Basil at the wheel and his parents and sister behind.
He introduced his father, a tubby, good-natured little man, and asked them if they would like a lift into Plymouth.
So, after some discussion, Gay went home with the board and Sausage, while Breeze got into the big cream-coloured car.
It was fun being whisked to Plymouth, though she hadn't much in common with this well-meaning but heavy family.
They were stupid, narrow-minded, and — worst of all — much too friendly, in a patronizing way; but Breeze wouldn't let herself feel annoyed.
It was not until they were coming back, with the required tins of paint and thick brushes amongst the rest of the shopping, that anything really unpleasant took place.
‘Is that quaint little dog your own, Miss O'Brien?’ asked Mrs Blessington-Dalrymple.
‘You got him off — I mean from — the blacksmith?
Well, I never!
What's his name?’
‘Sausage,’ said Breeze.
In the sudden silence that followed, she realized that something was wrong.
Cynthia and her father coloured hotly, Basil glowered, and Mrs Blessington-Dalrymple's small eyes snapped angrily.
It was on the tip of Breeze's tongue to ask what was the matter, but she knew that Susan would condemn that as being too impulsive; so she endured the very uncomfortable atmosphere for the rest of the drive.
Gay had scraped together quite a creditable lunch, which Breeze swallowed in haste and then rushed off to the Vicarage.
This time Sausage accompanied her, and as she set off with the the two small boys and their three dogs, Korah, Dathan and Abiram, she reflected that they must look rather like a circus.
Pat and Chris were very fond of animals, and kept on throwing things for Sausage, whom they knew, of course, as Fido.
Breeze told them that his name had been changed, and they laughed.
‘Mummy won't let us talk about sausages —‘cept when we have them,’ said Chris.
‘She says it would hurt Mr Blessington-Dalrymple's feelings.
She says one should be awfully careful about people's feelings.’
‘Doesn't he like sausages, then?’ asked the baffled Breeze.
‘He made his money in them,’ Patrick gravely explained, ‘and now he tries to pretend he didn't, because he wants people to think he's always been rich.
He thinks it's because of the sausages that people don't like him enough to ask him to tea; but it isn't really.
It's because they're all so silly.’
Breeze was horror-stricken, but she could not encourage the child to gossip.
‘People can't help being silly,’ she said rather shyly.
‘If you saw a blind man coming along, wouldn't you feel sorry for him and want to help him?’
‘Of course we would!’ they cried.
‘I'd give him some chocolate,’ said Christopher earnestly.
‘'If I had any,’ he added, with a sigh.
‘Well, then, you ought to feel just as sorry for silly people.
It's a misfortune, just the same as being blind.’
‘I see,’ said pat thoughtfully.
‘Like ‘suffer fools gladly’.
Daddy preaches about that sometimes.
Shall I ask him to preach a sermon about the Blessington-Dalrymples?’
‘Good gracious, no!
That isn't the way to be sorry for people — to make them conspicuous.
We won't talk about them any more,’ said Breeze, very firmly indeed.
Then she took them into Arkwright's and bought them a bar of chocolate each, which she could ill afford, and they all went back to the Vicarage.
This time Mr and Mrs Dare were alone, and she enjoyed the half-hour she spent with them over the study fire.
She told them about ‘Factota Limited’, and asked their advice — and no two people could have been kinder.
Mrs Dare thought it a splendid idea to serve cooked meals on washing-day, and promised to tell everybody she knew about the project.
‘Mrs Rossitter is an invalid,’ she said, ‘and I'm sure there are lots of odd jobs you could do for her.
And Lady Paignton, whom you met yesterday, is always saying she wished she had somebody to do shopping for her.
Peggy, her daughter, is at a finishing school in France and only appears during the holidays, and Tony, who's twenty-one, is away a great deal.
You must meet him next time he comes home.
He's a charming person.
He and Roger Kenyon are great friends.’
‘Gita, you are a gas-bag,’ said the Vicar affectionately.
‘Look here, Miss O'Brien, if you're really serious, why don't you write a few handbills, saying what’ Factota Limited' is and explaining its aims, and send one to everyone in the village?
Put the board up, too, by all means — yes, it's quite all right; such things are not prohibited in Catkin Lane — but the handbills would ensure that everybody got to know about you.
You really should be on the telephone.’
‘We simply can't run to it yet,’ said Breeze.
‘Well, have it installed as soon as you can.
Of course, young Kenyon's got one so he may help you over that.
You're not going?
Can't you stay to tea?’
‘I'm afraid not, thank you.
I've got to call in somewhere on my way home,’ Breeze explained, as she took her leave.
With her heart in her mouth she entered the imposing portals of Mon Ré, and rang the bell.
In a voice that shook in spite of her efforts to control it, she asked if she could see Mrs Blessington-Dalrymple.
The butler hesitated, casting a malignant look at Sausage, who was quietly gnawing the mat, but finally showed her into the drawing-room where the whole family was having tea.
They gazed in bovine surprise at the scarlet-faced visitor, and for one frightful moment Breeze felt that she must flee.
Then she walked straight up to them.
‘I'm sorry,’ she said.
‘About Sausage, I mean.
You see, I didn't know.
And in any case, I love sausages!
They're so nice and easy to cook.’
‘I like mine burst!’ said Basil, one cheek distended with muffin.
‘No, no, my boy, you lose half the flavour that way,’ frowned his father.
‘They should be lightly browned…’
‘Well-cooked, though, Egbert!’ interrupted his wife, jingling her earrings to and fro.
‘Give me a nice dishful, all frizzled!’
She beamed at Breeze.
‘We shouldn't have took umbrage this morning, only — what with the people down here being so stand-offish, like, we got sort of sensitive about sausages.
Though why we should — when Dad here's made the best on the market!
Maybe you've heard of Dalrymple's Dairy Dainties?’
After that it was plain sailing.
Breeze had nothing to do but listen.
Fresh tea was brought in for her, and when she said she must go, Basil took her home.
Gay had spent that afternoon writing hard; the story was going well, she said, and she was in high spirits.
She put it aside now and helped Breeze to prepare the very simple meal that Roger Kenyon would share.
Susan's arm was better, and she herself seemed more cheerful.
She took a great interest in the Factota scheme, and helped the other two to make out a rough draft of the ‘handbill’ that Mr Dare had suggested.
They were engaged upon this when Roger arrived, and he was so friendly and jolly tonight that Breeze took him into her confidence.
He thought it a fine idea, and presently excused himself — returning with a bottle of Mrs Westaway's cowslip wine, in which to drink to the new venture.
He had also brought James, whom he wished to make friends with Sausage.
So they made quite a party of it, and had tremendous fun.
Only once was a jarring note struck, and that was when Roger referred to the long room leading out of the kitchen as the ‘museum’.
‘Museum?’
Breeze was quick.
‘Yes, didn't you know?
Mr Fennell had it built specially to display some of his treasures — now in the big museum in Paris.’
Roger's face had flushed, and she knew he was thinking about that wallet.
‘Well, here's to Factota Limited!’ he toasted hurriedly and they all lifted their glasses.
But there was something forced about his gaiety now, and Breeze, looking at him across the table, felt again that sharp pang of uncertainty.
Could she trust him, or could she not?
FELICITY
‘I am so glad,’ wrote Felicity three months later, when the meadows were golden with cowslips and bluebells were already beginning to displace the primroses in the woods, ‘to hear that ‘Factota’is such a success.
What fun you do have, Breeze and Gay.
How I wish I were with you.
Your last letter made me laugh — I loved your description of the village dancing classes at threepence a time — though it must be horrid taking their pennies.
And fancy your having complete charge of the Vicarage kids during the Easter hols, while their mother is in Hungary!
And Susan teaching music — why, you must be coining money.
I wonder more people don't go in for that sort of thing.
It must be marvellous to have something definite to do .’
Breeze, who was reading the letter aloud — it was addressed jointly to Gay and herself — broke off at this point and frowned.
‘Flick's very pensive, all of a sudden.
I hope nothing's wrong,’ she said anxiously.
‘I thought she was having such a wonderful time.’
‘You can have too much of anything,’ was Gay's sage rejoinder, ‘and I rather think her mother's been overdoing this entertaining stunt.
Everyone likes fun and pretty things, but — having too many frocks must be almost as bad as having too few, and if you go out somewhere every day, and razzle every night, you wouldget stale.
At least,’ she amended, laughing, ‘I imagine so!
Marcia does.’
Marcia was a character in Gay's novel, which was growing apace.
‘Yes, of course, Flick has been going it lately — her letters have been awfully scrappy, but she's told us about all the  dancing and bridge, and that Russian prince with the name like a hiccup who takes her all over the place.
Perhaps she is getting bored,’ said Breeze, and read on.
‘What ages and ages it seems since we were at Pinehurst.
It seems like another life.
I can't talk about it now, because nobody I know is in the least bit interested.
I sometimes think you wouldn't recognize me if you saw me as I am these days!
And there are occasions when I don't recognize myself …
‘It's difficult to believe that I'm still a Musketeer, but I am, and as we've always told each other everything, I must tell you that although Mummy and Dad do such a lot for me, I'm Perfectly miserable.
Does that sound very ungrateful?
I really don't care if it does!
Yes, I've reached that stage.
‘I've been wanting to tell you for ages, but I couldn't while you were so worried.
However, it's got to come out now, or I shall explode.
Breeze and Gay, have you ever been bored?
I don't mean sermons, or those awful sewing bees we used to have.
I mean real boredom, that makes you want to scream and tear the curtains!
That's what I feel liken now.
‘Lotus-eating was fun at first.
I thought it was going to be marvellous.
But to begin with, it's far harder work than any actual job could be — and I start each day absolutely fagged out.
My free time is taken up by the hairdresser and manicurist — and if I do escape them, I have to be fitted at the dressmaker's.
Riding's fun, certainly — or it would be, if I could sometimes go alone.
The same with the car.
But I never am alone —the house is full of people from morning till night, and my whole day is to be nice to them and get taken about .
‘And I hate it !
‘The climax came last night.
Prince Alexis — who's been staying with us for ages — asked me to marry him, and I said no.
(He has whiskers and wears shoes.)
Well, he told Mummy, and now she's furious, because apparently it's what she'd been hoping for.
You see, he's got thousands of titles and things, and she likes him into the bargain; also she wants me to be presented at court next year — as his wife.
So the atmosphere is very thundery at present, and life is anything but gay.
I can't stay here, of course.
I'd run away if I could, but I've no money of my own; they don't even give me an allowance, but pay all my bills for me.
So — can I come to you?
If you wrote and invited me, I could show the letter to Mummy, and I'm sure she'd let me come, because she says I'm Pale and will lose my looks 
if I don't take care.
‘Breeze — please do this for me.
I'll work — I'll do anything — only I must get away from here .
‘Flick .
‘This is awful,’ said Breeze soberly, and reached at once for her pen and writing-pad. ‘we must ask her, of course, but it won't be easy, having her here.
You know she never has liked village people, and she's always had rather a squashing way towards kids.
But — poor old Flick!
How ghastly for her.
I'll get the letter posted today, on my way to Miss Martindale's.’,
‘’ The Sorrows of Felicity; or The Mockery of wealth,’' murmured Gay, to conceal her genuine distress.
‘She says she'll work, and we'll jolly well keep her up to it!
She can do some of the cooking and all the mending.
Susan won't mind, will she?’
‘No.
I'm going to tell her now, but she won't mind a bit,’ said Breeze, as she hastily finished her letter and went in search of her sister.
As she entered the lounge where Susan was sitting, playing a César Franck prelude in an oddly preoccupied way, she found herself wishing that the senior partner of Factota Limited were a little less amenable.
Susan was quite well now; at least, she had recovered from the effect of nursing their father through that long, heart-breaking illness, but she seemed to have lost all her spirit.
To Breeze and Gay she was unfailingly gentle and sweet-tempered; moreover, she was interested in her work, and her little pupils loved her.
But she seemed so empty , somehow.
That was the only way Breeze could express it.
She seemed as if only her outer shell were present, while the real Susan was far away in some secret world where no one could follow her.
‘Felicity?’
Susan stopped playing César Franck and raised her eyebrows.
‘Yes, of course, we must ask her,’ she said, ‘but will she fit in?
I've never met her, but from what you've told me about her I doubt it very much.’
‘So do I,’ said Breeze frankly; ‘but that's her own lookout!
She wants to escape from home, and the least we can do is to let her stay here for a while.
All the same,’ she sighed, ‘I wish it hadn't happened just now.’
It did seem a little hard that, just when things were beginning to go really well, the even tenor of their lives should be upset by the arrival of someone else — someone who, although a friend, was none the less a stranger.
Factota Limited had at last found its feet.
Thanks to the Dares and the Rossitters, it had had a good start, but all innovations are eyed askance in small villages — and Overclyst was very small indeed.
Breeze and Gay had printed their handbills with great care, and had painted their board most beautifully — with the result that on the following Sunday afternoon the entire population of Overclyst and Clyst St George filed past Sunset Cottage in slow procession, gazing open-mouthed at the birthplace of such a surprising scheme.
Breeze never forgot Roger's kindness on that occasion.
While she and Susan and Gay kept in the background, he hovered near the gate, ready to answer any questions put by the more curious of the passers-by, and the sight of his familiar figure reassured the villagers, and they began to think that there mightn't be a catch in it, after all!
Breeze, of course, already had her afternoon job at the Vicarage, and, as the nurse left soon afterwards, she found herself with her salary increased to fifteen shillings a week and little Nancy to look after, as well as the two boys, and Korah, Dathan and Abiram.
Before very long Gay was running her close.
She went with Breeze to call upon Mrs Rossitter, who was so charmed with her voice that she engaged her on the spot to read to her for two hours every day.
Lady Paignton, too, found various jobs for the girls, as Mrs Dare had prophesied, and when her son Tony came home for a fortnight, things began to hum in another direction.
Tony Paignton, although only twenty-one and a merry-faced person bubbling over with fun, was an intensely serious young man.
He had come down from Oxford a few months ago obsessed with the idea of social service.
Economics had always been his strong point, and his family had expected him to go into Parliament.
Now he was wondering whether he would be ordained instead.
His parents fully understood his difficulties and raised no objections when he said that he wanted to live in the poorest part of South-East London for a year, to study conditions and work in a lay capacity amongst the people.
It goes without saying that he was deeply interested in Factota Limited — and in the girls themselves, of whom he had heard a great deal from Roger Kenyon, who was his friend.
Tony it was who persuaded the village people to take advantage of the benefits offered them — meals cooked on washing-day, for instance, and the simple lessons in pianoforte and painting that Susan and Breeze had suggested giving.
Tony it was who organized the bi-weekly dances in the ‘Sunset Hall’ as he christened the disused museum, and who scoured the neighbourhood to get regular orders for the cakes Susan made so well.
Everyone was sorry when he went back to Bermondsey, but the good work he had done lived after him.
With the money that Gay contributed to the house, the ménage at Sunset Cottage contrived to keep going.
Some weeks, of course, were more affluent than others.
Some were very lean.
One day they lived entirely on bread-and-butter and tea, but the next morning Breeze received an unexpected half-crown from the sour old witch, Miss Martindale, who couldn't cope with her spring-cleaning single-handed.
So they feasted royally on eggs-and-bacon and coffee, to make up!
Breeze was on her way to Miss Martindale's now, for the old lady had intercepted her in the lane the day before, to ask her if she would come and do two hours' digging at tenpence an hour.
(’’ The usual wage is a shilling,’she had said, ‘but you are untrained.’
And Breeze, least grasping of mortals, had agreed that the labourer was worthy of his hire.)
This request opened out a new field of activities for Factota Limited, and the amateur gardener was in high fettle as she marched down Catkin Lane, with a large fork over her shoulder and Sausage prancing at her side.
She had written to Felicity before she left the house, and posted the letter on her way; and already she was feeling less pessimistic concerning the arrival of the third Musketeer.
‘You're in good time,’ the witch-like Miss Martindale admitted in grudging tones, as she opened the door.
‘Go round to the back, and no dawdling, mind!’
Once upon a time — oh, years and years ago!— she had been a schoolmistress.
Breeze had heard her history from a certain Mrs Easton, wife of a poultry farmer in Clyst St George, and a  gossip of the first order.
Miss Martindale had had a school, but her rigid ideas and stern manner had frightened the children, and their parents had taken them away.
And gradually the school declined, until she had to give it up and retire to end her days in the white cottage with the inevitable cat as her only companion.
Breeze had never imagined that digging was such hard work.
At the end of one hour her back was aching as if it had been kicked all over by a mule; but she went on doggedly, though it soon became absolute agony.
It was a pretty little garden — or at feast, it could have been, if it had been properly looked after.
But apparently its owner regarded it simply as a vegetable patch, for there were no flowers to be seen.
Breeze felt quite depressed.
April — and no daffodils!
‘Time's up,’ snapped Miss Martindale, approaching the crimson-cheeked labourer, and counting out one-and-eightpence — all in coppers — into her blistered palm.
Breeze thanked her and picked up the fork.
As she passed the back door she noticed that the lid had fallen off the dustbin and the fresh spring wind was playing havoc with the bits of paper and odds and ends that lay strewn on the tiled path.
As a matter of course she picked them up, spearing them with her fork and not pausing until she had collected them all, and replaced the lid.
‘I suppose,’ said Miss Martindale's voice behind her, ‘you want an extra twopence for that.’
Breeze was so hot already that she couldn't blush any more, but her eyes flashed as she faced the witch, and shook her head.
‘No, thank you, Miss Martindale,’ she said quietly, and made her escape.
But when she had joined Sausage, who had been waiting for her outside, she bent and stroked his curly head, and two large tears rolled down her cheeks and splashed on to his fur.
‘Oh, Sausage,’ she said, ‘there are some beastly people in the world!
Felicity's mother wanting her to marry that Prince Hiccup, and Gay's awful Aunt Millicent, and Jack Carey ruining Susan's life — because he has , and there's no getting away from it!
And now the Witch of Endor, taunting us because we've got to earn money…’
She broke off, straightening her aching back, for she had heard the sound of wheels.
‘Come on, old chap-Home!’ she said, gulping hard.
‘Hallo!’
Roger, overtaking her in his ramshackle car, pulled up and opened the door.
‘Going home?
So am I. Have you taken to gardening now?
What's the matter?’ he asked in a different tone.
‘Nothing!’
Breeze blew her nose fiercely on an earthy handkerchief, and stumbled into the car.
‘You're tired out,’ he said.
‘Don't bother to talk.
Come and have some tea.’
‘But Susan and Gay…’
‘Oh, I'll square them!
Do come —.
I see so little of you these days,’ he said, and added craftily: ‘There are soda scones and potato cakes.’
‘Well — but my nose is red,’ she said ruefully, ready as always to poke fun at herself.
‘Don't say it isn't, because I know.’
‘All right, then.
It is!
Like a cherry.
But it suits you,’ he teased her, as he started the car again.
‘Roger, you are an idiot.
as if a red nose could suit anyone.
I often wonder how Niobe managed,’ she said reflectively; and then, struck by the ridiculous nature of the conversation, they both burst out laughing.
Mrs Westaway took Breeze upstairs to wash her hands and face while Roger went round to Sunset Cottage to explain matters to Susan.
When he came back Breeze was sitting curled up by the fire in the quaint but attractive parlour, her eyes fixed thoughtfully on the dancing flames.
Roger sat down in the high-backed armchair opposite her and smiled at her.
‘Now,’ he said, ‘tell me all about it.’
‘But there's nothing to tell, Roger.
I was rather tired, and everything seemed black.
Come here, Sausage,don'tchew that rug!
I'm very sorry,’ said Breeze sedately, ‘that you should have seen me in that cowardly moment.’
‘Cowardly!’ he  said .
‘If I told you what I thought of your pluck…’
He checked himself.
‘But look here,’ he went on, ‘if there really was anything wrong, you'd tell me, wouldn't you?
First of all, I mean.
You wouldn't turn to anyone else — instead of me?’
There was a tone in his voice that Breeze had never heard before — a tone that startled her, and made her look at him with wide, bewildered eyes.
‘No, Roger, of course not.
I'd tell you like a shot if we ever got into a real jam.
B-but…
I mean, why…?’ she stammered.
‘Why did I say what I said just now?
Because I like you, Breeze, and it makes my blood boil to think of you slaving away as you do.
I suppose Miss Martindale had been baiting you?
Oh, never mind — that's beside the point.
What does matter is that you're wearing yourself to a shadow to make a bare livelihood — and my hands are tied,’ he said violently, looking down at them as though he longed to tear off the invisible fetters.
She had never seen him in this mood before, but the expression on his face was familiar.
It took her back to St Petrock's, and the scene of their first encounter.
That something was weighing on his mind was only too evident, and she quite forgot her own worries in her concern for him.
‘Roger, please don't feel like that about me.
I'm not a martyr at all— I love Factota.
We all do, really, and we're keeping our heads above water most beautifully.
We're making a profit now — yes, we're all going to Plymouth next week to buy new shoes, so you see, we're Croesuses!
Or is it Croesi?’
‘Oh Breeze!’ he said.
‘Why?
What's wrong?’
‘Nothing.
Only I wish you weren't quite such a babe, that's all.
Here's tea at last!
Enter potato cakes!’
The potato cakes had soon disappeared, for they were both hungry.
The arrival of tea had changed the atmosphere, and Roger cast aside his rather sombre mood and listened with genuine interest while Breeze told him about Felicity.
‘What's she like?’ he asked.
‘Pretty?’
‘Very,’ she said, with an ignoble pang.
‘You'll like her awfully.
Everyone does.’
But when Felicity arrived, three days later, it seemed at first glance as if she had lost every atom of her old charm.
Breeze and Gay went to meet her at Clyst St George station, and hardly recognized the ultra-smart figure which languidly emerged from the train, as the boon companion of not so long ago.
‘Flick !’ they gasped, and Gay muttered under her breath:
‘My hat, the complete screen vamp!’
Felicity swam towards them.
Swam is the only word.
She was so slim that she seemed to have no breadth whatever.
She was wearing black, with an absurd little French hat perched over one ear.
Her hair — her beautiful golden hair — had been permanently waved, and lay in rigid loops along her cheeks.
Her eyebrows had been plucked and pencilled, and her mouth was unnaturally red.
She was carrying her gloves, and they saw her finger-nails were bright vermilion.
‘Oh, Breeze!’ she said.
‘Gay!’
And, after a second's pause: ‘Isn't this marvellous!
Mummy was delighted at my coming to you, but she mayhave to send for me…’
Breeze smiled.
Felicity, wise in her generation, was leaving herself a loophole whereby she could escape.
‘Come along,’ she said briskly.
‘Your luggage can be sent up, but we'll have to walk.
Think you can manage three miles?’
Felicity laughed affectedly.
‘I'm not quite decrepit!
Seeing I played two rounds of golf yesterday…’
But before she had covered a quarter of the distance she began to complain about the light, high-heeled shoes she was wearing.
‘I thought there'd be a bus or something,’ she said peevishly.
Breeze didn't worry about the shoes, because she knew Felicity could get plenty more; but she did feel sorry for the feet inside them.
‘Look here,’ she said at last, ‘you can't go on like this — you'll get fearful blisters.
We're just by an inn now — the Half Moon — and I'll go in and see if they've got a conveyance of any sort.
Sit down, Flick; this bank's quite dry.
And for the love of Mike take off those shoes!’
With a groan poor Felicity sank down and obeyed.
Gay stayed with her, while Breeze ran into the inn and, with lively recollections of her last visit, asked rather nervously to see the proprietor.
She was taken to wait in the room with the stuffed fish.
Suddenly her quick ears caught the sound of voices.
One belonged undoubtedly to the little landlord — and the other to Roger Kenyon!
Well, there was no harm in his being there.
Why shouldn't he, if he wanted to, drop in to have a chat with the landlord?
Nevertheless, his presence gave Breeze an uncomfortable feeling, and she moved to the far end of the room so that she should not overhear what he was saying.
Very soon the landlord appeared, and told her shortly that he possessed neither car nor pony-and-trap.
Breeze returned to her companions and broke the news that they would have to walk.
Then a new dilemma presented itself.
Felicity, having taken off her shoes, was quite unable to put them on again.
‘It's no good.
I simply can't!
They're a bit small for me really, and I suppose my feet have swollen.
What am I to do?’ wailed the victim, and indeed it did seem a problem, because — since she was so much taller than either of her companions — her feet were larger than theirs, and she could not get into their comfortable country shoes.
‘Well, you'll have to stay here while I dash home and get my wellingtons…’
Breeze was beginning in desperation, when deliverance came — in the shape of the Paigntons' car.
Sir Eric was driving, and beside him sat Tony — home for an unexpected holiday.
He had, it turned out, travelled in Felicity's train to Exeter, where his father had met him.
They stopped, of course, and asked what had happened, and two minutes later the three girls — clutching a pair of high-heeled shoes — were safely ensconced in the back of the car.
Such was Felicity's introduction to Overclyst, and it took her some time to recover from it.
She was glad to see her friends, naturally, and she loved the cottage, and got on quite well with Susan; but at first she was completely baffled by the simple yet busy life they led.
She didn't know what to do.
Breeze, hoping to please her, gave a lemonade and sandwich party one evening, to which she invited Roger, Tony, the two younger Blessington-Dalrymples, and that live wire, Mr Dare, who was working much too hard now that his Hungarian wife was having a holiday in her native land.
It was a most successful party, and the only person who failed to enjoy it was the one for whom it had been given.
‘Really, Breeze,’ said Felicity, when the last guest had departed, ‘what you can see in these rustics I simply can't imagine.
Oh, they're all right— amiable and well-meaning, and so on; but so utterly deadly, my dear!
Even Roger…’
Breeze bit her lip.
‘What about Roger?’
‘A bit old-fashioned, isn't he?
I know he dances quite well, and his clothes are all right; but he doesn't seem to have read anything worth reading…’
‘His subject is French history, as a matter of fact,’ said Breeze.
‘If you'd mentioned Pépin Le Bref, or Madame sans Géne, he'd have prattled away for hours!
As for his being old-fashioned…’
‘All right, all right , keep your hair on!’
It was quite a relief to hear Felicity lapse into the phraseology of Pinehurst days.
‘Mr Dare's nice — not a bit parochial…’
‘Flick, what doyou mean?’
Felicity flushed.
‘Well, Mummy says clergymen are so frightfully parochial.
I don't quite know what it means.
Anyway, he's nice.
The person who annoyed me most was Tony Paignton.
My dear, he's no manners at all!’
‘Tony ?’
‘Yes, he was frightfully rude.
Well, perhaps I asked for it in a way,’ Felicity admitted reluctantly.
‘My lipstick fell out of my bag, you see, and he trod on it —not on the carpet, thank heaven!— so he picked up the mangled remains and asked if he could get me another.
My dear, he was holding it exactly as if it had been a squashed blackbeetle, and I knew he'd been criticizing me all evening.
So I said, ‘You don't approve of it, do you?’
And he said, ‘Since you ask me, no.'’
‘Well, that wasn't rude, Flick.
He's entitled to his own opinions.
And, without being narrow-minded or anything like that, I must say that lipstick doesn't suit you.’
Felicity frowned.
‘It isn't a question of ‘suiting’.
Everyone uses it!
Everyone who counts…
Oh, sorry, I didn't mean that.
But you don't understand.
At home…’
‘But you didn't like being at home,’ said Breeze gently.
‘You've come away — you've escaped.
If you stopped making up your face — which is a perfectly good one and needs no camouflage — and gave up going about like a languishing lily, and got that gory stuff off your nails, you'd be your old self again.
But I didn't mean to lecture you, old thing.
Go on about Tony.’
Felicity shrugged her shoulders.
‘You and he seem to share the same ideas!
I was a fool; I ought to have let it go at that, but I asked him why he didn't approve — and had a regular  tirade!
He said make-up was all very well for some people, but he hated to see it on girls who weren't the right type — implying I suppose, that I ought to wear  woollen stockings and teach in a Sunday school!
So I told him what I thought, and we parted after that.
And I saw him five minutes later eating sandwiches —postingthem, Breeze, like letters in a pillar-box!’
Breeze chuckled.
That was the final insult, then; Tony, after hearing Felicity's opinion of him, had not crept away in chastened mood, but had consoled himself with sandwiches.
‘Oh well,’ she said, ‘you may not see him again.
He's very seldom at home.’
‘Why — is he going away quite soon?’ asked Felicity in dismay, and Breeze could only gaze at her in astonishment.
‘Flick's made a hit,’ Gay observed that night, strolling into Breeze's bedroom clad in the patched pyjamas she had worn at school.
Since the advent of Felicity, she had gone up to sleep in the attic — an arrangement she preferred, as she had absolute privacy up there, and as luck would have it, there was an electric fire, so that she could use it as a study.
‘A hit?
With Roger?
They danced together a lot.’
Breeze spoke casually, giving no sign of the fact that her heart had missed a beat — as it often did nowadays, when Roger's name was mentioned.
‘Not Roger, you poor fish!
Tony.’
‘But they were quarrelling all the time!’
‘Does one,’ asked Gay rhetorically, as she seated herself on the foot of the bed, ‘quarrel with those to whom one is totally indifferent?’
‘Oh, if you're going all psychological…!’ snorted Breeze, and Gay laughed.
‘You didn't really think that Roger was keen on Flick?
You ought to know by this time that — in the language of popular fiction — he has eyes for no one but you.’
Breeze sat up and stared at Gay, who was still laughing.
But somehow there was no merriment in her vivid blue eyes.
They were thoughtful, grave, as they so often were; but Breeze had a queer impression that they were veiled tonight.
‘You're raving, my child,’ she said briskly.
‘You know well enough that Roger's nice to everyone.’
‘Good night,’ said Gay, and tip-toed up to her bedroom.
But she did not get into bed.
Instead, she went to the window and stood looking out at the vast starry sky.
‘Nice to everyone,’ she whispered, and clenched her hands.
‘Oh, Roger, if only you weren't — so nice!’
DISCOVERIES
Until they came to Overclyst, Susan and Breeze had never experienced the endless joy of watching the seasons come and go.
Although they had often stayed in the country, this was the first time they had lived in it, and that makes all the difference.
The visitor, seeing an orchard in blossom, thinks wistfully of the autumn fruit harvest, knowing that by then he will be far away; but the resident looks at the pink and white flowers with delight, for when these lovely petals fall he will see the young fruit growing until, when September comes, the orchard is once again beautiful.
And even then the pageant is not over, for the leaves change colour before they shrivel, and when they drop off, the bare gnarled trees stand out fantastically against the winter sky.
Then comes another spring, and fresh buds; and so it goes on, always the same and always new.
Summer at Sunset Cottage was an idyllic time.
The roses were perfect, the lawns like green velvet, and the tall trees threw