

8000 BC to 1918
Prussian Danzig
As industrialisation advanced eastwards across Europe, so social and political pressures within the logic of capitalist organisation helped to simplify and solidify national identities as part of the new economic and political order.
Poland, Silesia, Brandenburg and Prussia were all slowly drawn into the West European economic orbit.
Yet the fact of West European industrial growth also had the opposite effect too: these places were not drawn into the new scheme of things in exactly the same way or on exactly the same conditions as France, Britain, Belgium and Holland — the original members of the industrial club.
Industrialisation served to divide Europe into east and west, roughly along the line of the river Elbe.
West of the river lay a quite distinct series of societies, differentiated from each other by the varying pressures and responses to industrialisation, geography and language.
To the east of the Elbe the western demand for grain and timber had helped create and then kept in place a series of societies based upon the feudal manorial order of lords and serfs.
Western Europe's first colonial possessions were in the immense grain basket of the Prussian and Polish latifundia.
The Polish and Prussian land owners — Junker and szlachta alike — had responded to the western demand for grain by exploiting the two commodities they had at hand: labour and land.
In exchange for exports of grain they received money with which they purchased manufactured goods and luxury items.
The result was that the eastern lords saw no reason to modernise their society, no reason to foster the growth of industry.
At a time when Western Europe was enjoying the first benefits of industrial society, trade with the west was actually stultifying social progress and the development of industry in Poland and Prussia, and particularly in backward Pomerania.
After the first partition of Poland in 1772 Danzig remained independent but tied to what remained of the Polish state by trade and treaty.
Unlike most of the other Prussian monarchs, who were genially indifferent to Poland and things Polish, Frederick William II had a deep contempt for the Polish nobility.
While he expressed  no great desire to conquer Poland, he had ambitions to build a land bridge of Prussian-controlled territory from Brandenburg to East Prussia, and to regulate the grain trade through Danzig and along the Vistula in order to raise revenues to expand and equip the Prussian army.
Frederick did not care to see that these ambitions could only be satisfied at Poland's expense and that they threatened Poland's existence.
By 1793 it is estimated that West Prussia — the area that now contained Danzig and Pomerania — had a total population of around 647,000.
Of these, 371,000 were thought to be Protestant, 271,000 Catholic and 5,000 Jews.
While the Jews were both Polish and German speakers, not all the Catholics were Polish, yet nearly all the Protestants were German.
Though Danzig was by this time 90 per cent Protestant and almost entirely German in character and culture, the city still feared the worst from Prussian rule.
Even those Danzigers who felt relief at being removed from the lax and distant hand of Catholic Warsaw were soon to see this as cold comfort when they began to experience Prussian rule.
Within 20 years the Prussians had ruined what remained of Danzig's grain trade and the population of the city had plummeted to what it had been at the end of the fourteenth century.
Prussia's new territories were no great source of satisfaction on any level.
The Prussians were horrified to learn that in Pomerania and Danzig the surviving Polish nobility were reluctant to work for the new authorities and much preferred to lease out their estates to tenant farmers while they lived off the income in Warsaw.
Such an attitude merely confirmed Frederick's worst prejudices against the Poles.
Though he established a military academy at Chełmno in 1776 specifically for the sons of the Polish nobility, this was not consistent with his general line of thought.
Under Frederick Pomerania experienced intensive Germanisation.
Frederick, a man of limited imagination who thought himself to be the very model of a modern enlightened despot and who had travelled in Poland in his younger years, believed that the Polish nobles and gentry were fools and madmen, deluded Catholic warmongers who lived in a perpetual fog of political weakness and drunken anarchy.
The Polish peasants were at best, he thought, poor, lazy and dirty, exceptionally ignorant, negligent of social obligation and therefore of little use to either the military or industry in any civilised and modern state.
The very idea of Poland was an insult to everything Frederick thought Prussia stood for, and the only hope he held out for the Poles was that partition and Germanisation would turn them into useful  members of society.
He made the Poles on his territory pay double the level of taxes paid by Germans, encouraged the Poles to sell up and move out and refused to rent out Royal Estates to Poles, declaring that he would rather see Danzig merchants working Pomeranian soil.
It is hard to know who was the more aggrieved by this insult.
Frederick insisted that Polish nobles must either live on their estates in Prussia or sell up their holdings, and to this end he allocated state funds to purchase any Polish lands that came available.
He said he wanted to eliminate the ‘schlechtes polnisches zeug’, the bad Polish stuff, and he claimed that the Poles had brought this upon themselves by refusing to accept the new Prussian authority with good grace.
More by luck than good judgement Frederick's policies were effective.
As the Polish-Russian grain and timber was diverted away from Danzig, the number of Polish bankruptcies grew and the number of Polish estates on the market climbed steadily.
There was a drastic shift in the ratio of Polish to German nobility in and around Danzig.
In 1772, when Frederick had admitted to the Danzig Chamber that the population of Pomerania was mainly Polish, it is estimated that the German speakers formed only about 13 per cent of the Pomeranian noble element.
By 1800 they made up nearly 50 per cent of the total.
It is almost impossible to judge the attitudes of the non-noble Poles of Danzig and Pomerania at this time — and even less so the attitudes of the Kaszubians.
Numerically both the Poles and the Kaszubians were declining; socially they were at best second-class citizens.
Politically, the Danzig Poles and Kaszubians were leaderless and the departure of the gentry left them in the indifferent care of a German Catholic hierarchy.
They were also out of sympathy with the Protestant Germans who, though faintly alarmed at the poverty of the Polish peasantry, seemed unable to realise what part they themselves might have played in creating and maintaining these conditions.
The confusion and lack of leadership among the Pomeranian and Danzig Poles — and the almost total failure of the Polish peasantry to identify the Polish cause as their own — can be seen in the Pomeranian response to the 1794 Polish uprising, led from Kraków by Tadeusz Kościuszko.
Poles from the other areas of partitioned Poland rose up and fought for over eight months in support of his efforts to halt the dismemberment of the Polish state.
Only in Pomerania was there no such support.
Without a Polish middle or burgher class in Pomerania there was an enormous social and political chasm separating the Polish peasant and the noble Polish szlachta .
This gulf made the formation and manipulation of a specifically Polish identity in  Pomerania very difficult.
The two social groups had almost nothing in common: they lacked any common shared sense of a Polish past; they did not share a sense of common identity; and historically and geographically Warsaw was far too remote, and contact with it too inconsistent, ever to exert any power over the Pomeranian peasant imagination.
Grudging Polish promises to end serfdom, made when the szlachta thought this was the only concession that would rally the peasantry to them against foreign aggression, came too late and in any case lagged far behind the pre-emptive Prussian declarations ending serfdom.
In Pomerania, where in practice serfdom was to last almost a generation longer than in any other corner of Europe, the Prussians were able to prevent even a narrow coincidence of interests between the Polish nobles and peasants by inviting the nobles to leave and by inviting the peasants to become Prussians.
There was virtually no Polish middle class to act as a rallying point for the upper and lower classes, to act as a focus of opposition to Prussian policies.
Under these circumstances it was highly unlikely that the Poles and Kaszubes of Danzig would rally to the Polish cause.
Although technically the Treaty of Vienna guaranteed the Poles autonomy within Prussian law and government, in fact in Pomerania the idea was never put into practice.
For the Kaszubes and Poles of Danzig Poland was a distant idea only.
Most of them would never set eyes on the place and few felt any loyalty towards it.
For illiterate and landless serfs and peasants the language of their landlord made little difference to their lives.
Conditions of service on the estates were arduous and whether the landlord came from Berlin or Warsaw, whether he spoke German or Polish, it was certain that his agent would always make himself understood.
In 1797 the young Poles of Danzig did stage a street demonstration, but that was the limit of their effort to revive the Polish state, and the limit of their willingness to parade a Polish identity.
Warsaw was simply too distant and the Polish nobility too self-interested for the peripheral and unregarded Poles of Pomerania and Danzig seriously to consider dying for them.
Also the material benefits of Prussian citizenship had begun to show in improved living standards and educational opportunities.
The years 1794–1806 were something of a honeymoon for the Prussians and their Poles: a spirit of co-operation flourished as the Prussians sought to secure the affections of their Polish subjects.
Poles were appointed to administrative posts in local government, and the law courts attempted to accommodate requests for the use of the Polish language.
Some Polish judges were even appointed to district courts.
It was not uncommon for German children to be taught in Polish, and there was a principle in Pomerania of bilingual education.
Official notices were published in both languages until the 1870s.
By the time of Napoleon's war against Prussia and his defeat of Frederick William III's armies at Jena and Auerstadt in 1806, the people of Danzig were far from disloyal to the Prussian cause, far from willing to throw off Prussian rule, lest they be handed over to some form of Polish domination.
Rather than rise against Prussia, Danzig endured a 20-month siege by Marshal Lefebvre's Franco-Polish army.
After the siege there was a rapid polarisation of opinion within the city, which resulted in the absorption or departure of the remaining Polish gentry, so that by the end of the Napoleonic Wars Danzig and Pomerania, though still containing a very substantial number of Poles and Polish-speakers, were considered loyal to Prussian ideals and identity.
Ironically, by absorbing huge new areas of strong Polish identity in the years 1793–1807, the Prussians probably helped extend the idea of a Polish identity to Poles who up to then had simply thought of themselves as Polish-speaking Prussians.
In Kaszubia, Mazowia and Silesia the peasants referred to themselves as Kaszuby ,Mazury and Slęzaki rather than as Poles:Polak was a term reserved for the Polish nobility.
In most of the territories they occupied, the Prussians, by putting pressure on the peasantry to Germanise themselves, concentrated rather than diluted a Polish identity.
The way in which Germanisation was carried out gave to the newly released serfs, the put-upon peasantry, the tiny Polish middle class which felt itself to be discriminated against, and the ambitious and inflexible Polish nobility a rallying point — probably their only rallying point.
The Poles had nurtured the hope that the French would restore the old Polish state with Danzig attached as before, but Napoleon had other ideas.
He strung the Poles along to the very end in order to keep their enthusiasm for his cause and their manpower for his army.
Danzig became a Free City attached to the Grand Duchy of Warsaw — a Duchy that was grand in name only.
In effect Warsaw became a staging post on the road to Moscow and the Poles were little more than cannon fodder.
Most of the Poles who went to Russia in the belief that this would help to restore their country's independent existence never returned: of the 82,000 Poles who made up the Grand Armée's V Corps, only 2,300 survived the retreat from Moscow.
If Warsaw was a glorified recruiting post, then the same in miniature was true of Danzig.
A small amount of local capital was generated by the spending power of the garrison, and by the French decision to extend and modernise the city's walls and defences, but this was all brought to nothing when the  British Navy caused incredible damage by bombarding the city with Congreve Rockets.
Following the defeat of Napoleon in Russia the Russian Army laid siege to Danzig for over 10 months.
When the city finally surrendered the population had fallen to less than 16,000.
The Congress of Vienna returned Danzig to the Prussians, and for a short while it functioned as the administrative capital of West Prussia, with a corresponding growth in civil servants and officials.
In 1819, when Danzig had been the provincial capital for only three years, and for reasons that are unclear, the Prussians moved the function of administrative capital to Königsberg.
This decision, combined with the Prussian mismanagement of the waterways and consequent flooding, as well as high trade tariffs, caused rising unemployment which hit the city's Poles hardest of all.
It was becoming increasingly clear to the Prussians that they would have great difficulty in making their eastern possessions a financial success: the only way to make the eastern marches profitable was to exploit the poor natural resources to the limit and develop industrial capacity.
Industrialisation and the mechanisation of farming techniques would have inevitable knock-on effects within Prussian social structure, however, and the Junker land-owners — who dominated Prussian politics, the military and the agricultural economy, and who were the most entrenched and backward-looking group in Pomerania — could be counted on to resist all change.
Prussia in the 1820s and 1830s stood with one foot in the feudal, agricultural past and the other foot in the new age of industry.
It was an unfortunate combination.
Through the 1820s and 1830s there was increased contact with British and French industrial concerns.
Prussia became aware that it had lost parity with its allies from the Napoleonic years and determined to catch up by creating a series of technical schools — later to include Danzig's Technical High School for boys and the famous Conradinum — and by beginning to investigate and research industrial techniques.
They also set up a light-engineering works (one of a number throughout the Prussian east) at Dirschau (Tczew).
The Prussians found that the advanced industrial nations of the West were using their colonial possessions to fuel their industrial drive, and accordingly Prussia began to seek out markets that the British, French, Belgians and Dutch did not dominate.
The Seehandlung organisation, set up by Frederick the Great in 1772 to promote trade along the Prussian reaches of the Vistula, was expanded and reorganised to seek outlets for Prussian goods in Silesia, India, the West Indies, South America, China and the Balkans.
Increasing industrialisation in and around Danzig did the local Poles little good, however.
In 1832 the new Prussian Oberpräsident Edward Flotwell supervised the introduction of a property qualification into municipal elections — a manoeuvre that automatically increased the influence and power over the Poles of the German settlers, burghers and merchants.
In the 1850s a new electoral system with a complex arrangement for the election of an electoral college for each social class further downgraded the possibility of political intervention for the Poles.
By 1840 Poles were almost entirely absent from the lists of Danzig merchants, were only a small minority on the list of Danzig house-owners, and were thus almost totally excluded from public life and government of the city.
The peasantry and the  labourers had no voice at all, and only the few remaining Polish gentry had any representation in the upper house of the electoral college.
The Prussians had, it is true, introduced compulsory education for all 6–14-year-olds in 1825, and by 1850 some 82–5 per cent of all young Poles in the border districts, including Danzig and Pomerania, had received an elementary education, as opposed to 24 per cent in the Russian and Austrian sections of Poland.
But those who received this education did so in the German language, and those who made no progress in German could proceed no further than elementary school.
The Poles had maintained a very efficient educational system under a special national commission up to the time of the partition.
Polish schools were not physically suppressed, but were simply left outside the system of Prussian state subsidy.
After 1870 education for the Poles was seen as a way of bringing them within the German order, of lightening their Slav darkness by opening up to them the world of ‘civilisation’.
The Poles did not see things this way.
Increasingly they felt German education to be a way of excluding them from the experience of industrial and urban life, from the totality of modernisation.
With the single exception of the Polish Gymnazium in Kulm, the Germans had a total monopoly on higher education.
For Poles it was impossible to become educated and technically competent in the Polish language.
To insist on an overtly Polish identity was to exclude oneself from polite and educated Danzig society and to disqualify oneself from any job that promised social and economic advancement.
Under the Prussians education for the Poles was a mere down-payment for later, more thorough, Germanisation and absorption.
To cling to a Polish identity was to exclude oneself from the German monopoly on higher education and from all but menial employment in industry; given the rapid depopulation of the countryside it was also to insist on the right  to become and remain part of a backward, ignorant, illiterate, inward-looking agrarian people, stuck in a rural backwater with no access to the outside world, with scant interest from that world and little hope of progress.
It was not only the Junkers who misunderstood the processes at work and who felt both contempt and fear of the ‘backward’ Poles.
In 1859 Engels contemptuously referred to them as the ‘ruins’ of a people ‘no longer capable of a national existence’.
For him it was part of the natural order of things that a rising ‘larger nation’ like Prussia should absorb Poland and the Poles.
The only alternative was that Poland should maintain itself as an ‘ethnographic monument without political significance’.
Belated Prussian efforts to improve the dock facilities in Danzig and to modernise the port were aided considerably by the Great Flood of 1840 which altered the course of the Vistula and opened up a new river mouth through the delta.
The cramped dock area began to expand eastwards across the newly exposed terrain.
As West European industrialisation got under way, so the demand for goods manufactured in and around Danzig also began to improve: there was increased Prussian demand for armaments, chemicals, food, timber, clothing and shipbuilding to support the growth of industry in Western Prussia.
There was also a considerable improvement in international trade through Danzig.
Prussian industrialisation was part of a wave of change that was sweeping over the whole of Western Europe and which was just beginning to filter into Eastern Europe.
As capital was generated by French, Belgian, Dutch and British industrial power, so the new industrial middle classes began to demand luxury goods: the trade in furs from Poland and Russia improved massively and Manchester, which had previously exported cotton cloth and some Yorkshire manufactured woollen goods to Danzig in return for flax and hemp, now began to open up its own fur trade based on imports from the Baltic — Manchester's Danzig Street (which changed its name from Charter Street by residents' petition in the mid-1860s) commemorates the trade of this period.
In 1854 Ferdinand Schichau, who had constructed Germany's first steam dredger, and first screw-driven steam ship at his yards in Elbing, opened the Schichau Werft construction yard in Danzig, and this was closely followed by the extension of the Klawitter yards.
Canals and the inland waterways were of vital importance to Danzig: all of the main tributaries of the Vistula were navigable and the river trade, with its construction yards and various specialised professions, was very well developed.
In 1771 the completion of the Bromberg Canal had linked the Vistula with the Oder and  Berlin; the Dniepr-Bug Canal and the Dniepr-Niemen Canal (1775–84) opened up the possibility of river trade as far south as Kiew and the Black Sea.
The Augustów-Grodno Canal (1825–37) connected East Prussia and Danzig's immediate hinterland with Lithuania and the river Niemen.
The König Wilhelm Canal (1869–73) opened up a connection between the Kurisches Haff and Memel.
Prussian canal-building projects meant that by 1914 Danzig was linked to a network of waterways that allowed inland trade with the Rhine, Bordeaux, Le Havre, Brussels, Antwerpen, and northern Germany up to the Danish border.
By 1914 it was technically possible for a Danzig bargee to visit Bordeaux and the Black Sea with roughly equal facility.
However, while Danzig enjoyed these widespread trade contacts and reaped the benefit of the still massive river trade in Polish timber (16,949 log floats of 9 logs per float were rafted down the Warthe to Stettin or Berlin in 1871 alone) Western Europe had already moved on to develop its rail networks.
Britain, France, Belgium and Holland had been engaged in the process of capital accumulation from the formation of overseas empires and from the slave trade since at least the sixteenth century.
Prussia however had access to neither of these as a way of financing industrial change.
Also, Prussia was only one of a series of German states and as such could hardly take advantage of the rapidly developing and highly lucrative Atlantic trade.
While Prussia struggled to create a tariff union of German states — the first step on the road to forming a German nation-state — the Western nations were already involved in building up their as yet un-integrated but nevertheless substantial rail networks.
In general, the first growth of German, French and Belgian railways was about 30 years after the first British lines.
In contrast to the other states though, Germany was still a series of small states and principalities, and this made it very difficult to finance and develop the railway network.
The bulk of Germany's railways were established between 1848 and 1877, but even then they served the west of Germany far better than they served the east.
Danzig's first railway connection from Bromberg to the city's Main Gate, came into operation in 1852.
In the 1860s a line was built along the path of the old moat and then out to the new dock at Neufahrwasser (Nowy Port), and ten years later a second branch line went on up the coast to Koszalin.
In the 1890s the Central Station was constructed, and in 1905 two more branch lines extended among the factories and workshops of the Lower City, and a third snaked its way out over a drawbridge and a railway ferry to the island of Ostrów.
It was also reflected in the internal  development of the city.
In 1864 a horse-drawn tram service started, followed in 1895 by an electric tram system.
By 1870 the old city ramparts and defensive gateways had been torn down because they hindered the greatly increased flow of traffic.
Yet for all the growth of its port and shipyard facilities, the size of its herring fleet, the complexity of its transportation network, the growing popularity of the bathing beaches and Spa Cures in nearby Zoppot, Danzig was tied to a backward and unstable agricultural hinterland, dominated by the massively retrograde talent of the Junkers.
In many ways Pomerania is central to the processes that were at work in Prussia and Germany.
It was a marcher territory that produced extremely loyal Germans and abused and confused Poles.
What happened in Pomerania also happened elsewhere, but in Pomerania the processes were accentuated because the place was so far behind the rest of the world in its social and economic order, and because its mixed Polish and German population accentuated the clash between the rural and industrial identities and social orders.
Bismarck, chancellor, prime minister and architect of the German Reich, was a Protestant.
As such he was deeply suspicious of all Catholics, and especially of Polish Catholics.
Bismarck said he sympathised with the Polish position, but nevertheless believed that Germanisation meant the Poles would be emancipated and enriched by contact with German language and culture.
He believed that Germanisation would bring the Poles security and a place in the world that they could not otherwise expect.
He identified totally with the Prussian cause, and if to remain exactly as you are is an ambition, then he identified with Junker ambition too.
He had been born on a Junker estate at Schönhausen in Brandenburg in 1815, and his family had moved to Kniephof in Pomerania soon afterwards.
Bismarck held Pomerania in most particular regard all his life.
In 1876 he said the nationality problem in Eastern Europe was not ‘worth the healthy bones of a Pomeranian musketeer’.
It was an interesting remark on many levels: A.J.P. Taylor has said that the phrase was more revealing than Bismarck intended: ‘When he wanted to define Germany it was Pomerania on the Baltic, not the Rhineland, Bavaria or Austria which came into his mind.’
That the German leader should choose an area of mixed nationality as somehow typical of Germanness is interesting in itself.
It does not necessarily indicate the physical absence of Poles, but rather their invisibility to the Germans — even to those who lived there.
At the same time it also indicates a polarisation of national identities.
Perhaps the essential point to make is that of the ambiguity embodied in this Junker position.
If Bismarck could overlook  the Poles, how could a people whose political profile was so low, and whose organisation was so poor, possibly be a threat to German identity?
The answer was that Pomeranian Polish identity was no threat unless the Junkers decided that it was convenient for it to be so; the identity of the Pomeranian Poles was so peripheral to Polish national identity that politically these people were no threat at all.
In time the Pomeranian Poles would have undoubtedly been absorbed into the German-language community as their forbears had been in previous centuries.
However, the Junker need for an external threat required that a sense of otherness, of not being Prussian, of not speaking German, when it was not altogether invisible, should be a threat.
From about 1860 the European agricultural sector entered a period of crisis in which the baleful influence of the backward Prussian agricultural system and its links with the politics of the Prussian east were made abundantly clear: the mechanisms which the Junkers managed to hide from the German populace were at last revealed.
In Prussia the agricultural crisis was to reach its climax in the 1880s and 1890s, but its effects were still to be seen and felt well into the twentieth century.
All across Europe there was a movement of population from the country to the city, from the south to the north, from the east to the west.
In Eastern Europe this movement was related to the ending of serfdom and the growth of industry in the western regions of Germany.
The abolition of serfdom was staggered through the different parts of Poland.
The bulk of the Prussian peasants were released from service in the years 1811–50.
In Pomerania the general impoverishment and the already poor Pomeranian soil meant that very few peasants could gather together enough money to buy their own farm equipment — a necessary prerequisite for purchase of their land from the estate — nor could they ever manage to garner a purchase price that was often the equivalent of over 25 years' rent.
This, yoked with the survival of unpaid feudal service on the lord's land, the lord's continued control of woodlands, common land, open fields and meadows used for grazing, and the continued obligation of the tenant to consume only alcohol which had been distilled through the lord's own stills, meant that while in theory Prussian serfdom was abolished by 1850, in practice it was not really seriously undermined in Pomerania until the agricultural review of 1865.
Even then abolition was not completed until the early 1890s when the number of landless and dispossessed peasants and rural labourers increased dramatically.
During this period the population of Danzig rose from about 50,000 in the 1830s to about 70,000 by 1860.
A large number of  people released from bondage simply emigrated: between 1870 and 19141,200,000 Prussian Poles left Europe for America, Brazil and Canada.
Throughout the 1860s Poles and Germans had probably existed in roughly equal numbers in the border districts.
But by the 1880s the Poles outnumbered the Germans by two to one.
In Prussia as a whole there was a discernible and understandable population shift, an Ostflucht (literally: East flight) from the poorly developed Spartan provinces of the east to the more ‘civilised’, better developed and rapidly industrialising cities of the west.
By 1913 one third of all Dortmund industrial workers were émigré Poles.
In Prussia the crisis manifested itself in a variety of ways.
The Pomeranian Junkers began to complain that the end of serfdom had released the peasants they held in moneyless bondage to wander where they would.
This not only disturbed the Junker sense of social stability, but played havoc with their income since it opened up the estates to the market force of unfettered labour: the Junkers were obliged to acknowledge a world that they had been desperately trying to shut out.
Under pressure from the aggrieved Junkers, the Prussian government responded by pushing 30,000 Poles who lacked proof of Prussian citizenship across the border into Russian Poland in 1885.
The ending of serfdom in Pomerania coincided with Prussian efforts to increase the number of German settlers by granting land to those prepared to resist the Ostflucht and settle in the east.
The Prussian government passed legislation designed to Germanise landholdings in the border districts, but these laws were so badly framed and so crudely implemented that they had exactly the reverse effect from that intended.
A German peasant farmer moving to the east was obliged to pay one sixth of the profit of his labour to a landlord, and only those peasants who took on more than 6.4 hectares (16 acres) were given the opportunity to buy their land.
In Pomerania the average holding was about 5 hectares (13–14 acres) of very poor soil, and even with Herculean effort on the part of the farmer it was clear that the payment of one sixth of profits made purchase almost impossible.
Often a German settler, realising that his farm was too poor to yield the one-sixth levy required to keep his purchase, would offer instead free labour on the lord's demesne.
It has been estimated that in the years 1877–1904 70 per cent of Pomeranian farmland was held in large estates and only 30 per cent in peasant smallholdings of various kinds: about two-thirds of Pomeranian farmers were smallholders living in the most appalling poverty; their assets were non-existent or too small for them to  think of trekking westwards to look for factory work; they were too poor to pay cash for their land, and too impoverished for any bank to risk giving them a loan.
Their diet consisted mainly of potatoes, turnips, cabbage, beetroot, millet, buckwheat and rye, supplemented by wild fruit in the autumn and by concentrated hedge and verge scavenging to find edible grasses, wild cabbage, cress, linden leaves, horseradish, bitter-vetch, water lily, mushrooms, wild sorrel, nettles, comfrey, mallow and goose grass.
They rarely ate meat, and rather than consume butter, milk, meat, poultry and eggs, preferred to send any such produce to market.
Many of these people lived largely without the agent of money, and survived by bartering what excess produce they had.
Living outside the money economy, they had no access to the world of manufactured goods, still less to luxury goods.
The remaining one-third of Pomeranian farmers had rather larger self-supporting farms and enjoyed a reasonable degree of comfort.
They covered their costs and were able to transport their grain and produce to Danzig.
A tiny minority of landowners lived in enormous wealth and comfort, exacting feudal dues and enforced labour from farmers who had in effect become their tied peasants: these landowners still engaged in the grain trade as their families had done for generations, and as if they could think of nothing else to do.
In Danzig it was still possible for a merchant to make a small fortune from the grain and timber trades, but it was not considered wise to invest the profits in agriculture — either the farms were too small and the returns non-existent, or the estates were too ramshackle and labour-intensive to warrant investment.
As the area still had very little industry, the profit generated by trade and agriculture around Danzig was hardly ever invested locally.
Danzig merchants tended to invest their money in the new and growing industrial concerns of the west.
If this was not enough, the Poles in all three partition areas were enjoying a baby boom.
In 1840 there had been about 10 million Poles — by 1914 there were over 18 million.
Pomerania, with a population of over 100,000 Polish-speakers, was about 35 per cent Polish, and in spite of the flight from the land and the flight of the population to the industrial centres of the west, Pomerania was one of the few Prussian provinces to show a marked increase in its population, and almost all of that growth was attributed to the Poles.
In south-eastern Pomerania and the areas immediately around Danzig the Polish birth-rate was running at 36 per 1,000 of the population, which meant that by 1933 the Polish population of Pomerania had experienced a 28 per cent increase in a mere 15 years.
In the predominantly German districts of northwest  Pomerania, however, 14 of the 34 districts recorded a decline in their population in the same period.
The Poles, it seemed, were multiplying, while the Germans were deserting.
Although the number of Poles may have been on the increase there was very little sign in Prussia that they were organising to reinstate an independent Poland.
Indeed, if anything, they seem to have been too demoralised politically to organise effectively at anything more than a local level, and that in itself is testimony to the devastating effect of the Kulturkampf and Polenpolitik .
In 1864, after the 1863 uprising and the massive repression that followed its collapse, Julian Łukaszewski, a former Polish commissioner in the Prussian government, wrote a pamphlet despairing of the Polish people's ability ever again to control their own destiny:
…we don't even have the elementary conditions to start to develop our national economy on a large scale.
Where is the work force?
Where is the necessary capital?
Where are the communications routes on land and water?
Where are the credit institutions, banks, trade companies?
Where are the industrial, joint-stock, and insurance companies?
Where are the regulations for social relations?
Where is the spirit of enterprise?
Where, finally, are the people with professional education, the technicians, machinists and manufacturers to skilfully run the industries.
All this must be extracted from the governments that have invaded us.
The Prussians did not see, did not want to see, could not afford to see, this side of life in their border districts.
Throughout the 1870s the Prussian Lands began to restrict the use of the Polish language by removing it from schools, churches, courts and local government.
In 1871 the Prussians feared that their Poles might rise up against them — partly as a late reaction to the failed anti-Russian uprising of 1863, partly in protest at the incorporation of the Grand Duchy of Warsaw into the German Reich; they deprived the Poles of the right to print their own magazines, newspapers and almanacs, and shortly afterwards banned the publication and circulation of Polish poetry.
In Danzig and Pomerania, where the substantial Polish minority might have made it difficult to implement such a policy, there was a special dispensation.
In spite of this, however, Polish sermons were scrutinised by Prussian bishops, and Polish prayer books were confiscated.
In 1872, in an effort to eradicate Catholic influence in schools, the control of education passed to the state: the hymn ‘Boże coś Polskę’ was banned, and freedom of assembly and association were also severely curtailed.
In 1887 Polish was banned from all elementary schools throughout the Prussian east, and German language tuition was made compulsory.
Teachers were prevented  from joining any Polish cultural or Catholic societies, and German language teachers were given a special bonus if they volunteered for work in Polish-speaking districts.
When Polish priests protested at these measures and at the attempt by schools' inspectors to interfere in religious instruction, the government responded by arresting and exiling them.
By 1876 applicants for the German civil service had to pass a special exam in German culture, and German was compulsory in virtually every aspect of public life.
In 1885 Prussian Oberpräsident Möllendorf, who was widely regarded as pro-Polish, recommended a total ban on the Polish language, saying that only in this way was it possible to force the Poles to appreciate the benevolence and wisdom of German culture and administration.
In 1887 Polish was officially banned even from the few private bilingual schools of Pomerania, and children heard speaking Polish were threatened with public flogging.
In response to the massive changes that were taking place throughout Germany a whole series of patriotic clubs and societies grew up in the 1890s.
Hannah Arendt has linked the rise of both pan-Germanism and pan-Slavism with the ‘triumphant imperialist expansion of the Western nations’ in the 1880s, but it is clear that while pan-Slav ideas were confined in the main to the idea of restoring or gaining independence for the Slav subjects of Prussia and the Austro-Hungarian Empire, pan-German ideas ran in a quite different direction.
In the Reich the various German patriotic societies were designed to combat ‘Jewish influence’, which was seen to be both ethnically alien and racially inferior, and also to be at the very heart of the economic change that at once afflicted and enriched German society.
However, these organisations drew the bulk of their support from the Marcher territories, where anti-Semitism took second place to the fight against Polish influence.
The National Germanic League of Clerks (1893), the Agrarian League (1893), the Pan-German League (1886), and the Naval League were all fully operational by the end of the decade.
Of all the German patriotic associations that sprang up along the eastern borders in the 1890s it was the Ostmarkenverein, the Eastern Marches Society founded in 1894, that was to have the most profound impact on German border society.
The Ostmarkenverein was more generally known as the Haketa, after the initials of its founders: Ferdinand von Hansemann, Herman Kennemann and Heinrich von Tiedeman.
They were respectively a banker's son, a Junker and a retired army major, and between them they represented the whole range of Junker-middle-class collusion and delusion.
It was Haketa that was responsible for circulating and popularising Völkisch ideas of German historians  that were favourable to the extension of the Prussian state.
They stressed German title to the lands of Pomerania, Silesia and central Poland, saying that German settlement had predated Slav settlement.
They claimed that despite the hundreds of years of Polish independence, ‘the East’ owed what little civilisation it could muster to the efforts of the Germans.
They claimed the Goths who had settled along the Vistula and in the Ukraine as the founders of the Polish state, saying that rule and order had been brought to these lands over the heads of the drunken, idolatrous and stupid Polish peasantry.
Haketa said that the Slavs had German missionary priests to thank for their liberation from the depths of ignorance.
In 1914 Emmanuel Ginschel, echoing the Haketa line on the legitimacy of the Prussian partition of Poland and its continued control of its share of old Polish territory, wrote:
This once German land, which under Polish rule sank into misery and neglect, has been conquered for the German people by sword and plow.
It has been fertilised by German blood and sweat, and owes its culture to Germans.
For these reasons, we are masters here.
By 1901 Haketa had a membership of 20,000 — mostly drawn from small farmers, small businessmen, craftsmen, and small estate-owners of the eastern borders.
They were also recruiting among teachers and the Protestant clergy and among the Prussian civil service, employees of which were normally banned from belonging to political organisations, but whose membership was in this case overlooked.
Although it was convenient for the government to appear to be quite separate from Haketa, the relationship was so close that in practice it would be accurate to describe the organisation as an officially sanctioned and sponsored ‘tame’ pressure group.
Under popular ‘pressure’ from Haketa the German government extended laws forbidding the sale of land to Poles, sought out and expelled all non-Prussian Poles, and began to harass the increasingly effective and efficient Polish financial institutions with petty legalistic restrictions.
In 1901 Haketa persuaded the government to revive legislation forbidding the use of Polish in Pomeranian bilingual schools, and as the task of teaching the language fell increasingly to the Catholic Church, and the clergy felt obliged to give extended ‘Catechism’ lessons, so Haketa set about interfering in private language tuition too.
Their interference did not pass without resistance.
That same year there was a school strike in the small town of Września, near Poznań, among Polish pupils who refused to receive religious instruction or to say prayers in German.
The strike was only broken when the children were publicly flogged and their parents sent to jail.
The issue simmered on until 1906, by which time it was illegal for a Polish teacher to teach Polish history to Polish pupils in the Polish language: an estimated 60,000 elementary pupils refused to attend school.
The strikes spread.
By 1907 over 93,000 Polish pupils throughout the Prussian east were involved, and even in the normally pacific Polish community of Danzig there were street demonstrations with crowds chanting ‘Polish children to Polish schools’.
The strike was broken only by widespread flogging and imprisonment, but it was clear that if the Danzig Poles — by tradition the meekest of them all — were willing to protest, then Polish resistance as a whole must have stiffened considerably.
In spite of Polish protest the Haketa continued and extended the range of its work.
It Germanised the few Polish street, town and place names, undertook propagandist ‘research work’ on historical subjects, supervised the Germanising of family names among those Poles who decided to take the plunge into German identity, took down Polish-language warning notices about venereal diseases from public toilets and instituted a system of bonuses for all teachers and civil servants prepared to move and settle in the eastern provinces.
Neither land nor language was the real issue, however.
These were the mere surface indicators of deeper problems, the media through which the deep, internal cultural and economic pressures at work within German society showed themselves.
One of the most spectacular failures within the Prussian Polenpolitik was that of the Ansiedlungskomission or Royal Prussian Colonisation Commission.
This body had been set up by Bismarck in 1886, when it was estimated that if the Ostflucht continued, 3 million Germans would have left their homes in the Prussian east by the start of the twentieth century.
The Commission was widely believed to be the only hope of reversing the Ostflucht and was allocated vast sums of money by the Prussian government.
Its instructions were to buy up Polish land and estates for resale to German settlers at massively reduced prices.
In general the effect of the Commission's inflated purchasing ability was to drive up the price of land in the borders.
Farmers were confident that if they sold to the Commission there would be no great rush of Germans to buy it, and the Commission could not sell the land to the Poles.
The inflation of land prices encouraged farmers who wanted to remain in the east to sell to the Commission only to buy the same land back again at a reduced price and pocket the difference.
The Commission slowly realised that there was a second loophole in their work: on paper the scheme looked simple enough, but in fact the Prussian  government had mistaken its own hostility towards the Poles for that of the general populace — with unexpected results.
Polish and German farmers collaborated throughout the Prussian east to extract huge sums of money from the Commission through the sale and resale of the same property several times over — each time at an ‘improved’ price.
A German farmer would ‘sell out’ to a Polish farmer who would then sell the land to the Commission; the original farmer would then buy back the property.
Both German and Polish farmers made a tidy profit from the deal, and on paper it looked as if the Commission had ‘Germanised’ a farm.
In 1886, in direct response to the founding of the Colonisation Commission, the Poles created the Bank Ziemski to promote Polish counter-colonisation.
This bank ran into financial difficulties almost immediately, and in 1892 was bailed out from certain bankruptcy by credits and low-interest loans from the conciliatory government under Caprivi.
Inevitably, government help undermined the bank's ability to do the job for which it  had been established, and in 1897 the Poles opened the new Land Purchase Bank.
The Commission so stirred the Poles, that while it had initially been possible for them to buy up Polish estates for German settlement, by 1898, when the Prussian Landtag voted an additional 100 million marks for the Commission's use, the Poles had already begun to see the sale of land to the Commission as a crime against the nation and had begun to organise their own agricultural co-operatives and credit unions.
In the years 1880–1913 the number of land purchasing agencies and co-operatives associated with the Land Purchase Bank was to rise from about 120 to nearly 300.
The crucial difference between the Germans and the Poles who profited from the efforts of the Colonisation Commission and the Polish banks through the sale and resale of farms and estates was that, while the Germans would eventually sell up for good and move away westwards to retire on money invested in Germany's growing industrial enterprises, the Poles would stay put, use their money to consolidate their farms and purchases, and deposit their savings in the Land Purchase Bank.
In 1904 the German government passed a law that forbade the construction of buildings and dwellings on any Polish-owned land which the Colonisation Commission might want to buy.
The idea was to prevent the Poles who managed to buy land from being able to inhabit it.
The result was that one Michał Drzymała, who purchased land in Wolsztyn, circumvented the rules only by living in a caravan for nearly ten years.
The Colonisation Commission did more harm than good even by Prussian standards.
By putting pressure on the Poles and  Kaszubians to Germanise themselves, it stimulated the very sense of Polish identity it had sought to suppress.
Throughout the Prussian east a wide range of specifically Polish cultural organisations sprang up in response to this pressure: the Slav Literary Society (1836), the Wroclaw Flute Choral Society (1890), the Sokoł Physical Culture Society (1894), and the Association of Polish Boy Scouts in Germany (1912).
In Danzig the new-found Polish identity even allowed a Polish language newspaper —Gazeta Gdańska — to flourish from 1891 onwards.
As Polish financial institutions became more effective it was no longer necessary for Poles who fell on hard times to sell their land to the Germans.
Instead, it became possible for the Poles to compete on the open market and to bid against the Commission with capital made available by the Polish banks.
The fact that Poles could now compete with the Prussians ‘reconciled profits with patriotism’.
By 1907 Polish financial institutions, though cramped by legal restrictions, had become so effective that finance flowing through them allowed almost every Polish farm in Pomerania of 5 hectares or more access to some form of farm machinery on a shared or collective basis.
The Colonisation Commission became more and more frustrated.
Between 1885 and 1905 over 830,000 Germans left the Prussian east.
The Commission resorted to desperate, grand-scale measures: along the valley of the river Netze as far east as Bromberg it settled a solid block of 22,000 Germans in an effort to prevent Polish land purchases in the area.
The Commission found that it could no longer find any Poles or Kaszubians who were willing to sell their land, and so began to turn to the purchase and resale of Junker estates.
The Junkers, as usual, were badly in debt.
While industrialisation and capitalist economics had advanced into the Vistula delta region, into Central Poland, Russia and the western regions of Germany, the Junkers had remained fixed in a stubbornly feudal corner of the world.
Having borrowed money to maintain their vast estates they found that the estates were too inefficient to generate the income to pay back the loans.
The Prussian banks found that they had been lending increasing amounts to the Junkers to maintain a lifestyle rather than to finance the modernisation of facilities and improve agricultural methods.
The Junkers drained the banks to the very limit of their credit and were then forced to sell off plots of land to repay the interest on their debts and refinance their lifestyle.
By 1900 it must have been increasingly obvious that the policies of Frederick and Bismarck were not producing the desired effect.
But the Germans did not relent; indeed the height of their efforts  came in the years 1900–9.
Competition between the Poles and the Commission had driven up the price of land in Pomerania by over 100 per cent by 1900, so that land the German farmers did not want to farm cost twice as much as farmland anywhere else in Germany.
In 1912 it was estimated that since 1886 the Commission had purchased only 60,000 hectares of Polish-owned land and 100,000 hectares of German land in Poznania and West Prussia.
In 1921 a report placed before the Prussian Diet revealed that of the 460,884 hectares of land purchased by the Commission up to that time, only 27.4 per cent had come from the Poles; a staggering 72.5 per cent had been purchased by the Commission from German estate owners.
In 1906 the Colonisation Commission estimated that it had brought over 14,000 German families to the east in the 20 years of its existence, and claimed to have removed over 40,000 Poles.
Yet far from cowing the Poles, the Commission had made them more nationalist and more determined to resist than ever.
In 1906 the Colonisation Commission, with the enthusiastic backing of the National Liberal Party, the Pan-German League, Haketa, the National Germanic League of Clerks and the Agrarian League, decided that the only way to resolve the issue in Germany's favour was by a policy of expropriation of Polish-owned land.
In 1908, against fierce opposition from the majority of Prussian property-owners, the Catholic Centre Party and the Union of West German Liberals, Prince Bülow equipped the Colonisation Commission with the legal power to seize Polish property, and allocated increased government funding — including a substantial bribe to the Junkers to persuade them to use German rather than the cheaper Polish labour.
At the same time the Prussians hamstrung Polish opposition by making the use of the Polish language illegal at all public gatherings.
Yet still the Prussians delayed introducing expropriation to Pomerania until May 1912 lest they provoke an uprising, and while they bought up only four estates totalling over 6,624 hectares of land, they paid more than double the market rate.
It is estimated that in the years 1896–1913 German landholdings declined by over 98,000 hectares, 20,000 of which were in and around Danzig.
While the Danzig Poles were thought to be docile and largely invisible, it is clear that their slumbering sense of identity had been roused by anti-Polish policies.
In spite of the obvious malice of the Prussian and German governments, the Poles still favoured a peaceful resolution rather than a bloody revolution.
They insisted on fostering legal forms of  opposition and on social rather than political resistance.
Although the Poles participated in the Reichstag, in the Prussian Diet and in the North German Union Parliament, their main areas of activity lay in the co-operatives, culture clubs, in popular education societies, reading rooms, choirs, orchestras and libraries that grew up in the 1880s; in Catholic social organisations, in the physical culture movement and in the popular Polish-language daily newspapers like the Grudziądz Codzienny .
It was through these avenues of expression, and through the admirably restrained quality of their protest that the Poles earned the sympathy of their German co-religionists.
Opposition from German Catholics was one of the main reasons for the brutal policy of expropriation being largely suspended.
The Kaszubian people who lived along the western Danzig suburbs were badly affected by the changes of Prussian and German rule.
For the most part they had been one of Europe's invisible, historyless, subject peoples.
They speak a Polabian dialect of the Pomeranian group of Slav languages, closely related to Wendish (Sorbian), Serbian and the vanished Slovincian dialect, all of which are/were related to Polish.
The Kaszubes are part of the ancient complex of Slav tribes who had occupied the southern Baltic shores right up to the Danish borders some time around the fifth and seventh centuries AD.
In spite of everything that history had thrown at them since then the Kaszubes had remained in their chosen place.
Subject to invasions and to the steady and relentless pressure to Germanise or Polonise themselves they had watched their language and culture dwindle away as the other Pomeranian cultures had done before them.
By 1928 the Kaszubes numbered around 110,000, and they and the few thousand speakers of Leban dialect were the last survivors of the original Slav settlers of Pomerania.
Neither German nor Polish, the Kaszubes were then (and still are) a stubbornly insular and agrarian people, thoroughly resistant to change.
Sir Robert Donald, writing between the two world wars, described them as: ‘a somewhat primitive community.
They have no ideals.
They are devoid of initiative in political action, are content to be led, and are easily exploited.
They want to cultivate their fields; to live peacefully under conditions which suit their habits and characteristics.’
At one time the Kaszubians and their Pomeranian kin had been part of a powerful independent principality: their territory had stretched from the gulf of Danzig westwards to Słupsk (Stolp) and the river Słupia (Stolpe), where the small town of Dębnica Kaszubska (literally: Kaszubian Oaks) still survives.
Kaszubia, even if it was under constant German pressure, remained an identifiable area of Slav settlement centred on Kartuzy (Karthaus) and covering the northern edge of the Tuchler Heide (Bory Tucholskie), present day Chojnice (Könitz) and Tuchola (Tuchel), Kościerzyna, Bytów (Bütow), Wejherowo and Puck (Putzig).
The more fertile areas of farmland along the coast had long since been taken over by German farmers.
The Kaszubes were smallholders, farm labourers, tradesmen, marketwomen or fishermen.
Those that worked the land grew rye and potatoes, beetroot, blueberries, apples and cherries; they fattened pigs and kept large flocks of geese who were indifferent to the Pomeranian damp.
The Kaszubes had not been interested in the fate of Poland at the time of the partitions, and had been reasonably well satisfied by early Prussian rule.
Later, as the Prussians revoked statutes governing the activity of the Jews and laws preventing usury, the Kaszubian farmers began to find themselves heavily in debt.
As Frederick's policies turned into those of Bismarck's Kulturkampf , the Catholic Kaszubians found further cause for alarm.
Their fears were not allayed by restrictions on the Polish language, since the Prussians made no distinctions between Kaszubian and Polish.
In the 1890s the Kaszubians emerged from the fog of feudal serfdom and manorial labour.
For them it was only very slowly that seasonal and migratory work was replaced by the idea of emigration to Canada or America.
As the Poles organised themselves to combat the increasingly virulent Germanisation policies of the new German Reich, so cash flowed into the newly created and increasingly efficient Polish Land Banks.
With financial backing the Poles were able to compete very favourably with the Prussian Colonisation Commission for Kaszubian land.
As a result of Kaszubian naivety Polish land-dealers and banks were able to buy up 35,000 acres of Kaszubian-owned land in the years 1896–1905.
Prussian law made it almost impossible for the Kaszubians who wanted to expand their holdings to do so by buying land from Germans.
Kaszubian farmers felt that they could never raise enough money to compete with both the Poles and the Prussian Colonisation Commission for good quality land, and thus stood no real chance of ever turning their smallholdings into profitable concerns.
The Kaszubians came under strong pressure to Germanise under Frederick the Great, and again under Wilhelm II in the early years of the Reich.
However, it took them a long time to see an ally in the Poles.
Since the Kaszubes lacked any political organisation or ambition and had no recognition for their language, hardly any literature of their own and barely any sense of a common  Kaszubian identity, the Poles thought of the Kaszubians as a joke and paid them little heed.
It came as something of a shock to the Poles to realise that the Kaszubians saw no difference between selling their land to a Pole or selling it to a German.
Increasing pressure over Germanisation policies probably prevented any real unpleasantness between the Poles and Kaszubians, however.
Hieronym Dudowski, that rare creature, a Kaszubian poet, doubtless caused much scratching of heads when he coined his slogan ‘No Kaszubia without Poland — No Poland without Kaszubia’, but slowly the Kaszubians did come to see their own survival as lying in the resurrection of an independent Poland rather than in the straightjacket of Prussian-German citizenship.
For the Kaszubes released from the land anchor of serfdom or property at the end of the nineteenth century, the natural focus of population drift was neither Berlin nor Warsaw, but Danzig.
Their increasing presence in the city was signalled by the congregation of small traders and migrant vendors on the square between the Stadt Archiv and the main Railway Station, and in time the square became known as the Kassubischer Markt.
Pomerania was still experiencing the flight from the land into the cities over 40 years after its main impact in the rest of Europe, and it was only in the years 1925–33 that the mainly German-speaking Pomeranian towns of Lauenburg, Bütow, Rummelsburg, Neustettin, Belgard, Kolberg, Köslin and Stolp expanded with the absorption of country dwellers.
Danzig too was affected and by 1880 its population had risen to 109,000.
In the years after the partition of Poland Pomerania had become increasingly divorced from the bulk of the Polish population; the policies of Germanisation and of steady cultural absorption had done their work.
Even if the Prussian Colonisation Commission had failed to drive the Poles out entirely, many of the old Slav survivors of the original settlement of Pomerania had been drawn into the German language orbit.
In 1750, although Pomeranian Słupsk had already become German Stolp, it had been possible to say that east of a line drawn from the tiny Pomeranian fishing hamlet of Rowy to the hamlet of Tuchomie, Polish or various Slav dialects were spoken.
By 1830 the line of the Slawische Sprachgrenze or ‘Slav speech border’ had been pushed further east: Rowy had become Rowe, Lębork had become Lauenberg, the Łupawa river had become the Lupow.
By 1850 Smołdzino had become Schmolsin, Łeba had become Leba, Wierzuchino had become Wierschutzin, Sasino had become Sarbskie.
By 1910 Danzig had a population of about 175,000.
The Danzig  administrative district had a total population of 315,281 Germans, 9,491 Poles, 2,124 Kaszubes and 3,021 assorted bilingual and other peoples.
In Danzig and the eastern parts of Pomerania combined, the population consisted of 919,102 Germans, 555,337 Poles, 106,598 Kaszubes and 20,456 bilingual and other peoples.
Detailed analysis of the 1910 Prussian census returns and the 1911 survey of primary schools shows, however, that there were huge differences in the location and concentration of Poles and Germans.
Danzig's northern and western districts had as high as 60–100 per cent Polish population, while south of the city the numbers fell to between 10 and 15 per cent.
To the east of the city and across the Vistula delta the number of Poles fell to between 0.5 and 10 per cent.
Eastern Pomerania, however, the area that was eventually to become the Polish Corridor was 60–100 per cent Polish, while the Pomeranian districts of Lębork and Słupsk were by this time only 0.5–10 per cent Polish.
Western Pomerania had become almost entirely Germanised, and had a Polish population of less than 0.5 per cent.
It was inevitable that the confrontation between industrial and rural cultures, German and Polish languages, between folk and high cultures, between distinct religious, social and political allegiances should produce envy, suspicion and even malice.
Yet in Pomerania the Poles and most of the native Germans had come to accept the intermingling as perfectly natural and of no special significance.
German and Polish peasants and farmers lived side by side without producing unendurable national conflict within their communities, without producing enduring hatreds.
The real pressures on these people were not racial but political, and their real struggle was almost entirely economic.
Yet even the economic tensions that existed in the villages around Danzig failed to produce results that showed any real or clear-cut and intrinsically national difference in their impact on one group as opposed to another, and failed to polarise Germans and Poles in any clear-cut political or national sense.
The German middle classes and the German Catholics in particular knew that the Prussian Poles were no great threat to the state, yet in spite of their protests, the Junker-dominated Government found it essential to work through crude Völkisch opinion to maintain itself and divert the impending revolution.
The growth of German industry, the flight from the land, the Ostflucht and the ending of serfdom had all broken the bonds of the Prussian feudal system; had caused a massive upheaval in terms of social and geographical mobility; had caused a radical change and development in German class- and national consciousness, and had created problems of identity  deep within the German consciousness, precisely because they took place much later than in the west European nations.
Germany's position on the developmental ‘gap’ between East and West Europe, between the feudal and industrial worlds, meant that Germany was subject to fear of Western competition and envy of Western colonial markets; the proximity of poorly developed lands to the East gave Germany the opportunity to rectify its lack of colonial holdings and to sink its internal problems in external conquest.
To the Colonisation Commission and its supporters the start of the First World War offered a solution to all their problems.
Here at last was the opportunity for almost unlimited eastward expansion.
Following the seizure of the Russian section of partitioned Poland in 1916 and the creation by the Germans of a new ‘Polish state’ based on the old Congress Kingdom of Poland, it was suggested that the entire Polish population of Prussia and Silesia should be expelled into this new satellite state, and that Germany should then repopulate its borders with colonists from the western districts, with recalled settlers from Russia, the Ukraine, Hungary and Romania.
Only the threat of revolution and the defeat of Germany prevented the plan from being put into action, but it was a plan that was to surface again under the Nazis.
There can be little doubt that if the Prussians had not diverted social and economic pressure into anti-Semitic and anti-Polish fears along the eastern borders, the pressures of industrialisation, democracy and socialist thought would have clashed with the government's determination to support the Junkers and with the Junkers' manipulation of Völkisch opinion.
It was an impossible balancing act: the Junkers were after industry and a highly developed industrial working class without democracy or social revolution and without any devolution of ancient privilege.
It was a balancing act that could only be accomplished by constant recourse to the ‘threat’ of communist revolution, the economic power of the Jewish presence and the racial and nationalist danger of the inferior Poles.
Yet the Germans, by their insensitivity in these matters, actually created the very spectres they sought to exorcise; they conjured a growing Polish national feeling where virtually none had existed before.
The failure to find trade outlets in a world dominated by the French, British, Belgian and Dutch colonial holdings led Germany to penetrate the Slav east — the Balkans in particular— but there, as in Prussia, they did no more than provoke Slav nationalism.
After the defeat of 1918 the policies of Frederick, Bismarck and Wilhelm II were to be taken up and extended quite logically; the search for identity, for colonial  holdings, the logic of industrial expansion, the ‘question’ of the eastern marches would all be solved and resolved in the Endlösung .
This ‘Final Solution’ of Germany's problems was to harness German industrial power to a regressive, atavistic and murderous renewal of the drive to the east under Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party.
Polenpolitik und Kulturkampf
Nationalism, like capitalism, is the very bedrock of European organisation: nationalism of one sort or another constitutes the building blocks for the construction of markets, the creation of transport networks, tariff barriers, for banking systems, for economies of scale in industry and business, for defining which internal and which external markets are to exploited and to what degree.
The obsession with homogeneous populations and monocultural, monolingual societies has been a feature of life only since capitalist economics forced a uniformity of workforces and markets.
For the most part, when Europe was a collection of city states, dukedoms and principalities, these societies were far from uniform in their language, dialect and religion.
While the phenomenon of the unitary state is relatively recent, in Eastern Europe, where the process of industrialisation and capitalist organisation arrived late, the surviving multicultural and multilingual societies were purged and simplified very late and with all the vigour that technology could muster.
It is difficult to divorce the changes taking place in the fabric of Danzig's social and political life from the wider application of Prussian policies in the eastern marches.
Indeed the changes wrought by the Prussians were to have enormous consequences for the formation of nationalist opinion in the city after the First World War, and it is important to see the extent to which these policies provided the basis of German identity and political purpose in the east, and provoked the very Polish nationalist response they supposedly sought to suppress or prevent.
If German anti-Semitism was the ‘bastard child of the union between German nationalism and Christian anti-Semitism’ then it must also be said that German nationalism was the offspring of military ambition and industrialisation.
German nationalism was very largely a search for a lost, elusive, mythical unity with which to bind up the German states in a re-animated, re-invented version of German history.
Napoleon's armies handled the Prussians very roughly every time they met, and at the battle of Jena in 1806 a whole series of  Prussian myths had evaporated in defeat.
The Prussians lacked political, military and economic power against the might of revolutionary France.
The rout of German self-opinion meant that while Britain, France, Holland and Belgium were busy shaking off the last vestiges of feudal restraint in order to industrialise, the Prussian reaction to defeat was to define their contribution to the world as Kultur — a commodity that was best seen as the absence of change.
Progress was defined as the continued existence of a lack of change, and as far as the Junker lords were concerned the variety of civilisation represented by Western European societies was conspicuous for the absence of specifically German Kultur .
Nevertheless, Napoleon's victories over the Prussians meant that the German states were opened up to foreign and revolutionary influences.
Napoleon simplified the great patchwork quilt of minor German states and principalities, swallowed up a series of Free Cities, abolished a series of Church states and pushed the Germans into modern Europe, whether they liked it or not.
He also set about the forced emancipation of the Jews.
By bringing within German identity a group that had traditionally been considered unalterably ‘alien’ he caused alarm and resentment against French interference in German affairs.
French and Jewish ‘influence’ went hand in hand for many Germans and allowed Völkisch opinion on the matter to flourish: slowly but surely the word Völk came to mean not simply ‘people’, but also ‘populist’, and to imply a sense of common identity and of racial superiority over those peoples who needed the French to emancipate them.
In spite of their divided, defeated and reactionary Kultur , the Germans came to see themselves as people who needed no emancipation.
With the defeat of Napoleon the German states reversed emancipation of the Jews.
Only in Prussia and the eastern border districts was the emancipation not revoked for the simple reason that the Junkers needed the Jews to operate between the Prussian nobles and the German peasants, and as go-betweens for the Prussian Poles.
With such a poorly developed social structure the Jews were very important to Prussian Poland: without their skills Prussian society could not hope to make Ost-Elbian society more hospitable and attractive to settlers and could hardly hope to persuade the border Poles to become Germans.
Many observers supposed that the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789 would force the Junkers to embark on a programme of liberalisation and reform lest they should find themselves facing a similar threat.
However, the Junkers, instead of facing up to the industrial, economic and social changes that  were sweeping Europe, preferred instead to set about the ruthless suppression of any and every gesture of sympathy for the French revolutionaries, and they took military action against the few tiny peeps of protest that emanated from Pomerania.
In 1848 Prussian peasants rose up to put an end to serfdom and to pledges of service to their landlords.
Engels believed that the ‘callous, narrow-minded and conceited’ Junkers had learned from the French Revolution that the system they maintained was doomed, but in reality the Junkers crushed the rising and insisted on ‘service’until an agricultural review had been conducted in 1865 — after which they abandoned serfdom with great reluctance.
As Antonio Gramsci pointed out, the movement of 1848 failed because of the scanty bourgeois concentration in Germany, and also because the question of the renewal of the state was intertwined with the reaction to the national question.
In the years that followed, the German bourgeoisie gained considerable economic and industrial power, but did not struggle against the Junkers since they regarded them as the very backbone of German society; the Junkers, even though they were already ‘pensioners of economic history’ were a convenient rallying point for Völkisch opinion and as such had no particular reason to adapt to the changing economic structure of Europe or Germany.
Instead they acted as a brake on German economic power by milking the state of subsidy as if it had been set up for that purpose alone.
Prussian reaction to the French Revolution and the advent of modernity was a headlong flight into the past, and an expression of firm resistance to the new order.
In Pomerania this reaction took the form of an even tighter grip on the feudal peasantry and serfs of the great estates.
Engels was at a loss to explain the Junker refusal to accept that after the French Revolution they could never again command the total obedience and respect they had once enjoyed from a cowed and illiterate peasantry.
Junker resistance to the abolition of serfdom, their mistrust of the new powers of industry and their blank incomprehension when faced with the idea that their estates could be run more profitably on other than feudal lines set them on a course that was to have a profound impact on German history.
The failure of the Prussian and German people to follow the successful example of the French in a revolution from below meant that in 1870 they were forced to accept the unification of Germany by the reactionary Junker powers.
That is, a revolution from above, a revolution guided not by the ambition of the bulk of the population, but by the interests of the landed aristocracy and the military.
The unification of Germany protected the lifestyle of  the Prussian Junkers — indeed, the Junkers' need to protect themselves and their lifestyle from the disrupting effects of outside economic competition through the creation and extension of a tariff union had been one of the major components in the formation of the German state.
The Junkers, by leading the German unification, were able to enshrine their own position.
They made deals with heavy industry and government to extract huge subsidies to maintain their outmoded and inefficient estates and they gained tariff protection for their expensive and inefficiently produced foodstuffs.
The Junkers also set about diverting social pressures that emerged from the spread of industrial and urban society and the creation of national identity away from socialist revolutionary solutions into naval and military expansion, anti-socialism, and the manufacture of a threat from the east that justified the maintenance of traditional German life — a life that was, of course, best represented in the continued existence of the Junkers.
Eventually these ideas coalesced into the belief that Germany's rise as a new state and as an industrial power was being hampered by uncertainty over the unreliable national loyalties of the Slav peoples in the east, by the back-stabbing machinations of the Jews inside Germany, and by the threat of communism that came in both Slav and Jewish forms.
Vested interests in Germany saw only what they wanted to see: namely that the Junkers were the traditional political and military leaders of German society, that they had brought about German unification and that this would make Germany into an industrial power of the first order.
The Junkers engineered the belief that any attempt to ditch them would leave Germany prey to communist take-over, to Jewish exploitation and subversion, and to a flood of Slav immigrants.
In a blatant lie the Junkers argued that their massive estates were vital to the German economy and to the country's ability to support itself.
Yet the Junkers did not have things all their own way.
The growth of political parties and pressure groups meant that there was a non-socialist, non-revolutionary challenge to their power.
The German urban commercial and industrial middle classes, unlike the rural peasantry, were far from being the cowed, feudal illiterates that the Junkers would have liked them to be.
Yet to a large extent it was a question of symbiosis.
The Junkers tolerated the troublesome middle classes only because they guaranteed the Junkers their place in German society; the middle classes looked up to the Junker traditional leadership, and regarded them as the German image of itself.
The Junker tradition gave Germany direct contact with its historical purpose and its ancient drives.
For their  part the urban middle classes tolerated the Junkers because they guaranteed the shape, content and continuance of German middle-class life and ambition over the vast bulk of the rural German population.
Both the Junkers and the German middle classes created a focus for their ambition and discontent.
That focus lay outside Germany and outside their own class.
Together the Junkers and the middle classes located the cause of their anxieties about Germany, their reaction to industrialisation and problems with the formation of national identity as lying outside German nationality, in the threat to German nationality.
The defeat of Napoleon left Germany with a problem half solved.
The German states were aware of the need for change, but found that no matter how they tried, the better organised markets of Western Europe were very hard to penetrate.
The successive wars between the German states and France might be seen as the result of increasing German frustration over failed attempts to reach these markets.
In most of the West European colonial powers the alliance between mob and capital to form a bridge between nationalism and racism worked to ship internal pressures abroad to the colonies.
The colonies in turn acted as a buffer in the ups and downs of trade.
Germany, however, had no such outlet or buffer.
The connection between racism and nationalism had no such outlet simply because Germany had no successful colonial holdings.
The comparative lateness of German industrialisation meant that German capital had neither outlets in the colonies nor a slave trade to generate the further capital necessary to finance industrial development.
Increasingly, as penetration of the West European markets on any large scale failed to materialise, the German states looked eastwards to the less socially advanced, less well-organised societies along their borders.
The German states in the years before the formation of the Reich sold largely to one another, and this brought pressure to bear on ‘unfair’ Jewish trade.
The eastern marches were seen as a means by which internal German social and economic pressure could be relieved, where economic expansion was far more feasible than competition with France and Britain.
The Jews of Poland in particular were to absorb the shock of the German economic drive to the east since it was often conducted by emancipated German Jews — and this in turn fostered Polish anti-Semitism.
That the Polish Jews were socially, politically and economically quite distinct from German Jews only made the business easier, since the two groups were at loggerheads with each other.
Increasing pressure on the Poles to Germanise themselves, and the corresponding Polish reaction in both compliance and  defiance, were all part of the impact of capitalist industrial organisation as it spread from the first comers of Western Europe, to the second rank of industrialising nations — to Germany, Japan and Italy in particular— and through them to their potential empires and marcher territories.
Industrialisation, the foundation of the German state and the growth of national identity were all closely linked.
For all the surface change that accompanied the industrialisation of Prussian and German society the social and political pressures that emanated from the Junkers on these issues remained uniform and constant.
The Prussian Poles had little chance to exploit any crisis in Prussian affairs.
The uprising of 1848 gave them an opportunity to alter their status, but they did not take it and by and large seem to have accepted that industrialisation meant inevitable Germanisation.
However, the Junkers, military, civil service and politicians chose to react to the Polish uprisings of 1830, 1846, 1848, 1863 and 1905 — which took place in the Russian and Austrian sectors — by seeing, not a social and political movement that harked back to French revolutionary practice, and which aimed only in part at the restoration of the Polish state, but a Polish threat to Prussian and German identity.
The Junkers determined to suppress political protest by reference to a mysterious external enemy whose nationals — ungrateful wretches!— were to be found on Prussian and German soil.
The suppression and control of internal and external enemies became a useful safety valve for German society, but in practice there was little in the way of a genuine Polish threat for the Prussians to fear.
The Poles of the Prussian marches had been under pressure to Germanise themselves for centuries.
Partition had cut off the Pomeranian Poles from the areas of Poland that might have sustained a more confident sense of Polish national identity.
There can be little doubt that if the Prussians and Germans had not attempted to force them to become Germans, then in time the Pomeranian Poles and probably the majority of Prussian Poles would have allowed themselves to become Germanised.
Germany was too desperate about its own sense of identity and too bound up in attempting false solutions to its internal problems to realise this.
The flight of large numbers from the German east to the increasingly industrialised western districts revealed, for those willing to see, the entrenched problems of the Prussian eastern marches.
Without industry and rapid social development, the eastern lands were simply too unattractive and severe to Germanise with any ease.
The Prussians could not industrialise the east because local  commerce did not generate profits large enough to finance industrial investment, and because local agriculture could not support the bulk of the population at more than subsistence level.
Increased agricultural production was only possible by using intensive farming methods, rather than the traditional method of leaving fields fallow one year in three.
Yet it was clear that intensive farming was not possible on the poor Pomeranian soil.
The Prussian government could have forced agricultural change by opening up its borders to competition from cheap Russian grain, thus undercutting the Junkers and forcing them to modernise and/or change over to dairy farming.
The Junkers, predictably, wanted none of this and their interests in the government, civil service and the military persuaded the government to continue shoring up the ailing Ost-Elbian estate system through continued tariff protection, artificially high grain prices and a policy of grants and loans.
After 1870 the German Reich, dominated by Prussia, proved equally incapable of cutting subsidy to the Junkers.
It must have been clear to the Prussian government that if it had not been for government subsidy the Junker estates would have collapsed under their own weight long ago, but they were nevertheless incapable of striking at what they saw to be the basis and guarantor of their state and society.
Instead, as officials realised that the failure of agriculture, the failure to industrialise and the continuing Ostflucht were combining to produce a massive crisis in the east, they cast around for an external enemy on whom to project the cause of their misfortune.
German officials decided that the Poles of Pomerania, Posen, East Prussia, West Prussia and Silesia should all be Germanised.
Rather than face the revolution that was simmering under the surface of German political life, they were more than happy to divert attention away from the real cause of the problems in the east and to let the Poles appear to be the troublemakers.
Indeed, after 1870, under the new administration of a united Germany, there was a sudden and remarkable intensification of the struggle against the Poles of the border districts.
The success of German industry in the west only made the people in the east more desperate and paranoid.
The period 1860–90 was crucial for Germany: as the German state emerged and the German self-image was formed, Prussia-Germany went through a chaotic period of social and economic transformation: a boom in canal and railway building, in the steel industry, in banking, engineering, scientific research and in developing industrial techniques had been accompanied by a war with France; this was followed by a slump, financial collapse and a  steady move to the right in political thinking.
Bismarck, who had relied upon liberal support to create the Reich, now moved towards despotic absolutism, insisting on the centrality of the Junkers, the Kulturkampf against Catholicism and the unnecessarily aggressive Polenpolitik .
Kaiser Wilhelm II came to the throne in 1888 and, after forcing the ageing Chancellor to retire, took his belligerence several steps further by bolstering the German military, by promoting the growth of pan-Germanism and by demoting and suppressing the voice and interests of the non-German peoples within the borders of the Reich.
The German middle classes had lost heavily in the slump that followed the Franco-Prussian war, and many, ruined by the collapse, now looked to the Junkers to restore their standing.
Lower-ranking civil servants, small farmers, craftsmen, independent traders and small businessmen all feared that the growth of German cities and the development of foreign trade and heavy industry would somehow undermine traditional German values, and would render them homeless and jobless.
Völkisch opinion on these subjects came increasingly to the fore with simplistic solutions that fitted in well with the Junker status quo.
It became far easier to identify Jews, communists and Poles as the cause of their misery.
In the closing years of the nineteenth century, just as the eastern Germans were leaving the land and deserting the east, at the very time that the Polish population of the border districts was on the rise, the theoretical and practical policies of both the Polenpolitik and the Kulturkampf were hardening around the drive towards industrial and imperial expansion — if not overseas, which was almost impossible — then in the eastern borderlands.
It was by no means a simple set of feelings: many longed for the straightforward solutions that apparently lay in the golden-age reign of the Emperor Charlemagne when unity, conquest and expansion to the east had surely indicated racial superiority.
Many looked to the new Germany to recover the supposed certainties of a pre-industrial superiority.
In part the German obsession with woods, forests and mountains was a sentimental reaction against urbanisation, harking back to a restless, tribal existence.
Yet to a very large extent German efforts were contradictory: Völkisch opinion wished Germany to remain as it was and yet somehow to return to the past; they wanted to return to the past yet at the same time wished for the power to behave as they pleased.
Only the military power conferred by industry could help them do this.
Industry was seen as both the cause of German distress and Germany's salvation.
Germany, hampered by its tardy arrival at nation-statehood, had begun to industrialise early, but still in general rather later  than Britain and France.
Although Germany had steel mills as early as the 1780s and a railway line by 1847, it was still able to learn from the mistakes and avoid the dead-ends of its competitor neighbours.
In 1872 Britain, caught up in the complacency of overseas empire, had only 12 students reading for the Natural Sciences Tripos at Cambridge, while Germany already had 11 technical universities.
In Britain government finance for schools and universities did not become available — and then only in piffling amounts — until 1890.
The Prussian government's minister of finance, Peter Beuth, had been forced to offer subsidy to encourage industry in the years 1818–45, when it was realised that the kind of large-scale enterprise that Prussia would need to enter the international market was already beyond the pocket of most individuals, and beyond the imagination of the Junkers, who might have supplied finance if their estates had been more productive.
By the 1840s the Bank of Prussia — which was to become the central bank for the expanding joint-stock and credit banking system — had been established with capital of over 11 million thalers.
Through this bank the Prussian government controlled investment, trade and the issue of paper money.
By the 1870s, when it became clear that very little investment capital was going to flow from private sources or joint-stock ventures, and that the German people as a whole now viewed the development of the economy as part of the business of creating a strong and unified Reich, the Bank of Prussia became essential to all major German long-term investment plans.
Because the development of the economy was bound up with the growth of the nation, Germany was far more tolerant than Britain, France or the US of monopoly capital, of government subsidy, and of cartels.
German business ventures were, from the very start, far more closely tied to an efficient funding system and to government policy than in most other industrialised European countries.
In Germany this proximity was seen to be entirely natural.
Building on the old Prussian foundations, the Reich set out to break into the world coal and steel markets.
Unlike her major competitors, however, Germany lacked both a well-developed economic hinterland for agricultural and commercial support, and helpful overseas colonies.
For the most part the cosy partners of Atlantic Trade saw German industrialisation as a hugely disruptive affair.
America, already tied to markets in Britain, France and Scandinavia, saw the rising tide of German manufacture as a threat to its own burgeoning industries, and in 1897 raised a tariff barrier against German coal, steel, iron and textiles.
In spite of this  German industry expanded rapidly: between 1870 and 1913 the UK economy was growing at an annual rate of about 2.2 per cent; the French economy at 2.6 per cent ; the US economy at 3.2 per cent ; and the German economy at a staggering 4.3 per cent .
Precisely because it lacked access to captive overseas markets for cheap raw materials and for the sale of manufactured goods, the German economy had been forced into developing high-quality competitive produce for cut-throat international markets.
The combination of modern production methods, the application of modern accounting and business practice, the rapid growth of a disciplined industrial workforce, coupled with huge state subsidy, produced staggering results.
Although company policy, especially among the larger cartels, was seen as politically neutral, in practice the links between German business and political life were very close indeed.
Unlike Britain and France, where profits were leaked abroad to colonial landholdings and estates, and where profits did not automatically become industrial investments, Germany had been forced to embark on a series of massive and successive re-investment programmes and re-equipment drives.
The French were sufficiently worried by the rapidity of German industrialisation and by the quality of their wares that by the 1890s they had begun to invest in Russian railways, coal, steel and textiles as a way of controlling and reducing German competition.
In the years 1860–1913 German coal production leapt from a mere 17 million tons to 277 million tons.
German iron and steel production in the same period went from 2.1 million tons in the 1870s to 30 million tons by 1913.
For many observers it was as if German industry sprang out of nowhere.
By 1914 Germany had established a massive lead over Britain in traction and diesel engineering, in dye manufacture, motor engines, mining technology and in optics.
Yet while monopoly capital and government subsidy played a large part in this rise, it is important to set this development against the total picture of German industrial effort.
Germany, though it produced massive quantities of coal, steel and iron, was still a very backward place.
While Germany as a whole might well be described as a capitalist state with feudal trimmings, Pomerania and the long arm of East Prussia remained feudal with modest capitalist trimmings.
More than a third of the German population lived on the land, the east was still dominated by the huge Junker estates and the south by the highly conservative small- and middle-scale farmers and their labourers.
Of the 11 million German workers less than 1.5 million worked in enterprises employing more than 1,000 people.
However, the new cartels were growing rapidly.
In 1900 in  the Ruhr town of Hamborn, three enterprises between them employed 10,000 people; by 1913 these same enterprises employed 30,000.
German industry was seen to be a major threat to the European powers and to established patterns of Atlantic trade.
But where could the new, economically powerful Germany find outlets for its production?
The Far East, US, and European markets were very difficult to penetrate.
German industrial expansion was forced to cultivate markets elsewhere.
With no history of effective colonial rule or overseas empire building, German efforts at slave trading and colonialism in Africa proved an unmitigated disaster with whole stretches of Africa laid waste and depopulated.
They turned increasingly to those areas where the British and the French had not made much progress: to the Balkans, Turkey and South America.
In the Balkans the arrival of capitalist modes of production as the gift of foreign nationals provoked — just as they had in Poland — a rise in Bosnian and Serbian nationalism.
Balkan aggression was directed at the Germans and Austrians for much the same reason that Polish nationalism was directed against the partitioning powers, but unlike the Poles, the Serbians and Bosnians were supported by the Russians.
The long history of contempt for the Poles fostered by the Prussians was given greater depth when, as a result of German defeat in 1918, Poland — against all the odds — was revived.
What had previously been a safety valve for German economic change now assumed the aspect of a threat to an already shaken German identity and sense of purpose in the world.
The paraphernalia of capitalism — the banks, mortgages, moneylenders, credit, exchange rates, inflation, Jewish competition, Polish labour — these were all things that German small business had learned to fear and mistrust as its economy had, without the buffer of empire, ridden the rollercoaster of boom and slump between the Franco-Prussian wars and the Great War.
If these were things that could not be fully understood or controlled, then they were all the more menacing because they could not be avoided.
It is true that Germany between the wars spawned industrial giants like IG Farben (founded in 1925), which had interests in metals, chemicals, coal, explosives, film, pharmaceuticals, armaments and synthetic fibres, and which with 120,000 workers, 50 subsidiaries and more than 100 factories was the world's fourth largest industrial combine.
However, it was to the small farmer and small businessman, the very people who had failed to colonise the east, individuals who felt themselves beset by Poles, Jews and communists in ways they could not articulate, that the  Nazis were to make their main appeal.
The limitations of this class were clear: they were the opportunists whose sense of failure and sense of grievance could be nicely manipulated through their sense of German identity and nationalism.
These were the people most at risk from foreign agricultural policies, the failure of banks, under-capitalisation, the closure of foreign trade, tariff barriers and a whole range of xenophobic fears.
The SS and the other security services became the cutting edge of German racial and economic policies, but only, as it were, on licence from the middle and lower-middle classes who stood to gain by their activities.
For thoroughly understandable reasons, however, it was not to these people that Hitler turned for his image of the German: he did not want the average German for the SS, he wanted supermen for the conquest of the east.
Militarisation worked for the Nazis as it had for the Prussians in that it helped control large numbers of people, allowed a cheap and easy growth of populist emotion and nationalist identity and became the mainspring of industry by providing demand.
It satisfied business by backing competition with force.
However, in terms of the logic of German society there was only one direction in which that force could go.
The vertical and the horizontal structures of Germany were locked into a system of finance, into a particular sense of ‘Kultur’ and the drive to expand eastwards, that were all connected with the development of industry and the logic of capitalist modes of production.
In 1886 Paul de Lagarde, a leading Völkisch theoretician who was already disillusioned with the idea of a Reich dominated by the Junkers and an industrial bourgeoisie, wrote:
The Russians should have the courtesy to move over for some miles into middle Asia, where there is an abundance of space that lies close to them but far from us: let Russia give us sufficient coast on the Black Sea so that, from there we can resettle our beggars and peasants in Asia Minor…
We need land at our doorstep…if Russia does not want to give it to us, she will force us to undertake an expropriation proceeding, i.e. a war, for which we have long stored up the reasons…
The land we have to take from Russia, whether she is willing or not, must be large enough to allow us to resettle, in Bessarabia or northwest of there, all the Rumanians now living in Austria and Turkey (minus Rumanian Jews, who together with those of Poland, Russia and Austria, should be packed off to Palestine, or better yet, to Madagascar)…
The Germans are a peaceful people, but they have a right to live, and to live as Germans, and they are convinced of the fact that they have a mission for all the nations of the earth; if one hinders them from fulfilling their mission then they have the right to use force.
De Lagarde's work is clearly a product of the mentality created by the eastern marches.
The bulk of his writing appeared in the 1870s but enjoyed a revival in the 1890s, mainly because of its open display of virulently anti-Semitic and anti-Polish attitudes.
By policing the mental and the physical borders of the newly formed Germany the Völkisch ideologists wanted to create a new and pure German identity.
De Lagarde wanted to restore Germany to ‘unity’.
The unity he had in mind was, ironically, that which had existed before Germany became a nation-state, the unity of the disunited rainbow of German states and principalities, the state of unity when Jews were legally inferior to Germans, when Poles were not a numerical threat, when expansion to the east had been easy, when the German people had not been a rising industrial power, when the massed levy of conscripts had been enough to rout their opponents.
That all this was long gone and impossible to recover, except through industrialisation, social change and arduous struggle with a resilient and increasingly nationalist foe only made life in the eastern borders even more frustrating.
The eastern solution to Germany's problems was to create an area of unified language, unified identity, unified wealth and settlement, a bulwark against the barbarism and poverty of the Poles.
Yet all this was a direct response to the same basic insecurity that drove the German people to support Völkisch opinion and later to support Hitler.
Eventually National Socialism, which was deeply rooted in this national complex, was felt to be a way of withstanding the impact of unfettered foreign capitalism on German society, a way of organising the country's own resources and of competing on more equitable terms — by force where necessary.
Also, as West European capitalism filtered across Germany and set in motion the inevitable homogenisation of markets and language within the customs union, the reaction of the Polish subject people, who were after all not the primary, nor even secondary, beneficiaries of capitalist modes of production and the spread of profit, and who had behind them a different set of cultural and political orientations, was similar to that of the Germans.
As Germany was to use state finance to a remarkable degree in launching German industry, so in the 1920s and 1930s Poles working through the Bank Polski were to use state finance derived from France to build their own industrial projects like the new port at Gdynia.
The rise of Polish nationalism merely confirmed German opinion.
The Germans could never imagine that they had provoked the Poles, and yet by German standards Polish nationalism was a remarkably mild affair.
Haketa and the rest worried that the Prussian Poles were disloyal to the Prussian state, yet the  Germans' behaviour more or less guaranteed Polish disaffection.
Even so, open hostility towards Prussia or the German state was largely absent from Polish public pronouncements.
For all the fears of a Polish revolt, it is worth emphasising just how moderate and tractable the Poles of Prussia were for most of the nineteenth century: they did not rise up in 1815, nor in 1848, nor in 1863, nor during the Franco-Prussian Wars, nor even during the 1914–18 war.
Between 1871 and 1907 there is not one recorded case of a Prussian Pole being convicted of treason or anti-state activity.
In its many pamphlets the Pan-German League habitually referred to the Germans as the Herrenvolk , the master race.
Opinion such as this was well established long before Hitler rose to power and there can be little doubt that Germanisation was one of the many items of baggage the Prussians left behind for the Nazis to snatch.
The ideology of Hitler and his cronies derived from a long history of pseudo-philosophical state thuggery.
It was a tradition that avoided any real contemplation of the root causes of German unease; their preference for ‘action’, rested secure in the knowledge that everything they did was for the good of the nation, sanctioned by law and sanctioned by the German people.
After the defeat of 1918 the conservative German government lost ground to the legatees of the Haketa, the Colonisation Commission and the Pan-German League.
Both Haketa and the NSDAP sought to resolve and dissolve the internal German class and social conflicts brought about by attempting to maintain a feudal nobility and at the same time to industrialise a newly formed country by projecting their energy into false imperialist and colonial solutions in their eastern borderlands.
The inter-war German democracy was precarious precisely because it was grafted on to a social order that had failed to create the very basic social and political conditions that would allow a democratic system to flourish, but also because while German expansion in the east had been halted, the drive to the east was still seen as a tantalising solution to all of Germany's problems.
In 1918 the Western Allies had neither accepted nor totally crushed German economic competition: instead they had pushed it back in on itself like some kind of demonic and lethal jack-in-the-box.
Worse, by stripping Germany of much of its industrial wealth, its merchant fleet and its colonial possessions; and by resurrecting Poland, and making inroads into the German sense of security over Danzig and the Polish Corridor, they gave further cause for grievance and hardened the most unpleasant facets of the German identity fostered by the marcher lands.
There can be little doubt that Hitler's conquests were ideologically bankrupt, but they were built on a profound understanding and wilful exploitation of German fears and ambitions.
Germany between the wars felt a sharpening of the internal contradictions by which it lived, but it is doubtful that the people concerned ever had a clear understanding of what was happening because the tensions were buried deep within the very fabric of the Reich and because the form and pattern of struggles that resulted from these tensions were always far removed from the real heart of the matter.
Hitler's idea of Lebensraum , living space, though derived from the ideas of an earlier period, was in practice total nonsense.
The Drang nach Osten , or drive to the east, so beloved of Nazi propagandists was a fiction maintained in the face of scientific evidence to the contrary.
The Teutonic Knights had indeed penetrated eastwards, but their influence, when it was not military, had been to spread a lifestyle and set of material, cultural and linguistic bearings rather than set in motion the bodily removal and resettlement of vast numbers of Germans.
If anything, by the end of the nineteenth century it was the expanding Polish population of the partition areas that needed living space, and the German Ostflucht might well have given it to them had it not been that Germany desperately needed to maintain the spluttering fiction of the drive to the east to divert and subvert internal political pressures.
The logic of German attitudes to the east was very much that outlined by Rosa Luxemburg:
The historical process of the accumulation of capital depends in all its aspects upon the existence of non-capitalist social strata…
Imperialism is the political expression of the accumulation of capital in its competition for the possession of the remainder of the non-capitalist world.
Hitler's solutions were an extension of this capitalist logic working through National Socialist mechanisms: he bodied forth the traditional Prussian remedy for all ills, but pressurised and extended by Versailles, backed up by industrial technology.
It was a set of problems that were problems to no-one but Germany, and the solutions were calculated to satisfy no-one but Germany.
The Poles were well aware that they had been classed as Untermenschen , or sub-humans, long before the Nuremberg Race Laws made it official.
By 1945, German ‘solutions’ in the east had become so much a part of the German view of the world and ‘German historic destiny’that the Russians and the Poles, who had played human safety-valve to German ambition throughout their long  joint histories, saw dismemberment of German territory in the east as the only possible long-term solution.
To be isolated and relegated is ever likely to be the fate of those whose state authority falls prey to a stronger power.
The dynamics of history are such that one nation's strength is another's weakness; nothing is constant; both strength and weakness may be part of some process as yet unrevealed.
The only certainty is that those nations that are victorious will write what is later termed ‘history’, and will do it in such a way as to justify their actions.
The inheritance of those on the losing side will be that of mistrust, and the peculiar scars, fears and obsessions that run through their later political and cultural life and which never disappear entirely, but reappear in constantly changing guises.
Poland had not been a particularly Polish entity before partition.
Its lack of a well-developed indigenous middle class to act as a focus for a national identity meant that the failure of the nobility to resist partition was seen as exactly that: not a failure of the Polish people, but a failure of the Polish nobility.
Poland had been penetrated with comparative ease by the partitioning military powers because its social structures made most of its population marginal in one way or another.
The internal contradictions of Polish society were revealed by external invasion, and — particularly in Pomerania and Danzig — people who felt themselves to be marginal to Polish life either succumbed slowly and reluctantly or embraced the new identities on offer with enthusiasm.
Some — particularly in the Polish heartlands around Warsaw and Kraków — reacted against the new identities.
They reacted to the threat of absorption into the German scheme of things by clinging tenaciously to their Polish identity, often in direct proportion to the ‘threat’ they felt.
Slowly, painstakingly, these people set about preserving and promoting Poland's folk-life, while attempting to assimilate Polish szlachta culture and cultural values for themselves.
After the partitions Poland became invisible for over a century, its character dissolved, its history overlaid with that of the partitioning powers.
For the most part the mechanisms of the growth of capitalism and the development of a lay state passed Poland by.
Industrialisation took place on old Polish territories and involved Polish people, but it was conducted in someone else's name, and in general a generation after the rise of German industrial power.
In Britain the railways began in the 1800s, in Germany in the  1840s, but in invisible Poland the railways were not so much a network as the far flung provincial extensions of three distant empires.
It was only in the 1850s, while Prussia was ‘filling in’ the gaps of its network by connecting up places like Danzig, that Warsaw received its first major rail connections.
The main effort of railway work in Poland came between 1880 and 1900 — considerably behind the bulk of Prussian rail building.
In general this was the pattern for Polish industrialisation as a whole — a phenomenon that took place when there was the least chance of Poland ever regaining an independent existence.
Polish nationalism, like its artistic counterpart, Polish Romanticism, was a specific reaction to the material underdevelopment of partitioned Poland.
The music of Chopin, the poetry of Mickiewicz — both produced in exile — and the paintings of Jan Matejko are all powerful emotional and political responses to the reality of life in a country whose people were denied their own forms of government, and whose culture was relegated to nothing more than a set of quaint country ways.
Polish Romanticism differed from German Romanticism in the same way that German and Polish nationalism differed.
In both cases the German provoked the Polish response.
German Romanticism was a set of feelings and way of seeing the world, that reacted to and reflected on the fact that Germany was beginning to flex its intellectual and industrial muscle.
With its longing for nature and the life of the spirit it reacted against industrialisation and the growth of capitalism.
But German Romanticism could not sustain itself against the blandishments of urban existence, and as the nineteenth century progressed the movement lapsed into sentiment and kitsch — the absolute artistic opportunism that insisted on ‘moving’ people emotionally.
This was the reverse face of German culture that underlay the barbaric treatment that Prussia and then Germany meted out to the peoples of the east.
Germany's higher level of economic development allowed it to show a cultured and sophisticated face in the west.
And, regarding itself as a cultured nation, the eastern bastion of civilisation, the bringer of culture to the poor benighted Slavs of the east, Germany conducted a Kulturkampf that was intended to destroy and subdue the peoples on its margins.
The fact that parts of Poland were virtually indistinguishable from parts of Germany in terms of social complexity, levels of absolute poverty and economic success, that the Polish szlachta and the German Junker had more in common with each other than they did with either Berliners or Warsawians, that the average Polish and German smallholders and peasants had more  in common with each other than they did with their social betters and political masters — all this meant nothing, except perhaps to make the Germans more convinced that the Poles would eventually drag them down to the Polish level of degradation.
None of this dampened German feelings of superiority.
If anything the proximity of a revived Poland after 1918 was to intensify German passions.
Polish nationalism and Polish Romanticism grew up hand in hand.
Both were part of an urge to fight back, to resist, an urge to power and safety, an expression of identity forged under enormous pressure.
In Polish Romantic art there was a frustrated urge to responsibility and national independence accompanied also by an indolence that grew out of the crushing knowledge that the resurrection of Poland would not arrive in the artist's lifetime.
The Polish Romantics had no option but to celebrate the will to resist — no matter how compromised and battered — to celebrate the persistent and resilient folk ways of rural Poland.
Rural Poland was the old, pre-partition Poland; anything that came after that was hardly Poland at all.
The poet, playwright and painter, Stanislaw Wyspiański (1869–1907), saw himself as the bridge over the confused gulf that separated the Polish intelligentsia and the peasantry, the perfect representative of the Young Poland movement that contained all the bitterness of repeated national defeats, all the resignation of patriots who felt they could change nothing, and all the compromised hopes for material change that the Positivists saw in Poland's potential industrial wealth under foreign rule.
Wyspiański wrote: ‘You could pay the wide world a visit /Watch it grow and grow /But Poland you'd never find.’
Alternating euphoria and despair, intense struggle and the depths of apathy are found in Chopin's piano music, which from exile in Paris celebrated Poland's folk music and at the same time elevated it to the role of a respectable and specifically bourgeois art form.
Polish nationalism, as Rosa Luxemburg pointed out to Lenin on several occasions, was unusual in that it was not primarily a bourgeois phenomenon, but rather a substitute for ideology taken over from the szlachta by the Polish peasantry as they and the lower ranks of the gentry coalesced to form an industrial working class and a commercial bourgeoisie.14 An important component of Polish political life, and part of the damage wrought by partition, was the continuing failure to produce an ideology that went beyond the purely national to link the aspiration to exist as an independent nation with either capitalist organisation or a socialist vision of society.
The search to find and restore the Polish state led Polish politicians to mistake the restoration of the state  for a decision as to the social and political form the state should take.
The highest goal was national rather than ideological.
Poland reappeared in 1918 with its wounds and hurts unbound, the pain of partition vivid and undimmed.
Poland had been trapped in a time capsule, and try as it might to struggle free, the parameters of its political and spiritual life had been set firm for years to come by the humiliation of invisibility.
Specifically Polish ways of looking at things — their fear of the Germans, contempt for the Russians, their intensely inward looking, ghetto-like literary culture, their almost unbounded and largely unfounded faith in the Catholic Church — are all manifestations of nationalism wrought by alien rule.
Poland emerged from the feudal soup of partition to the bright light of history and to the ongoing crisis of capitalism, which had apparently reached a peak in the horrors of the First World War.
Yet most of the content of this crisis had passed Poland by: the Polish state had not been in existence.
Poles had experienced the crisis as a series of personal events; they had not experienced it as a nation through institutions and organisations they saw as undeniably their own.
The failures of capitalism were not Poland's failures.
For all its efforts to make good the loss of over 100 years, Poland was not invited to join the club of industrialised nations.
The Allies, having revived Poland as part of their anti-German strategy in 1918, had absolutely no intention of equipping Poland beyond what was strictly necessary to keep Germany occupied and at bay.
Such French capital as Poland managed to secure was for specific projects like the new port at Gdynia — which was encouraged by the French to discomfort the Germans as much as to aid the Poles.
Just as Britain and France had fought repeatedly to prevent German competition from developing, so Germany in its turn tried to restrict Polish economic growth and rivalry.
1918–1945
Danzig and Versailles
In 1918 the 47-year-old Reich created by Bismarck found itself in an increasingly difficult situation.
The Reich's attempts at industrialisation had been contradicted by the effort to retain a semi-feudal social and political structure.
At the same time the desire to catch up with more advanced industrial neighbours in Western Europe, to found an overseas empire and to break into the lucrative Atlantic Trade system had led Germany into conflict with the British and French.
Its efforts to find new markets in the Balkans had provoked intense nationalist feeling among the smaller peoples of the region.
With the assassination of the Archduke Ferdinand by a Serbian nationalist in Bosnia, Germany found itself at war with its trade competitors in the west, and at war with its nationalist rivals and its potential empire in the east.
Germany never had the slightest chance of winning a prolonged war on two fronts.
As the military situation had deteriorated, so social and political unrest inside the Reich began to threaten a Russian-style socialist revolution.
In case any such revolution should unseat its ruling class, the German leaders were prepared to cease hostilities against their external enemies in order to concentrate on defeating their internal enemies.
For their part, the Allies were happy to see the Germans turn their aggression upon the revolutionary socialists.
They feared lest Germany should become a socialist state and the revolution spread to France and Britain.
The Germans negotiated an armistice and redirected their military effort at containing the German revolution.
It was not a decision that was understood or desired by all Germans.
Adolf Hitler was at a military hospital in Pasewalk in Pomerania, recovering from burns to his eyes after a British gas attack at Ypres, when on 10 November 1918 a pastor brought him news of the armistice.
Later, in Mein Kampf Hitler was to write:
I knew that all was lost.
Only fools, liars and criminals could hope for mercy from the enemy.
In these nights hatred grew in me, hatred for those responsible for this deed…
Miserable and degenerate criminals!
The more I tried to achieve clarity on the monstrous event in this hour, the more the shame of indignation and disgrace burned in my brow.
What was all the pain in my eyes compared to this misery?…
My own fate became known to me.
I decided to go into politics.
The moment was to have fateful consequences for the whole of Europe.
For a while it looked as though Germany were going to sidestep all the unpleasant consequences of going to war against its neighbours — the most predictable being the payment of reparations — by avoiding a full surrender.
The Allies, however, had no intention of letting the armistice arrangements slide by default into a full-blown peace.
On 7 May 1919, without prior consultation or warning, the Allies announced the terms of the Versailles Treaty and Hitler s fears were realised.
Germany was to lose Alsace-Lorraine to France, and northern  Schlesswig to Denmark.
The German navy was restricted in its construction of both battleships and submarines, and the army was reduced to a puny 100,000 men.
In the months that followed the Allies stripped Germany of all its overseas possessions and colonies, 13 per cent of its territory in Europe, 10 per cent of its population, 75 per cent of its iron-ore deposits, 45 per cent of its coal fields, 10 per cent of its industrial capacity, 44 per cent of its pig-iron facilities, 38 per cent of its steel facilities, 72 per cent of its zinc sources, and 12 per cent of its farmlands.
The British confiscated the entire German merchant fleet and then imposed a 33 per cent tax on all German goods imported to the Empire.
The French imposed import quotas.
The Allies then presented Germany with a bill for US & dollar 32 billion to be paid off at a rate of & dollar 500 million dollars per year.
And to top it all the Allies then imposed a 26 per cent tax on all goods and materials imported into Germany.
The German High Command was scandalised by the treaty and considered offering armed resistance to its implementation.
However, given the demoralised state of the army, the growing dissatisfaction of the officer class, the bitter social and political polarisation that followed the defeat of the Spartacist uprising, and the clear numerical and logistical superiority of Allied forces, the High Command abandoned the idea.
The Weimar Assembly protested to the Allies that the terms were too harsh and there followed a series of street demonstrations.
The Allies remained unmoved.
The victors, the senior members of the European industrial club and their main transatlantic trading partner, were determined to put a permanent cramp in Germany's economic and military potential.
These measures were designed not just to prevent Germany waging war, but to cripple German industry.
While the Treaty as a whole was deeply humiliating to Germany, it was accepted for the most part with a sullen resignation and silent disgust.
There was one section of the Treaty, however, that occasioned deep anger and resentment.
Enormous areas of eastern Germany were to be handed over to Poland.
This was a newly independent state formed by the Allies around the nucleus of the Polish puppet state set up by the Germans in 1916.
Poland reappeared on the maps of Europe not so much through its own efforts to liberate itself — though over the years these had been prodigious but unsuccessful — but through the collapse of the partitioning powers that had held Poland in check.
In 1918 Europe lay overwhelmed by the ruin and destruction it had wrought.
Poles had fought both for and against Germany, and, partly because their state had not been involved in the war, Poles were ready — unlike the other participants in the war — to fight again, this time for something in which they had a stake.
Although aware of the twentieth century, Poland's feelings and emotions were trapped in the experience of partition, and it had to struggle to catch up, not just in industrial and economic terms, but socially, artistically and emotionally.
Polish independence, which had been unthinkable in 1916, was now a fact.
That there had been no time to prepare for a gradual hand-over of power, to make plans for social, political, economic and military integration, only made things worse.
Those who still thought in terms of a rural peasant Poland dominated by the feudal power of the szlachta and the Church had little time to adapt their vision.
Poland was not even in the same shape or place as it had been, and virtually the only thing that now united the Poles of the different partition experiences, religious beliefs and political outlooks was a new found sense of Polish national feeling.
The leaders of the new state — Ignacy Paderewski and Roman Dmowski — were campaigning vigorously for an even bigger allocation of German territory.
For most Germans it was bewildering that they should suffer such losses at the hands of a country that had not existed for over 100 years.
For the East Germans the Poles had been objects of contempt for most of Prussian history, and the loss of land to them was an insult that was not to be swallowed, but would instead produce a festering sense of indignity, shame and anger.
Throughout the Paris Peace Conference the Polish leaders heard tales of hunger and violent disturbance.
The Poles found that they could not impose any kind of law and order until they knew the exact borders they had been given, and as each day passed they became more and more desperate for a final decision.
On 28 June 1919 the Treaty was put into effect and  plebiscites were set up in Warmia, Mazuria and Silesia to determine the exact areas of land to be allocated to Poland.
The precise formula for the problems that beset the complex area around Danzig between the wars is to be found in the terms of the Versailles Treaty.
In January 1920 Poland was awarded a Corridor to the sea through West Prussia to the Baltic coast.
On 20 January 1920 a detachment of Polish soldiers in greatcoats and four-cornered caps waded out knee-deep in the icy Baltic.
They paraded national and military flags, recited ancient poems, sang hymns and the Polish anthem Still Poland is not lost as long as we are living.
Then they raised their hands in the air and gave three cheers.
The ceremony was called ‘Ślub z morzem’, the betrothal to the sea.
Poland had access to a coastline for the first time since the early seventeenth century.
This direct and effective control of the coast — compared to access through the vassal state of Danzig — was probably the first in Poland's history.
The only problem was that the coastline awarded to Poland lacked a single port larger than a fishing village along its entire length and was therefore virtually useless to a modern state.
The Corridor through which Poland had access to the sea ran almost exactly through Pomerelia and the area occupied by the Kaszubes — who were now considered to be Polish.
The Corridor totalled some 16,295 sq km, was 230 km long, 230 km wide at its base, and narrowed to less than 30 km near Danzig.
To the north the Corridor had a sea coast of 76 km; to the south it had the river Notec and the Notec canal.
The Corridor had a mixed German, Polish and Kaszubian population.
The figures from the 1910 German census show the ethnic and linguistic complexity of the Corridor in some detail: in Pomerania as a whole there were 919,102 Germans, 555,337 Poles, 106,598 Kaszubes and 20,456 Bilingual people.
In Danzig itself there were 315,281 Germans, 9,491 Poles 2,124 Kaszubes and 3,021 Bilingual.
In some parts of Pomerania the Poles and Kaszubians together may have outnumbered the Germans, but along the river Notec there were no Kaszubians at all, and German settlers planted in a block by the Prussian Colonisation Commission outnumbered Poles by two to one.
The situation was further complicated by religion.
Most Poles were Catholic, but not all Germans were Protestant and there were also German Jews and an increasing number of Polish Jews.
German defeat and the arrangements at Versailles revealed just how complex the political, social and economic balance around Danzig had become.
To the south-east of the city, around Elbing, there was some pig- and horse-breeding and the main farm produce was sugar-beet; there was some shipbuilding, light engineering and  munitions works — all in German hands.
On the Vistula delta the Mennonites bred black and white Friesian cattle just as their ancestors in Holland had done, and grew sugar-beet, tomatoes, rye, and a resilient variety of wheat on the rich alluvial soil.
Like their ancestors, the Mennonites still shunned buttons and pockets, relying on hooks and eyes; they refused cars and engines, preferring horsepower; the Mennonites nevertheless reclaimed land from the river and sea, regulated the flood planes and wanted as little as possible to do with the evils of the outside world.
To the south and west of Danzig lay the Tuchler Heide and Kaszubia, an area of damp, sandy forest, marshy scrub, brackish lakes and poor farmland.
There the Kaszubians occupied smallholdings; all the better farmland towards the coast had long since been taken over by the Germans.
To the east there was now the great long arm of East Prussia, an area occupied by German settlers planted on the remains of the Baltic Borussian peoples after the civilising work of the Teutonic Knights.
Cut off from the Reich by the Polish Corridor these people felt themselves to be German and to be threatened by the new Polish state.
Traditionally they had looked to the Reich to trade their lumber, wheat, furs and amber, and they had every intention of continuing to do so in order to spite the Polish state.
German influence in East Prussia had been so strong that over the years the southern strip of East Prussia, which was occupied by a large number of ethnic Poles, had become increasingly Germanised.
Many Poles in East Prussia still clung to a Polish identity, but very few of them wanted to become part of a Polish state.
National rivalries were all the more intense and confused in these districts precisely because it was often not possible to tell who was which nationality, or where a person's loyalties lay.
There were German Catholics in Pomerania, Protestant Poles in Mazuria; there were large numbers of ethnic Poles and Kaszubians in both the southern districts of East Prussia and in Pomerania who spoke German rather than Polish and who had even Germanised their family names.
The Germans, where they thought about it at all, regarded Poles of all varieties as uncivilised upstarts whom they loathed for their backwardness, presumption and ambition, and this was a judgement that many East Prussian Poles accepted.
Indeed there were also sizeable groups of Poles in Pomerania, East Prussia and Silesia who saw very clearly that passing under the administration of the new Polish state would mean a severe drop in their standard of living and who preferred to remain as second-class citizens under German administration.
Even though the Germans were demoralised by the end of the war and by the Versailles arrangements for peace, the Poles did not have things all their own way in setting the new borders.
In disputed territory plebiscites were held in which both Germans and Poles brought proceedings into disrepute by menaces, abduction, blackmail and by outright thuggery on such a massive scale that the term border warfare would be appropriate — even if there was as yet no actual border.
In Silesia both Poles and Germans brought in thousands of relatives and in-laws to swell their vote.
When the vote went against them the Poles simply marched in and took by force the areas they considered rightfully theirs.
In Warmia and Mazuria, two of the districts that made up East Prussia, the Poles suffered serious reverses, gaining only 3 of the 28 disputed villages.
In the Allenstein-Marienwerder district, just south of Danzig, there was a massive vote of 460,000 to remain with Germany and only 16,000 to move under Polish administration.
Although the Poles could have exercised a military option in the north just as they had done in Silesia, by this time their involvement in a war against the infant Soviet state, over territories and borders in the eastern provinces, made this a logistical impossibility.
Since the days of Frederick the Great the Germans had been brought up to believe that the Poles were drunken, brutish and in every way inferior.
Polish behaviour in the plebiscite areas, though no worse than that of the Germans, did little to dispel German prejudice and fear.
In the Corridor and those areas ceded to Poland before the plebiscite, the Poles set about a land reform and began expropriation procedures, to dispossess German farmers of land and homes.
Between 1919 and 1923 about 700,000 Germans living just inside the Polish border, in Poznania and the Corridor were forced to abandon their homes and trek west into the Reich.
Between 1921 and 1931 the German population of the Corridor fell from 177,942 to 109,696, while the Polish population rose from 935,643 to 1,080,100.
In 1939 the Poles published figures showing that their part of Pomerania was now 91 per cent Polish.
By 1939 two-thirds of the German inhabitants of the areas ceded to Poland by plebiscite had been forced out.
The drastic and often brutal Polonisation policy showed that the Poles had studied very carefully Prussian methods of Germanisation.
On the question of Danzig there was no possibility of a simple answer to the problem of attachment and government.
The French and American negotiating teams at the Paris Peace Conference wanted the city to be incorporated into the new Polish state.
Even though its population was overwhelmingly  German, the politicians rightly considered that its position made it vital to the Polish economy.
Lloyd George said that if the Conference was to adhere to President Wilson's established principle of National Self-Determination, the idea of placing such a large number of Germans under Polish rule was unacceptable.
In general the Paris negotiators were keen to emphasise solutions to the national minority problem of eastern Europe, rather than reveal that their main aim was the creation and resurrection of neighbour-states to control and limit German power and influence.
The final decisions affecting Danzig were left in the hands of Lloyd George, M. Clemenceau and President Wilson.
The French, with Polish support, believed that the Peace Treaty ought to smash German industrial power and territorial ambition by dismembering as much of the German state as was possible.
President Wilson had no particular policy except a vague notion that National Self-Determination was a good thing — a notion that owed more to America s position in the world and the nature of its own historical development than it did to the realities of European life.
Wilson had made National Self-Determination the central plank of his 1916 election campaign for a second term in office.
His use of this notion was in effect an extension of America s own aggressive domestic policy into foreign policy.
The US's solution to the problem of its own borders and indigenous peoples had been to expand until stopped by force, to renege on all treaties with native peoples and to conduct a policy of genocide and dispossession which, though it reached a peak in the years 1860–90, continued well into the 1920s.
While this solution lurked in the consciousness of a large number of US citizens and was eventually to appeal to Hitler and the SS, it was not the kind of thing the Americans admitted or believed about themselves, and was certainly not the kind of solution they wished to offer to their civilised European cousins.
The result was that Roman Dmowski, one of the two Polish leaders in Paris, was reduced to despair and frustration by Wilson s attitude over Danzig.
The Poles hoped at least for the award of Danzig, the nearby town of Elbing, the Vistula delta and the tiny republic of Memel.
But a bitterly disappointed Dmowski was moved to complain again and again that Wilson simply did not appreciate the importance of Danzig to the Poles, and was incapable of thinking like a European.
Even President Wilson s negotiating team had problems in reconciling their leader s various directives.
If Wilson's Thirteenth Point was to be observed — that Poland should have access to the sea — then the principle of National  Self-Determination, so dear to the President s heart, must inevitably be compromised.
Danzig was the most obvious port to hand over to the Poles, but the Danzigers were German.
The Allied politicians tried hard to find a solution, to resolve the conflicting demands of their own economies and ambitions along with those of the Poles and Germans.
In fact the Allies were ill-fitted to assume this responsibility and unlikely to find solutions to problems that were largely of their own making.
Lloyd George made a stand on the issue of a plebiscite for Upper Silesia, saying that he would no more give the place to the Poles than he would give a clock to a monkey.
But on the issue of Danzig Lloyd George was prepared to compromise.
He suggested that Danzig should become a Free City and a ward of the League of Nations.
Polish historians blame Lloyd George for the unstable and unworkable arrangements imposed on Danzig; they emphasise, quite rightly, his hostility to the Poles and his susceptibility to German pleas.
And yet, although Lloyd George was the author of the Free City proposals, they were approved by the Americans and the French, and had the Poles not been so heavily engaged against the Soviets by this time, they might still have attempted to seize Danzig by force — there was certainly little the Germans could have done to prevent such a move.
Without doubt Lloyd George had a very poor record on national issues.
Even so, his compromise on Danzig was not malevolent.
It was designed, naively perhaps, to minimise the grievance to Poland and Germany by depriving them both of Danzig.
Instead, the compromise proved to be a lasting source of grief to both parties.
Unlike un-historical nations, Poland had a long history to recall and refurbish.
But it was a history that was now informed by the lengthy experience of partition,Polenpolitik and Kulturkampf As such it was a history that was perceived and shaped in terms of feelings, legacies, fears and foes.
Modern Poland needed to accomplish certain tasks in order to stay alive, and it searched a pre-nationalist, pre-nation-state Polish history to find the seeds of action, historical necessity and national logic.
Poland's claim to Danzig was part of the mythologising in which the new state indulged, part of its creative compensation for the years of partition.
In so far as Poles began to claim Danzig on grounds other than those of practicality, then the claim was one of nationalist reaction.
To insist that Danzig was Polish on any other grounds than practical economics was to enlist some very uncertain history.
Danzigers had good reason to be apprehensive about the Versailles Treaty arrangements, and they were not alone.
The  whole of eastern and central Europe was affected by the Treaty.
Germany in particular felt abused.
The redrawn boundaries left over 8.5 million Germans as national minorities in Hungary, Romania, Lithuania, Poland, Italy, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union.
Poland, too, was unhappy about the Versailles borders.
Over 6.5 million Poles had been left outside the Polish state-1.5 million of them in Germany.
Also, in contrast to the golden years of the multi-racial, multilingual, multi-ethnic Commonwealth, Poland was unhappy about the number of non-Poles who now resided within its borders.
According to the 1931 census more than 30 per cent of the population were not Polish.
But after hundreds of years of colonisation and settlement, of population shifts and absorption, how could it have been otherwise?
Given that the massive exchange of populations was out of the question, it was clear that the Versailles politicians could not hope to solve the problems of forming homogeneous nation-state identities in Eastern Europe.
Still less could they do this while trying to disperse the economically powerful German population of the east among the various neighbour states without aggravating the problem still further.
Articles 100–108 of the Versailles Treaty detailed the exact arrangements by which the new Free City of Danzig would be governed.
The city would be under the protection of the League of Nations; its territory would include Zoppot and the surrounding farmlands.
Poland would have guaranteed rights of access to the port, but Danzigers were offered fragile assurances by the League that the Poles would not interfere with the internal affairs of the city-state beyond running the railways, maintaining a Post Office, a customs service, a small garrison and munitions dump on the Westerplatte peninsula, and exercising nominal control over the city s foreign policy.
In a last bid to gain full control over the port the German government offered Poland guaranteed rights of access if the Poles would allow the city to revert to the Reich.
The Poles, however, already had a guarantee of access from the League of Nations, and felt that as the city depended to an enormous extent upon trade with Poland there was no advantage in surrendering the Jewel of the Baltic to Germany.
The offer was declined.
For their part, however, the Poles saw their only access to the sea through a port that they did not fully control, and in which there was already a  swell of anti-Polish feeling.
Accordingly, they made a bid to gain command of the Danzig Harbour Board.
The League of Nations rejected their offer, ruling that the Board should comprise equal numbers of Poles and Germans with a neutral chairman.
The Polish effort to gain control faded out.
In spite of some very idealistic pronouncements and general high hopes, it soon became apparent that the best efforts of the League of Nations were to be frustrated with ease by the fundamental and unresolved differences of opinion as to the exact meaning of Free City status.
In spite of their limited presence in the city the Poles worked to deny its sovereignty, pressed their historical claim to the place by promoting its Polishness and tried to gain increased control of Senate procedures.
While Danzigers remained unimpressed by Polish historical claims, Germany, too, longed to deny sovereignty, but found it more convenient in practice to encourage notions of the Free City's independence, since this discomfited the Poles without direct confrontation.
In truth the government of Danzig had become a labyrinth sown with pits for the unwary.
By 1922 the city had no less than four separate charters establishing and defining the limits of its powers: the Treaty of Versailles, the Danzig-Polish Accords, the Danzig City Constitution and the Covenant with the League of Nations.
It had at least seven governing bodies and watchdogs set over it: the Danzig Volkstag, the Danzig Senate, the Polish Commissioner General, the German Commissioner General, the Danzig Harbour Board, the League of Nations High Commissioner, the Council of the League of Nations at the High Court in the Hague and finally, the League itself sitting in Geneva.
The historian N.N. Brailsford, echoing German opinion, called the Poles a primitive unschooled race and went on to say that no matter how hard they tried, the Allied politicians would never manage to replace the industrial and intellectual skills of the German workforce with the likes of the Poles.
Danzigers felt with some justification that they had been left to the mercy of the Polish military and were now chained to what Molotov called the monstrous bastard of Versailles — the backward Polish state and economy.
The new Polish republic faced enormous difficulties.
It lacked industrial power, but alienated its neighbour and allies alike by attempting to rectify this; it failed to maintain a democratic government, yet under the circumstances it was highly unlikely that any state could have done so.
Poland was condemned because it was not a proper nation-state, but it was condemned for its efforts to become one.
Poland was set up by the Allies to help subdue Germany, but was then criticised for taking German territory.
If Poland was backward it was not because the Poles wanted it so, but because Germany and the other partitioning powers had made it that way, and because the Allies had failed to provide the  necessary capital to finance Poland to do the job they required.
The level of economic development varied; eastern Poland was appallingly backward; in comparison the western provinces were not so bad.
Only 16.5 per cent of the Polish workforce was classified as agricultural labour, and another 4 per cent as industrial labour, yet in the east as much as 87 per cent of the population scratched a bare subsistence from agriculture.
In the west the average number of those involved in agriculture fell to around 74 per cent.
One observer estimated that between the east and the west — that is, between the old Russian provinces and the old German provinces of partitioned Poland — there existed a socio-economic gap of experience and development of 50–100 years.
In the new Poland barely two-thirds of the population was Polish, and of these barely two-thirds could read and write.
In effect literate Poles constituted less than 44 per cent of the population.
Predictably, the anti-Polish legislation and the policies of Kulturkampf and Polenpolitik meant that by far the worst areas of inherited Polish illiteracy were the old German territories.
And there the highest level of illiteracy was to be found in Pomerania: between 1921 and 1931 the Poles reduced illiteracy in Pomerania from 5.2 per cent to 4.3 per cent.
On a national scale there was a reduction from 33.1 per cent to 23.1 per cent in the space of ten years.
Although by 1931 some 5,543,700 Poles were still officially classed as illiterate, the level of illiteracy in Poland compared very favourably with Italy (27 per cent) and Spain (47.5 per cent ).
Although it was clear that Poland would need massive industrialisation if it were to become a modern European nation, it was hampered in its efforts at every level by the legacy of partition.
The integration of its railway system — it could hardly be called a network — was a major problem.
Old Congress Poland, the section controlled by the Russians, had about 1,000 miles of track by 1890; the Austrian and Prussian sectors had a very highly developed system with over 50 lines running up to the old Russian border.
Yet of those lines only 10 actually crossed the border into Russian Poland, and even as late as 1918 there was no direct railway link between Poznán and Warsaw.
The Polish government set about a land reform as soon as it felt able.
Among the first victims of the reform were the larger German-owned estates that now fell within Poland.
After the German estates came some 2,000 Polish estates of 3–4,000 hectares (about 8–10,000 acres) totalling some 20 per cent of agricultural land.
These were broken up into 10,000 farms of not less than 2 hectares (5 acres).
The reform was intended to affect all farms and estates of more than 180 hectares (450 acres) but in  Pomerania — the Polish Corridor — the soil was so poor that the lower limit was set at 400 hectares (1,000 acres).
However, in Pomerania, where more than 30 per cent of all farms over 400 hectares were owned by Germans, such a reform could only add to the tensions and aggravations that already abounded in the border districts.
Without doubt the Germans constituted the most wealthy stratum of border society.
While the Danzigers could ignore neither Poland's claims to historic rights, nor the Versailles arrangements, the fact was that Danzig was sitting on a potential gold-mine.
Once again Danzig had a virtual monopoly of Polish international trade.
While the Germans presented their situation as a disaster, they overlooked the fact that one of Danzig s major and continual problems had been that it could not grow or thrive purely on the traffic of its immediate Prussian hinterland.
Pomerania, the Vistula delta and East Prussia had little in the way of natural resources or industrial centres; worthwhile manufactured goods and raw materials for export were located some 250–500 kilometres inland in areas that lay south of Poznán, Warsaw and Lublin.
The restoration of Polish influence in the area should have returned the flow of trade from this distant hinterland to Danzig.
Danzigers might have rejoiced that as Poland's industrial wealth increased, their city would have a monopoly of Polish international trade.
Instead, nationalist argument and continual bickering between nation-states played on the fears and worries of the borderlands.
Danzigers were far too busy protesting and petitioning, nursing wounded pride to realise the potential of their situation.
They preferred to connive with Germany against Poland and never really assessed the value of cooperation at all.
Bloody-mindedness on all sides soon began to show in the economic performance of the region.
The river Vistula had been one of the great European water highways.
It reached, through a series of canals, linked rivers and tributaries, a hinterland that more or less defined the limits of Danzig's trading potential.
In the immediate vicinity it linked Danzig with Stettin and Berlin via the rivers Notec and Oder and the Bromberg Canal; via the river Nogat and the Frisches Haff it linked up with Elbing, Marienburg and Königsberg; via the river Pregel and the river Dieme and the Kurisches Haff it reached out to Memel and Tilsit.
It stretched out to Warsaw and Kraków and and beyond that into Galicia, the Ukraine and regions bordering the Black Sea.
The Polish Corridor, with its customs barriers, check-points and crossing places cut right across the Vistula trade complex.
It effectively disrupted the old established patterns but prevented new and more sensible patterns developing.
In the first few months of independence the Poles came to realise that the lower reaches of the Vistula waterway — their economic lifeline to the coast — had in fact been badly neglected by the Germans.
Constant silting and the collapse of flood-banks now threatened Polish trade along its whole length.
The cost of maintaining the waterway through the war on reduced Polish trade from the Russian and Austrian partition lands had been so high that the waterway had gone into decline.
After 1918 the small shipbuilding industry at Elbing almost collapsed as a result of the creation of the Corridor simply because the cost of maintaining the river was compounded by the cost of negotiating the tariff barriers.
Elbing s shipyards were kept going after the war only as a result of massive subsidy from the Reich.
Now the cost of restoring the lower reaches of the river were simply too high for the East Prussian authorities to contemplate without revenues from Polish trade.
The effect of the Polish Corridor was to send the East Prussian economy into an abrupt and dizzying nosedive as it lost its traditional markets for beef, grain, timber, fur, sugar-beet and alcohol.
These markets had either disappeared into the new Poland, or they were screened off by the Corridor.
The feudal Prussian Junkers, whose estates had limped on for as long as anyone could remember, were hit particularly hard by the Corridor.
In 1928 the Preussen Kasse , the Prussian Office, estimated that within a year almost 75 per cent of the surviving East Prussian estates would be bankrupt.
Almost all of these estates had been mortgaged and German banks were unwilling to lend more money at the rates the Junkers requested.
Even those Junkers who managed to secure loans were already heavily in debt.
New loans went to pay off the interest on earlier loans rather than on buying new farm machinery or modernising farming methods.
In effect the Berlin banks who loaned money to the Junkers were paying themselves through an agricultural clearing house in East Prussia.
The overall effect was to speed up the disintegration of the larger estates, but to leave the smallholdings virtually untouched but constantly threatened.
Germany was forced to donate massive subsidy to East Prussia by laying new railway tracks across the Corridor, by starting new air services and by offering finance to the Baltic shipping lines operating out of East Prussian ports, whose trade had been damaged by the Corridor and who might otherwise have collapsed.
Items of trade destined for southern Germany now had to be transported across the Corridor and then down the length of Germany.
Expensive though this was, it was still cheaper than trying to transport freight by the more direct route, across Polish  territory.
In spite of German efforts, traditional East Prussian trade with Silesia almost ceased entirely.
In Danzig itself the sugar, sweets, chocolate, tobacco and match industries, as well as the famous Danzig Gold Water business were all badly affected by the Versailles arrangements.
Local Danzig consumption of these items was taxed heavily — 7 per cent of revenue going to Poland — while consumption of these items and their raw materials was duty-free in Poland.
Also it became clear that the local currency was a problem.
The Danzig gulden was tied to the Gold standard, but the Polish zloty (in spite of the fact that the word means gold) was not.
Though the city's finances were supposed to be independent, Polish control of the railways meant that any citizen wishing to use the trains had to change Danzig currency into Polish currency before buying a ticket.
Problems with the city s finances ran right through the local economy.
By 1928 over one-third of the city s population depended on the administration for employment, unemployment relief, income or pension.
A great many civil posts — postal officials, customs officers, policemen, street cleaners — were duplicated and this led to a serious imbalance between the non-productive bureaucracy and the private sector production workers.
Nevertheless, in these inter-war years unemployment moved swiftly upwards: 10–17 per cent of the population were unemployed or dependants of the unemployed.
The financial strain upon the Danzigers came from other directions too.
The city had to offer higher than average wages to attract civil servants from the Reich and was also forced to make a contribution to the salary and expenses of the League of Nations High Commissioner to the tune of £44,000 per year.
Finance was a constant source of tension within the city, and increasingly the city's problems in this area were seen to be the fault of the Poles.
Both Poland and Germany took delight in giving hurt and discomfort to no great purpose.
Under the terms of the Versailles Treaty the Munsterwalde bridge at Kurczbrak was ceded to Poland.
The bridge was one of the largest of its kind in Europe carrying a two-lane highway, railway and a footpath.
Even though it was the only route for Polish-German transit between the towns of Graudenz and Dirschau — a distance of 120 kilometres — the Poles closed the bridge as soon as it came under their control.
The traveller was forced to make an enormous detour.
The closure of the bridge did not make good economic sense for the Poles, but their demolition of the bridge in 1928 made even less sense.
This, however was a mere pin-prick compared to the actions that lay in store.
Throughout the years 1918–23 Poland was fighting to reestablish itself.
It used every means at its disposal: it argued and pressured the Versailles politicians; it cheated in the plebiscites; it engineered uprisings in Silesia and Wielkopolska; it skirmished and then went to war with the Red Army for territory in the east.
Poland was surrounded by neighbours who were contemptuous of its existence and anything but trustworthy, and Poland treated them as such.
In the fight to regain both its old territories and some viable modern form, the link with the sea was of crucial importance.
The fragility of Poland s access to the sea was brought home with devastating clarity in 1920.
Poland had taken advantage of the chaos in revolutionary Russia to launch an offensive to seize Kiev in the Ukraine.
At first the Russians had been driven back in disorder, but in the months of July and August they had begun to recover and had driven the Poles back on their tracks until finally the Red Army was at the gates of Warsaw itself.
The Poles stood with their capital at their backs while the Russians prepared for the assault that would end the war.
It was at this moment that the Danzig dockers union, inspired as much by anti-Polish sentiment as by fellow feeling for Soviet brother-workers, decided that they would no longer handle supplies and munitions destined for Poland.
In a battle that the Poles called the ‘Miracle on the Wisła’ the Red Army was defeated and chased out of Poland.
The Poles eventually settled for territory far short of their initial ambitions.
No matter what part divine intervention had played, the Polish government had learned a very practical lesson, and it was one that the Danzig dockers would come to regret most bitterly.
The Polish government realised that the action of the Danzig dockers might have lost them their independence.
They also realised that it might only be a matter of time before Poland's enemies used the same tactic as part of a concerted effort to wipe the country from the maps again.
The French, who throughout the latter part of the nineteenth century had used investment in Russian railways as a way of discomforting German industry, now provided the Poles with capital to continue the work the Russians had started.
With French backing, the Poles began to develop the tiny fishing village of Gdynia into a modern harbour.
They drove huge concrete piers (totalling 13 kilometres in length) straight out from the beaches into the shallow Baltic.
Behind the sand-dunes, schools, offices, churches, a market, a railway station, a radio station and hundreds of homes began to spring up with all the rapidity of a cow-town on the American prairie.
The Poles constructed 200 kilometres of dockside railway and a new line from Gdynia to Bydgoszcz that avoided use (and payment) of the old  German railway.
They offered very favourable rates to industry to move into the area, and the whole venture enjoyed massive success.
In 1924 the infant port of Gdynia handled just 90,000 tons of freight.
In 1933, just after the port was completed, it handled 2,700,000 tons, was second only to Copenhagen among Baltic ports and was ranked the ninth largest European port.
In 1927 only 33 per cent of Polish trade went by sea, but by 1936 the figure had risen to 77 per cent.
In 1927 only 3 per cent of Polish sea trade went through Gdynia, the rest went through Danzig.
By 1936 Gdynia handled 46 per cent of all Poland's foreign trade and handled almost all of Poland's sea trade.
The effect on Danzig of the development of Gdynia was enormous.
In 1931–2 Danzig's trade with Poland dropped from 8,300,000 tons to 5,400,000 tons.
In 1934–5 Danzig's share of Polish trade dropped from 47 per cent to 37 per cent.
No city could absorb such a body-blow without showing the effects, and by 1937 Danzig was in severe financial difficulties.
Not only had the Poles removed the bulk of their trade, but even the remaining Polish trade went to the Polish shipping firms who still operated out of Danzig, rather than to German concerns.
Danzig found that whether it liked it or not, its life was dominated by Poland.
Local farmers, too, were forced to face up to the unpleasant fact that they could no longer compete with the Poles because of the low cost of Polish labour and the high Reich and Polish tariff barriers.
No matter what they did, Polish produce in the Free City and in Poland was always cheaper than Danzig produce.
Kaszubian farmers in particular— scattered right across German Pomerania, the Polish Corridor and in the Free City — were hard hit.
They found that neither the new port at Gdynia nor Free City status was of much use to them.
The growth of population in Gdynia provided another market outlet, but now the Kaszubian farmers were in competition with the Polish farmers of the Corridor who had identical produce for sale.
The Kaszubes in Danzig and Germany found that they could not export their produce to Poland economically simply because Polish produce was cheaper, and in the Corridor they could not export their produce to Germany effectively because, as far as the Germans were concerned, the Kaszubes were Polish.
Kaszubian produce, though initially cheaper than German farm produce, was much more expensive by the time levies and taxes had been added.
As usual the Kaszubes were piggy-in-the-middle and found their sales restricted almost entirely to local markets and the bigger markets in Danzig, Oliva and Zoppot.
By the mid 1930s it must have been abundantly clear to the Danzigers that their ‘independent status’ was a millstone round their necks.
But it was a situation that had problems for both Germany and Poland.
The Poles bore the massive burden of state subsidies and international debt repayments first to create Gdynia and then to run it at rates that would undercut the Danzig trade.
The whole Gdynia venture was only possible because of massive government preference, and there is little doubt that the port could not have been run indefinitely at such favourable rates.
However, in the short run, Gdynia was more than capable of causing the Danzigers severe economic distress and genuine hardship.
As the Danzigers saw it, Gdynia was just a very expensive way of ruining them; it proved just how hard-hearted and merciless the Poles could be, and that feeling helped to foster the growth of the Nazi Party in the Free City.
If the economic situation of Danzig was complex and in decline, then the ethnic and linguistic changes in the city reflected these alterations.
In 1910 there had been 315,281 Germans, 9,491 Poles, 2,124 Kaszubians and 3,021 others living in the area that was to become the Free City.
In 1921 the population of the urban districts was about 195,000, and of these only 5,000 were Poles.
In 1934 the population of the entire Free City area was about 400,000 and of these 50,000 were Polish or Kaszubian.
By 1935 the population of the urban districts had grown to 295,000.
Although there was some overlap — Polish Poles, Danzig Poles, Polish Jews, German Jews, Polish, German and Danzig citizens — the vast bulk of the population was German.
By 1937, as a result of migration from rural Kaszubia, an influx of unemployed people from nearby Elbing and Marienburg, and the large number of Jews in transit through the city who had become trapped there after a change in US immigration policy, there were about 17,000 Poles — including Kaszubians, Danzig Poles, Polish immigrants and Polish Jews — living in the urban districts.
The total population of the Free City in 1937 was 375,972.
The rich ethnic mix gave massive scope for discontent, disruption, tension and victimisation.
In spite of the fact that most of the Völkisch parties in the city blamed the Poles for all their problems, relations between Poles and Germans in the city were  spiky but surprisingly good.
It is true that we didn't speak Polish — well, a few words maybe: Tak, nie, dziękuje.
But we had no need to speak it.
There were only a few Poles in the city and they all spoke German.
All of them.
It was very rare to find a German who knew Polish or even thought they should…
Frederick the Great said that Poland was all heath, moor and Jews, and
that the Germans had tidied it up a bit and turned it into a garden.
I don't know if that's true.
Many people thought it was.
We used to say that the Poles were all fur coats and dirty knickers.
I remember we went on a visit once to the newly opened Polish Post Office.
We were surprised to see this fantastic marble everywhere — on the table tops, on the benches, on the counters — but when we went back there three years later the place was a total mess.
Everything was filthy and broken.
Even the marble was damaged.
The Polish presence in the city may have been small, but they made the most of it.
Indeed they made a significant contribution to the life of the city and took every opportunity to demonstrate their existence.
They had a remarkably dense network of social organisation — probably in reaction to the overwhelming ‘Germanness’ of their surroundings.
While the Danzig Poles were not keen for the city to come under Polish rule, they were nevertheless determined that they should not be penalised for being Polish, and in their own way they were proud of their identity — even if it did not quite amount to ‘nationality’ in a conventional sense.
Of the 50,000 Poles in the Free City, almost 40,000 were members of the Community Association of Poles.
The Poles had 20 nursery schools, a music school, 7 primary schools and 13 other schools; speech days, sports days and prize-givings were big events in the local calendar.
There were still 40 Polish shipping firms in the city.
There were several Polish newspapers.
The Gdansk Society of Friends of Science and Art published an annual yearbook.
On Westerplatte peninsula the Polish military had an ammunition store, their own port, brick-built barracks, guard huts and concrete bunkers.
Inside the spacious military depot the soldiers kept several cows for fresh milk and grew vegetables under glass.
The Polish military had close links with the Polish community; soldiers' rowing, football and handball teams often played against local Polish and German teams.
Polish officers attended both League of Nations and Danzig official functions in full dress uniform with swords at their sides.
They maintained close contact with the League of Nations High Commissioner and with the Polish Commissioner General.
It was common to see Polish soldiers walking on the Hel peninsula, on day trips to Świbno or out courting local girls.
On Sundays a detail would march out to the nearest Polish church to attend mass.
Polish control of the railways and customs, and the presence of a Polish Post Office and military garrison, were a constant reminder of Danzig's fragile economy and expensive independence.
Indeed, by 1933 Danzig needed Poland far more than  Poland needed Danzig.
Ironically, while the post-war Polish communist regime was to seek desperately to legitimise its seizure of Danzig in 1945 by reference to history, ancient settlement and archaeology, the inter-war Polish Communist Party (KPP: membership approximately 16,000) under J. Herryng and J. Leszczyński, decided to oppose the continued existence of the Free City and campaign for its return to the Reich by attachment to East Prussia.
The KPP recognised that the city's economic difficulties were fertile ground for a German nationalist reaction, and that the Versailles solution was unworkable.
Indeed, since Poland now had its own port, the Versailles solution and the continued existence of Danzig as a Free City were no longer relevant, and the KPP considered the Polish military presence in Danzig an unnecessary provocation.
The KPP argument made sense, but they compromised this position by claiming that the Ukrainian and Silesian territories seized in the first years of independence should also be returned to their respective ‘owners’.
The KPP, whose membership included Rosa Luxemburg and the young Isaac Deutscher, was continually at the mercy of Russian nationalist machinations masquerading as the theories of the world's first socialist state.
Later it was found that its policies in relation to Polish territorial claims had been formulated for it by the Comintern as a way of weakening Poland.
The Soviets hoped that the prospect of reunited German lands would somehow help the German revolutionary left.
The KPP, clearly influenced by Rosa Luxemburg, believed that national self-determination was impossible under capitalism, since the logic of capitalism led to bigger combinations, bigger markets and bigger conflicts fed and fuelled by ever-increasing military and industrial complexes.
It believed that under socialism all nationalism would be irrelevant since there would be no need to organise market forces against one another in competing nationalities.
The KPP made two mistakes.
First, it defended Trotsky against Stalin.
Second, it supported Marshal Piłsudski's May 1926 coup d'etat in the belief that the Marshal was still a socialist.
The Russians could not forgive the Poles for supporting their internal and external enemies, nor for their independence from Moscow.
Even if Piłsudski had been a socialist, he would still have been an independent Polish socialist in Moscow's eyes.
As things developed Piłsudski was to mix his own highly individual style of socialism with Polish nationalism in a manner reminiscent of James Connolly's Irish socialism, and was to remain hostile to the Soviet Union until his death.
While Piłsudski was to accuse the KPP of undoing his own hard work as military leader and of trying  to dismember Poland by ‘Trojan horse methods’, Moscow decided to rein in the free-thinking Polish socialists.
In 1938 the KPP was accused of factionalism, intellectualism and misguided patriotism.
The Soviets claimed that the party was riddled with fascist and Trotskyite agents and initiated arrests and executions.
The party disintegrated and with it went one of the very few sensible perspectives on the Free City's position.
The Growth of the NSDAP in Danzig
In the Reich the elections of 1930 were the turning point of Nazi Party fortunes.
The insecurities of life in the border districts, maturing over a period of 14 years, had produced Poles who were very Polish, and Germans who were very German.
But one of the ironies of life in the border districts was that it also produced Poles who became more German the more nearly they were incorporated into the Polish state, and Poles and Jews whose political opinions were so far to the right that only their ethnic, religious or national identity stood between them and the Nazi Party.
In East Prussia and Danzig the effect of being ‘cut off’ from the Reich was to compress ambition, exaggerate opinion and tune emotions to a remarkable pitch.
The solutions offered by the Nazi Party were no less simple than in the Reich, but isolation, the proximity of Poland and the effects of the Depression gave the hopes and fears of the borderlands a personal intensity and meaning quite different from those in the Reich.
Thus, when Hitler landed at Danzig's Saspe airfield on a whistle-stop tour of the east for his 1932 election campaign, the entire Danzig SA, along with a uniformed company of the local police force, turned out as a guard of honour.
Hitler was pleasantly surprised to see thousands of cheering Danzigers waiting for him.
But as he progressed on into East Prussia, towards Tannenberg, the full impact and consequence of the Depression and partition were borne upon him, and so also the full potential of the Nazi Party was impressed upon him.
Otto Dietrich, Hitler's Chief of Press Bureau and link with Rhine and Ruhr businessmen, recalled Hitler's tour:
…here in the Masurian border districts, Adolf Hitler had the vast majority behind him, already at the time of the first Reich Presidential election.
But on this journey it seemed as if the whole land of Masuria was faithful to the Hooked cross.
Here the nation's poorest children were the most true of all.
Hitler flags lined all roads, pictures of Hitler decorated all houses, and garlands draped the entrance to every village; hope and loyalty were prevalent everywhere!
Wherever our Führer approached, every man and woman came out.
Crowds lined all streets.
Grandmothers, on whose distressed faces the direst poverty was written, raised their arms in greeting.
Wherever we stopped, the women stretched out their children toward our Führer.
There were tears of joy and emotion.
The growth of the NSDAP in Danzig followed that of its growth in the Reich, but it did so with a slight time-lag — a phenomenon of border districts everywhere.
The high-point of the Danzig Nazi Party's electoral success came in 1935, though it was never as massively successful as the Nazis had hoped.
One of the reasons for this was that while the border districts bred massive ambition for simplistic solutions, it also bred an open cynicism about the effectiveness of all solutions.
Many Danzigers felt that the Nazis could not help them, and at the same time that only the Nazis could help them; they urged the Party on while at the same time distancing themselves from it.
Even though the NSDAP was to achieve its majority in the Danzig Volkstag with a very clear mandate from the electorate to do what it thought necessary, most Danzigers were prepared to reap the benefits of being on the winning side without pondering too deeply the significance or morality of their own personal support for a party they did not entirely trust or like.
In this they might have taken heed of the Reich's experience, but instead they went ahead and repeated that experience in miniature.
In the period 1928–32 Hitler had gained about 13 million votes.
About half of these had been won from the moderate middle-class parties and were augmented by the vote of about 6 million new voters, half of whom were young people voting for the first time, and the other half of whom were people who up to now had been too weary, cynical or lacking in hope to vote at all.
But the vast increase in the Nazi vote came primarily from the impoverished middle classes who had seen their savings and living standards smashed in the wake of the Versailles Treaty and the Depression.
Perhaps half of those who had previously voted for the middle-class parties now voted for the NSDAP.
The People's Party and the Democrats had between them polled over 5,500,000 votes in 1928, but in 1932 they polled less than a million.
With their insistent anti-Polish, anti-Jewish and anti-Communist propaganda, their apparently radical economic policies, their contempt for the ‘weakness’ of Weimar democracy, their emphasis on military virtues and their theories of racial supremacy, the Nazis appeared to have solutions for the problems that beset the Reich.
It seemed that they were determined to carry these solutions through.
Nevertheless, in Danzig these policies took longer to establish themselves as specifically Nazi ideas because there were  already several local political parties with a similar outlook, but with less ruthless and less violent leaders.
Also, since to a large extent the promise of Nazi solutions was false and depended upon the Nazi ability to create the problems it intended to resolve by force, matters in Danzig had to move much more slowly because the city was subject to massive foreign observation through the League of Nations.
In Danzig it was not possible for the Nazis to proceed as they had in the Reich.
This fact meant that Danzigers had far more opportunity to mull over Nazi propaganda and assess for themselves the extent of the Polish, Communist and Jewish ‘threats’.
The more isolated rural Free City population gave its support to the NSDAP at an early stage, but by and large the city dwellers could give the lie to much Nazi propaganda.
It was obvious to them that Danzig, up to the advent of the Nazis, had been far freer from racial strife and entrenched national rivalry than might have been expected in such a complex and explosive economic and political environment.
There was certainly far too little tension between the Poles, Danzigers and Jews than was convenient for Nazi recruitment.
The Danzig NSDAP was founded by a minor tax office clerk called Albert Hohnfeldt, who had served with both the Erhardt Brigade and the Freikorps — organisations famed for violence fuelled by spectacular beer consumption.
When he joined the Party in 1922 he was the only member in Danzig, and had to wait until after Hitler was released from the Landsberg prison and the Party was re-launched before he could become active on its behalf.
By the end of 1925 NSDAP-Danzig boasted 130 members.
Hohnfeldt's leadership left much to be desired.
He had no notion of how to create, channel or exploit the frustrations of this retrograde and embarrassing nook of dismantled empire.
He lacked imagination and, like most of those in the right-wing Völkisch parties, was not noted for the subtlety of his political thought.
His ‘confrontation’ with the Reds in the workers' district of Emmaus ended with the tiny Nazi Party surrounded by a sea of Red Front members, who, to the intense discomfort of the Nazis, did nothing more violent than bellow endless verses of the ‘Internationale’at them.
In these early years the Reich Treasury was unwilling to offer any subsidy to the Danzig Party, presumably on the grounds that with such poor leadership it would be money wasted.
If this is so then the Danzig Volkstag elections of 1927 would have confirmed this opinion, since the NSDAP polled a total of 1,400 votes to obtain only one of the 120 possible seats.
Following their disastrous showing at the polls, there was a period of time-consuming  and bitter recrimination followed by a round of resignations.
So intense was the internal struggle that the Party actually missed a magnificent opportunity to display itself to the public: the tenth anniversary of the Treaty of Versailles — the seat and source of all their misery — passed without the Nazis mounting even a token demonstration.
Recognising that the local leaders were incompetent dimwits, the NSDAP put the area under the control of Gauleiter Erich Koch of East Prussia, and he appointed Bruno Fricke as Danzig's new business manager.
Under Fricke's guidance membership began to increase: from 300 members in 1926 to 800 by 1930.
But this was not achieved without stirring up local feeling.
As the Reich Nazi Party moved towards its own internal revolution so tensions arose within the Danzig Nazi Party too.
However, while dispute in the Reich centred on the political control of Ernst Röhm's brownshirt empire within an empire, in Danzig the affair had more to do with petty jealousies and spite, through which the hazy outline of some dispute about the future and direction of the Party was just discernible.
The year 1930 saw a bewildering and rapid sequence of events: Bruno Fricke was arraigned for court martial, there was a string of resignations, public rows and even expulsions.
Finally Hermann Göring intervened to dissolve the Danzig Party.
Almost immediately the party was reconstituted, but this time Göring kept a watchful eye on the Danzigers.
In the three years that followed, the Danzig Nazis became better at governing themselves and at developing strategies to exploit the increasing economic difficulties of the Free City.
As the NSDAP in the Reich moved nearer to its electoral victory of 1930, so the Danzig Nazis shifted their thinking from the idea of seizing power in the city state to the altogether different business of returning Danzig to the Reich.
The man to whom this task fell was Albert Forster.
Forster was a Bavarian who had joined the Party in 1923.
He had been an associate of Julius Streicher, the editor of Der Stürmer.
In 1930 he was the youngest member of the Reichstag and was considered by all to be a high-flyer.
It was Göring who suggested to Hitler that Forster should be appointed Gauleiter of Danzig in time for the forthcoming elections.
Certainly Forster's powers of demagoguery were equal to the city's economic distress.
Unemployment — mainly a result of the opening of the new Polish port at Gdynia — had risen in 1930 to 25,000, and would rise to over 30,000 in the next three years.
Forster made use of this in a way his predecessors had not been able to.
He organised huge torch-lit rallies on the Langemarkt, uniformed marches through the city, military displays on the Maiweisse, and an impressive list  of speakers from the Reich.
The result was gratifying to Göring.
His man had increased the Nazi presence in the Volkstag from a single seat to 27 seats.
And just as in the Reich, on the back of electoral success rode increased party membership; between June 1930 and December 1932 membership increased from 800 to 9,519.
The Danzig Party leapt into the political struggles of the Volkstag with renewed energy and Forster settled down with confidence to work at his leisure the rich vein of economic discontent that ran right through every strata of Free City society.
The discriminatory policies of Poland, which had been prompted by Germany's boycott of Polish coal in 1925, had by this time developed into a fully-fledged trade war, and this, combined with the effects of the new port at Gdynia, the increasing Jewish population, the irritating presence of Danzig Poles and the continual clucking of the League of Nations, all helped to shift the political perceptions of the local population towards simplistic, populist, nationalist and ultimately racist solutions — namely those offered by the Nazi Party.
The economic crisis reached into every corner of city life.
It was impossible for any society to absorb without hardship a shock like that of the massive loss of trade to Gdynia.
At the same time it was widely known that unemployment relief, while inadequate, could only be paid at all as a result of direct subsidy from the Reich.
Even Catholic sympathy for Polish co-religionists was wearing thin, and, in spite of the efforts of Bishop O'Rourke, there was considerable hostility towards the Poles from within the Free City's Catholic hierarchy.
With their increased membership and improved position on the Volkstag the NSDAP felt confident enough to begin behaving badly in public.
An article appeared in the Nazi newspaper Danziger Vorposten claiming that the Danzig Harbour Board served only the interests of the Poles and should therefore be abolished.
Artur Greisser, a Nazi and the Danzig nominee on the Harbour Board, went to the office of one of the Polish engineers on the Board and threatened him with a revolver.
The Danzig Senate dismissed the incident as a joke.
The Poles took the matter seriously, but the League of Nations, saying that no-one had been hurt and perhaps the revolver had not been loaded, took no action.
Tempers flared again later that year over the renewal of the Danzig-Polish Accord on the use and access to the port facilities.
According to the initial agreement, any foreign warship putting into the port was to be greeted by a Polish warship and escorted inside the port canal for an exchange of courtesies.
In the spring of 1932 the British announced that a flotilla of three destroyers was to grace the city with a visit.
The Danzig authorities immediately  began to drag out the renewal of the Accord and, hoping perhaps to stop the visit altogether, told the British that all procedures were in temporary suspension and that this would prevent the Poles from greeting the British in the agreed manner.
The Poles reluctantly asked the British to cancel the visit but the British insisted that the visit should go ahead as planned.
Marshal Piłsudski ordered the Polish destroyer Wicher to greet, salute and escort the British as if the Accord were still in effect, and Tadeusz Morgenstern, the commander of the destroyer, was instructed that if the Danzig authorities insulted the Polish flag or tried to interfere with the visit in any way, he was to bombard designated targets in the city centre.
Mercifully, the event passed off without incident.
Afterwards the Danzig Senate lodged a complaint with the League of Nations about the behaviour of the Poles, and the Poles lodged a similar complaint about the Germans.
The two sides were still arguing when the League of Nations endorsed the Accord in Geneva the following September.
In 1933 the Nazis increased their number of seats on the Volkstag to 38, and were present for the first time in sufficient numbers to have an effect on the business and workings of the chamber.
As in the Reich, it seems that they had gained votes at the expense of the middle-class Centre Party.
The biggest Nazi vote came from the rural districts, and the lowest came from urban areas, where the SPD, KPD and DNVP were still firmly based.
Regardless of where their support came from, the fact was that possession of 38 seats in the Volkstag meant they could now rule with little or no reference to the other parties.
The Danzig Nazis celebrated their electoral success by journeying to Berlin to share coffee and cakes with Hitler.
He congratulated them, but at the same time insisted that, for the time being at least, they must move towards some sort of accommodation with the Poles.
Hitler had no wish to provoke an armed conflict that he was not certain of winning.
This left the Danzig Nazis in an awkward situation since they had specifically whipped up anti-Polish feeling as part of their election campaign.
They felt that they had a much stronger position than before and that a certain amount of muscle flexing was now unavoidable if they were not to lose face with their supporters.
When the Danzig Polish Accord came up for ratification, the Nazis ordered that all Polish Harbour Board officers should be replaced by German and Danzig officers.
The Poles were furious and determined to resist any such move.
On 16 March 1933 they brought in armed Polish police to protect their Harbour Board officers, and saying they feared the Nazis were planning an armed  raid on the Polish ammunition dump, they reinforced their garrison on Westerplatte by bringing in 120 soldiers aboard the destroyer Wilia .
The Danzig Senate denied any such plan and, after a debate, the League of Nations, in a rare display of firmness, obliged the Poles to withdraw their soldiers and police.
The Danzig authorities renewed the Danzig-Polish Accord on direct orders from Berlin, and in September 1933 they signed, without fuss, the Minorities Agreement guaranteeing the protection of Poles and Polish Jews within the city.
In return the Poles agreed to drop some of their discriminatory tariffs.
If Marshal Piłsudski and Colonel Beck, the Polish leaders in Warsaw, were upset that France had not given them stronger backing over the Wilia crisis, then they were also relieved to find that Hitler was not prepared to go to war over the city — at least not yet.
Even without offering provocation to the Poles the Danzig Nazis were busy enough with their Gleichschaltung or Nazification of the city.
They imposed a ban on all unemployment relief organisations that were not run through the Nazi Party.
They passed an Emergency Powers Act which, under the guise of doing anything they felt necessary to ‘relieve the distress of the people’, allowed them to do as they pleased without resorting to the Volkstag for authority.
Their plans under this law included: the introduction of protective custody without trial; the introduction of a law to protect the NSDAP from libel, slander or defamation — which effectively meant that all criticism of the Party ran the risk of legal action; and the curtailment of the rights of newspapers, editors and journalists.
They also made communism illegal.
The Danzig police, who had been early to convert — almost as a bloc — to Nazism, began the ominous rounding up of oppositionist politicians, communists, activists from the Centre Party and those editors and journalists who remained hostile to the NSDAP.
Even though it was against Danzig law, these people were all sent to the Reich, presumably to concentration camps.
Bishop O'Rourke organised a petition complaining of the illegality of the move, but all this achieved was to get those who signed (and later re-signed) beaten up.
The Nazis also set about preparing their version of history for public consumption.
Danzig's first Nazi Senate President Rauschning recorded a conversation he had with Himmler, probably at the end of 1933:
Himmler called me to account about a professor who lectured on prehistoric times at Danzig and Königsberg.
This man, he said, had been criticising current ideas about the origin of the Teutons and the age of their civilisation, and had condemned these ideas from allegedly scientific points of view.
At the time a sensation had been created by an
exceedingly silly book, a manifest forgery, the Uralinda Chronicle .
The book traced back the history of the Teutons to an infinitely remote period: and it proved once more that the original German-Teuton race was the true creator of European civilisation.
The professor had treated this book with proper severity, and Himmler wanted me to dispose once and for all of this type of scientific mischief-making.
He himself would put the fear of God into the professors of Königsberg and Breslau; I was to do the same thing in Danzig.
The Nazis now had little need of the Volkstag, and it met only rarely.
Yet the Nazis knew that they could not behave too outrageously because there was always the threat that the League of Nations might call in the Poles to annex the city and suppress the NSDAP in the name of European peace.
Hitler's instruction to curb anti-Polish activity meant that what they could not accomplish by open violence or legalistic chicanery they would have to accomplish by stealth and skulduggery.
The odd balance of power within the city was almost destroyed entirely when on 12 November 1933 Adolf Hitler announced that Germany was leaving the League of Nations.
Only his swift conclusion of a non-aggression pact with Poland saved Danzig from a final resolution of the city's problems in Poland's favour.
During 1934 the tensions within the Danzig NSDAP were most evident in the hostility between Gauleiter Forster and Senate President Hermann Rauschning.
Rauschning was an ex-Prussian cadet who had been wounded in the First World War.
Although he was a leading member of the Danzig Party it would probably be fair to describe him as a misguided liberal who only realised his mistaken alliance when he saw the brownshirts pulling on their kicking boots.
Rauschning had tried to bring about some sensible appreciation of Danzig's rapidly fading monopoly position vis-a-vis Polish trade and to effect a policy whereby the city would realise its unique position on the Baltic by quietly penetrating the Polish, Lithuanian and Russian markets.
In many ways this was a sensible policy since even if Danzig had not been made a Free City and had remained within the long arm of Prussia, the local economy was too poor to maintain it for long; a German Danzig would still have been forced to rely upon a distant Vistula hinterland.
Gauleiter Forster, on the other hand, had been using the threat of Russian communism and Polish nationalism as the basis for the development of the NSDAP.
Without these threats the party would cease to exist.
While Rauschning emphasised reconciliation, understanding and harmony through balanced trade, Forster had been saying that reconciliation with the Poles was impossible and endlessly repeating that a return to the Reich was  essential, but was prevented only by the intransigence of the vengeful Poles.
It took Rauschning a long time to realise that his standpoint was exactly opposite to Forster's.
Rauschning also began to realise that Gauleiter Forster had been using the economic reforms initiated by the Party in 1933 to line his own pocket.
Forster's holdings in real estate and fine art, his lavish lifestyle and frequent ‘entertainments’ were common knowledge within the Party and a source of embarrassment to Senate President Rauschning.
Opposition leaders had long since satirised the Nazis as ‘all new cars and gold braid’.
Unlike in the Reich, where the Nazis had sealed off the German people and the NSDAP membership from foreign scrutiny, and where investigative journalism, hostile comment and moral concern were all about to disappear into the camps, leaving the party accountable to no-one, Danzig was never able fully to apply these principles simply because the city remained a ward of the League of Nations.
Danzig, even if its own journalists and citizens were harassed and threatened, was open to all the observation and criticism the world could muster.
Rauschning, though he hardly seems to have understood, could complain about the Gauleiter's lifestyle precisely because they lived in the Free City.
Inside the Reich Rauschning's moral scruples would have appeared foolish, even suicidal.
If anything Forster was restrained compared to the excesses of other leading Nazis.
Rauschning made the mistake of taking his complaint to Hitler.
And while the Senate President was away in Berlin, Forster and his cronies concocted a simple plan to remove him from office.
In September 1934 the Danzig Nazis charged a Latvian Jew with communism and violation of the Press Laws.
Under ‘pressure of interrogation’ the unfortunate man named two of Rauschning's closest associates as his accomplices.
Rauschning returned to face a whole series of issues and policies he felt he could no longer support or accept and to find himself cited in an investigation of both Jewish and communist influence in the city.
Failing to find support from within the Danzig party or from Berlin, Rauschning had little option but to resign from both his post as Senate President and from membership of the Party.
He withdraw on sick leave to his farm at Grosses Werder and later, by a roundabout route, emigrated to the US where he wrote various books warning about the Nazi menace and lamenting his involvement with them.
The departure of Rauschning was significant because it meant that the last liberal conscience, the last internal barrier to the complete and violent Nazification of the city had now been removed.
Their ‘soft’ attitude to the Poles lost the Nazis a great deal of support In the 1935 Volkstag elections.
The business sector of the city was also upset by the circumstances of Rauschning's departure.
As a local — he was from Thorn — and as a farmer with business interests in the Free City, they had trusted his leadership far more than they trusted Forster, whom they saw as a boorish Bavarian appointed by Berlin.
Rauschning's departure had brought to the fore worries that Danzig was not sharing in the economic recovery about which the Reich newspapers — strictly controlled by the NSDAP — trumpeted so loud.
as if to reassure the Danzigers, on the first day of the election campaign Hitler announced his intention to renegotiate the Anglo-German Air and Naval pacts.
Even so, this was nowhere near enough to win over the Danzig voters.
That Forster and the local Nazis knew as much is evidenced by the fact that the 1935 election was the dirtiest and most dubious of the Danzig NSDAP's victories.
At this stage of their takeover the Nazis needed a massive vote of confidence from the electorate to justify the virtual disappearance of the Volkstag and their assumption of Emergency Powers.
The Nazis also needed a mandate to proceed with their policies.
The election was required by law, and if anyone thought it odd that there should be such trouble over elections to a chamber that now met only to ratify decisions taken elsewhere, then they kept the notion to themselves.
When it looked as if the Danzigers would not oblige the Nazis with an overwhelming vote of confidence, the Nazis set out to help themselves.
The election campaign included forcing all newspaper sales off the streets, widespread use of violence and thuggery, arson attacks on offices and homes, the takeover of the local radio station by the NSDAP and exchanges of gunfire on the streets.
Miraculously no-one was killed.
The Poles, in an effort to re-elect their own representatives, drew money illegally from outside the city.
But the amounts the Poles spent were dwarfed by the way the Nazis used state funds as if they were from the Nazi Party cash box.
Goebbels visited the city to give the campaign a boost, and toured around in a series of noisy, impressive and carefully stage-managed motorcades complete with motorcycle outriders.
He reviewed the massed ranks of the uniformed SA and SS on the Langemarkt and made violently anti-Polish speeches from the Artushof and from the Zoppot Cure-House — speeches that left what remained of the opposition staggered at his vehemence and fearful of the consequences.
But his words and attitudes heartened the Danzig Party, who had begun to feel that Berlin no longer cared for the city's struggle against Poland and Polish trade.
Expectations that the vote would repeat the Saar plebiscite of the previous year and that the Nazis would make a clean sweep of the Volkstag were dashed.
The NSDAP gained only 43 of the 72 seats and polled less than 60 per cent of the vote.
Forster was so smitten by the result that he could not trust his voice to announce the Nazi gains on the radio, and is said to have spent the night at home weeping uncontrollably.
Even though they had failed by their own standards, the Nazis had reduced and contained the power of the communists, DVNP and SPD.
Technically, they still did not have total control of the machinery of state, but in practice their use of the Emergency Powers and willingness to use violence meant that, subject only to the threat of a Polish invasion, they could do more or less as they pleased.
Ambassador Lipski had begun to complain to Göring that German newspapers like Der Stürmer and Der Gessilige from Pila were stirring up resentment against the Poles throughout the border districts by referring to the forcible separation of Danzig from the Reich, and by referring to the Polish Corridor as land ceded to Poland.
Lipski was able to point to several passages in school textbooks containing similar references.
He also complained that the consistent use of the word Pomerellen in German texts was offensive to Polish residents of the Corridor.
Lipski made the point that these and other examples of anti-Polish sentiment occurred with greater frequency in the areas bordering the Polish Corridor than they did in other parts of Germany.
Pomerania in particular was rapidly approaching hysterical anti-Polish feeling.
Lipski cited three German publications from the previous year in which the generally intolerant attitude of the border districts was not only present, but had clearly been sanctioned and licensed by the energy and policy of the NSDAP in Berlin.
In short Lipski said that the Germans were manipulating a crisis in order to renege on their debts to Poland.
There was a great deal of truth in Lipski's comments.
The Reich's rearmament programme and the continued high level of subsidy to Danzig had caused a severe drain on German gold reserves and had upset the balance of payments.
The Poles calculated that Germany owed 29,500,000 złoties to Poland in transit fees through the Corridor, but was dragging its feet over payment.
Early in 1935 Göring assured Ambassador Lipski that, far from stirring up trouble in the border, Danzig was quiet only because the Nazis were in control.
He said that if they had not gained the upper hand then the old Völkisch parties would certainly have picked a fight with Poland.
Lipski had to agree.
Even if Nazi domestic policies were worrying, it did look as if the Nazis were  maintaining a friendly stance towards Poland.
Hitler's instruction that the flags should be flown at half mast to mark the death of Marshal Piłsudski on 12 May 1935 was also taken as a reassuring gesture.
Göring, of course, knew more than he told Lipski.
In late April 1935 Gauleiter Forster, Hitler, Göring and the Reichsbank president Hjalmar Schacht had met and discussed the city's desperate financial situation.
Failure at the polls had exposed Danzigers to the true state of the city's finances.
Looking at the account books — the real ones, not the fabrications served up to the Poles and the League of Nations — it was clear that Danzig's projected budget for 1934–5 would run at a deficit of over 44 million gulden, which, when added to the employment projects the Nazis needed to keep their supporters in Danzig happy and faithful, would leave the Reichsbank to pick up a bill of over 110 million marks.
The Reich had been injecting money into Danzig to make it appear that Forster and his pals were able to find the resources to create employment projects through their superior management skills.
Reich subsidy to the city had now reached its limits and Schacht was in favour of cutting off all further aid.
In Berlin it was agreed that with the depression eating away at Danzig's own tax revenues, the city's only possible course of action was to devalue the Danzig gulden by 57.5 per cent to achieve parity with the zloty.
The announcement of the devaluation and the attendant massive fall in the standard of living caused total panic at every level of society.
Huge queues formed outside shops as people tried to spend all their savings before they were devalued.
Prices rocketed to anticipate the devaluation and speculation was rife.
Danzig's already depleted currency reserves dropped steadily.
Local banks faced massive demands for withdrawals which they could not possibly meet and promptly declared several bank holidays in a row.
Local businessmen felt that all their worst suspicions about the Nazis had been confirmed, though some suspected that the Poles had engineered the crisis in order to introduce the zloty as the new Danzig currency.
By the end of April 1935 Danzig's currency reserves stood at less than half of their 1933 figure; by June the reserve had dropped to less than one-eighth of that figure.
Bankruptcy stared the Nazis in the face, and for a while they were so desperate that they actually considered introducing the zloty as a way of stabilising the currency and restoring calm.
They abandoned this idea when they realised that it would mean the end of the NSDAP in Danzig.
On 11 June 1935, without consulting the Poles, the Danzig Senate imposed currency and  exchange controls — a move that was in direct contravention of the Danzig-Polish Accords.
In Warsaw the move was seen as a strike against Polish business interests in Danzig.
Ambassador Lipski hastened across Berlin to speak with Hjalmar Schacht, who was on his way to Danzig to help sort out the mess.
Schacht made soothing noises and promised Lipski that there was no real crisis at all— merely a psychological one.
He said that in fact the gulden was very healthy, that no cunning ploy against Polish business had been intended, and that everything would be well again within two months.
The Poles were nevertheless alarmed.
Their revenues from Customs Duties were affected by the imposition of exchange controls.
They stopped all trade entering Poland via Danzig and rerouted traffic through Gdynia.
They also decided to levy duty in Poland rather than in the Free City.
These measures put many of the dockworkers out of work.
The port never recovered from this blow and about 10 per cent of the trade lost to Gdynia during this crisis never returned.
The Danzig Senators argued that the only way forward now lay in an immediate return to the Reich, but they were still afraid that this would provoke an invasion of the city and war with Poland.
Eventually the Senate decided to admit tax-free food and medicines destined for use in Danzig.
The Poles responded by refusing entry to all goods (mainly matches, beer and chocolate) made in Danzig.
On 2 August 1935 Ambassador Lipski spoke with German Secretary of State von Bülow, but still could not effect a solution.
It was only after the personal intervention of Göring, who spoke with Lipski by telephone on 6 August, that it was agreed Danzig would return to a fixed currency levy.
Göring, much to Hitler's annoyance, also managed to persuade the Danzig NSDAP of his point of view.
After lengthy phone-calls between Berlin and Danzig on 8 August, Forster announced that a fixed currency levy was now in operation and everyone breathed a sigh of relief.
In spite of evident satisfaction that the crisis had been resolved, the Poles were increasingly alarmed by the instability of the Danzig economy and the Nazis' failure to control the city's financial arrangements.
While the Poles were largely indifferent to the internal problems of the city — which they reasoned were the result of German agitation and would never have arisen if the Versailles politicians had made some more workable arrangement — they were very sensitive to any disturbance in their trade through the Corridor and the Baltic ports.
Poland, too, was hard hit by the Depression and, in spite of the developing trade war, Germany had taken advantage of the weak Polish mark to trade at  advantageous rates and to become Poland's main trading partner.
In 1918 the exchange rate had stood at 1 US dollar to 9 Polish marks; by 1923 the rate was 1 US dollar to 15 million Polish marks.
The currency reform of 1924 had introduced the new Polish zloty, tied to the newly created central Bank Polski, but a stable currency was maintained only at terrible social and political cost.
The British General Strike of 1926 had given both Germany and Poland a new sense of the gains that might be made through co-operation, and while they explored this unexpected windfall, the effects of the Polish currency reform were hidden.
Both countries poured out millions of tons of coal to make good the orders of the international coal trade.
The Poles filled every available truck and train with Silesian coal and sent it north; for weeks a fine drifting cloud of coal-dust hung over Danzig and it seemed the port was to become a coal-opolis fit to rival Cardiff, the coal capital of the world.
But after the settlement of the dispute Danzig-Polish co-operation lapsed as if it had never existed.
The currency reform had been intended to halt inflation and end the inequality in the terms of trade.
In this it was a great but short-lived success and provoked Germany into refusing to buy Polish coal, which in turn provoked Poland into putting an embargo on all German trade.
In many ways it was the currency reform and the severance of trade with Germany the following year that had paved the way for the military coup in Poland that installed Marshal Piłsudski as head of government in May 1926.
By the time Piłsudski took over, the Polish economy was in a desperate plight and it was only with centralised planning introduced in 1936 under the guidance of Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski and the left wing of the Sanacja (‘moral cleansing’ regime) that the Polish economy began to show signs of recovery.
The new state had so far relied heavily upon French, American and Italian finance to integrate its railways, rationalise its industry and build the new port at Gdynia.
But after 1936 — a turning point for Poland — only the French continued to supply finance (over 2,600 million francs) and roughly half of the trade credits and finance that flowed through the economy came directly from the state.
Even so, by 1937 40.1 per cent of all remaining capital in joint-stock ventures was foreign-owned.
Companies in which foreign capital amounted to more than half of the total capital constituted 63.1 per cent of all joint-stock companies.
The Polish economy showed signs of economic recovery and of rapid industrialisation in the years 1936–9.
Nevertheless Poland was still encumbered by a poorly developed industrial sector, a  primitive, almost feudal, agricultural system, an under-funded banking sector and a poorly integrated railway system, and was hampered by the fact that it paid out 40 per cent of Gross National Income (approximately 28 per cent of all government expenditure) to maintain an army that was second in size only to that of Russia.
Under the ageing Marshal Piłsudski the Poles had become very hard-nosed about the problem of Danzig and trade with Germany.
They had no choice; their economy had very little room for manoeuvre, the German threat meant heavy military investment at the cost of social and industrial improvement; yet any halt in the country's ability to trade was tied directly to the continued life of the government, the existence of the state and the possibility of a military solution to all its problems.
Throughout 1936 Danzig teachers, trade unionists and politicians who were unsympathetic to the Nazi Party were beaten up or suspended from their jobs.
The League of Nations appeared to have washed its hands of the city, and the general attitude was that it was a matter for Poles and Germans to decide between themselves.
It was only with the greatest of difficulty that the League could be persuaded to do its job in Danzig.
In June 1936 the Danzig SA attacked a DVNP meeting, and in the brawl that followed one of their men died.
Rejecting medical evidence that he had suffered a heart attack brought on by stress and aggravated by a syphilitic condition, the Nazis used the funeral to turn the dead man into a Nazi martyr.
The year's prize crisis occurred just a few days later, when the German battleship Leipzig visited the city.
At an official reception the captain of the ship pointedly ignored Sean Lester, the League of Nations High Commissioner, and later excluded him from the list of official courtesy visits.
Lester summoned Senate President Artur Greisser to explain this breach of etiquette and protocol.
Greisser said that the previous year the German battleship Admiral Scheer had put into Danzig, and on that occasion the ship's captain had been introduced socially to anti-Nazi members of the Danzig Senate.
This, Greisser said, was a breach of courtesy, and as Lester had been responsible, there would be no apology for the German reply.
Greisser was summoned to the High Council of the League of Nations in Geneva to repeat his explanation.
When he arrived Greisser gave the Hitler salute, and by his pompous language and ridiculous bearing reduced journalists, observers and officials to helpless laughter.
Upon leaving the League's Palace Greisser said loudly: ‘This place is nothing but wind.’
He accompanied this with a rude gesture — some say it was a noise, others that he stuck  out his tongue, or even that he made a sign with his forearm.
Whatever it was, the meaning was clear.
When he returned to Danzig Greisser was treated as a conquering hero, and was greeted by cheering crowds at the railway station.
The League of Nations and the Danzig Senate exchanged notes of protest, but that was as far as the League pursued the matter.
On 31 October 1936 armed Nazis attacked a Polish home at Schönbrun, near Danzig, and Marian Chodacki, the Polish Commissioner General in Danzig, had to intervene to try and get the police to bring the trouble-makers to court.
A week later the Senate created the Landesarbeitsamt — a kind of labour exchange, but one which refused to cater for the Polish unemployed of Danzig.
There were continual violent clashes between the SPD, DVNP, Centre Party and the Nazis.
The Volkstag hardly met at all by this time, so those anti-Nazis who had not fled and who were not under arrest had no voice in the government of the city.
By Christmas all three main opposition parties had dissolved themselves.
Nazi Party membership was still climbing steadily.
In June 1934 membership had stood at 21,861.
During the electoral and economic crisis of 1935 the Party had accepted no new members, but when it opened its books again in September 1936 membership shot up to 29,819.
In proportion to population there were now more NSDAP members in Danzig than there were in the Reich.
In February 1937 Marshal Göring visited Marshal Śmigły-Rydz in Warsaw and assured him that Germany had absolutely no territorial claims on the Polish Corridor and that Danzig, though ‘eternally bound’ to Poland by trade, would remain a Free City.
In August Ambassador Lipski wrote to Colonel Beck, the Polish Foreign Minister, to say that von Moltke, the German Ambassador to Warsaw, had informed him that 80 per cent of the 300,000 Germans living within the Polish borders were now unemployed.
Lipski and von Moltke agreed that Berlin understood its Poles about as well as Poland understood its Germans.
On 5 November 1937 Hitler made a public speech in which he said that Germany had no claim on Danzig and that he did not want to change the city's status: ‘Danzig ist mit Polen verbunden — Danzig is with Poland bound.’
Yet had he decided the reverse it was already clear that the League of Nations lacked the will-power to say him nay.
At this stage Hitler's plans were still fluid, but the last thing he wanted was for the useful Danzig problem to be solved.
It was in any case too late for the League of Nations to move against the Nazis since they were in power as a result of legal democratic electoral procedures.
To attempt to suppress the  Party in Danzig would probably have united the Danzigers against the League.
In any case, Germany had already removed itself from the control and sanction of the League of Nations.
On the same day that he declared he had no intention of altering Danzig's status, and after meeting Ambassador Lipski at the Reich Chancellery to make the same assurance, Hitler went to a private meeting with a small group of Nazi leaders.
At that meeting he said he hoped that if Germany occupied Czechoslovakia the move would paralyse Poland at the same time.
He warned that if war in the west should break out, Polish neutrality — guaranteed by treaty with Germany — would end abruptly.
Hitler predicted that, if given the opportunity, Poland would strike out to take over Silesia, East Prussia and Pomerania.
It was clear that Hitler was mentally preparing himself and his assistants for all possible configurations of alliance and animosity.
Notes from this meeting were kept by Colonel Hossbach and later fell into Allied hands.
Several commentators are of the opinion that the ‘Hossbach Papers’ mark the beginning of Hitler's practical planning for war in the east.
In spite of his plans, as late as January 1938 Hitler told Colonel Beck that he considered the Danzig arrangements binding, that he thought it possible to accommodate Poland and that he had no territorial claims to make.
As Hitler's preparations for war gathered pace, so the atmosphere in Danzig became increasingly tense.
In the late summer of 1938 the local campaign against the ‘Jewish problem’ received public attention.
In August Göring told Lipski that certain anti-German incidents along the Polish border were poisoning the atmosphere and that Poles were conspiring to interfere with the work of the League in Danzig.
Göring added that it was widely believed that Poland intended to annex East Prussia and Danzig in the near future.
By September 1938 it was clear that Carl Burckhardt, the Swiss League of Nations High Commissioner, was not prepared to do anything to prevent the drive to Nazify the city, and that he saw his position to be that of ‘observer’ or, at most, intermediary.
The Poles and the Jews were uneasy about Burckhardt.
He failed to do all he could for the Jews and socialised with the Nazis too easily for the Poles' liking.
Only later did it emerge that the Germans had supported his candidature for the post of High Commissioner in Danzig, and that he had since 1920 been on very friendly terms with Baron Ernst von Wiesäker, the head of the political section of the German Foreign Office.
In Colonel Beck's terms, the appointment of Burckhardt meant that the League was now ‘bankrupt’.
Accordingly the Poles instructed Ambassador Lipski to seek assurances from Hitler that  his statement of 5 November 1937 still applied.
On 16 September 1938 Lipski reported to Warsaw that Göring had said that without Poland Danzig could not expect to survive on trade from East Prussia.
Poland had by now withdrawn most of its trade through the city to its own port at Gdynia, and the Reich could hardly be expected to maintain or guarantee for an indefinite period the subsidy the city required.20 Lipski and Göring agreed that Germany and Poland should draw together in an understanding that they would jointly stabilise the city if the League should either collapse or decide to withdraw from Danzig.
Later events proved this ‘understanding’ to be a smokescreen of Göring's invention.
On 24 October 1938 von Ribbentrop had dinner with Ambassador Lipski at the Grand Hotel in Berchtesgaden.
Von Ribbentrop said that if Poland would allow Danzig to return to the Reich, Germany would be happy to guarantee Poland access to the road, rail and port facilities.
He also said that if Poland would agree to an extra-territorial railway line to run across the Corridor, linking Stettin, Danzig and Königsberg, Germany would agree to guarantee Polish borders for a period of 25 years.
Lipski was both shocked and impressed by the offer.
Only six weeks before, the Germans had said they had no claim on the city.
Now they had a claim.
Lipski said he would repeat the offer to Colonel Beck in Warsaw, but that he was sure the answer would be ‘no’.
The Germans began to put on pressure.
In November 1938 there was trouble over the installation of several Polish postboxes in Danzig.
As fast as the Poles installed them, the local Nazis tore them from their mountings and heaved them into the Radaune canal.
Following hard upon this came the issue of a set of stamps to commemorate the anniversary of Poland's rebirth in November 1918.
On 11 November 1938 (the twentieth anniversary of Armistice Day and therefore a very sensitive date on the German calendar) the Poles released a set of 15 groszy stamps.
The design on one of the stamps recalled the victory of the armies of King Jagiełło and Queen Jadwiga over the Teutonic Knights at Tannenberg (Grunwald) in 1410.
Another stamp showed Polish and Danzig merchants trading grain.
The Danzig Senate complained to the League that the stamps were offensive to Germans and pointed to a pair of crossed swords incorporated in the design as indicating particular ill-will on the part of the Poles.
The Poles, through Commissioner General Marian Chodacki, said that what went on to their stamps was their business, and they were genuinely mystified that Danzigers whose ancestors had risen up against the Teutonic Knights should feel offended by stamps that  celebrated their victory.
Also, as the Poles pointed out, many of the Knights had not been German.
The Senate then took exception to the legend on the stamps: ‘Polish Post Office: Port of Gdansk’.
Again the Poles were mystified.
They had a post office in that location; it had been there protected under Treaty and by the League of Nations for nearly 20 years, and that was where the stamps had been issued.
The Senate then took offence at the picture of the grain merchants.
They felt it emphasised the Polish presence in the city.
The Poles replied that the design was based on a painting by the Dutch artist Van Der Block dating from about 1608, that the original painting hung in the Danzig Main Town Hall in a room which the Nazis used for frequent social and political meetings.
They had not taken exception to it before, so why start now?
The Senate retreated in sullen anger.
The Poles withdrew the stamps and reissued them without the crossed swords.
The only people to benefit from the clash were the philatelists.
The Polish government debated von Ribbentrop's proposals and decided that, if granted, concessions to Hitler would start rather than end with Danzig, and would lead to demands for the return of Mazuria, Poznań and Silesia.
While the Poles appreciated German fears about the threat posed to Central Europe by a rise of Soviet power they did not see that they would be serving Poland's interests by agreeing to Hitler's demands.
The Poles were well aware that they were a kitten between two cats, but they preferred to persist in Piłsudski's strategy of keeping both Germans and Russians at arm's length while trusting to Western capital and military alliances.
Germany's offer may have appealed to anti-Russian prejudice, but then the Polish state had fought and beaten the Soviets once, and compared to that Hitler's offer sounded to Lipski like the opportunity to become a mere German satellite.
Certainly there seemed little point in giving either side the initial advantage; invasion by one might be precipitated by an agreement with the other, and if Germany and the USSR came to blows, it would inevitably be on Polish soil.
On 19 November 1938, with the row over the postage stamps still simmering in the background, Lipski and von Ribbentrop met again.
Lipski explained that the proposals had met with no enthusiasm in Warsaw, and that while Foreign Minister Colonel Beck was prepared to discuss the removal of the League from Danzig, he was not prepared to hand the place back to Germany.
Nor was Beck prepared to discuss improved road and rail links across the Corridor unless they were ‘territorial’— that is, under Polish control.
Von Ribbentrop reported back to Hitler, and on the evening of 24 November 1938 Adolf Hitler added Danzig to the list of military targets for the forthcoming campaign in the east.
It was clear that in spite of the NSDAP's grip on the local population and the conciliatory attitudes of British and French politicians, he would be unable to bargain Danzig back into the Reich.
For the first time Hitler's policy of threat and bluster met with a loud, clear and firm rebuttal.
It was something of a gamble.
The Nazis must have known that the Poles would not release Danzig without a struggle — indeed, they had asked for something they knew the Poles would not give.
The Nazification process thrived on an air of constant tension.
If by some chance the Poles had agreed to hand over the city it is quite possible that even at this late stage NSDAP support in the city would have evaporated.
The Nazis could only thrive on being seen to be refused, and the Poles had just obliged.
The Nazification drive had been remarkably successful by this time.
According to the Party's own population estimate there were 375,972 people resident in the city.
In December 1937 Party membership stood at 36,475 — or 9.7 per cent of the population.
In that year Nazi posts of responsibility, membership of voluntary organisations and services totalled over 254,389.
Though many of these posts overlapped and the bulk of the membership were passive, it is clear that almost every avenue of expression or opinion — from welfare to warfare, from motoring to flying — was controlled, regulated and policed by the NSDAP.
Only the Catholic Church stood a little to one side from this network.
But even there, after the departure of Bishop O'Rourke in June 1938, his successor Bishop Splett released the pent-up tensions of the German hierarchy in a ferocious anti-Polish campaign that blocked the promotion of Polish clerics and administrators, harassed Polish priests and closed Polish Catholic schools.
The Danzig NSDAP was a floundering, brutal beast for most of its existence.
Its importance within the city lay not in the speed of its rise — which was hardly spectacular — nor in its violence — for it could only do what Berlin sanctioned, but rather in the social and national spirit it fostered within the community.
Its real achievement lay in slowly but surely creating and manipulating opinion to create a border mentality where one had not existed in such crude form before.
By and large the Poles and Germans of the city had shown very early in the Free City's existence that they could rub along together.
The discrepancy between the large number of Party members and the Party's poor performance at the polls indicates clearly that while Danzigers were prepared to take advantage  of it as a social refuge, they were by no means as convinced by it as Forster and Hitler desired.
The failure of the League of Nations in Danzig was a failure of nerve and understanding on the part of the member states: unforgivably they minimised the difficulty and frustrations of the position they had carved for Poland — a country emerging to modernity after over 100 years of partition, a country without financial capital, with hostile neighbours, border problems, huge minorities but without a port of its own.
The League also failed to understand the humiliation of the defeat and dismemberment inflicted on Germany and failed spectacularly in its appreciation of the unworkable arrangements made around Danzig.
In the abstract the Free City arrangements might have worked, but they failed to take into account the hostilities they provoked; failed to take into account the fears and prejudices unleashed by the sudden alteration of patterns of trade and allegiance; and failed to take into account the long years of humiliating Polish partition, Prussian Polenpolitik and the rise of revolutionary Russia.
For both Poland and Germany, Danzig became an isolated node of half-realised ambitions, of pointless and wasteful economic competition, of half-understood fears, of provincial prejudice and wilful stiff-necked pride.
These elements were part of a long and complex history of German restlessness and Polish insecurity — ideas that the British, French and Americans, secure in thoroughly different kinds of national, linguistic and cultural identities, could not even begin to chart.
The Allies' aim in 1918 had been to leave Germany shorn of its military and industrial power, to make sure that it would never again be capable of waging war or threatening the established pattern of Atlantic trade and European industry.
To help them do this the Allies had, among other measures, resurrected Poland to stand as a barrier to the reunification of the German eastern lands.
But that was as far as their thinking took them.
Western Europe hardly appreciated the cultural and economic complexities of the German drive to the east, nor the nexus of ideas lodged in its collective polity used to fuel that drive.
They did not understand, or gave no thought to, the ethnic, national and ideological conflicts that their arrangements would create within Germany, nor the internal and external targets Germany would come to identify as the causes of its misfortune.
The Allied politicians lacked understanding, and yet they did not hesitate to place a barrier to Germany's growth, and having placed that barrier, did not think to support it effectively in the years to come.
Mikos, In his study of the League of Nations' actions in Danzig, attempted to apportion blame by counting up the number of  important decisions made by the various High Commissioners.
The British — who had dreamed up the Free City idea in the first place — came out of the exercise very badly, while the Dutch and Italians did rather better.
And yet it is much more complex than that.
The British made some bad decisions, as did the Irishman Sean Lester.
Yet at a time when decisive action against the Nazis might still have been effective the Swiss Carl Burckhardt made very few decisions at all.
In a carefully balanced account of the pressures at work H.S. Levine has written:
Try as the Danzig government might, the free city's ethnic and economic difficulties were dependent on forces almost totally beyond its control.
Some small amelioration of the economic catastrophe might have been gained by a programme of thoroughgoing compromise with Poland, but the success of such a policy depended on the reasonableness of Polish demands and on the good sense of the Danzig electorate.
Unfortunately so sensitive were the Danzigers on the issue that no serious Polish demand appeared reasonable.
The voters turned to those parties that promised a fight against the Polish enemy.
Given the weakness of the free city, this fight could not possibly succeed.
On the contrary, it invited effective Polish economic retaliation.
The political anger created by economic fears was diverted by nationalism away from the only course that stood even a small chance of success.
The anger of the electorate, denied an outlet in successful political action, became hysterical.
The Nazis made themselves the beneficiaries.
In the long run the Nazis made the Danzigers their willing victims.
The Danzigers went along with them — slowly at first and then with greater enthusiasm.
They agreed to support policies most of them knew to be damaging, misguided and inhuman.
They went along with populist solutions to problems that if not actually created by the Nazis, had certainly been worked on and exaggerated to the Nazis' own advantage.
After the voluntary enslavement of the Reich it was the failure of the Danzigers that opened up Eastern Europe to the murderous policies of the Nazis.
The Danzigers, in spite of the clear example of what was happening in the Reich, tolerated the Nazis in their city because they were ‘strong’ on Poland and the Polish threat.
And they did this against all common and economic sense.
While Danzigers were most definitely on the sharp end of Polish-German relations they were also historically and personally in a unique position to give the lie to Nazi manipulation and simplification.
This they did not do.
Instead, to their own imagined advantage, they fell in with the renewed Drang nach Osten .