

CHAPTER 1 HOLLOW PROMISES?
Policy, theory and practice in the inner city
Michael Keith and Alisdair Rogers
It is tempting at times to ask ‘where is the inner city?’
One can run to a map, locate examples, even indulge in exercises of cartographic explicitness, but eventually the answer, at first so obvious, can become progressively more confusing on closer inspection.
Everybody knows about the clustering of certain social and economic problems in some parts of some of the older metropolitan areas of post-industrial economies.
But do these places have a great deal else in common?
Or is the inner city problem no more than an exercise in name-calling?
Is this nothing more than the perennial appearance of uneven development, one of the principal diagnostic phenomena of capitalism, only this time at the intra-urban rather than a regional or national scale?
More worryingly, what are the implications of tying manifestations of urban crisis to these places that we call inner cities, thus characterising a social problem as a spatial expression?
In other words, does the very notion of the inner city serve to site the blame for poverty on a location, a variation on the invidious rhetoric of blaming the victim?
By dressing up deprivation in this spatial vocabulary it is possible to hide the more unpalatable realities of economic restructuring, redundancy and exploitation.
In this volume we have tried to bring together a collection that will go some way to answering these questions without losing sight of either city experience in a welter of academic abstraction or powerful analysis in a stream of political rhetoric.
We have tried to build on the uncertainty that surrounds the very definition of the inner city, firstly to examine the utility of particular cases of state intervention (Part I of  the book), then to highlight some of the misconceptions that have informed political initiatives in the inner city (Part 2) and finally to present alternative perspectives on community mobilisation, entrepreneurship and urban crisis in the inner city (Part 3).
With one exception (chapter 10) the essays in this volume focus on Britain and the USA.
These two countries share a political culture, a conservative strategy of managing the social and economic changes of the post-1980 period by re-establishing the conditions for successful capital accumulation and ‘de-integrating’ society (Krieger, 1986).
For Krieger this involves increased racial polarization and poverty, and a corresponding erosion of some of the social rights instituted under the welfare state.
Both Reagan and Thatcher administrations, he argues, have reversed post-war consensual and integrative politics in favour of the fragmentation and competition of the market.
In the case of Britain at least, we shall argue that this strategy is grounded most recently in the imaginary space of the inner city.
Further points of similarity include the exchange of policies and ideas (Barnekov, Boyle and Rich, 1989; Parkinson, Foley and Judd, 1988).
Although the exchange was never exclusively one-way (e.g. Butler, 1981 on enterprise zones), the American experience initially served as a model for British efforts to regenerate cities on the part of both the state (Urban Development Corporations, the stream-lining of urban grants) and private capital (e.g. the Rouse Corporation's festival market places, which have inspired developments in Glasgow, Manchester and Newcastle).
Following the Reagan administration's retreat from urban policy, President Bush's appointment of Jack Kemp as head of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the announcement in June 1989 of the formation of a Presidential Task Force on the Inner City signalled a possible return flow of ideas.
Given the task of reviving urban policy at low cost, Kemp is considering such Thatcherite innovations as housing vouchers, tenant management and tenant purchase of public housing.
On both sides of the Atlantic, a more privatised mode of housing consumption is being encouraged.
Finally, given the internationalization of financing, property development and construction, prestige regeneration projects in Britain and North America involve the participation of a small number of firms.
The most notable are Rouse's own Development Corporation and the Canadian-based Olympia and York, behind both the Battery Park City (New York) and Canary Wharf (London) projects.
Cesar Pelli is the architect of both schemes.
It is therefore the connections of political culture, policy formation and property capital as much as those of urban experience that have prompted us to focus principally on these two nations in this volume.
An American model of ‘privatism’(see Barnekov, Boyle and Rich, 1989) has in recent times been deemed as exportable .
Here again policy and practice in the inner city are as much about the way we chose to conceptualise social problems as they are about the experiences of inner city communities themselves.
A particular theoretical diagnosis of American urban crisis achieves a certain respectability and is assumed to generate policy templates that are universally useful in all post-industrial societies, as applicable in Newcastle as in New York.
If it is difficult to define inner cities in terms of some geometric configuration of urban morphology, it is even less easy to identify the inner city within any national political economy.
Are inner cities only found as pockets of deprivation within an area of relative prosperity, as has been the case in London, Birmingham and New York, where the East End, Handsworth, and select sections of Manhattan and Long Island are traditionally contrasted with the rest of the city?
Or do cities trapped in declining regional economies such as Pittsburgh in the USA or Newcastle in Britain also display distinctively inner city problems ?
Given such ambiguity, perhaps the notion of the inner city should be dropped altogether from academic analysis.
After all, flawed basic concepts should not form the starting point for rigorous analytical investigation.
Yet such cynicism begs important questions and detaches objective academic research from the common sense categories of everyday language in a suspiciously elitist manner.
It is not as though academic social science has yet found a language that can address these problems that is not contentious.
All academic paradigms, from the Chicago school onwards, that have tried to capture theoretically the essence of ‘the city’ have come to grief (Saunders, 1981) and so the concepts that are used to describe and analyse the nature of contemporary urban life may be necessarily flawed.
Hence, a political economy of the urban is scarcely more plausible now than it has ever been in the past.
In these circumstances to talk of the inner city may be to accept a vocabulary which we might prefer not to endorse but it might also use the only language in which we can be heard.
Beside this, the very persistence of the term is itself worthy of interest and on academic, moral and political grounds any resolution of the uncertainty that surrounds the value of the concept of the inner city must surely start by taking on this vocabulary for what it is.
So it is against a background of almost two decades of popular acceptance of the urban problem , a crisis of the cities, that this text is set.
In two decades remarkably  little has been done to alleviate the conditions of some of the poorest city citizens, who personified the unacceptable face of the urban crisis, even if the terms of the debate itself have changed dramatically.
Any book about the inner city in 1990 cannot ignore this failure and must surely look at both the reality on the ground today and at the manner in which academic analysis has conceptualised these problems in ways that have facilitated this persistence.
It is imperative not to accept the subjects of popular interest as the objects of theoretical scrutiny, not to reify a concept of dubious historical provenance, but instead to unpack the powerful rhetoric that hides behind the notion of the inner city , to outline the contours of alternative urban realities and to place this empirical evidence in the political and economic context that will determine the life chances of those people that live in real places in real urban locations today.
There are moral and political implications that follow on such a stance.
For there is a sense in which the ready and correct dismissal of essentialist definitions of any legitimate inner city problematic has characterised literature of the left.
Typically, the call has been to go ‘Beyond the inner city ’(Byrne, 1989).
This has had political and analytical ramifications, with the inner city debate frequently lacking a left perspective, leaving the field to a contest between liberal assertions of the case for sympathy (ESRC, 1986; Robson, 1988; MacGregor and Pimlott, 1990; Wilson, 1987) and more recent and robust demands on the right for a faith in strategies of benign neglect based on market led regeneration and tempered by occasional state facilitation of the private sector (Savas, 1983; Trippier, 1989).
In contrast, the contributors to this book, whilst differing between themselves in many respects, share both a critical refutation of the manner in which the inner city has commonly been taken as unproblematic and a belief in the need to use the vocabulary of popular debates to propose alternative conceptualisations of urban crisis and to subject current policy to critical examination.
So there is an important strategic point here.
From a purist point of view if the terms of debate set by the study of an inner city problematic are illegitimate then perhaps they should not be addressed at all.
However, we believe that not only is such a stance disingenuous, but it also promotes a fundamentally flawed political strategy and reproduces naive notions of academic objectivity.
In this volume we are in part trying to draw out the links that tie the assumptions involved in policy debates to some of the grim realities that affect local communities in contemporary city life.
This has certain implications for the kind of research on the inner city that we are interested in.
The questions that are asked in academic texts are as significant as the results that are produced.
For in defining any research agenda two pitfalls have to be avoided.
One is that academic research should pluck the fruits of the  contemporary political agenda and lend credibility to vogue and vague notions that may fleetingly assume a high profile, reify concepts that are of the moment and endow them with the status of real analytical phenomena.
The second, equally flawed strategy, particularly relevant here, is to ignore the realities of contemporary life in which state policy and popular practice are informed as much, if not more, by the common sense construction of a neat array of social problems as by the theoretical wisdom of the ivory tower.
The social construction of an inner city problem echoes through the political world, structures the vocabulary of policy formulation and has ramifications in the realms of political economy.
The politics of the inner city problem are not just the surface manifestation of economic imperatives; here there is no straightforward linear determination of superstructure by base.
Instead we are talking about a series of complex configurations of politics, economics and ideology that recursively interact to guarantee that it is not possible to understand what is happening in the local economies of Glasgow, Liverpool or Birmingham in the UK or Baltimore, New York or Toronto in North America without reference to inner city policies wedded to a particular form of symbolic, frequently spectacular, regeneration.
Policy formulation takes place in a theoretical, social, economic and political context.
We cannot divorce economic change from esoteric architectural style, state intervention from community immiseration, new wealth from recurrent poverty; all encapsulated in the notion of the inner city.
One issue here centres on the notion of novelty.
The urban crisis or the inner city problem conflates a number of quite different economic, political and social issues.
The urban ramifications of massive economic restructuring in the 1980s did not produce the same effects as the legitimacy crisis of welfare state capitalism in the cities of the 1960s and 1970s.
But by hiding in the term ‘inner city’ the novel appears as perennial, the strange appears to be familiar.
In the political process that structures the future of cities professionals talk at politicians who leak to journalists who are lectured by academics who scrutinise any policy pronouncement.
Just occasionally somebody may even listen to the urban citizens whose city and whose fate is being discussed.
In this Babel like context the apparent exchange of information between different interest groups may commonly founder.
Each in turn speaks their own language of jargonistic expertise and coded euphemism.
It is in this context that even the barest skeleton of a common vocabulary that captures the different forms of urban life may be welcomed and it is in this search for cogent communication that the notion of the inner city, so commonly discredited analytically, remains so powerful descriptively.
The term ‘the inner city’ may tell us much more about the manner in which an agenda of social problems is set by the combined and unequal influences of a variety of interest  groups than about the political economy of cities but its very reproduction in a set of discourses about ‘the urban’guarantees it a status of its own.
Academic theorisation conventionally attempts to find a language that represents reality.
The theoretical project attempts to represent an accurate abstraction of the empirical diversity of the social world, in this case, the urban world.
In this text we are in part challenging this straightforward relation.
There is no essential definition of the inner city; it is now a truism to note that the inner city is theoretically chaotic.
It cannot serve as a term that describes objectively a specific set of conditions.
Conceptually, it is a term that is linked not to one social problem but to a host of economic, social and political issues.
Linguistically, it is a signifier with no referent and a multiplicity of significations.
But it is precisely this problematic relationship between language and reality that instead of rendering the term theoretically redundant exemplifies one of the problems implicit in all urban social theory but addressed only occasionally.
We want to say quite explicitly that the language with which the problems of contemporary urban life are addressed is necessarily problematic.
It is not just that the academic protocols of putative objectivity, cross referencing and theoretical vocabulary sit uneasily beside political polemic which reads so differently from the equally strict conventions of focused brevity in the local government or consultant's report, although these issues of style are themselves not minor.
It is also that the perspectives necessarily adopted by very different interest groups, some of which we have tried to reproduce here, will contain a degree of indeterminacy of translation between themselves.
But this indeterminacy should not, and ultimately cannot, be hidden or brought together under a single overarching account.
In this sense we are arguing that all accounts, including those that aspire to academic objectivity, are structured by the social contexts in which they are generated.
Academic, or theoretical, discourse is not privileged but is instead a form of accounting which uses abstraction to illuminate.
Our task as editors of this book is to make these social contexts explicit and our own intentions to contribute to a critical discussion of the inner city issue, which challenges the meanings of the powerful, as open as possible.
Authorship counts.
Politicians and academics, policy makers and local communities, all have their own, understandably distinct agendas and commonly, it would seem, their own languages.
But these agendas overlap, subtly borrow concepts and ideas from each other.
It is  the attempt to examine some of these interdisciplinary intersections that lies at the heart of this text.
In this book we have tried to bring together practitioners from different fields as well as from four different academic disciplines.
Half the chapters are written by people involved at first hand with the initiatives that they discuss.
This has important ramifications for both the style in which they are written and the claims to truth that they are making.
In this sense we are not concerned to produce a book by academics for a purely academic audience.
Yet neither are we attempting to understate the value of theoretical abstraction.
Indeed we want to examine the ways in which a concept which appears to be logically fraudulent, the inner city, has sustained its central position in both popular and academic discussion of the urban.
This is why this volume is concerned with an attempt to tie together policy, theory and practice.
FROM A SOCIAL PROBLEM TO A SUITABLE CASE FOR TREATMENT
It is not the intention to rehearse here the history of the evolution of an inner city problem from an academic vogue of the 1960s and 1970s, to part of the vocabulary of common sense understandings of contemporary urban life, to a major and recurrent item on the political agenda of two nations (for such information see Barnekov, Boyle and Rich, 1989; Peterson, 1985; Robson, 1988; Sills, Taylor and Golding, 1988).
We are concerned here with the more recent debates that have used the inner city as a central organising theme, debates that have grown out of the economic boom years of the second half of the 1980s in many of the richest economies in the world.
It is in these countries, particularly in the United States and the United Kingdom, that significant upturns in the economy have done little to relieve a sense of urban crisis reminiscent of the 1960s, although the political terms of debates that address urban problems have changed dramatically over this time.
The most crucial change in emphasis over the past twenty years, and particularly over the past ten, has been the common rejection of any suggestion that poverty alone warranted social policy intervention based on state amelioration.
Whereas urban policy on both sides of the Atlantic was originally justified as a form of welfare initiative, it is now presented in functional economic terms aiming to introduce growth to areas of depression or industrial decline.
Recently produced  figures on British Urban Development Corporation expenditure highlight precisely what a small fraction of budgets are currently spent on community projects as opposed to economic initiatives.
Put crudely, state intervention in contemporary urban Britain (and America) is justifiable only to facilitate market led growth.
Figure 1.1: Percentage of UDC budgets used for community projects and voluntary sector initiatives
Under this rubric there have been several locations which in the 1980s, at least at a particular, symbolic level, have lent a rhetorical credibility to the notion of an urban renaissance in many parts of the First World.
The list of cities that have ‘refused to die’, ‘come back’ or ‘turned around’increases steadily.
Some, like New York, have restored their economies after a decade or so of decline, while others, such as Baltimore or the London Docklands, have focused optimism on high prestige, frequently waterfront, projects.
How much longer such presentation remains credible in the light of trends in cities such as New York, where there are at least 90,000 people sleeping on the streets and an annual budget deficit of around $500 million is itself a significant issue.
Moreover, these successes have to be set beside the less successful regeneration projects attempting to replicate the well known formula in cities such as Richmond (Virginia), Toledo (Ohio) and Flint (Michigan), all of which are faltering (Guskind, 1989).
This focus on a particular strategy of growth-based survival on both sides of the Atlantic has been lent a credibility by the apparent successes of these high profile city projects.
In Britain, American experience is commonly cited as setting a precedent both for what can be done and for the policy strategies necessary for success.
It is in this context that a new future role for inner cities finds favour with Robson, who justifies the need for an inner city policy on the potential of the city to become a place of consumption linked with business services: ‘the role of cities in production is no longer that of access to labour, but of access to information’(p16).
These observations may reflect what is already happening, yet their implicit optimism needs to be tempered by the realities of this kind of economic growth (see also Kasarda, 1985 for a similar assessment of the US context).
In work looking at the labour markets of Los Angeles and New York, Sassen (1989) has argued that economic growth creates both wealth and poverty.
Two new forms of poverty arise from the bifurcated wage and occupational structure of the producer services sector (businesses dealing in information) and through the development of a semi-skilled or deskilled labour force in personal services such as restaurants, hotels and domestic service.
Evidence from both cities supports the contention that the informal sector in services and labour intensive manufacturing is growing alongside the higher status sectors of the economy.
In this context the fallacy of any straightforward equivalence between economic boom and social wellbeing is exposed.
Poverty is a constitutive element of a particular form of economic growth as much as it is a product of economic recession.
It is not necessarily the case that similar patterns are being repeated in the quite different social context of the UK.
As Pahl (1988) points out, it is not possible to accept uncritically the idea that an underclass has emerged in British society.
But the view that poverty is the consequence not of the failure of growth but of its very success is one that needs to be taken seriously.
In short, what we understand as the persistence of poverty may in fact be more complex, a function of new social relations tied to new forms of economic development.
By focusing principally on spatial variation and concentration of deprivation it is easy to overlook the processes that underscore these recurrent areal patterns.
By 1987 the revolutionary restructuring of the British economy in the 1980s had, so it appeared, left residual pools of localised recession and left wing politics.
The economic miracle of the decade seemed to have passed the inner city by, leaving a  few localities outside the new society.
The agenda here had changed by the time of Margaret Thatcher's election victory promise to do something about ‘those inner cities’.
In contrast, by the late 1980s, the inner city appeared to be less prominent on the American political agenda.
The most evident shift in the terms of debate in Britain concerns the focus and nature of growth.
Consequently, the whole vocabulary of political debate has changed.
These changes are inextricably linked to the new social context of the 1980s in which the parameters of the social problem that is the inner city have changed.
Conceptually, the inner city is a space outside society which has shown, for whatever reasons, a marked recalcitrance in responding to the macro-economic revival that surrounded it on all sides (Massey and Meegan, 1989).
In short, the inner city appeared in 1987 to be a suitable case for treatment.
The language of parliamentary debate in Britain has reflected this change.
Rhetorically, the central organising theme of the debates on the inner city in Britain over the last three years has been the problem of exporting the successes of the rest of the nation to this extraordinary conceptual space.
The debates take on an almost sacramental nature as speakers resort to the most basic metaphors of reproduction and renewal in a search for the rites of an inner city spring (Goldberg, 1990).
The key word becomes regeneration .
Typically, in one of the first debates about inner cities of the third Thatcher term, Nicholas Ridley, then Secretary of State for the Environment, justified his aggressively business led strategy, introducing more Urban Development Corporations:
‘They will have the same powers as the larger UDCs, but above all they will create the business-friendly environment and single minded approach which are the necessary preconditions for regeneration.’
(Nicholas Ridley, Hansard Vol 117; 1 July 1987, 534)
This language permeates policy making discussion.
To take just one example, the British House of Commons Employment Committee report on the effects of urban development corporations mentions the concept of regeneration eight times in the opening eleven paragraphs, stating that
‘we do not see Urban Development Corporations as being primarily and immediately concerned with employment; they are about regeneration.’
(1988, p3)
Their report returns again and again to this unproblematic notion of regeneration in spite of their own rather plaintive recommendation that 
‘the remit for UDCs should be altered to provide a more precise definition of ‘regeneration'’(1988, p4)
Yet there remain some continuities, echoes of the past pathologies of urban life.
Economic degeneration taints those who are associated with it.
This is more than blaming the victim, it involves making the victim part of the problem.
One minister for the inner cities in Britain has made this quite clear:
‘[W]e must ensure that those who live in derelict inner-city areas are not people who are there because they have no choice and who would leave the moment they were given an alternative.’
(Kenneth Clarke, Hansard Vol 129; 7 March 1988, 35)
Instead, as ministers are quick to suggest, there is something essentially specific about the nature of the inner city, a political echo of a spatial fetish:
‘I do not agree with the proposition that the only problem in inner cities is poverty and that all that we need to do is to alleviate poverty, there being no need for other policies.
I do not accept either the Right-wing proposition that we need only to make the country better off as a whole without making any special effort in the inner cities.’
(Kenneth Clarke, Hansard Vol 129; 7 March 1988, 37)
‘The inner cities will succeed in solving their problems only through their own strength and determination.’
(Timothy Raison, Hansard Vol 117; 1 July 1987,543)
American rhetoric on the city shares some of these themes, notably those of enterprise and the liberating influence of the market, although there have also been distinct differences embedded in US political culture.
Carter's federally aided approach to help cities adjust to changing economic realities gave way to Reagan's sink-or-swim philosophy.
‘States and cities, properly unfettered, can manage themselves more wisely than the Federal Government can.’
(US Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1982, p1)
However, while ‘[t]he Administration does not believe that any city is condemned to inevitable decline’(US Department of Housing and Urban Development 1984, p27), the emphasis on comparative advantage and entrepreneurialism carried an inevitable warning.
‘Improving the national economy is the single most important program the federal government can take to help urban America; because our economy is predominantly an urban one, what's good for the nation's economy is good for the economies of our cities, although not all cities will benefit equally, and some may not benefit at all.’
(Savas, 1983, p447)
Wolman (1986) argues that what informed Reagan's urban policy was the misplaced notion of a national and urban dichotomy, economies engaged in a zero-sum game; the federal government could assist the one but not the other, since the costs of doing so would detract from national economic recovery.
What lay behind the urban strategy of the 1980s therefore was the discipline of the frontier, that most American of archetypes.
‘History shows us that the inherent strength of American communities and institutions can be attributed in large part to the freedom Americans had to experiment without the deadening hand of capital control.
Frontier communities were left alone to devise ways of dealing with unusual crises and opportunities without having to conform to rules that bore no relation to local conditions.
The enterprise zone concept sees inner cities, in effect, as ‘urban frontiers’ constrained by regulations and a tax code that is irrelevant to the problems and opportunities that exist.
By reducing these suffocating barriers, the aim would be to simulate frontier creativity in urban neighbourhoods.’
(Butler, 1984, pp 141–2)
Like Savas, Butler was another expert from the Heritage Foundation who sought to influence urban policy with ideas.
The contrast with Britain's lingering commitment to active intervention is revealed more clearly by Kemp himself.
‘The British just wanted to move whole industrial sites, whereas I did not want to force people to move from the South Bronx.
The idea was to try to bring back the spirit of entrepreneurship that I thought people in these neighbourhoods would be inclined towards if the right environment were established.’
(in Guskind, 1989, p1358)
Thus, the spirit of regeneration, derived from the frontier experience, is an innate quality of Americans, even in the South Bronx.
SO WHERE ARE THOSE INNER CITIES?
In spite of our concern with the dubious provenance of the term itself there remains a need to research ‘the inner city problem’, evaluate existing policies and propose new ones.
Robson's volume,Those Inner Cities ‘(1988), although an authoritative contribution to this debate, in accepting common sense constructions of social problems (e.g. the section in Chapter 1 on ‘Crime and unrest’) stubbornly ignores the reality of politics and uncritically reproduces the inner city as a space outside society.
We are not trying to ignore the material traumas of contemporary cities.
A cursory look at the experience of late capitalist economies across the world suggests that changes in the labour process are closely linked to highly demarcated differentiations in the labour force; socially constructed identities that describe the division of labour, differential incorporation into the economy tied to cultural (ideological) constructions of gender, skill, age and race.
The degree to which deprivation is reproduced across successive generations of oppressed and minority groups will largely depend on the interaction between such divisions of the labour force and the regional economies of the localities in which such minorities are concentrated.
In this sense we want to tie the structural changes in political economy that have marked most nations in the last decade and have commonly had their most profound consequences in cities, to attempts to demarcate a space that corresponds to the political, social and academic construction of a traumatised inner city.
Inherently, these attempts have been doomed.
Similar and perennial manifestations of urban crisis at the empirical level are not attributable to a consistently repeated set of causal processes that would justify a conventionally theorised problematic of the inner city .
Poverty has many different roots but only one public face.
But it is in the tension between conceptual confusion and social reality that it is possible to expose some of the assumptions that inform policy and some of the hidden agendas that are currently structuring the life chances of subordinated communities.
A case in point can be taken from recent British experience.
LEGITIMATION AND THE NEW AGENDA IN BRITAIN
It is a commonplace now to acknowledge the difficulties involved in drawing a boundary around the inner city.
Across the political spectrum there are always those quick to proclaim the injustice of specific circumscriptions.
The reasons for this are obvious.
In the United States in the 1960s the political will to get to the trough of federal aid resulted in the Model Cities programme rapidly expanding from a focus on 66 metropolitan centres to a total of almost 140 cities spread across the nation (Levine, 1989).
Similar competition multiplied the areas receiving urban programme funding in Britain at roughly the same time.
Enterprise zones altered arbitrarily the relative locational advantage of firms inside and outside their perimeter.
And, of course, relative spatial concentrations of deprivation do not involve absolute absence of deprivation from other areas.
In the words of a suburban Conservative party member in one of the British parliamentary debates on the inner city,
‘Will my right hon.
Friend not lose sight of the fact that need does not always exist only in the inner areas of a city.’
Jill Knight, Hansard Vol 1 17; 1 July 1987, 535)
The number of ‘unemployed’ is never on its own an adequate description of the forms of economic restructuring that are occurring, even when such figures are calculated with integrity.
Once it is accepted that the inner city is an idea rather than a place it is tempting to ask which interests really do benefit from the recurrence on the political agenda of the urban crisis.
We wish to suggest here not a conspiracy theory but a coincidence of interests that embodies these beneficiaries.
It consists of a fortuitous, almost accidental, alliance between a particular fraction of development capital and New Right political reformers, not always particularly clearly articulated, which has in the last few years managed to don the cloak of inner city concern.
The social reformers who staffed the think tanks that fed into the right wing of the Conservative Party and who advocated the restructuring of education, the dismantling of the welfare state and the restriction of local government power, needed a theme through which to proselytise their views.
The forces of property development always wanted to structure the terms by which the city became again a safe investment location for capital.
An understanding of an economic project, distinct from, but complementary to, an exercise in political legitimation, helps to  decode the most recent expressions of concern for the ever ailing inner city.
The inner city provides a medium through which the political project may be legitimated and the site on which new forces of economic change may be played out.
It is in the very nature of democratic politics that policy change must be rationalised in a vocabulary that both appeals to popular understandings of the social problems that are being tackled and yet does not disturb certain common sense understandings of the workings of the economic system.
In the British context of the 1980s the political project that has come to be identified as ‘Thatcherism’ has commonly been seen as an attempt to legitimate both the reintegration of a restructured British economy into the global economy and the revision of the relationship between the state and civil society that the preferred version of restructuring required.
Most neatly captured by the notion of the free economy and the strong state (Miliband and Saville, 1979; Gamble, 1988), the project has involved both the disciplinary reaction to those who have come out worst from this restructuring in the handling of uprisings among British Black communities and a series of confrontations with the Trade Union movement and the need to present massive cuts in welfare service delivery as essential for economic prosperity.
In the post 1987 era this logic has underscored urban policy interventions which incorporate two key themes, one a straightforward exercise in symbolic amelioration and social control of racial injustice, the other the manipulation of the raw social context by which the Thatcherite ideology of privatism can be extended in housing, education and local government finance through the particular representation of contemporary urban life that the term inner city evokes.
As long as new measures of social policy in these areas could be presented as solutions to an inner city problem they stood a greater chance of popular acceptance than if they were seen as no more than further attempts to rid the nation of the welfare state legacy of the post-war era and the dependency mentality that went along with it.
Third term Thatcherism became grounded in the imaginary place that was called the inner city.
There can be no area in which the distance between the pretence and practice of British inner city policy has been greater than that of racist injustice and racial deprivation.
Regularly presented as the principal policy medium for the resolution of these two problems, the impact of urban policy on either has been as minor as the significance they have had for the formulation and legitimation of policy has been major.
Dating back to the late 1960s when the announcement of the Wilson government Urban Aid programme followed swiftly on the heels of Enoch Powell's predictions of rivers of blood flowing through British cities as a result of racial conflict, there has regularly been a connection between the fear of (racially based) civil unrest and the implementation of high profile symbolic palliatives for inner city malaise (Sills, Taylor and Golding, 1988; Solomos, 1988).
Yet at the same time urban policy in Britain has provided an escape clause that allows British politicians to avoid the implementation of race specific policies aimed at redressing racial inequity.
As Rex (1988, p58) has pointed out, the 1977 White Paper ‘A Policy for the Inner Cities’ stated that it was not concerned with the problems of Black communities as these were the responsibility of the Home Office and the Commission for Racial Equality.
Nevertheless, it was presented by the minister responsible (Peter Shore) as a way of fighting the National Front, an integral part of government race relations policy.
Similar ambivalence has continued to characterise much of the thinking behind British urban policy.
Typically, in the wake of the uprisings of 1985 in Britain the government announced the advent of a new policy measure, the introduction of eight Inner City Task Forces to Moss Side (Manchester), Chapeltown (Leeds), Notting Hill (London), North Peckham (London), North Central (Middlesbrough), Highfields (Leicester), St Paul's (Bristol) and Handsworth (Birmingham).
Seven of the eight are well known Black communities and the sites read like a civil servant's check list of those places where the state expected an uprising (excluding those with Inner City Partnerships already present), yet no race specific dimension was added to their brief.
Moreover, the self-defined small scale nature of these projects placed them in marked contrast to the first seven Urban Development Corporations announced in Britain in the 1980s in London Docklands, Merseyside (see chapters 2 and 3), Sheffield, the Black Country, Teesside, Tyne and Wear and Greater Manchester, all of which received over £100 million in financial support.
The suspicion that a two tier urban policy has developed, high profile symbolic initiatives for the Black poor and a particular (American) model of urban regeneration for the decayed white heartlands, is not readily dismissed.
This is in marked contrast with US federal urban policy where racial deprivation has provided an explicit and recurrent theme.
In Britain the inner city provides an analytical empty vessel which serves well rhetorically to provide a rationale for a disparate set of political projects, not only those of racial subordination but also far fetching social reforms.
It is within this conceptual framework that a government minister at the Department of the Environment can, with seemingly irrefutable common sense, conceptualise inner cities as the places where ‘those living there have not been able to participate in the economic miracle of the Thatcher years’(Trippier, 1989, p7) and which require a strong police presence because ‘the future prosperity of the inner cities depends directly on how safe they are in which to live and work’(ibid, p22).
It is in this context that the Conservative party presented its new programme for the third term, following the Queen's speech; a set of policies lent a coherence by the inner city problem:
‘Today's debate is about those parts of the Gracious Speech related to the inner cities — local services and education.
In choosing to link the issues for debate, the Opposition at least seem to recognise that they go together as part of a coherent strategy.’
(Nicholas Ridley, Hansard Vol 117; 1 July 1987, 536)
‘A partnership between local and central Government on inner city policy must be one between partners who believe in attracting private enterprise and capital through a constructive attitude to the private sector, low rates, sensible planning and the pursuit of excellence in education, housing and many other essential services.
Partnership where there is no consensus seldom seems to work.
But with compatible partners, much can be done, and I believe increasingly that there will be more compatibility when the practice of local accountability conforms with the theory.
The present rating system gives neither accountability to residents nor effective control over local authority spending to Government.’
(Nicholas Ridley, Hansard Vol 1 17; 1 July 1987, 534)
Approximately two-thirds of the minister's speech comprised an attack on the inefficiency of local government, more specifically socialist local government, and a trenchant defence of the value of the proposed community charge as a key factor in promoting the regeneration of British cities.
‘Profligate spending has not only driven employers and would-be employers away and thus lost jobs, but resources have been taken away from other areas by the rate support grant formula as the spiral of inner city decline causes the rate base in inner city areas to diminish, while their needs…grow’
‘There must be an incentive for councils to control their costs.
The community charge provides that incentive, and our new local government Bill that was published last Friday provides local authorities with a way of so doing.’
(Nicholas Ridley, Hansard Vol 117; 1 July 1987, 536, 538)
A whole legislative package — the Educational Reform Act, the new Housing Act, and the revolution in local government finance — is framed by the immiserated inner cities, borrows its evangelical force from the language of philanthropy.
There are two important points to note about the economic project that has run alongside the exercises in political legitimation in the imagined space of the inner city.
The first is the old truism that the beneficiaries of urban policy in both Britain and the United States have not always been those for whom the policy was apparently designed.
In 1960s America urban renewal was angrily equated with ‘nigger removal’(Friedland, 1982).
Likewise, in the British experience the act of pumping money into a particular spatially defined area has never guaranteed that those most in need in that area will benefit.
As Bob Colenutt describes in this volume (chapter 2), state financed property speculation can be represented as inner city benevolence when the government hands over rich tracts of real estate to an unaccountable Urban Development Corporation in London.
There are self-evidently interests other than those of social concern in the spatial revitalisation of urban economic activity and there is no need to descend into a dogmatic public v. private sector debate on the efficiency of urban renewal to suggest that these interests stand to benefit when state intervention, so discredited in the early Thatcher years as creeping socialism, can be represented as a free market solution to urban crisis.
The second point is best captured in Peter Hall's 1982 defence of the enterprise zone model of urban policy, when, perhaps inadvertently, he called for the state to facilitate multinational corporations, ‘doing in Liverpool what they already do in Singapore or Mexican border cities’(1982, p418).
Again there are echoes from across the Atlantic.
In the early 1980s Jack Kemp drew on Puerto Rico's Operation Bootstrap as an inspiration for his support of the Enterprise Zone model in the United States (Guskind, 1989).
In short, the strategic choice in British and American urban policy has not been simply about the encouragement of economic development, it is also about the changing nature of that development itself, more specifically the changing nature of the labour process in an economy designed for the post-Fordist era (Lash and Urry, 1987; Murray, 1989).
On one level this is self-evident within the ascendant economic rhetoric.
‘Our policies are based on the proposition that we need to bring the enterprise economy into the inner cities.
That has been successful in reviving the national economy as a whole.
It can be a success in the inner cities if the same principles are applied consistently by the Government and by leading people in business throughout Britain.’
(Kenneth Clarke, Hansard Vol 129; 7 March 1988, 43)
The diagnosis is a chronic case of socialism, the prognosis pessimistic and the prescription an evangelical dose of Thatcherite economics.
A conscious strategy has been adopted to promote a low skill, low cost, numerically flexible and compliant labour force as preferred to alternative models of a high skill high wage economy.
In part this complements the manner in which cities are increasingly economic actors competing against each other in the new global economy (Hill, 1984).
In this vein, the spectacular presentations of the postmodern city should not be divorced from the ubiquitous role of spatial competition in capitalist societies:
‘the way in which particular localities must engage in a bitter and divisive struggle to sell themselves to capitals as the most desirable location for their activities in an attempt to defend the right to live, learn and work in their place.’
(Hudson and Sadler, 1986, p188)
This is invariably as true of urban locations selling cultural capital with voodoo economics as it is of declining industrial regions of manufacturing industry (Harvey, 1989).
But at another level it is significant that almost every new initiative in British urban policy in the last decade has involved a ‘freeing up’ of the labour market.
Deregulation of health and safety legislation and ‘training initiatives’ which are bracketed with inner city policy, as with Employment Training in the UK, enforce labour discipline as an integral part of urban regeneration (Trippier, 1989) and share many of the same assumptions as the ‘workfare’models of welfare/labour market regulation in the USA.
In this context the rhetorical commitment to the free market begins to look contradictory not only in terms of the feather-bedding of urban redevelopment but also in the imposition of a particular new economic order, a specific choice about the form of economic change that will occur.
We are not arguing that either is necessarily an illegitimate exercise, only that it is significant that these things are done in the name of urban regeneration.
THE CITY AS SPECTACLE
Once the inner city is defined as a suitable case for treatment it becomes the logical social laboratory for any and all political, economic and social projects which can be presented as palliatives for the urban crisis.
So we have two key themes, both fallacies, but both as profound in their consequences as they are specious in their origin.
One is the definition of a distinctive social problem, demarcated in space —the inner city .
The other is a political ethos which has structured the vocabulary with which economic distress can be addressed around the archetypal notion of regeneration .
This is the perfect marriage: a disease and a cure, both geographically specific.
In the 1970s in America ‘urban renewal’ was discredited as President Nixon unilaterally proclaimed an end to the urban crisis, in Britain as part of the grand failures of state social engineering against which Thatcherism was set.
But the tawdry image of urban renewal has been given a facelift and can now return, again with all the metaphoric power of seasonal fecundity.
To make the return more palatable what is needed is symbolic reassurance that changes draw on the life blood that epitomises the regenerative power of the city.
After all, in the postmodern city presentation is all.
The inner city provides the perfect site to be the playground of post-industrial capital, and what a sight this can be!
A new identity is to be as important as new social relations, part of the forging of cultural capital through which the city is to be sold.
Image is all and those who refuse to play the game will be damned.
In the words of The Economist , the British city of Liverpool is
‘a museum to the depression, failing to hype itself back to prosperity in the fashion of Glasgow and Newcastle…stuck in the past, in a timewarp of Beatlemania and class solidarity.’
(The Economist, 12 August 1989, p25)
Spatially circumscribed definitions of an inner city problem can, we have seen, focus on the patterns of economic depression and social injustice rather than the processes at work behind them.
The inner city becomes a problem of space rather than a problem in space.
But this does not mean that the reality of these concentrations is irrelevant.
After Lefebvre, we still wish to see space as an object  commodified, but in late twentieth century Britain this commodity has not one but a multiplicity of identities.
Networks of production and consumption relations, ossified in fixed capital and anachronistic infrastructure, share the same geographical location as the places mediated by the rich political symbolism invested in the notion of the inner city .
Spatially shifting, but perennial, concentrations of (frequently exacerbated) poverty share urban landscapes with the sites of regeneration, which by their very presence offer powerful ideological testament to the life forces of renewal retained by late capitalist growth.
It is here that the contradictory character of the inner city assumes such significance.
Sills et al .
(1988) contrast the political projection of the inner city as a place of hopelessness and blight and a residuum of crime and disorder with ‘The Action for Cities’ connoted vision of British values embodied in policy prescriptions extolling stability, partnership and self-help.
This contrast is served by a dual locational identity, defined negatively and positively.
The imported imagery of the ghetto (American, conflict-riven, Black, crime, decay, neglect, dependence) contrasts with a local vocabulary of urban tradition (English, community, white, stable, work, self-help, renewal, care).
This chameleon-like character of the inner city lends the concept its remarkable potency.
The cumulative effect of the language of the British inner city has been to give it a contradictory definition, as a conceptual space both inside and outside of society.
It is inside in the sense of geography, its supposedly stable working-class past implying the moral obligation of society to do something about the fundamental causes of the problems.
But in the political language of the right in the 1980s it is outside in the sense of being cast as alien, normally via the stigmata of race or socialism, the locus of criminal delinquency, the site of disorder.
The conception of the inner city as internal demands a policy response; external conceptions provide a rationale, even an excuse, for inactivity, a justification of neglect and hostility.
On one level it is hard to see how we can avoid reproducing this contradictory space when speaking of the inner city as a place, a fusion of social problems.
But at another level it is imperative that we do so because it is here that policy, theory and practice intersect.
The contradictions that are built into the term ‘inner city’ have to be seen not as the root of analytical uncertainty but as the source of rhetorical utility.
Contradictions can be subsumed in something so unproblematic as the designation of places.
In this context the rhetorical power of spectacular redevelopment should not be underestimated.
What does it matter if the prestige presentation of another shopping mall in Albert Docks, Canary Wharf, Riverwalk or Seaport produces effects which  are of marginal relevance to metropolitan political economy?
They lend a credibility to powerful, primordial tales of rebirth, as important for their pomp as for their pump-priming of the local economy.
It is not really necessary to locate the degree of premeditated dishonesty involved in the politics of policy formulation.
As Edelman (1971, 1985) has pointed out, political discourse is itself routinely structured by the symbolic presentation of social problems and policy solutions.
Social problems are discursively constructed and demand policy resolutions that must be first and foremost valuable in the context of this discourse.
In plain English it is more important, in an administrative context,to be seen to be doing something about a politically generated agenda of problems than it is to examine critically the agenda itself.
It should therefore be of little surprise if the expenditure on inner city regeneration turns out to be a risible fraction of that necessary to have a major impact on the level of urban immiseration as long as it can still produce the sort of photogenic spectacle so clearly embodied in Birmingham's super-prix or Phoenix's grand prix, Boston and New York's marathons or Liverpool's Tall Ships Race.
This line of argument does not demand an exercise in conspiracy theory sociology, or even a belief in premeditated state malice, only an acceptance of the realities of the world of policy formulation in which both issues and policy prescriptions are not structured solely by empirical reality.
The spectacle of inner city regeneration offers a powerful medium for a political commitment to a strategy based on what is superficially market led growth.
GROUNDING THE INNER CITY
It is not just that politicians speak with forked tongues.
Admittedly, there is commonly a manifest purpose and a hidden agenda in almost all urban policy (Sills, Taylor and Golding, 1988, p36).
But, equally significantly, surface appearance draws meaning from its own context.
This is where the spectacular forms of regeneration that characterised the 1980s (Harvey, 1989) were not so much a postmodern discontinuity as a logical extension of the tradition of symbolically rich, effectively marginal, policy palliatives that were offered to the urban crisis from the 1960s onwards.
It is also where writing about urban immiseration takes its significance from the context in which it is placed.
There is much in recent British government pronouncement which on its own is unobjectionable or even highly laudable.
After all, we all do want to live in ‘safer cities’, we (mostly) all do  want employment and material affluence, and do not want to discourage enterprising individuals.
But where the inoffensive becomes disingenuous is when policies that are irrelevant are proffered as solutions, whether as fostering an entrepreneurial culture, minor training initiatives or financing property speculation.
And the disingenuous becomes invidious when this is set against an attempt to locate blame for economic dislocation on its victims, cast inner city residents as ‘a poor social mix’(Trippier, 1989, p19), and offer instead a radical recasting of multi-national capital as the means of saving the inner cities.
Yet these contexts are set by the parameters of political discourse in exactly the same manner as the conceptual vocabulary of academics and practitioners structures their own treatment of the same issues.
In exactly the same way as it is essential to deconstruct the rhetoric of Hansard by examining the context which structures Parliamentary debate, what we want to do here is to reveal this grounding of other contributions to this volume.
Four themes recur throughout this volume.
None provides easy answers to the problems raised here but all relate to the difficulties of tying together policy, theory and practice in the contemporary city.
The spatial fetish
One of the powerful motivating forces behind any spatially focused social or economic policy is that a degree of political consensus can be reached in identifying economic dislocation and poverty with particular places .
This is the heart of the notion of the inner city; at the very moment that policy draws the boundaries of the inner city a place takes on the qualities of coherence that it does not possess, embodies all the contradictions that are part of the original concept.
There is a danger that a concentration on spatial manifestation masks the realities of social processes, that space itself is fetishised.
By defining the object of policy in spatial terms the contradictory interests represented may be understandably subsumed in a real or imagined community identity which stems from or reproduces the notion of shared interests (see Sue Buckingham-Hatfield's case study in Chapter 4).
Neither is it the case that this is a facet of capitalistic conspiratorial machinations, a spatial rubric of the principles of divide and rule.
Territorially based affinities are the very stuff of popular mobilisation, social movements and the rights by which the left have historically based political demands.
Yet the focus of urban policy on specific areas has regularly reproduced these contradictions in microcosm.
Gentrification benefits selectively, takes away with one hand as it gives with another, bestowing respectability at a cost of displacement (chapters 5 and 6).
The inner city is transformed, but for whom?
In a very different sense London Docklands was an invented place, a series of disparate communities which were united by the imperatives of a specific form of development chosen for them by an imposed Urban Development Corporation (chapter 2).
We are not proposing here any simple remedy to this problem, only restating the point that spatially realised problems do not always have spatially constrained solutions.
The problems of the city can be conceptualised as much in terms of service delivery and collective consumption as about a particular representation of the inner city (see Patricke Le Gales in chapter 10 on France).
The inner city is a social problem of an imaginary space, realised incoherently, though no less brutally for this incoherence.
The way to resolve this necessary dilemma is surely not to discredit spatial policy altogether but to contextualise it, to draw out the links between the locally specific and the internationally ubiquitous, as Patrick Bond describes in his description of the campaign for the community control of capital in Baltimore (chapter 8).
Engagement
At times urban policy debates take place in a context where almost all agree that the wrong answers are being offered to the wrong questions.
Yet there is no simple point of either pure detached observation or committed involvement from which this can be made.
And here there are marked differences in the way the contributors to this volume see the inner city problem.
The fraudulence of many of the basic policy tools implemented in the inner city immediately raises questions about the nature of either constructive engagement with flawed institutions, as seen in the consultancy work of Ladbury and Mira-Smith in chapter 7, or about the monitoring role adopted by the Docklands Consultative Committee, which has aided the campaigns of those whose interests the London Docklands Development Corporation has consistently ignored (see chapter 2).
In contrast, the local circumstances are such that for Parkinson the Merseyside experience is one that he may disapprove of in principle but lives with far more readily in practice.
Following on from this, the superficial certainties of theoretical abstraction do not lend themselves easily to neat policy prescription, theoretical writing is necessarily partial, of limited value in helping people to see urban crisis from a different  perspective.
This is the lesson from Patrick Bond's chapter on the nature of possible mobilisation illustrated from the experiences of inner city Baltimore (chapter 8).
It also suggests that caution that must be exercised in reading the chapters by Neil Smith (chapter 5) and Liz Bondi (chapter 6).
What we have tried to avoid here is a sterile debate on the preferred ideologies of urban regeneration cast in terms of the relative merits of private and public sector involvement.
It is certainly the case that urban areas such as inner Liverpool would benefit from private sector involvement and a stronger economic base but as Barnekov, Boyle and Rich (1989) point out this is little more than a truism.
In this sense it would be naive to make ‘policy recommendations’, given that a central tenet of this work is that ‘policy’ is more the product of a particular set of vested interests than a technocratic implementation of neutral measures.
Yet the prospects for the people who live in blighted cities are bleak unless as a bare minimum there is a recognition across the political spectrum of the specificity and the extent of racial inequity in both the UK and the USA, a reconsideration of democratic involvement at both the local state and national state levels, and an attempt made to locate urban policy within local economic strategy; urban policy needs to be conceptually disentangled from regional policy.
The manufacture of expertise
We are trying to suggest here that academic enterprise may be useful as long as it is placed in its proper social context.
This social context is not one where a body of intellectuals think up resolutions to an objectively defined urban crisis and then make this knowledge available to the wide church of policy makers and practitioners in the best enlightenment spirit.
Things do not work like this at all.
Expertise is contingent, socially manufactured.
In the British and the American cases it is as necessary to contextualise the production of knowledges about the inner city as it is to unpack the glossary of terms of urban regeneration used in contemporary political discourse.
The Ford Foundation was interested in a specific agenda in funding philanthropically inclined research into urban crisis in the USA in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
In the early 1980s in Britain, the Economic and Social Research Council funded a major research project which lent an official academic seal to the work of individuals concerned.
Some used this expertise to work in the private sector as consultants advising on urban policy; in one case a firm that employed no Black people was  selected for its ‘inner city expertise’ to evaluate the Handsworth Task Force in inner Birmingham which it had previously also been paid to advise but which was now being shut down to make room for a newly fashionable Urban Development Corporation, this time in the Birmingham Heartlands (sic ).
And as inner city expertise readily becomes transformed into a supplementary expertise on Black people, within months the same company was awarded a contract by the Department of Trade and Industry to evaluate the effects of inner city policy on British Black communities.
Whilst individuals in the company privately admit to knowing little about ‘race and racism’, a major research contract which did not go out to open tender is safely located in an institution which can only with a degree of implausibility don the cloak of academic neutrality.
The oppression of Black communities which justifies policy intervention but barely touches on policy implementation may be mirrored rather than challenged in the nebulous realm of academic research.
In contrast, the style of some of the chapters of this book does not pretend to be academic .
Chapter 2 by Bob Colenutt is written from within the political processes that structure the work of the Docklands Consultative Committee in monitoring the London Docklands Development Corporation (DCC, 1990).
Chapter 7, which is written by Sara Ladbury and Clive Mira-Smith, is a piece of work by the Cities Research Unit, a private consultant, and accordingly reflects the style and the medium in which it is rooted, whilst similarly Jon Dawson and Michael Parkinson's chapter is written from a perspective that is able to take on board their own personal involvement with the Merseyside Development Corporation.
These differences are important, just as it is important to highlight the political position taken by the editors of the volume and the empirically based nature of some of the chapters (chapters 8 and 9) compared with the more abstract nature of others (chapters 5 and 6).
The importance of language
There is no suggestion here that any academic work is pristine pure in this regard.
Instead we are arguing that all academic texts are effectively working with a particular brief and it is important that this be either spelled out in the production of academic texts or taken apart systematically by the readership.
This is no different from an examination of the political and practical frame within which the work of policy analysts (e.g. chapters 3 and 7 here) or those more ostentatiously ‘involved’(e.g. chapters 2 and 8 here) is placed.
We have already flagged the very language used to address a set of urban issues as a central problem.
This key theme crops up repeatedly throughout the book in all the contributions because it is through language that the hidden assumptions that make up the common sense of both theoretical and empirical discussions are revealed.
One of the rewarding products of placing language under the microscope is the abolition of many of the categoric certainties that often inform rhetorical discussion of the inner city.
Several examples come to mind here.
The dichotomy between private and public sector is not so clear cut as it may appear.
In London Docklands state subsidies have hidden under different names, disguising state intervention on a massive scale as Bob Colenutt describes in chapter 2.
Conversely, Dawson and Parkinson (chapter 3) argue that in Liverpool the unaccountable work of Merseyside Development Corporation has to be set beside the ineffectual work of the putatively democratic local state.
As Barnekov, Boyle and Rich (1989) have pointed out, ‘privatism’ in urban policy is as much a cultural tradition or ideology as a coherent set of practices.
Similarly, the notion of fostering a local enterprise culture has been suggested both inside and outside Parliament (Trippier, 1989) as a potential source of urban renewal and in Britain is officially inscribed as a goal of all Inner City Task Forces.
Yet it is a peculiar use of the term that confines the concept of entrepreneurial ability to the realm of material affluence.
This is surely where academic research can be used as a useful corrective by examining the power of some of the central terms which are used in day to day discussion to make sense of the urban present.
Typically, the notion of ethnic enterprise may be useful or dangerous, depending on the context in which it is used.
When used by certain political interests on both sides of the Atlantic to reproduce the myth of migrant mobility it can be extremely misleading.
Mel Thompson (chapter 9) goes some way towards rescuing the term, arguing that whilst the trumpeting of particular forms of entrepreneurial success is dangerous because it can be used to locate the blame for economic distress on the victims of economic disruptions, it is equally worthwhile not disparaging a broad set of practices that qualify under a more conventional definition of this term.
This balance, which celebrates the survival of Black communities in situations of great hardship, whilst not losing sight of the economic circumstances in which urban poverty is generated, needs to be emphasised because it undermines the pernicious popularity of cultural stereotypes.
Afro-Caribbean communities in the UK are stereotyped as economic  underachievers whilst the same ‘ethnic group’ in the USA are often described by the dangerous caricature of ‘Black Jews’because of their economic successes, with attempts made in both cases to trace the success/failure to the cultural proclivities of the group itself.
The offensive becomes particularly unpleasant in the British case when used by certain interest groups to highlight a supposed dichotomy between a stereotypical notion of Afro-Caribbean business failure and an equally flawed representation of ‘Asian’ success.
Secondly, an emphasis on the complexity of the issues at hand prohibits the portrayal of the Black community as either problem or victim, a recurrent feature of much race relations discourse and popular debate, and a recurrent feature also of much discussion of inner city communities generally.
Likewise, concepts which are used in abstract glossaries of urban regeneration good practice need to be examined in practice before they can be accepted as universally applicable.
Here, Sara Ladbury and Clive Mira-Smith highlight the central fallacy underpinning the complex relationship between training and labour markets (chapter 4), Sue Buckingham-Hatfield demonstrates the dangers of crude measures of the leveraging of private capital with government investment and she, Neil Smith (chapter 5) and Liz Bondi (chapter 6) all focus on the downsides that may be involved in the visible expression of residential urban regeneration that is often conveniently tucked away in the concept of gentrification.
On each occasion a common sense category tied to urban renewal often hides a set of social processes which does little for those whose poverty provided the central rationale for urban policy in the first place.
All of these categories are necessarily in constant flux.
It is not necessary to purge the political and academic language which we use to think about the inner city, only to be aware of its contingent value.
This is why we do not want to abandon the term inner city, either analytically or politically, only to ground it in the academic debates which have reproduced it conceptually, the political debates that have refashioned it discursively and, most significantly, the social injustices and inequalities that lend the term its emotive power and mobilising force.
PART ONE POLICIES: MAKING SENSE OF THE INNER CITY
Once placed in their political context, it is difficult to imagine a set of guidelines of good practice in urban policy precisely because of the interaction of policy, theory and practice that this volume attempts to emphasise.
Yet this begs the question of how policy initiatives should be assessed, given that they regularly embody flawed conceptualisations of urban crisis, were created in contentious circumstances and reflect spatial realisations of a political agenda as much as objectively circumscribed social problems .
This section attempts to highlight some of the ambiguities involved in just two of the criteria by which the success of urban policy is commonly measured.
The first is that of leverage.
A notion common to much contemporary urban policy is that state capital pump-primes local economic development.
On one level, whilst the rhetoric of such intervention is often that of the free market, the logic seems to differ little from that of social engineering and regional policy which was commonly thought out of fashion and eschewed in such circles over ten years ago.
At another level all three chapters here demonstrate that the notion of private investment following public is far from simple; in both London's Docklands at the grand scale, and in Pittsburgh, in finer detail, urban policy initiatives amplified social polarisation and benefited the local communities, which had provided the rationale for policy intervention, far less than might be expected.
Merseyside, in contrast, has continued to reflect as much its disadvantaged structural and geographical position within the UK economy as any set of generic urban problems.
From a different perspective such repeated defects of urban policy might be expected to be overcome through local community involvement, yet again the three contributions here demonstrate a complexity which belies naive aspirations.
In London, the community, Bob Colenutt suggests, was never even considered, yet even when, as in the case of Pittsburgh, community involvement is statutory, the outcomes may be only to amplify those within the community (or coming into the community) with the greatest resources and power to exploit the local political system.
The Merseyside experience reinforces this with its particular history of conflict between the local and central state.
CHAPTER 2 THE LONDON DOCKLANDS DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION Has the community benefited?
Bob Colenutt
It is no longer fashionable to say anything nice about the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC).
After almost seven years, when the press were unwilling to print an unkind word about the LDDC, everything has now changed.
The ‘flagship’ of the government's inner city ‘regeneration’is on the defensive.
It is not in danger of sinking, but it is no longer leading the way.
The ‘success’ of the LDDC is now suspect and its operations under closer scrutiny.
In the other parts of the country where UDCs have been set up, prominent UDC Board members are quick to reassure local people that ‘we don't want a Docklands here’.
But what do they mean by this?
Why is it so important for them to say such things?
Has the LDDC, in spite of all the hype and political prominence, been in some sense a failure?
And if so, why?
This chapter examines four questions about the LDDC which help to explain both the predicament raced by the government today and also the contradictions thrown up by tying the salvation of the inner cities to properly-led regeneration agencies such as the LDDC.
(1)
Why has so little of the development in Docklands ‘trickled down’ to benefit the people of the East End of London?
(2)
Why has the LDDC changed the presentation of itself from that of a ‘yuppie’ development agency to an inner city concern ‘working for the community’?
(3)
Why has the government decided that no new UDCs will be announced, at least until after the next general election?
(4)
What are the alternatives to UDC style ‘regeneration’ from the perspective of the political left?
TRICKLE DOWN?
Nearly £1 billion of public money and over £4 billion of private money has gone into Docklands since 1981.
The official figures produced by the LDDC itself that describe the results of this investment are superficially very impressive:
‘20,000 jobs had been created by 1988.
This total was predicted to rise to a projection of 150,000 jobs by 1995
15,000 homes had been built by 1988, with a projection of 30,000 by 1995’(Source: LDDC estimates)
Already, the development activity has had a massive physical and economic impact, especially in the western part of Docklands and on the Isle of Dogs in particular, with spillovers into surrounding areas such as Greenwich and North Southwark (Figure 1).
Yet in spite of this physical transformation, the statistics of unemployment and homelessness, which of course are not cited by the LDDC, show that LDDC-led ‘regeneration’ has not trickled down very far into the working class communities of East London.
To take one example, in October 1988 male unemployment in East London was at the highest levels in the South-East: 21 per cent in Tower Hamlets; 18 per cent in Southwark and 14 per cent in Newham, reflecting the acute poverty and low levels of education in these areas.
Homelessness in these three boroughs rose almost fourfold between 1981 and 1987 (from 1308 to 4394).
Incomes, as shown by the Family Expenditure Survey and the Docklands Housing Needs Survey in 1986 show very low incomes among the majority of the populations of these three boroughs.
Thus, only 10 per cent of the population of Newham, Tower Hamlets and Southwark can afford a new house in the LDDC area.
Figure 3.1: Inventing a new place.
The area covered by the LDDC
Moreover, in spite of massive changes on the key development sites, the environment of the East End, where most ordinary mortals live on council estates    and streets in and around the busy A13, or in Canning Town or in North Southwark, has changed little if at all.
There have been dramatic changes to the environment of Surrey Docks, Wapping, the Isle of Dogs and Beckton, where extensive housing and commercial developments have taken place.
But whether one walks through these parts of Docklands or through surrounding areas where the ‘ripple effect’ is supposed to be taking place, there remain run-down estates crying out for funding, for modernisation and for improvement.
New development sits beside old poverty.
In Wapping there are poorly maintained public spaces adjoining expensive new developments with their own private courtyards and river terraces.
Docklands is far from being a Garden City, or a New Town for most people.
The activities of the LDDC and Developers are no compensation for cuts in local authority services.
It is therefore no surprise that local opposition to the LDDC has continued for over eight years now, even though the first chairman of the LDDC, Nigel Broackes of Trafalgar House, predicted that within a few years local opposition ‘will not exist’.
Even where there is no overt campaign against LDDC schemes, there is widespread cynicism and suspicion about the aims and effectiveness of the Corporation.
Those in the new housing may feel the area is improving, but the thousands in bad housing or without jobs see no benefit at all.
Even some in new houses now want to move out because of the construction works, traffic congestion, and a general decline in the image and attractiveness of Docklands over the past three years.
It is not easy to measure with any accuracy the trickle down effect of the sort of redevelopment seen in Docklands, particularly the more indirect benefits.
But it is the considered view of local authorities monitoring Docklands development that the residents of the East End are getting ‘little more than crumbs from Docklands’.
On occasions larger pieces fall from the table, but given the vast size of the investment cake, the East End has got very little.
WHY HAS THERE BEEN SO LITTLE COMMUNITY BENEFIT?
There were clear political reasons for setting up the LDDC and other Urban Development Corporations, and for deciding the way in which they conduct their affairs.
Part of this strategy involved local authorities being bypassed and a reliance on the regenerative power of private capital in the form of property developers.
But  in addition, the strategy LDDC chose to adopt has itself contributed to the problems they now face:
Bricks and mortar
The LDDC is concerned largely with physical development of land and buildings.
Government grants to Docklands are a subsidy to property development, most particularly in the Isle of Dogs Enterprise Zone, but also elsewhere.
Moreover, because the LDDC approach is led by the market, the development process was driven by the property boom in London and the South-East throughout most of the 1980s.
Reg Ward, the former Chief Executive of the LDDC, wrote in the Annual Report 1984/85 that land values were ‘the most accurate barometer of physical and economic regeneration’.
By letting the property market lead, the industrial sector has been ignored and on many occasions existing industry has been driven out or left to die.
This experience is not confined to the LDDC: several of the other UDC areas are experiencing the same problems.
The significant point is that the LDDC has intervened to help out developers of retail, housing and office projects, but has done little for existing local firms and businesses.
Nor has it made building up the industrial base an objective.
The free market solution?
Secondly, the development of Docklands has been ‘unplanned’ in the sense that the Corporation has not followed or adhered to statutory plans of the Boroughs nor followed normal planning and consultation procedure.
Reg Ward argued that planning was an obstacle to ‘regeneration’.
There never have been any economic or social targets, but given the attitude of government over the first seven years of the LDDC this is hardly surprising.
But more recently, as criticism of ‘non-planning’ and piecemeal development has grown, the LDDC, along with the other UDCs, is introducing some social programmes and is trying to be reasonable and cooperative with local communities and ‘host’local authorities.
The House of Commons Employment Committee 1988 report, ‘The Employment Effects of Urban Development Corporations’, concluded that
‘UDCs cannot be regarded as a success if buildings and land are regenerated but the local community are by-passed and do not benefit from regeneration’.
(Para 89).
The committee went on to recommend that the remit for UDCs should be altered to provide a more precise definition of ‘regeneration’.
The government, in its written response to the committee, refused to change the remit, but nevertheless the point is now well taken in most studies of urban regeneration.
Labour recruitment
The third reason why local people have not benefited is that Dockland development draws in workers from a very wide area across London and the South-East.
Residents of the East London boroughs make up only a fraction of those working in Docklands or seeking jobs in the area.
Moreover, around two-thirds of the jobs ‘created’ by LDDC are in fact transfers from the City of London financial district and Fleet Street's newspaper printing and publishing centre.
We also know that the construction industry offers few ‘local jobs’: it brings in contractors and sub-contractors from all over the country.
Quite apart from that, LDDC figures show 13,000 jobs were lost from Docklands between 1981 and 1988, of which quite a large proportion were jobs held by residents of the Docklands boroughs.
Because the types of jobs lost are quite different from the ‘new’ jobs, the proportion of Docklands residents in the new jobs is much lower (about 15 per cent) than the percentage in the ‘old’jobs (about 40 per cent ).
Housing
Just as those benefiting from new jobs have come mostly from outside the Docklands the markets for private housing in Docklands are not local either.
In the first phase of development in the early 1980s around 30 per cent of changes were bought by former council house tenants, but as prices have rocketed this percentage is now below 10 per cent.
New residents are coming in from a wider and wider catchment area.
Local people also lose out because, even on LDDC owned land, 85 per cent of the 15,000 houses are for sale, so ruling out local people needing to rent in precisely those London boroughs with notoriously long waiting lists for council accommodation.
‘Skills’ for local people
Lastly, where the LDDC has belatedly entered into ‘agreements’ with local authorities, such as with Newham and Tower Hamlets, and helped to set up training schemes like SKILLNET, designed to improve the skill levels of local communities, it has had little impact so far on getting local people into Docklands jobs.
This is because such schemes are taking a long time to get off the ground and  because employers generally recruit from non-local networks (see also Ladbury and Mira-Smith in this volume).
There is also a political cost to pay for such ostensibly benevolent reforms.
In the Royal Docks the London Borough of Newham in 1987 agreed to support the broad pattern of land use in three consortia schemes and co-operate with LDDC plans on land development and transport change in the area in return for the provision of 1,500 rented houses, a minimum of £60 million of social facilities and training measures to ensure maximum local employment.
But now this much vaunted initiative has foundered because there is little or no market interest in redevelopment.
To be fair, there is a significant Construction Training Programme in association with Canary Wharf which is beginning to make some local impact.
Yet on the other hand, new employers in offices on the Isle of Dogs are not required to take on any local people or train people for the jobs that are on offer.
WHY HAS LDDC CHANGED ITS PRESENTATION?
The public relations exercises of the LDDC have undergone a marked change over the past two years.
The Corporation now claims that it is ‘working for the community’.
Although this message is unlikely to be one that LDDC highlights when it approaches Whitehall for money, there is no doubting it has shifted its public relations away from targeting solely yuppies and City businessmen.
In the LDDC Annual Reports published since 1981, the images and the language have altered dramatically.
The 1986/87 Annual Report showed windsurfers with the subtitle ‘The Emerging City’; but the following year, in 1987/88, the cover showed local kids milking cows at the Mudchute Farm.
The sub-title was ‘Working for the Community’.
The then Chairman, Christopher Benson (Chairman of MEPC property company), said that there would be
‘increased emphasis on the social and community aspects of regeneration -not purely the physical provision of buildings.’
(LDDC, 1988)
The interesting question to ask is ‘why has this happened?’.
There are several possible answers, all of which contain some truth.
One view is that the Corporation can now afford to do this.
After all, with so much physical development now on the ground it can be generous to ‘the community’.
Moreover, having engineered physical development, social engineering is the next challenge, to tie in with the expectations and requirements of new residents — and also to those of the developers.
The developers now need social facilities and infrastructure, such as schools, open space and leisure facilities to support their own schemes.
A third view is that these changes, at long last, are a concession to the ever widening criticism of the LDDC.
Not only troublesome ‘action groups’, but the House of Commons Employment Committee, the National Audit Office, and the media are criticizing the LDDC.
The end of the property boom is another salient factor: with developers in trouble, this is not the time to present Docklands as a paradise for ‘yuppies’, especially since so many of them are also now criticising the environment of Docklands.
Finally, perhaps this change of mood can only be explained in the wider context of gradual changes in government policy on the inner city and UDCs — the emergence of a ‘new realism’ tempering the policies and rhetoric of the radical right.
NEW REALISM IN GOVERNMENT POLICIES FOR THE INNER CITY
David Trippier, who in 1988 was the Environment Minister responsible for Inner Cities, announced in December of that year that it was unlikely that the government would create any more UDCs: why?
One of the reasons is almost certainly the very high cost of UDCs to the public purse.
UDCs were intended to be merely pump-primers to bring in the private sector, which after a time would be reduced as private sector finance took over.
The LDDC is sometimes cited as a success story because it  has attracted in so much private investment.
The LDDC claims a ‘leverage ratio’ of 12:1, private:public investment.
Do these figures prove the government's case that the LDDC is good value for money?
LDDC leverage ratios are in fact highly misleading.
Public investment is defined solely as LDDC grant, thus excluding equally important Enterprise Zone allowances and Department of Transport funding for roads and new railways.
LDDC figures  also omit the £400 million or so that was spent by local authorities and government in the area prior to the inauguration of the LDDC.
If these are taken into account the ratio falls to 4:1, and will fall further, as new rail lines like the £1 billion Jubilee Line are largely paid for by government, and as government foots the bill for the £600 million Docklands Highway, a four lane motorway from East to West Docklands.
Thus, pump-priming has turned into a bottomless pit for the Treasury, in spite of the reinvestment of large receipts from land sales.
Even this latter source of funds is now drying up as the property market slides into an ever deeper slump.
It was in these circumstances that the LDDC had to go to the Treasury for more money in 1989/90, and again in 1990/91, and was very successful in getting what it wanted.
The financial reality of Docklands reveals the systematic confusion that surrounds the government's claim that the Docklands is an example of the market regenerating the inner cities.
The development of Docklands is anything but laissez-faire economics.
It is dependent upon massive government intervention in land assembly and reclamation, in transport costs, and in education provision.
Moreover, it is anything but unplanned since it depends on considerable state involvement, promotion, and subsidy.
A further factor tempering government enthusiasm for LDDC relates to what can be called the ‘Prince Charles’ Factor.
Three years ago, there was hardly an architect who would criticise the new townscape of Docklands or the Isle of Dogs.
The giant Canary Wharf office centre, its largest tower reaching 860 feet, went through without a public inquiry, amazingly with no comment from the Royal Fine Arts Commission or the media as a whole.
Now all has changed.
The Prince does not like Canary Wharf.
Nor do many others.
The President of the Royal Town Planning Institute, in a speech in December 1988, said about the Isle of Dogs:
‘Did you not come away thinking that the urban development challenge of the century adds to little more than opportunistic chaos — an architectural circus — with a sprinkling of postmodern gimmicks, the ghastly mega-lumps of Canary Wharf and a fairground train to get you there?’
Similarly, the media treatment of Docklands and inner city challenges elsewhere has changed dramatically.
The changing image of ‘yuppies’ and spiralling costs and congestion have seen to that.
It is open season for criticising UDCs for lack of planning, lack of strategic thinking and short termism.
The government in 1989  had to appoint a special transport minister for Docklands (Mr Portillo) to keep the lid on the widespread anger of developers about the lack of transport to Docklands.
In addition, there are undercurrents of ‘nastiness’ about Docklands development which are doing its image no good at all .
From being a much sought-after residential area, it has lost its fashionable air.
The media have weighed in.
For example, the TV drama ‘Thin Air’ in 1988 brought out some of the unpleasantness about the ‘wheeler-dealing’that has been going on during the Docklands boom years.
Other interventions have reinforced the feeling that all is not well with the ethics of Docklands.
For example, the Bishop of Durham was widely quoted in December 1988 as saying that UDCs and Housing Action Trusts were ‘vast dispensers of patronage’.
The sleaze factor has been highlighted by the revelation that large chunks of the Brinks-Mat bullion robbery money were laundered via Switzerland into luxury flats on the Isle of Dogs.
The political currency that underpinned the spread of UDCs is no longer so clearly in the government's control as it was a few years ago.
In other UDC areas local authorities and UDC Boards are working together to ensure that there is some balance to redevelopment, and officials are making great efforts to reassure residents and distance themselves from the LDDC experience.
Perhaps more importantly, the government has backed away from declaring more UDCs partly because of the costs and adverse publicity but also because it can achieve its aim of driving local authorities into the arms of the private sector by other means.
Cuts in capital budgets, use of the land dispersal register, and the mere threat of UDCs achieve the same political goals without incurring the political problems and contradictions of UDCs.
CONCLUSIONS
There is now a major question mark in policy-making over the meaning of ‘regeneration’ and particularly over who benefits from regenerative policies.
There is a new consensus that purely physical developments based on property-led solutions are not enough.
Moreover, land use planning, which in the early 1980s was alleged to be an obstacle to investment, is very much back on the agenda.
It is now recognised in the business community that infrastructure provision is vitally  important.
Ironically, the properly market now wants more certainty about the future.
Even in the prosperous South-East there are demands for direct subsidy and state assistance.
From a different political quarter, the Green movement is resurrecting environmental issues which again tie back into a possible new vogue for planning.
A further change is that Michael Heseltine's original idea that UDCs should be ‘single purpose agencies’ has backfired.
Given the complexities and plural nature of urban development other agencies must be closely involved.
Specifically, this points to the necessity of local authority involvement, just as the Audit Commission Report on Urban Regeneration 1989 concluded.
Yet a crucial side-effect of the UDC programme has been to push hard-pressed local authorities into the arms of the private sector without the problems and costs of UDCs rebounding on the government.
Finally, the UDC experience, and particularly that of the LDDC, has now brought into focus alternative strategies for urban regeneration.
The lessons of UDCs are being learned by local authorities and political parties.
The most important of these lessons is that ‘regeneration’ must be linked to local needs and the local economy.
The second lesson is that the property market cannot and must not be allowed to dictate the form, pace and content of urban change.
This direction and control must come from local democratic structures, both in local government and in the community.
The third lesson is that local economic development cannot take place without an overall strategy for national and regional development.
Figure 3.1: Merseyside Development Corporation
CHAPTER 3 MERSEYSIDE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 1981–1989 Physical regeneration, accountability and economic challenge
Jon Dawson and Michael Parkinson
URBAN DEVELOPMENT CORPORATIONS AND URBAN REGENERATION
Urban Development Corporations, the centrepiece of Mrs Thatcher's urban policy, articulate most dramatically the current British government's vision of city regeneration.
Designated in 1980 but launched in the immediate aftermath of the 1981 urban riots, the first UDCs were introduced into the London and Liverpool docklands.
After the 1987 election the government introduced a second wave of UDCs in Cardiff, Bristol, Manchester, Trafford Park, Sheffield, Leeds, Tyneside and Wearside, Teesside and the Black Country.
Development Corporations are the foremost example of the government's antipathy to local authorities: they are designated, empowered, financed by, and directly accountable to, central government.
With their statutory origins in the 1980 Local Government Planning and Land Act, UDCs are designed to bring land and buildings into effective use, encourage the development of new and existing commerce, create an attractive environment and ensure that housing and social facilities are available to encourage people to live and work in the area.
To enable them to fulfil these tasks UDCs have been granted extensive financial, planning and land acquisition powers.
They are able to acquire land by compulsory purchase, by voluntary agreement or by the Secretary of State vesting it in them.
Planning powers also rest firmly with UDCs which are  responsible for development control policy and decisions within their area.
Moreover, UDCs have powers to operate outside their immediate boundaries, if they think it necessary to secure regeneration.
By supplanting local authority planning powers in this way, UDCs are intended to remove the political uncertainty and restraints of local democracy which, in the government's view at least, represent a significant hindrance to the development process and a deterrent to private investment (House of Lords Select Committee, 1981).
Underpinning government faith in UDCs is the belief that a single-minded agency with limited objectives, using streamlined administrative procedures and free from political ambiguity is better placed than local authorities to turn round a closely defined area (Adcock, 1984).
In the government's mind its single-minded agency approach assumes an entrepreneurial ability that contrasts with the alleged inflexibility and bureaucratic ethos of local authorities.
UDCs are designed to create the conditions and confidence necessary to attract private capital.
Government financial support is, therefore, primarily tailored to providing incentives to the private sector by reducing the costs and risks of inner city investment.
In practice, UDCs place heavy emphasis on quickly realised and highly visible results —‘flagship’ projects that will materially improve the local environment and its image.
Inevitably, therefore, and despite the broad range of goals allocated to them, UDCs tend to stress property-led regeneration and thereby dilute wider urban policy goals.
Each UDC is governed by a board commonly comprising local businessmen, senior local politicians and the Corporation's Chief Officer.
They have three major revenue sources.
They receive a substantial annual budget from central government coffers, they may borrow from the national loan fund for commercial purposes and they can make use of the proceeds from land sales.
In many ways the first two UDCs could not have possessed more diverse characteristics nor could they have differed more greatly in their potential to transform their respective areas from derelict urban landscapes to localities resonant with dynamic private sector activity.
The London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC) was faced with the opportunity of regenerating an area, which no matter how physically derelict, had an unfulfilled development potential the equal of any piece of real estate anywhere in the world.
Lying within a mile of one of the leading financial centres of the modern capitalist economy which was about to reap the economic benefits flowing from the deregulation of the domestic financial market and the internationalisation of world financial markets in the 1980s (Parkinson and Evans, 1990), London Docklands was ripe for development.
In sharp contrast, the circumstances faced by Merseyside Development Corporation (MDC) could hardly have been less propitious.
Its designated area lay at the heart of one of the most economically depressed cities in Western Europe which had suffered a massive withdrawal of private capital during the previous three decades and endured a series of political traumas in the process (Parkinson, 1985, Figure 3.1).
Despite these important differences, the original dockland areas shared similar economic histories.
Both had been, in their prime, booming and prosperous ports.
But shifting patterns of international trade, the development of alternative transportation, containerisation, inter-port competition nationally and internationally and growing industrial disputes all contributed to their rapid decline in the 1960s.
Related manufacturing industries such as food processing, chemicals and engineering suffered keenly from the ports' decline and the surrounding areas endured massive job losses and an exodus of their people.
The dock closures inevitably led to the visible scars of acute environmental deterioration and abject physical dereliction.
The first two UDCs were thrust into these circumstances in 1981.
The MDC was initially given control over a limited area of 865 acres of derelict and fragmented dockland which was geographically isolated from the rest of the city with little indigenous population or economic activity.
Redevelopment had been frustrated by poor communications, disparate land ownership patterns and the fanciful ‘hope’ values sought by many landowners.
Moreover, despite the efforts of Liverpool City Council and Merseyside County Council during the 1970s, no realistic development plans existed for the area.
LDDC on the other hand was charged with the regeneration of a massive eight square miles where entire communities lived and worked and which was the focus of a well-advanced redevelopment strategy — the London Docklands Strategic Plan — approved by the GLC, local authorities and the Department of the Environment.
At the end of the decade, the government continues to make great play of the success fermented by the private sector in physically regenerating the docklands — especially the phenomenal development activity engendered in London.
However, despite launching the second wave of UDCs amidst government promotional hype proclaiming LDDC and MDC a success story, there has been scant attention paid in government circles to any rigorous analysis of the London and Liverpool experience.
To help redress this imbalance, this chapter seeks to evaluate the MDC's policy and practice and will complement Colenutt's contribution on London in this volume.
EVALUATING THE MERSEYSIDE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Essentially there are two important phases in MDC's history which, for any meaningful evaluation, require different criteria of analysis.
In the first phase from 1981 until November 1988 MDC's remit was confined to regenerating an area with little indigenous population or employment.
The second phase began in November 1988 when MDC's boundaries were extended to localities embracing economic activity, entire communities and active local authorities.
However, assessing UDC achievements is not without its problems.
First, the indicators of ‘success’ are clearly critical, yet there are no uniformly agreed objectives.
The government, for example, emphasises physical renewal and the extent to which public expenditure has levered private sector investment.
Yet whilst this may be an adequate instrument of analysis for derelict and deserted areas, it is less convincing as the sole criterion of success in areas which have indigenous communities and economies and active local authorities.
Moreover, the lack of adequate data collected by UDCs compounds problems in assessing even the government's preferred narrow determinants of success and frustrates the systematic monitoring of the impact of their programmes.
Finally, as other commentators have observed (eg. Church, 1988), any evaluation of the impact of the UDCs has to be viewed in the light of co-existing initiatives, boundary definitions and the fact that any assessment is unavoidably interim.
Despite these complications this assessment of the MDC experience will focus on three broad themes.
(1)
Efficiency — how successful has MDC been in terms of the physical regeneration of its area and in promoting private sector confidence and investment?
(2)
Accountability — how responsive has MDC been to the local authorities and communities in its area and how has it worked with other agencies.
(3)
Equity — what have been the consequences of regeneration for job creation for local people and for social housing provision?
These themes can be applied to MDC, both before and after 1988, and for comparative purposes the assessment will also reflect on LDDC's experience.
Firstly, we will consider the ‘efficiency’ theme and the question of physical renewal and private investment.
Whilst these criteria will be an important element in future analyses of regeneration in the post-1988 area, at this stage any meaningful evaluation is essentially confined to the initial designated area.
Moreover, the  characteristics of the initial area suggest that the ‘success’ of its regeneration can be best assessed in these terms.
MDC PHASE 1: PHYSICAL REGENERATION AND INVESTMENT
There is little dispute that in terms of physical regeneration both MDC, in its initial area, and LDDC have been visibly successful.
Whilst their ability to lever private sector investment has varied widely, both have transformed once derelict landscapes and upgraded impoverished environments.
In these terms LDDC has clearly outshone MDC.
Given its inherent advantages however, this is not altogether surprising and the commercial and residential property markets have responded quickly and emphatically to LDDC's pump-priming activities.
Pursuing an entrepreneurial and demand-led strategy, LDDC claim to have leveraged over £4.4 billion of private investment for an outlay of £440 million of public money predominantly applied to land reclamation and infrastructural provision — a gearing ratio of 10:1.
By contrast MDC's land reclamation and infrastructural provisions have demonstrated a markedly weaker propensity for attracting private capital.
Despite expenditure of £170 million, by 1988 private investment totalled a relatively meagre £25 million.
The reluctance of private capital to commit itself to a still depressed regional economy must be viewed in the context of MDC's changing development strategies.
At the outset, emphasis was placed on stimulating industrial demand.
MDC's initial development strategy earmarked 55 per cent of its land for industrial development, 40 per cent for commercial residential and recreational use, with 5 per cent left for port related activity.
However, by 1984 it was clear that significant industrial investment was simply not forthcoming.
The absence of demand for industrial development forced MDC to abandon its original strategy and opt instead for a tourist and leisure based strategy.
Whilst the National Audit Office's 1987 report subsequently criticised MDC for its initial policy failures there is some validity in its argument that the economic climate in the early 1980s, not MDC's internal failings, was primarily responsible for curbing industrial growth on Merseyside.
Notwithstanding these criticisms, MDC's change of strategy direction has been broadly justified.
Whereas industrial demand fell below expectations, demand in the tourism and leisure sectors has exceeded them.
Three high profile initiatives testify  to Merseyside Dockland's tourist potential: the rehabilitation of the Albert Dock, the International Garden Festival in 1984 and the International Tall Ships Race.
The Albert Dock is MDC's ‘flagship’.
It is Britain's largest Grade I listed building and, after extensive redevelopment costing £25 million, now accommodates the Tate Gallery, a Maritime Museum, Granada Television's news studio and upmarket offices, shops and flats.
As a tourist spectacle it welcomed over 3.5 million visitors in 1988 alone and now ranks as the North West's premier tourist attraction.
The waterfront's leisure potential received a further boost with proposals for a major transfusion of private investment on the adjacent Kings Docks site, in the shape of a retail centre, ice arena and multi-screen cinema.
However, it has yet to be realised.
Indeed, the proposed development has been thrown into doubt with the Secretary of State's decision to call it in for a public inquiry following representations from environmental pressure groups objecting to the scheme's architectural quality.
Regardless of the Minister's decision on this particular case, heightened developer interest is evidence that substantial public expenditure in declining areas will attract future private investment.
Moreover, there have been other successes.
Ninety small firms are operating in the Brunswick Industrial Park, a marina now graces the once derelict docks and about 100 low income houses for rent have been built and over 200 flats for sale at the top end of the Merseyside housing market developed and sold.
A number of issues, however, remain unresolved.
Many of the shops and restaurants in the Albert Dock operate with below market rents and service charges and their future remains uncertain as outgoings rise to market levels.
Equally, the International Garden Festival site, which successfully attracted visitors in the initial year on a subsidised basis, has since remained problematic (Parkinson and Evans, 1990).
Bankruptcy hit a private operator in 1985 and MDC continues to have difficulty attracting further developers to manage the site.
In the meantime it remains unused and sealed off for much of the year.
Despite these reservations MDC has enjoyed major successes in physically regenerating its area, which looks dramatically different than at its initial designation.
Indeed, by 1987, when the government was reviewing the future of UDCs and their boundaries, MDC's initial land use strategy seemed broadly complete.
Developments had either been realised or were at least in the advanced stages of negotiation in the bulk of its area.
The government was essentially faced with the option of winding down MDC's operations or extending its boundaries.
Clearly, MDC's initial boundaries had been too tightly drawn — a fact recognised at the time — and much work remained to be tackled in surrounding areas.
The Department of the  Environment commissioned consultants to prepare a detailed boundary extension report.
The Secretary of State took on board the consultants' recommendations and, in November 1988, sanctioned the extension of MDC's boundaries.
MDC PHASE 2: NEW BOUNDARIES, NEW CHALLENGES
The wider geographical remit fundamentally altered the nature and characteristics of MDC's area and accordingly the challenge and tasks the Corporation faces.
The newly designated area incorporates substantial parts of Liverpool's North Docks and areas of mixed commercial and some residential uses inland, together with industrial and commercial areas adjoining the initial designated area in South Liverpool.
On the south side of the River Mersey the extension takes in the commercial heart of Birkenhead with a mixed housing/industrial dock hinterland and also housing and leisure areas in New Brighton.
The designation almost trebled its original area by adding over 1500 acres to the Corporation's responsibilities and increasing the number of its residents from 1000 to 6700.
The new remit brings to the fore locally many of the larger issues about the UDCs that in its original form had been relatively irrelevant to the operation of MDC.
In contrast to its initial responsibilities, MDC is now operating in localities with a significant indigenous population where local authorities play a major role.
These characteristics clearly add extra dimensions to MDC's urban regeneration strategy, raise central questions about local accountability and highlight the thorny problem of uneven development.
MDC's success or failure will inevitably be judged on its ability to develop quite different approaches to urban development than the physical regeneration process that has been the hallmark of its achievements to date.
Its more complex area —socially, economically and politically — bringing with it a new and more complex set of issues, calls for a more sophisticated policy response.
MDC's performance must in future be assessed in terms of its ability to work with local authorities and community groups and its achievements in bringing jobs and prosperity not only to its area but also to its indigenous population.
In other words, community development comes onto the agenda and distributional issues become more significant.
Whilst national debate has shifted the focus of urban regeneration policy away from the narrowly defined goals of physical development, the extension of its boundaries  has forced MDC to confront the issues of jobs, training and social housing provision, although MDC would argue that these objectives were always part of its long-term agenda.
Indeed, aware of the harsh criticisms made of its sister Corporation in London Docklands, concerning the distribution of employment opportunities (Peat, Marwick, McLintock, 1987), affordable housing for local people (National Audit Office, 1988) and democratic accountability (Nicholson, 1989) the local regeneration lobby is united in a consensus that the acutely uneven development characteristic of London Docklands should not be replicated on Merseyside.
In fact, experience so far suggests that MDC's approach to urban regeneration has been less cavalier than LDDC's, reflecting its concern to minimise the social costs of development to its residents and to avoid projects likely to prejudice other areas of the city.
For instance, MDC resisted retail proposals for Princes Dock considered prejudicial to Liverpool city centre (MDC, 1989).
Whilst this approach has opened MDC up to the laissez-faire criticism of market interference, it creates a policy flexibility within which there is potential to engage with local authority and community imperatives.
MDC's new responsibilities pose difficult questions about the Corporation's legitimacy and its capacity to handle its wider remit.
Its organizational form — a small core staff and extensive sub-contracting to consultants — together with the advantages of political stability, administrative simplicity and speed of implementation offered by an agency rationale, have proved well suited to redeveloping a derelict dockland estate.
It remains to be seen, however, whether the UDC model can effectively and efficiently adapt itself to its broader goals.
Furthermore, MDC's capacity to meet the new challenges has to be questioned, since it has been granted limited additional resources and has recruited no extra staff to meet its wider remit.
The remainder of this chapter, taking into account these uncertainties and the changing nature of MDC's development role, will discuss the consequences of its past and future policy and practice on the central — and controversial — themes of accountability, housing and economic development.
ACCOUNTABILITY
The primary objection to UDCs has been that they are not directly accountable to local authorities or local people in their areas.
Government policy for the UDCs — part of its growing disenchantment with, and undermining of, local authority  activities — emphasises their ability to act entrepreneurially, free from the constraints under which local authorities operate.
But it also questions the extent to which this freedom creates a loss of democratic control.
The UDCs are financed by, and report to, central government.
They are the local planning authority for their designated areas.
Their boards operate behind a shroud of secrecy — MDC does not even publish its corporate strategy.
In their defence, UDCs claim that they are politically accountable to Parliament, administratively accountable to the Department of the Environment and financially accountable to the Treasury.
Nevertheless, the fact remains that the extent to which they are genuinely accountable locally is entirely within their own discretion.
In London Docklands, the intense pressure for development has produced bitter conflicts between LDDC and the surrounding local authorities and community.
However, accountability has been a less controversial political issue on Merseyside.
The slow pace of development and the lack of residents in the initial local area has produced less charged relations between MDC and local organisations (Parkinson and Evans, 1990).
Despite original opposition to the principle of the MDC all three local authorities have taken a place on the board.
Liverpool City Council did withdraw when Labour took control in 1983, but even then political relations were never as strained as in London.
Rather, the city became preoccupied by its budgetary dispute with Mrs Thatcher's government and virtually ignored the MDC.
Relations took on a more positive tone in 1989 when the leader of the City Council returned to the Board, reflecting the reconstituted Labour group's more pragmatic policy of forming alliances with government and the private sector.
Throughout the period, officials of MDC and the local authority have maintained good working relations, which is hardly surprising since many of MDC's plans and personnel were drawn from local authorities.
There have been few disagreements over major planning issues and there has been surprisingly little explicit community opposition to MDC — except from the Black community in Toxteth.
Moreover, the obvious success of MDC in opening up the docklands for mass market consumption has also effectively restrained local opposition.
Public access to an environmentally attractive waterfront has received a favourable response in the city and has undoubtedly muted political debate.
Since the boundary extension however, accountability has become a much more pressing and pertinent issue.
Not only did the boundary extension encompass local authorities with active development policies and programmes, it also brought within  MDC's remit one of the strongest community groups, organisationally and politically, in Britain.
With influential links to central government the Eldonian Community in Vauxhall has developed the largest new-build housing co-operative in the country.
In the process, it succeeded in enlisting financial and political support from central government.
It has received international recognition and a long and impressive list of visitors — including the Prime Minister — have lauded its achievements.
Actively pursuing further ideas for community development and local economic regeneration it presents a challenge to conventional development rationale which focuses upon maximising the leverage of private sector investment for the minimum necessary public expense.
Adapting to these new circumstances, MDC's initial policy approach signifies a concern to adopt a co-operative rather than confrontational stance.
In particular it has attempted to take on board community aspirations and local authority plans rather than ride roughshod over local wishes.
This co-operation has gained practical expression in the formulation of Area Strategies for most parts of the extended area, notably New Brighton, Stanley, Vauxhall and Birkenhead.
Reminiscent of conventional municipal statutory local plan-making, the preparation of the Area Strategies —‘informal’ local plans — have enabled MDC to create a forum in which local authorities, residents and the private sector alike can contribute as consultees to the local urban renewal process.
In practice, public participation in land use proposals emerges in MDC's liaisons with local authorities, landowners, residents and interested developers, both in the preparation of draft Area Strategies and through opportunities for public consultation on the published drafts.
For instance, the draft Area Strategy for New Brighton (MDC, 1989b) acknowledges local authority commitment to a major housing improvement programme and an ongoing policy of coastal protection and beach enhancement.
Similar consultation procedures were adopted for the Vauxhall Area Strategy, which in its draft form (MDC, 1989c) reflects community concerns for affordable housing and at least provides space for community based economic development plans.
The community element of the strategy marks what is in many ways a unique experiment in physical and economic regeneration.
It suggests a partnership between ‘bottom-upwards’ community controlled organisations and a ‘top-down’central government-led area based initiative.
However, although the ‘informal’ local plan makes provision for community development, the lack of effective mechanisms, particularly in the economic sphere, to counter an impoverished community's inherent lack of financial, managerial and skilled resources must inevitably make project fulfilment, with the significant exception of community housing initiatives, far from certain.
Whether MDC's co-operative outlook would survive market-led development pressures that contravene local authority or community wishes has not yet been tested.
Nevertheless, so far as policy and plan formulation is concerned, recent practice indicates a willingness to reflect both local wishes and concerns for policies elsewhere in the city.
The broadly favourable response from all quarters to the New Brighton and Vauxhall draft area strategies suggests MDC has succeeded in allaying local fears of inappropriate development and has responded to local aspirations in a way that will promote co-operation with the private sector.
Indeed, the formulation of ‘informal’ local plans itself suggests that unfettered free market development, reminiscent of London Docklands, is unacceptable to MDC.
Rather, it sees development proceeding within a tightly controlled land use strategy.
For all the government's anti-planning rhetoric, it is ironic that land use planning should re-emerge so strongly within the context of a privatised urban regeneration agenda.
HOUSING
In the London docklands housing has been the most politically controversial issue since LDDC assumed control over virtually the entire housing land reserve of three local authorities in its area.
However, on Merseyside, at least until November 1988, housing remained a low-key issue.
Not only were Liverpool's original docklands essentially non-residential but the Merseyside housing market in the early 1980s was less buoyant, creating less pressure upon MDC to provide housing.
Moreover, MDC's relatively modest housing programme for the initial area, its mixture of public and private provision and the fact that it has not displaced existing residents prevented housing becoming the political minefield for MDC that it was for LDDC.
The extended boundaries, however, place the housing debate on Merseyside at the centre of the regeneration agenda.
If MDC is lo avoid the hostile criticism endured by LDDC it must avoid re-enacting their unpopular approach.
In contrast to existing local authority plans, LDDC explicitly encouraged mainly private housing to diversify the existing housing stock which was 80 per cent council housing.
Fuelling the top end of the market in this way caused resentment.
Furthermore, efforts by LDDC to provide affordable housing for sale proved inadequate in the face of intense demand pressures.
As a result only 5 per cent of intended affordable housing satisfied affordability criteria for a local community where 75 per cent earn less than £10,000 per annum(National Audit Office, 1988; House of Commons Employment Committee, 1988).
Continued criticism of LDDC policy led it to introduce a belated social housing initiative in 1986 aimed at providing new and refurbished housing for rent and shared ownership.
But the image of highly paid newcomers benefiting from a rapidly inflated housing market at the expense of low income natives is a broadly accurate assessment of LDDC's record.
The experiences of London Docklands housing development clearly raises critical policy issues for MDC if it is to nurture more equitable development in its extended area.
MDC's approach to housing development in its extended area acknowledges the need for social housing provision.
Moreover, it displays a political sensitivity to local authority and community plans.
For instance, the New Brighton Area Strategy (MDC, 1989b) acknowledges the borough council's housing role and commits MDC to undertaking environmental improvement schemes to complement the authority's existing policy programme.
Equally, MDC's strategy for Vauxhall reflects Eldonian community proposals for an extensive mixed tenure housing development.
Aware of the interest in low cost housing for rent and purchase in the area, sparked by the Eldonian housing development activities, the Corporation's Draft Area Strategy (MDC, 1989c) incorporated consultant's findings and earmarked land for a balance of housing type and tenure.
More importantly, the strategies provide the basis for effective partnerships to reconcile MDC's imperatives with local authority and community proposals.
In the case of the Eldonian's housing developments, the partnership would comprise several key actors.
The Eldonians themselves are originators of the scheme.
MDC as planning authority will determine planning permission and perform land assembly and reclamation works to bring land up to development standard.
A housing association will coordinate and supervise development activity.
Finally, the funding agencies — predominantly the Housing Corporation, in the case of housing co-operative and housing association stock development, and the private sector in the case of housing for sale — will provide the necessary finance.
Whilst this partnership should ensure that social housing provision does not simply remain a well-intentioned plan, two cautionary notes about social housing provision generally need sounding.
First, the advent of the 1988 Housing Act and the limiting of Housing Association Grant to an average 75 per cent of development costs forces housing association and housing co-operative developments to secure the balance of funding from private sources.
Government policy assumes that increasing the ratio of private sector funding into the social housing process will enable more houses to be developed from available public funds.
There is, however, a trade-off.
Obtaining private funds is not likely to create an insurmountable hurdle  in itself.
But the burden of satisfying private sector returns on loans and investments will fall upon tenants, through increasing rental levels risking the exclusion of those most in need of social housing provision or at least further enmeshing them in the poverty trap.
Moreover, if the housing market were to weaken, withdrawal of private funds could restrict development.
Secondly, if this partnership and private sector-led developments elsewhere in the MDC succeed, conflicts are likely to arise.
The realisation of community-led and private sector housing schemes, the improvement of the local environment, amenities and infrastructure and an emerging demand for new housing in the area will translate into increasing private developer interest and higher land prices.
Without firm planning control from MDC these developments could again exclude the local community and jeopardise further social housing provision.
MDC will have to balance realising market values against local wishes and community input to the development process.
The pressure to revert to maximising leverage ratios and suppress local authority and community-led development would be intense.
Although hypothetical at this stage, the degree to which MDC upholds the publicly consulted ‘informal’ local plans, in the face of pronounced market pressures challenging its land use provisions, could prove crucial in future.
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
MDC insists that, in the short term, most of its expenditure has not been intended to create but to regenerate physically derelict dockland areas and create confidence in a depressed local economy.
The Corporation would argue that attracting future private sector-led employment is a long term aim and that, given the nature of the task it is too soon to assess the success of its strategy.
There is some truth to this claim.
But equally, MDC in its first eight years was not a major generator of jobs — and the individual cost of those created was extremely high.
In job creation terms its return on the £170 million so far invested has been small.
It has created 1,900 jobs but during the same period over 800 existing jobs have been lost in an area which lies at the heart of three parliamentary constituencies with some of the highest unemployment rates in Britain.
In 1981, there were only 1,800 jobs within MDC's boundaries.
By 1989, there were 3,000 -a net gain of 1,200 in office functions, retailing and small firms in nursery workshops.
In addition, MDC estimate construction projects generate over 700 jobs annually.
MDC also operates a grants programme which provides support to 93 firms, allegedly creating 300 jobs  and safeguarding 600 existing ones.
MDC has also supported training programmes which provided 7,100 places in 1988 (MDC, 1989a).
Even though much of the training was short term, MDC's record in this respect compares rather favourably with LDDC's unimpressive training programme.
Moreover, it can be argued that MDC's revised strategy, focusing upon leisure and tourism, supplies jobs better suited to the skills of the local population than the London Docklands emphasis on service sector growth.
MDC has also been more sympathetic than LDDC to the interests of existing firms in the area.
Its refurbishment of industrial units in the docks has been successful and well received (Parkinson and Evans, 1990).
Equally, the lack of pressure for land has meant, in contrast to LDDC, that MDC has not had to decide whether existing firms should be forced to quit the area.
Whilst it can be argued that physical regeneration, not job creation, was MDC's original priority, the extension of the boundaries removes this premise.
In future, job creation will inevitably become one of the main indicators of success.
MDC's broad emphasis in its draft area strategies, on less prestigious physical projects and on commercial and industrial development suggests it now views its primary task in business development and employment creation terms.
However, despite this shift in emphasis, MDC policy reaffirms conventional economic development rationale as the central plank of its regeneration strategy.
Land acquisition, site assembly, land reclamation, infrastructural improvement and environmental enhancement are the means through which it engages with local authorities, the Department of Environment and most importantly, the private sector to lever investment that will lead to economic growth.
At the same time, reflecting community representations, notional support is given to ‘bottom-up’ initiatives.
However, unlike housing co-operative and housing association development, the targeted mechanisms to ensure community led economic development are less formalised and fail systematically to bridge critical funding and support gaps in the economic development process.
Community led economic initiatives remain a badly organised feature of urban policy targets.
The lack of effective mechanisms, tailored to community needs, makes community led economic development, even for the influential Eldonians, an uphill task with forbidding obstacles to overcome.
As one way of ensuring that local people share the benefits of any resurgence in local economic fortunes, MDC places considerable emphasis on the role of skills training.
However, whilst the extended area incorporates 30,000 jobs, an unemployment rate of 30 per cent stubbornly persists.
MDC, with matching European Social Fund contributions, finances its training programme through METEL (Merseyside Education Training Enterprise Ltd.)— an independent agency established by the now abolished Merseyside County Council.
By equipping local people with marketable skills MDC hopes to improve their chances of securing employment when vacancies arise (although see Ladbury and Mira-Smith, Chapter 7).
Although targeting employment through the labour market is inevitably uncertain, skills training certainly improves the job prospects of local people.
Nevertheless, training per se does not create jobs and, at the end of the day, local employment opportunities will depend on combining an appropriately skilled population with success in stimulating private sector investment.
As we have observed, MDC seeks to use pump-priming measures to promote regeneration.
The renewed emphasis on industrial and commercial development assumes that the local economic environment is in good health and that the private sector will respond to such techniques.
MDC's chairman claims ‘…there is a significant difference in 1989.
The economic climate on Merseyside is now very conducive to development…enabling us to define preferred strategies with greater flexibility than hitherto.’
However, with the UK economy teetering on the edge of recession, the mere provision of reclaimed land, infrastructure and renovated buildings — the core of MDC's economic activities — may be an inadequate investment incentive.
It must therefore remain an open question as to whether the local economy is sufficiently robust to attract private sector capital.
CONCLUSION
Government rhetoric and the proliferation of development corporations around the country assumes that the UDC model provides a winning formula for regeneration.
However, as we have observed, regeneration can attract diverse interpretations.
Any judgement of the UDCs record will depend upon the meaning of regeneration, urban policy objectives and the criteria employed to measure them.
The pioneering UDCs in Liverpool and London have demonstrated a capability to mobilise the property development process and achieve high profile and visibly impressive physical renewal.
At the same time, their capacity to leverage private capital in support of these developments has varied considerably.
In London, substantial pump-priming, from public funds, by extensive infrastructural provision and aggressive marketing  combined with a more buoyant and dynamic economy has induced far higher leverage ratios and inspired a prolific construction boom that dwarfs the Merseyside renewal.
Nevertheless, despite the weaker Merseyside economy, MDC has undoubtedly succeeded in transforming the docklands' image from that of a decaying twilight zone into a popular and fashionable urban environment.
The Liverpool waterfront has become a magnet for tourists from near and far.
Moreover, despite setbacks due to intervention from the environmental and conservation lobby which have been sustained by the Secretary of State for the Environment, retail and office development interest remains strong.
However, successful regeneration cannot be adequately defined in solely physical terms.
Other crucial factors are the distribution of social and economic benefits and issues of accountability.
These issues have been important from the outset in London Docklands and acquired increasing currency on Merseyside following MDC's boundary extension.
As Colenutt makes clear (Chapter 2), LDDC's record in these respects is less than impressive.
The indigenous community has borne the brunt of the costs of regeneration but has enjoyed few of its rewards.
Newly built houses, newly created jobs and environmental improvements have not significantly benefited the original population.
Private sector led regeneration has profoundly increased the inequality of access to both private and public goods in the area.
Lacking the direct accountability mechanisms and the power to engage with LDDC, local authorities and communities have been neglected in favour of private sector interests.
In contrast MDC's record on equity and accountability has been less controversial.
This was the case before the boundary extension but it is also so after 1988, despite its move into areas with active local authorities and residents.
Whilst MDC's employment creation record has so far been marginal, the service sector jobs generated by the policy focus on tourism and leisure based industries may be more appropriate to the skills of the local community.
Moreover, in its initial area, unlike in London, there were few original residents to displace and environmental improvements succeeded in granting access to large stretches of the waterfront formerly sealed off from the public.
As we have seen, however, the boundary extension raised the profile of local accountability and equity issues and the potential for conflict between MDC and local authorities and communities.
However, the broad local consensus on MDC's recent area based development strategies indicates that the Corporation is attempting a co-operative approach.
It  has engaged local authorities and local communities as participants and consultees in the strategy making process and as joint actors in regeneration projects.
This approach is markedly different from LDDC's practice and, indeed, from MDC's accountability concerns in its initial phase.
At the outset, the introduction of the MDC was opposed by local authorities.
However, pragmatic working relationships have since developed.
Nevertheless, the durability of these politically negotiated relationships is uncertain and they may prove fragile in the face of competing development pressures.
Moreover, the fact remains that despite its recent record on public participation, MDC's accountability to elected authorities and local communities continues to be at its own discretion.
This raises the question of how effectively MDC's ‘informal’ local plans, incorporating local authority and community concerns, will be sustained when the market prefers a different course.
Several further assessments of the UDC policy can be drawn out of MDC's experience.
First, there is evidence to support the thesis that investing substantial public expenditure into declining areas will attract future private investment.
Second, despite the assertions of government ministers to the contrary, public intervention into the local development process, through the UDC programme, has been significant.
This interventionist approach stands uneasily alongside the free-market rationale.
Whilst MDC aims to stimulate private sector activity, it is clearly public sector led and financed.
Not only has MDC produced land use strategy documents to direct the course of development — central government has also intervened directly against market, and indeed MDC's, wishes to counter environmental and conservation criticisms of the plans for Kings Dock.
The calling of public inquiries is significant.
It undermines certainty in the development process — one of the central rationales underpinning the creation of the UDCs.
Assessing or predicting the economic performance of UDCs cannot be viewed in isolation from the area's market potential.
Indeed, there is little doubt that UDC success and economic advantage go hand in hand.
The varied success of LDDC and MDC in stimulating private sector activity powerfully demonstrates the critical nature of the local economy's strength.
If a locality lacks a dynamic economy, merely introducing a UDC into its area is no guarantee of economic revival.
Whereas LDDC enjoyed substantial private sector growth due to its close proximity to the City of London, the less buoyant Liverpool economy has witnessed less dramatic ‘inner city’ regeneration.
It is also important to recognise that throughout the 1980s, whilst MDC has received access to substantial financial resources, the government has simultaneously squeezed local authority budgets, particularly Liverpool City  Council's (Liverpool City Council, 1987).
The retraction of finances from city coffers calls into question the government's real commitment to urban regeneration.
Although the waterfront areas, under the auspices of MDC, have clearly benefited from government expenditure, the physical and social infrastructure of the wider city has been neglected.
MDC's wider remit inevitably brings with it a broader strategy and will encourage it to form more elaborate working relations with other agencies in the field.
This is particularly apparent in MDC's efforts to forge alliances with local authorities in its extended area and to complement their regeneration efforts.
However, the modest additional resources granted to MDC to cope with its new challenges cast doubt on its ability to transform its single purpose agency practice.
Clearly, if MDC does not possess the institutional resources to meet its new challenges it will not succeed.
Equally, however, if they are essentially operating as traditional institutions and if it does succeed as a multi-purpose agency, it begs the question whether UDCs were necessary in the first place.
MDC has clearly demonstrated a capacity to realise physical renewal of its initial area and has operated effectively as a single-purpose agency.
It has essentially used its very extensive powers and privileges — direct access to central government resources and influence, relative autonomy and freedom from local political accountability — to achieve what the government required.
However its ability to carry through the wider social and economic issues that are now central to its agenda has yet to be proven.
CHAPTER 4 THE ROLE OF COMMUNITY GROUPS IN GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT IN PITTSBURGH'S NORTH SIDE
Sue Buckingham-Hatfield
A common theme of urban redevelopment in both the USA and UK is that of leverage, or the use of small amounts of public funding to attract larger sums of private investment.
The success of such strategies is therefore usually expressed in terms of the ratio between public and private investment.
Such evaluations are frequently made at the aggregate scale, for a city or designated redevelopment area as a whole.
There is less monitoring of such programmes at the micro-scale, that of the neighbourhood or census tract.
Given that urban districts may be subject to geographically uneven patterns of investment and disinvestment, the question arises as to whether urban redevelopment funds are targeted to those neighbourhoods most lacking in capital or those where private revitalisation is already well established.
In other words, does public investment follow private, and thereby exacerbate such unevenness, or does it act to compensate for the lack of private capital?
This chapter seeks to examine at a small-scale the variations in deprivation and investment in an urban area of Pittsburgh.
It asks whether there is any clear spatial relationship between need and public investment.
Secondly, it explores the creation and institutionalisation of community groups as part of the processes of channelling state funds into revitalising neighbourhoods.
It is argued that geographically constituted groups such as community organisations are not necessarily representative of socially  diverse populations.
The targeting of investment to areas rather than people, and the creation of a layer of bureaucracy to ‘represent’ such areas, is, in other words, a critical process in the delivery of urban policy initiatives.
PITTSBURGH'S NORTH SIDE
Although Pittsburgh was severely hit by the decline in the steel industry, its tertiary and quaternary sectors were thriving and there were demands on the city to respond to and cater for the large number of firms locating and expanding their professional and managerial activities there.
One of the areas that was targeted for local government investment lies on the north side of the Allegheny river, directly across from the ‘Golden Triangle’ which forms the heart of Pittsburgh's downtown.
Originally an independent city, Allegheny City was incorporated into an expanding Pittsburgh in the early twentieth century.
Through its development as a neighbouring city to Pittsburgh, Allegheny City had a self contained identity and a variety of housing provision.
For the Carnegies, Mellons and Heinzs were built substantial brick mansions up the slope from the river whilst the clapboard terraced houses on the riverside were occupied by mostly Eastern European immigrants drawn by work in the steel mills.
As Pittsburgh expanded during the twentieth century and out-of-town residential locations became feasible, the population profile of the North Side changed.
The area became marginalised, cut off from the hub of business activity across the river.
Its architectural and social heritage was no obstacle to the deterioration of the erstwhile mansions in Manchester, Allegheny West and the Mexican War Streets area.
These neighbourhoods were increasingly occupied by a poor population living in crumbling apartments and rooming houses.
In 1967 the once impressive Manchester neighbourhood was declared an Urban Renewal Area by the federal government, in 1968 a Redevelopment Area by the City Commission and in 1971 a Title I Federal Urban Renewal Project.
Lobbying efforts from the local (predominantly African-American) activist population secured a large Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) in 1979 which the Pittsburgh Urban  Renewal Authority (URA) used as a springboard to launch a broader improvement programme in the North Side.
The URA targeted six North Side neighbourhoods by selected criteria of decline.
The UDAG supported an initial city bond issue that was designed to underwrite a home buying programme in the neighbourhoods.
Initially this was given to both individual home buyers and investors, although this policy was later reviewed to exclude investors.
In 1982 the programme area was extended to cover an adjoining neighbourhood, California Kirkbride, which registered similarly high rates of deprivation to the original six neighbourhoods (Allegheny West, Central North Side, East Allegheny, Fineview, Manchester and Perry South).
The stated objective of the City of Pittsburgh in launching the North Side Revitalisation Program was:
‘to improve physical conditions without causing displacement of the low and moderate income residents and to stabilise the housing market.’
(An Evaluation of the North Side Revitalisation Program October 1979 — October 1983, prepared by the Urban Renewal Authority, City of Pittsburgh.)
While there were quite clearly areas of acute deprivation in the North Side, this was by no means ubiquitous.
During the time of the programme there were marked variations in deprivation and revitalisation indicators.
Marked also was the apparent increase in the discrepancy between revitalising and deprived areas both between and within North Side neighbourhoods.
Although leveraging was a stated principle of local government investment policy, no particular relationship could be established between government ‘seed funding’ and private investment.
Public money followed private as often as it led.
The legal requirement for local government to consult with the local community over spending federal money created a potentially critical role for community groups, and raised the question of their role in the decision making process.
The Pittsburgh Planning Office interpreted community in geographically distinct terms and liaised with only one group per designated neighbourhood.
The neighbourhoods were by no means socially or economically homogeneous, yet the active membership of the representative groups were.
The rest of this chapter will outline the variations in deprivation and investment in the North Side and then explore the disparities between need and investment through the activities of community representatives.
DEPRIVATION AND INVESTMENT IN THE NORTH SIDE
The neighbourhood unit was the focus of much of Pittsburgh's development under the citywide ‘Renaissance II’ programme.
This was inspired by the first Renaissance programme in 1943 in which leading business interests in Pittsburgh took the initiative to forge a partnership with city government to address three critical problems of the time: air pollution, flooding, physical dereliction.
Out of this partnership the Urban Renewal Authority (URA) was born in 1979.
Between 1979 and 1985, $482 million was spent on neighbourhood improvement projects and programmes.
On average this represented around 35 per cent of the annual operating budget available to the city.
The agency chiefly concerned with neighbourhood liaison was the City Planning Office, which employed a number of community planners responsible for consulting with their allocation of neighbourhood groups.
The role of the community planner was responsive and informative rather than proactive.
Housing had been the responsibility of the Urban Renewal Authority (URA) since the early 1970s when it achieved independent recognition through federal legislation.
The URA commanded a large budget share (just over half of citywide neighbourhood expenditure) during the Renaissance n programme.
Funding was broadly divided between federal programmes and locally raised bond issue finance.
The majority of housing expenditure (almost 70 per cent) made by the URA was committed to home improvement loans and equity participation units (the latter designed for owner-occupiers on low to moderate incomes).
Although rental accommodation comprised more than a third of Pittsburgh's housing only 5 per cent of URA housing expenditure was expressly devoted to this sector.
This was consistent with the philosophy of local government, in which owner-occupation was seen as the most efficient way of stabilising a neighbourhood.
The URA also had a responsibility for allocating a large share of the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG).
The North Side, recipient of substantial government investment through the URA, exhibited a strongly differentiated housing market.
The level of owner-occupancy did not correspond with house prices, as Table 4.1  quite clearly shows.
Other variations can be observed and are given in full in Tables 4.2a  and 4.2b : the rise in median income earned in the North Side was markedly low, but concealed a degree of polarisation.
The average income in Allegheny West, for example, in 1980 was 35 per cent of the city average (and this represented a decline on 1970), yet house prices at sale were the highest in the city in 1983–84.
The percentage of households earning more than $50,000 in 1980 was about 80 per cent of the city average.
This, together with house price rises since 1980, indicated that houses were being sold to buyers on incomes substantially higher than the average in Allegheny West.
Gentrification activity was indicated by a substantial reduction in properties without exclusive plumbing between 1970 and 1980 and by a disproportionate allocation of Historic Preservation Grants.
The neighbourhood housed 3.5 per cent of the North Side's population but received 17 per cent of the North Side's Historic Preservation Grants.
Table 4.1: Average Property Sale Price Relative to City and to Local Owner Occupancy Rates.
Manchester was the other neighbourhood that experienced high house price rises while maintaining low owner occupancy rates (29 per cent compared with a city average of 64 per cent).
Despite these house price rises, housing conditions in Manchester remained poor with almost 30 per cent lacking exclusive plumbing facilities.
The variations in prosperity in the North Side become more acute when observed on the smaller scale of the census tract.
Within Central North Side between 1970 and 1980, the census tract containing the Mexican War Streets historic area experienced the most  drastic drop in dwellings lacking exclusive plumbing arrangements, the highest property price increases, the sharpest rise in owner occupancy, a decrease in the proportion of elderly people and a slower than city average population decline.
Its neighbouring census tract to the north exhibited diametrically opposite trends, suggesting that whilst one area improved another declined.
Similar intra-neighbourhood imbalances were observed in Manchester, California Kirkbride and East Allegheny.
In considering indicators of revitalisation and gentrification, the percentage increase was above the city average in several areas (Tables 4.2a and 4.2b): above average rises in professional and managerial jobs and owner occupancy in Allegheny West, California Kirkbride, Fineview, Manchester and Perry South.
Manchester was the only neighbourhood not to witness conversion of buildings to single occupancy above the city average.
The above average increases in 20–45 year olds and college-educated residents were evident in Allegheny West, Central North Side and Manchester, whilst East Allegheny experienced the latter.
Allegheny West, the highly polarised neighbourhood referred to earlier, scored above the city average on every revitalisation indicator except rising income.
Together with this neighbourhood there were strong signs of gentrification in the Mexican War Streets area of Central North Side, the census tract with Historic Designation in Manchester and a single census tract in East Allegheny.
The pattern of deprivation in the North Side did not then present a universal picture of disinvestment or devalorisation prior to the declaration of the programme.
Even by the URA's own criteria of decline (population decline, low home ownership, increase in the African-American population, ageing population, low income, substandard housing and high crime rates) the North Side neighbourhoods did not always exhibit such symptoms.
Between 1970 and 1980 owner occupancy was only declining in Fineview, house prices were increasing throughout the area and the elderly population was increasing above the average rate in only half the neighbourhoods.
The drive to home ownership and the benefits to buyers was most concerted in Manchester and Central North Side.
There was no income restriction on any households in receipt of programme monies.
The only restrictions on purchasers were not to have owned their own home during the previous three years or to have spent more than $100,000 on their prospective North Side home.
These were waived in the case of Manchester and Central North Side.
Programme requirements necessitated a 5 per cent downpayment plus closing costs which immediately prejudiced the chances of low income residents, particularly in those neighbourhoods experiencing high house price rises.
The earlier designation of two historic areas in Manchester and Central North Side (Mexican War Streets) suggests that the URA was investing in areas already revitalising and therefore able to show a quick demonstration of the city's investment programme.
This is a charge increasingly being laid at the door of city governments when disbursing federal grants by, amongst others, Dommel and Rich (1987), Fainstein and Fainstein (1986) and Strickland and Judd (1983).
Whilst this is an attractive option, as the effects of such a strategy are quickly apparent, the more deteriorated property (less attractive to private investors) continues to decline.
Table 4.2A: Selected Indicators of Revitalisation and Deprivation on North Side Census Tracts 1970–1980
Table 4.2B: Selected Indicators of Revitalisation and Deprivation on North Side Census Tracts 1970–1980
The URA justified a large scale investment programme to ensure its effectiveness; however, this in turn exacerbates precisely the contradictions and polarisation already referred to.
To establish whether government investment was made where it was likely to see the greatest return or to areas of greatest deprivation, public spending patterns were analysed in the light of private investment and previous revitalisation and deprivation patterns.
The bulk of government investment was made to facilitate property purchase, considered by the programme implementers as the most effective way to stabilise the area.
Certain provisions were made within the bond programme, such as Equity Participation Loans (EPLs) to assist lower income purchasers.
Such assistance, however, was not restricted to owner-occupants.
Of the first bond issue (and by far the most significant in terms of funds raised: $20 million), 39 per cent was allocated to investors (individual loans averaging $57,064) whilst 61 per cent was allocated to owner-occupants (individual loans averaging $40,342).
Of EPLs made, 56 per cent were made to investors (average loan $20,235) whilst 44 per cent were made to owner-occupiers (average loan $9,063).
The URA's attitude to investor participation in the EPL scheme was ambivalent.
After the second bond issue (by which time half the total programme allocation had been made) investor participation through the EPL was excluded.
However, the URA was inclined to the view that investor activity promoted owner-occupation involvement.
Table 4.3  shows the various degrees of investment activity versus owner-occupier revitalisation activity in the North Side neighbourhoods.
Table 4.3: Loan Activity and Investor Loan Activity Using First and Second Bond Issue Finance in North Side Neighbourhoods.
According to the URA, the total number of loans made in Central North Side included 59 per cent on properties in the Mexican War Streets area already introduced as one of historic and architectural merit.
Property owners investing in the North Side during the URA revitalisation programme would have acted on deprivation and revitalisation information referred to earlier.
Allegheny West had a greater percentage of units for which bond issue loans were allocated and a still greater percentage allocated to investors than its percentage of North Side units would account for.
In 1980 it showed the greatest tendency to revitalise and performed averagely on a decline in deprivation index.
Central North Side enjoyed a rate of unit improvement using bond issue finance almost twice that of the percentage of North Side units it contained.
Investment activity by unit was more than double the percentage of North Side units contained by the neighbourhood.
Manchester scored higher than its share of North Side units merited in terms of general and investor loan activity but, unlike Allegheny West and Central North Side, was amongst the more deprived neighbourhoods and showed a lesser tendency to revitalise by 1980.
Fineview and Perry South both received less investment than their share of units would indicate.
East Allegheny displays the most glaring disparity as, whilst it contains one quarter of all North Side dwellings, total investment represents around one eighth of all North Side loans made.
When census tracts are scrutinised in this neighbourhood a sharp division in experience becomes apparent.
These data suggest that investment under the URA programme tended to be made in neighbourhoods (and census tracts) already showing stronger revitalisation signals.
The figures in Table 4.4  illustrate a further disparity between the share of all city capital expenditure and share of dwellings in the North Side.
Positive imbalances can be seen for Allegheny West, Central North Side and Manchester in favour of investment and negatively for the remaining neighbourhoods.
This also demonstrates the rehabilitation expenditure and incidence in North Side neighbourhoods and census tracts.
Understandably, this follows government programme allocation (in some cases the programme will have funded the rehabilitation work), but there is also a correlation with prior revitalisation experience.
Whilst Manchester shows exceptionally high expenditure on a relatively large number of properties, Central North Side and East Allegheny show selective investment (that is, higher amounts on fewer properties).
California Kirkbride and Perry South both show a pattern of low investment on a few properties.
When the data for census tracts are observed a marked discrepancy can be seen within East Allegheny.
On the number of rehabilitations, census tract 2202 (Mexican War Streets historic area) emerges substantially ahead of its fellow Central North Side census tracts.
Table 4.4: North Side Rehabilitation Expenditure and Activity, 1981–1985
There appears to be a clear trend allying census tracts that experienced faster revitalisation and declining deprivation prior to 1980 with subsequent public and private investment.
Investment since 1979 also seems to have been influenced by historic designation as census tracts containing such areas saw more rehabilitation activity.
An attempt to observe whether or not public investment leverages private investment has therefore been inconclusive.
By examining the time at which public and private investment took place, only two of the six neighbourhoods for which complete data are  available experienced city led investment.
In Allegheny West and East Allegheny public and private investment was contemporaneous after 1981, whilst private investment led public in Manchester and California Kirkbride.
COMMUNITY REPRESENTATION IN THE NORTH SIDE
Given the disparate investment pattern in the North Side, which appears to favour areas previously showing a greater tendency to revitalise, and an investment strategy that permits higher income rehabilitators to use government funds for revitalising increasingly fashionable homes, what guides programme investment in an alleged attempt to alleviate deprivation?
The nature of community representation in Pittsburgh has been such that, while obliged to consult groups over the allocation of federally originating money, only one group per neighbourhood was consulted.
Regardless of how diverse the local population or economy is in each neighbourhood, the neighbourhood planner has not sought to ensure even representation and, indeed, in most cases representation did not reflect the local socio-economic profiles.
The remainder of this chapter will review the nature and activities of these neighbourhood groups in an attempt to understand better the nature of the North Side Revitalization Program delivery, to trace out the mechanisms by which social polarisation may be exacerbated rather than alleviated.
Pittsburgh has a strong neighbourhood heritage and its Rand McNally citation as ‘most livable city in the USA’ in 1985 owed much to the feelings of intimacy residents felt towards their neighbourhood.
Almost three-quarters of city residents felt that their neighbourhood was a good or excellent place to live, whilst around two-thirds felt strongly attached to their neighbourhood (Ahlbrandt and Cunningham, 1980).
The neighbourhood factor was also an important marketing concept in trying to attract residents to move to Pittsburgh.
To this end the Neighborhoods for Living Center was established in 1979, under the auspices of the URA and in co-operation with ACTION Housing Incorporated.
ACTION Housing Incorporated is a local charitable housing foundation, founded in 1958 and in receipt of government funding.
Although this centre presented a coherent picture in which the city was divided into discrete neighbourhoods, residents would not always identify with these boundaries.
Moreover, single geographic units contained a range of advantage and disadvantage, revitalisation potential and public and private investment levels and, consequently, conflicting interests.
From these conflicting interests emerged representation that did not always reflect the majority interest.
Each neighbourhood was assigned a planner who was responsible for notifying neighbourhood residents of planning decisions which were likely to affect them and for  channelling requests for action through the appropriate city departments.
Neighbourhood groups were invited to nominate a representative to attend relevant council meetings.
As well as the groups purporting to represent individual neighbourhoods, two organisations covered the North Side as a whole: the North Side Civic Development Council (NSCDC), which was essentially an economic development unit, and the North Side Leadership Conference (NSLC).
This was, in fact, formed by the NSCDC after several unsuccessful attempts to unite North Side community and advocacy groups.
The NSLC comprised representatives from most of the individual neighbourhoods and employed one full- and one part-time member of staff.
The NSLC liaised directly with eight city agencies and nominated four representatives to sit on the NSCDC.
The North Side had, at the time of research, one community planner of eighteen months' standing.
Although she had responsibility for other areas, she considered that her appointment had begun to dissolve some of the negative feelings caused by the lack of a link person.
The general feeling that emanated from the City Planning Office (from directorate level downwards) was that the organisation on the North Side was both enthusiastic and sophisticated, as well as demanding.
The community planner saw the NSLC as a strong and uniting force which did not create conflict between the neighbourhoods.
The community planner was also aware that conflict probably did exist behind the prominence of what she perceived to be middle class agitation, but did not consider it part of her brief actively to encourage alliances that were not already formed.
Rather, her role was perceived as one of shaping ideas held by groups already in existence.
The individual group was seen as more important than the umbrella organisation.
These individual groups are discussed in more detail.
Allegheny West
Allegheny West Civic Council (AWCC) was formed during the early 1970s to mark the distinctiveness of the area from neighbouring Manchester, which had a reputation for disadvantage.
In addition to receiving subscription revenue, the AWCC received rent on a local property it owned.
Allegheny West's population was predominantly white (90 per cent), had doubled its owner occupancy level from 1970 to 1980 (from a low base of 6 per cent ), but had an average income of one-third of the city average.
Low income was not, however, represented in the house sale prices, which were the highest in Pittsburgh (Table 4.1).
Moreover, for the North Side, the neighbourhood had a relatively high percentage of households that earned more than $50,000 in 1980, close to the city average of 1.5 per cent.
This suggests a high degree of polarity between low income renters and high income owner-occupiers.
This trend was confirmed by a report published by the URA in 1985 that found no low income homebuyers moving into the area during the Programme period.
Quite clearly ‘neighbourhood’ representation emanated from the latter group since all active members were home-owners.
Conflict existed both within the neighbourhood and with other North Side neighbourhood groups.
Internally, the interests of the AWCC such as maintaining land in residential use and seeking effective zoning controls for this, lobbying for character street furniture and for historic designation and securing residential parking permits did not represent the interests of the wider neighbourhood population.
Externally, AWCC felt that its demands were highly specific and did not benefit from a wider articulation through the North Side Leadership Conference, which it joined in 1985.
The Council felt that it had only achieved a limited success in achieving the aims determined above.
The main opponents in the land-use battles were the Allegheny Community College and a local developer who planned to build subsidised apartments with 25 per cent reserved for handicapped residents.
The AWCC preferred to concentrate on environmental issues and gentrification.
By 1987 the group's emphasis was squarely on dwelling conversions at market rates.
In the Pittsburgh Neighborhood Survey, Ahlbrandt (1984) found that feelings of neighbourhood satisfaction were well below the city average, although neighbourhood attachment was greater.
Whilst the AWCC were lobbying for the conversion of vacant apartments to market rate housing, the population interviewed by Ahlbrandt and Cunningham (1980) suggested that the high house prices caused the greatest concern in the area.
This was considered more important than all the environmental and crime related problems prompted by the survey.
The Central North Side
The Central North Side had strongly organised if partial representation since the 1960s when the Mexican War Streets area began to experience small scale renovation.
This representation secured historic recognition for the area and spawned the Mexican War Streets Society.
The Central North Side as a whole was, by the 1980s, represented by the Central North Side Neighborhood Council (CNSNC) but there was evidence of tension between the young people brought up in the area for whom there were slim prospects of employment (levels of unemployment consistently outstripped the city average) and householders involved in revitalisation.
House prices, unlike those in Allegheny West, were not universally escalating: the average rise in house prices in the neighbourhood corresponded with the city rise.
The disaffected population referred to above were not active in either of the neighbourhood societies and perceived their aims to be remote from their own needs.
Of course, since they were not involved in these groups these needs failed to be expressed to the city council, although the two umbrella groups, NSCDC and NSLC, took some responsibility for this.
Community feeling in the area as monitored by Ahlbrandt was low, with barely more than one half of interviewees accepting the neighbourhood as a good or excellent place to live and two-thirds (almost 20 per cent below the percentage for Allegheny West) feeling strongly attached to it.
The concerns of the neighbourhoods appeared to be more with building condition (vacant structures and deterioration) than with crime related issues, house prices or non-residential environmental issues.
Economic problems were not addressed by the Ahlbrandt study and this reflects the lack of attention expressed by the neighbourhood groups to issues such as unemployment, affordable housing and employment generation.
The North Side Civic Development Council placed the latter firmly on its agenda through its attempts to establish incubators for small businesses and local labour contracts in larger projects, with limited success.
The Manchester Citizens Corporation was alone in lobbying for such provision, but its capability in this area became increasingly constrained towards the end of the Programme period (see below).
California Kirkbride
There had been an informal group in California Kirkbride for many years but the Charles Street-Kirkbride Area Council (CSKAC) was officially constituted in 1979 to take  advantage of the UDAG.
Of the active membership ninety percent were homeowners, but in contrast to the two neighbourhoods presented above, their average length of tenancy was twenty-five years.
The council incompletely straddles two census tracts and ‘officially’ defined neighbourhoods: Perry South and California Kirkbride, and so it is difficult to establish the representativeness of its membership, although owner-occupancy rates were around half that of the active membership in both census tracts.
Community satisfaction and attachment was found to be relatively low, hovering around 50 per cent.
The active membership were not hostile to the interests of non-members as appeared to be the case in the two groups mentioned earlier (and East Allegheny referred to below) but felt that there was a difference in neighbourhood perception between owner occupiers and renters.
The main thrust of the council's efforts had been to lobby for new housing, improve neighbourhood services and strengthen neighbourhood rapport.
This neighbourhood approach was echoed by the Fineview Citizens Council.
This group was founded in 1983 under the guidance of the Perry Hilltop neighbourhood organisation.
Residents had seen and been motivated by what other neighbourhoods had achieved through lobbying activities.
Fineview was considered by its residents to be an old-established family neighbourhood but it was generally felt that the cohesion was being destroyed by the increasing numbers of properties converted to the rental market.
This was the only neighbourhood in the North Side which experienced a drop in owner-occupancy between 1970 and 1980.
Whilst renters were encouraged to participate in the neighbourhood and its organisation, lack of involvement by this group resulted in the membership being comprised of owner-occupants of long standing.
Other issues that the FCC concerned itself with included the control of unruly behaviour (both by young people and by American Legion club members!), the use of vacant structures and neighbourhood welfare programmes, particularly for the elderly.
East Allegheny
In contrast, the East Allegheny Community Council (EACC) membership was dominated by new owner-occupants in recently renovated property.
This contrasted with a 26 per cent owner-occupancy rate in the neighbourhood.
Moreover, 55 per cent of the neighbourhood had been resident there for five years or more.
The council was formed in 1979 under strong leadership guidance (the only member who had not recently moved into the area, although a home-owner).
There was some committee approval for a small selective membership because ‘it facilitated decision making’, despite its exclusivity.
The council received city support for a part-time member of staff.
The main focus of the council's activities was to redevelop neighbourhood housing for market rent and to this end the EACC had become involved in commercial and residential development.
It had also successfully lobbied for a prestigious residential development under the Community Development Block Grant programme, although the sale prices far exceeded the borrowing capacity of the majority of local residents (median income was less than $7,000 in 1980, whilst unemployment stood at three times the city average).
While city agencies have argued that the encouragement of higher income groups into a low- or moderate-income area has a stabilising effect, the lobbying efforts of an apparently unrepresentative group, which also counted amongst its achievements the zone enforcement in respect of unlicensed multi-occupancy property and the installation of street furniture with public funding in character with the prestigious Deutschland Square development, raise the question of stability for whom.
These and other activities, such as commercial involvement in the conversion of a priory into a luxury hotel and the lobbying for historic designation status, created tension between the new, active residents and the majority of residents who were on low incomes and rented their homes.
The promotional literature for East Allegheny produced jointly by the EACC and the Neighborhoods for Living Center emphasised the renovation potential of the area, whilst minimising the community and family aspects concentrated on by Fineview and Charles Street-Kirkbride.
Ahlbrandt found a strong attachment to the neighbourhood but a low percentage of residents (57 per cent) expressing a feeling that East Allegheny was a good or excellent place in which to live.
Manchester
Manchester Citizens Corporation (MCC) had a rather different history to other groups in the North Side.
It was formed in response to the urban riots in the late 1960s, although there had previously been community activity concentrated on winning historic and architectural recognition for the area.
Citizen involvement began in 1972 to coincide with the approval of a large urban renewal project.
The project never materialised owing to a federal moratorium on housing funds, but the two strands of building preservation and community involvement came together in 1979 with the incorporation of the MCC.
The neighbourhood was instrumental in securing the Urban Development Action Grant both through its lobbying efforts and the prevailing conditions in the area.
The MCC employed eleven members of staff at the time of investigation and ran a development corporation which was involved in renovating and constructing housing as well as providing local jobs.
The MCC reported to a council of resident representatives.
The organisation was complex and not without internal conflict.
There was also some conflict between Manchester and neighbouring groups, largely due to the vast difference in the scale and resourcing of projects there.
Alone amongst the North Side groups, the MCC aimed to maintain opportunities for housing and jobs for low and moderate households in the area.
Unemployment in the area was not the highest in the North Side, but well above the city average; owner-occupancy was also low at around 30 per cent.
Conversely, house prices climbed fast between 1980 and 1985, whilst median income was low (see Tables 4.2a and 4.2b).
By 1987, the paid staff employed by the MCC had been reduced by half and the development emphasis had shifted to gentrification.
The number of homes sold to median-to-high income earners rose while neighbourhood representatives expressed concern over the concentration of substandard property.
Neighbourhood satisfaction was the lowest of all North Side neighbourhoods.
From being a highly charged organisation unique in the North Side for engaging in employment and economic related issues, Manchester appeared to be following the path of Allegheny West, Central North Side and East Allegheny.
Interests in the North Side, then, do not neatly fit into neighbourhood units which dovetail into the geographic space of the area.
The neighbourhood (for which physical limits may be assigned) acted as a base for a group but, often, these groups could be more accurately defined by housing and class interests than purely by locality.
Although it is clear that most of these groups were not representative they were instrumental in directing government funding to projects of limited use to the majority of residents, ‘neighbourhood stabilisation’ apart.
This raises the question of the appropriateness of organising community interests in spatial terms alone and questions the legitimacy of the community consultation process.
The operation of the communities of interest has varied from seeking to preserve neighbourhood cohesion or status quo(Fineview and Charles Street Kirkbride) to pursuing the interests of an exclusive and unrepresentative group within the neighbourhood (such as Allegheny West, Central North Side, East Allegheny and increasingly Manchester).
At the time of research there were over sixty well defined and locationally stable neighbourhood groups in the city of Pittsburgh, together with several official umbrella organisations and established routes of representation for neighbourhood groups.
Although institutional sponsorship can be a positive force, it can also be counter-productive in terms of representative neighbourhood mobilisation.
One formal route of expression set up in 1980 — the Home Rule Charter — was developed to provide neighbourhoods with an opportunity to form advisory boards to exercise limited powers in local government.
Representatives from twenty-four predesignated districts could advise Council and the Mayor on zoning, planning, public services and other related matters.
Additionally, the board could request a city departmental chief to answer questions about any relevant neighbourhood problem.
Inevitably, restricting the dialogue to one neighbourhood group in each area created a problem of representativeness.
Notwithstanding this, the city policy continued to approach only the designated neighbourhood group.
THE ROLE OF COMMUNITY GROUPS
The role of the community group is more than to be a channel through which individual needs and requests (however exclusive or partisan) are articulated to local government.
Wilson (1988) proposed that community groups should be regarded as the interface between structure and agency and that caution should be exercised in ascribing voluntaristic impetuses to them.
Both their formation and operation may be heavily constrained by the state through its managers.
He later argued (1989) that public participation via community activity fostered a value-free image which obscured the involvement of state officials in facilitating the activities of institutionally recognised groups.
Yet rather than forming a point between structure and agency, perhaps the role of community groups could be better represented in terms of a continuum between civil society and the state.
The point at which a group's needs and requests become institutionalised determines how far the community group is part of civil society and therefore lying outside the rubric of the state, and how far it is part of the state apparatus.
Nor would this position necessarily be fixed: a group might be part of civil society at its constitution but be transformed by appropriation by the state.
Storper (1987) argues that civil society can determine the nature of capitalism itself.
This may be possible through community representation and has been evident where neighbourhood groups have challenged the status quo and caused government to reappraise the practice of service delivery.
Ample, if often contentious, evidence of this is given in the literature on urban social movements.
There continues to be marginal evidence to suggest that ‘ guerrillas in the bureaucracy’ still exist (Needleman, 1974).
However, the evidence from Pittsburgh indicates that the community group , instead of acting as an oppositional force, has been brought more emphatically within the institutional orbit, both through the mechanisms for consultation and as it becomes formally integrated into local policy making.