

Taking Guard Richard Hutton
AT THE time of writing the fate of the Report of the TCCB's Structure Working Party is not known.
A full meeting of the TCCB on May 19 will have decided whether the recommendations are to receive similar treatment to those of its predecessors, that is the Clark Plan of 1966 and the Palmer report of 1986, and be consigned in large measure to the archives or to be adopted in full.
The proposals are intended as a package and not for piecemeal negotiation.
David Clark's committee of 25 years ago, irreverently referred to in some quarters as the ‘Dave Clark Five’ although it contained 13 people, took as its main brief the worsening financial position of the game consequent upon the postwar trend of falling attendances for first-class matches and declining membership of county clubs.
The salvation it proposed was based on a reduction in the amount of first-class cricket to a 16-match one-day competition without over limitation, a reduction in county staffs and the involvement and use of part time cricketers.
It did not foresee the massive commercialisation of the 1970s and '80s which rode on the back of the expansion of the limited-over game.
The nine-man Palmer Committee had a different point of departure — the chronic failures of the England team between 1982 and 1984, and the implied threat to Test match generated revenues if England continued to be humiliated on the international stage.
It blamed the decline in playing standards at first-class level in England on an excessive amount of limited-over cricket.
To improve quality it recommended a two-divisional Sunday League, a straight knockout Benson & Hedges competition, and a County Championship programme consisting of 16 three-day and eight four-day matches, the latter to include Sunday play, on uncovered pitches and with bonus points only for bowling.
The proposals implied too serious a threat to the counties' precious Sunday revenues, and were substantially rejected despite some compromise on the structure of the Championship, which in 1988 came to include six four-day matches.
Mike Murray's Party's proposals probably run less of a risk of rejection because its terms of reference covered a rationalisation of the structure of first-class cricket to promote quality and excellence compatible with commercial and financial aspects.
Moreover, the committee, to be commended for having conducted its extensive researches and drawn its conclusions within a few months, has the advantage of immediacy over the Clark and Palmer committees, which sat over so long a period, in a rapidly changing environment, that eventually no one who was still able to recall the original brief was sure whether it was still relevant to the prevailing situation.
Behind this report is a determination by the Board to take and hold the initiative over its constituent members.
Since the time of the TCCB's creation by MCC, under whose control of the first-class game the power and influence of the counties was restrained by their advisory status, stopping short of full enfranchisement, the power of the counties has become paramount, to the point at which the tail has appeared to wag the dog.
The Working Party's stance stems from the fact that 70 per cent of the Board's distributable income arises from Test match generated funds, and therefore the Board sees as its ‘principal function and power the promotion, financing and betterment of cricket generally with an essential object being the achievement of the highest possible standards at international level’.
It concluded that international matches should be the pre-eminent parameter to fixture programming.
Some counties take the view that the cricket they provide should take the form that their members want rather than allowing Test cricket to take precedence.
Although they might claim to generate 74 per cent of their own revenues (see Playing by Numbers (2), pages 12 to 14), and in several cases have become commercially adept, it should not be overlooked that TCCB distributions to the counties, totalling £6.4 million in 1991, is income of the highest quality.
It is recurrent and less volatile than many types of commercial revenue.
Above all it is clear that the County Championship will exist primarily to serve the interests of the national team.
However, it is given greater symmetry and therefore becomes a fairer competition for the contestants.
Fewer matches will be missed by England players, seven out of 17 rather than the present 12 out of 22.
The purist will feel the greatest disappointment though in the abandonment of any notion that pitches should be uncovered.
Covered pitches have caused the English game to lose its special character.
Variety has been replaced by uniformity, the unexpected by predictability.
Technical skill is at a discount.
The classless society has fewer class players than at any time in the game's history.
England is ideally suited to uncovered pitches, where time lost to the weather can be made good by allowing the bowler a natural means of compensation.
Some would like uncovering to be extended to Test matches in England.
This should be England's natural advantage when playing at home, a balance to alien conditions met on tour.
But the issue as it relates to the county game is sidestepped when the report states, ‘for commercial reasons a return to uncovered pitches at international level is out of the question’.
There can be no further argument, except perhaps to say that to preserve the symmetry and consistency of match conditions between first-class cricket and Test cricket, a tenet so assiduously sought by the working party in its proposals, the duration of Test matches should be reduced to four days!
So for five years, for that is the gestation period recommended for the proposals to prove their effectiveness, tour-day cricket is ordained for the promotion of spin and a wicket-taking approach to bowling, and the enhancement of batsmen's application and technique.
But is it a Stonewallers' Charter—for a dull, dreary game to be played by the mediocre on slow, lifeless, wicketless pitches?
1 TCCB STRUCTURE WORKING PARTY'S OUTLINE RECOMMENDATIONS
2 International matches 
1
Six Test match slots with three One-day Internationals (four in a double tour year) to be the norm.
2
The continuation of Thursday starts for Test matches.
3
The continuation of a two-day preparation, to include first day travelling and recuperation, for the England team prior to a test match.
4
The allocation of a reserve day for all One-day Internationals over 55 overs.
2 County Championship:
1
The continuation of an 18-first-class County Championship.
2
The introduction of a 17-match four-day County Championship, home matches for each county to alternate between eight and nine.
3
Uniform start date to be Thursdays, and matches to include Saturday as the third day.
4
Playing conditions, particularly the points system and the follow-on-target, to be reviewed by the Cricket Committee.
5
The maintenance of an over-rate of at least 110 overs per six and a half-hour day.
2 NatWest Trophy:
1
Retention of the present format, including a reserve day for each round up to the final and the retention of the lead time between rounds played in midweek.
2
Retention of the staging of the final on the first Saturday of September and the 10.30am start.
2 Sunday League:
1
To be relaunched as the ‘One-day Championship’.
2
Matches to be sandwiched during County Championship matches against the same opponents.
3
Number of overs per side to be increased to 50.
4
Matches to commence at 12 noon and be played until 3.10pm without a break, to be followed by a 40-minute interval and the close of the second innings by 7pm.
5
Bowlers' run-ups to be unrestricted.
6
Home matches per county per season to alternate between eight and nine.
7
Consideration to be given to incorporating in the playing conditions fielding circles, team identification and white balls.
2 Benson & Hedges Cup:
1
To be converted to a straight knockout competition, continuing to be played over 55 overs.
2
A preliminary round to be created to reduce the number of teams from the present 21 to 16, consisting of the three nonfirst-class sides and seven first-class counties taken in alphabetical order of rotation.
2 In the News…
Peter Perchard 
Ringing the changes: Keith Fletcher moving up from England A team coach to the ‘top job’.
Keith Fletcher , the Essex coach and former England captain is to take over from Micky Stewart as England team manager at the end of the season.
The five-year past will begin on September 1st.
Fletcher, 48, described his decision to leave Essex after 32 years as a difficult one.
‘It will be a bit of a wrench, but the England team manager's job is the top one in the business and if I hadn't accepted it, I might have regretted it in later life.’
Stewart became England's first full time manager in 1986 and is likely to be offered an advisory position upon his retirement.
Robin Smith has been named as England's Cornhill Player of the Year, by a panel of judges headed by Micky Stewart.
The award is worth £5,000 and was presented to Smith at a dinner held at London Zoo in mid-April.
Pakistan stand to win a jackpot of £50,000 if they win at least eight of their 12 three-day matches against county opposition, thanks to the sponsorship package put together by Tetley Bitter in conjunction with the TCCB.
In addition, Tetley will give the Pakistanis £2,000 for each three-day match they win, with a county collecting £4,000 should it beat the tourists.
Roy Palmer has replaced John Holder who has been rested from the panel of umpires for this summers's Tests and One-Day Internationals against Pakistan.
The panel is:
Bob Cowper , the former Australian Test batsman will be the match referee for the first two Tests between England and Pakistan with Clyde Walcott officiating in the other three.
New Zealand has joined India and the West Indies in their attempts to have Australia's and England's automatic right of veto removed from the constitution of the ICC.
The matter is due to be discussed at the ICC's July meeting.
A Rest of the World XI will play a West Indies XI in a 42-over-a-side floodlit match at the National Athletics Stadium at Crystal Palace on July 27.
The Rest of the World will play Pakistan the following evening.
Both games will be played under Australian floodlit rules with the teams wearing coloured clothing and using a white ball.
Graham Gooch has presented to the Lord's Museum the bat with which he made 333 against India in 1990.
Brian Statham,the former England bowler has retired from Lancashire's cricket committee for personal reasons.
A writ for defamation issued by West Indian umpire Lloyd Barker against Christopher Martin-Jenkins has been settled out of court for an undisclosed sum.
The writ was issued two years ago following remarks made by the then BBC Cricket Correspondent during a BBC World Service broadcast at the time of the Fourth Test between England and the West Indies.
The United Cricket Board of South Africa has announced the itinerary for India's tour of the Republic later this year:
There will also be seven One-Day Internationals between December 7 and 19.
To commemorate South Africa's readmission to Test cricket,Coopers and Lybrand Ratings have published a list of what their world rankings would have been in March 1970 when South Africa played their last Test match.
Graeme Pollock led the batting ratings (896pts), followed by Doug Walters, John Edrich, Gary Sobers and Bill Lawry, while Derek Underwood was rated as the world's top bowler ahead of Mike Proctor, Peter Pollock, Perver Sajjad and Bishen Bedi.
Damien Martyn, who captained the Under-19 side, picked for the Sri Lanka tour
Former vice-captain Geoff Marsh, Bruce Reid, Merv Hughes, Steve Waugh and Peter Taylor have been left out of Australia's tour party to visit Sri Lanka in August.
The squad is:
The team will train at Darwin, in Australia's Northern Territories before the tour starts, to acclimatize to the humid, tropical conditions likely to be encountered in  'Sri Lanka' .
Rothmans VILLAGE CRICKET Championship
The Swan Hotel from Dington, Herefordshire have beaten off the challenge of 11 other finalists to become the National Champions of the Rothmans  Village Cricket Pub Quiz and win £500 for Kingston CC to which all The Swan Hotel team members belong.
The final was held on April 26 in the Long Room at Trent Bridge and pictured (above left to right) are team members, David Lloyd, Derek Creswell, Barbara Johnston and David Vaughan, with Rothmans representative Lindsay Gomer (second left).
The finalists were winners of the 12 regional finals Quiz which were held throughout England, Scotland and Wales during March and April.
The Swan Hotel, who were the West England Regional Champions, won the final with 47 points, just two points ahead of Devon and Cornwall Regional Champions, The Wellington Inn, who won £250 for their local Ippleton CC.
Treeton Welfare Cricket and Social Club from Treeton, near Sheffield came third with 44 points.
Matches from the opening rounds of the Rothmans Village Cricket Championship will be reported in next month's issue of The Cricketer.
THE next President of MCC, to take office in October, will be Dennis Silk (pictured above), who after over 20 years service as Warden of Radley College retired in 1991.
An outstandingly natural and obvious choice, Dennis Silk has long-standing connections with MCC, having been part of the club's missionary tours of the 1950s to Africa, South America, and the continent of his birth, North America.
Subsequently he captained MCC's team to New Zealand in 1960/61.
A fine all-round games player, he was a dogged opening batsman, and played in four Cambridge University seasons, scoring centuries in two successive Varsity matches.
His chosen career restricted his subsequent appearances for Somerset to 33 matches between 1956 and 1960.
In 83 first-class matches he scored 3,845 runs.
As a schoolmaster and later a headmaster his distinction was unexceeded by any in his profession, and the affection in which he is held by his former pupils is equal to that accorded to the legendary Mr Chips.
Significantly he will be the first President of MCC under the new tenure of office regulations to fulfil the role over two years.
His knowledge of and involvement in the administration of cricket is widespread.
Through his chairmanship of the TCCB's Registration Sub-committee, he has been a member of the Executive Committee of the TCCB since 1980.
His appointment underlines the commitment with which harmonisation of relationships is being sought amongst those at Lord's.
Thieves have raided the Worthing home of former Sussex and England wicket-keeper Jim Parks.
£10,000 worth of jewellery and cricket memorabilia was stolen.
Intruders at the Parks removed covers during the night before Oxford University's game against Worcestershire,leaving the pitch open to the elements.
Undaunted,Adam Seymour scored his maiden century for Worcestershire on the sodden wicket.
However, in April a thief who fled from a house in Hartlepool, Cleveland onto an adjacent cricket pitch was apprehended on the boundary by two of the fielding side — one a prison officer, the other a police cadet.
Derbyshire played a match at Sudbury Open Prison on May 3 against the officers and inmates, in aid of Kim Barnett's testimonial.
Surrey have signed a new three-year sponsorship package with Foster's.
The First and Second Elevens will carry the sponsor's name on their shirts and sweaters, and Fosters will provide Player of the Month and Player of the Year Awards.
Nottinghamshire have announced a £35,000 sponsorship arrangement with Swithland Motors,offering winter employment to some of the players, working with young cricketers to promote the game.
Paul Pollard,the 23-year old Nottinghamshire opening batsman, has been awarded his county cap.
Trevor Bailey will receive the Wombwell Cricket Lovers' Society's ‘Denzil Batchelor Memorial Award’ for services to English cricket at a special dinner to be held in his honour on November 7.
Martyn Moxon,who has been granted a benefit in 1993 by Yorkshire, recently received the Society's ‘Cricketer of the Year’ Award for 1991.
Philip Robinson (above), the former Yorkshire batsman has joined Cumberland.
Former Yorkshire and England fast bowler Arnie Sidebottom has turned down the offer of a coaching post at Surrey.
Warwickshire have opened a new cricket museum at Edgbaston with the help of cricket photographer Ken Kelly,a former member of the club's committee.
The newly appointed Minister for National Heritage, David Mellor,(left) presents a £50,000 cheque on behalf of the Foundation for Sport and the Arts to the new president of the Lord's Taverners, Leslie Crowther, at the charity's St George's Day concert at the Royal Festival Hall.
The grant is to be used by the Lord's Taverners to continue their support and encouragement for young cricketers in state schools.
Steve Woodward,the 44-year old Test and World Cup umpire from New Zealand has announced his retirement.
Alan Hill has won the Cricket Society's Jubilee Literary Award which carries a prize of £500 for his biography of Herbert Sutcliffe.
The British Institute of Sports Coaches is to stage a congress called ‘Pathways to Excellence’ on December 4,5 and 6, to examine the needs of the growing child in competitive sport.
An England Clergy XI is to play the Oxford University Authentics at Luton Town CC on June 4.
The match is in aid of the Church of England Urban Fund for inner city projects.
THE EUROPEAN CRICKETER CUP
All spectators fro the week's matches are very welcome and entry to the grounds is free, though there will be a £2 charge for the MCC v European Cricketer Cup Winners match at Lord's on July 17.
Our aim is to foster interest in cricket on the continent of Europe — so why not come along and be a part of its growth and development.
Alan Lee's COUNTY SCENE
Glamorgan relegate Hugh to Morris minor
BATTLING for attention against the climax of the football season and the dissuader of customarily bitter weather, the start of a new county season never has enjoyed a high profile.
Decisions are taken and appointments made which rate, at best, a paragraph in the more serious newspapers.
Invariably, their significance is lost.
Two such items this year involved vicecaptaincy.
Gloucestershire informed Courtney Walsh, who had just led Jamaica, apparently inspiringly, to the Red Stripe title, that they were preferring Bill Athey as ‘Billy’ Wright's deputy this year.
And Glamorgan let it be known that their vice-captain would be Matthew Maynard.
Gloucestershire may well have been influenced by this being Walsh's benefit year, a traditionally powerful distraction, and by the fact that he could be thought out of touch, having missed last season due to the West Indies tour.
Athey, though having been exposed as a poor leader, could also, like Allan Lamb, be considered a good number two.
Glamorgan's reasoning was less clear and because the discarded man is, or was, a candidate for the England captaincy when it becomes vacant next winter, feelings inevitably ran higher.
For Hugh Morris, it was a baffling blow.
He was informed, by the captain Alan Butcher, two days before the season began that he no longer held any position of responsibility, Maynard having been promoted in his place.
No explanation was forthcoming.
Now, it is true that Morris, having become the youngest-ever captain of Glamorgan when just 22, resigned three years later because the pressures of the job were, he felt, affecting not only his form but his entire life.
The county committee were, at that point, very understanding and there was an unspoken understanding that Morris might, at some future date, return to the post.
In the meantime, he became Butcher's deputy, his batting form soared and, last year, he finally made his England debut.
Success and greater experience had also wrought a change in Morris.
When he led the England A side in Pakistan, early last year, he was still thought to be a limited captain, possibly through limited self-belief.
But this past winter, when the A team job returned to him following injury to Martyn Moxon, he was by all accounts a revelation.
Keith Fletcher, a fair but demanding taskmaster, praised him highly, both for his batting and his captaincy on what was, for the young A team, a daunting tour.
Morris returned from that trip fired with a new enthusiasm for captaincy.
At 23, he believed he was now ready.
He wanted to take on the Glamorgan job again, whenever Butcher may decide to retire, and he was pleased to be thought a contender to take England to India if, as is expected, Graham Gooch opts out.
To be summarily told that he has now dropped in the county pecking-order, that he cannot expect to graduate to the captaincy, came as a shock.
Morris is a decent, amiable guy, one of the best on the circuit, and he bit his tongue when many others in his position would have made a public scene of it.
But he was hurt alright.
Two weeks later the Glamorgan chairman, Tony Lewis, used his column in The Daily Telegraph to give the club's side of the story.
He rightly pointed out that the only duty of the Glamorgan selectors is to make certain the best captain is appointed in succession to Butcher.
He explained that it was a unanimous decision by Butcher, senior coach Alan Jones and second-team coach John Steele, that Maynard, a gifted but erratic player of whom the best has probably not been seen, should have the chance.
Lewis added: ‘On the face of it…the decision does look heartless because Morris has natural aspirations to captain England and his own county appear to be cutting them down.
In fact, his chances will not alter at all because he has had the valuable opportunity of leading two A tours and the grey matter of his leadership on the field is well known.’
England A captain Hugh Morris (left) opening with Darren Bicknell at Trinidad.
Perhaps this avoids the nub of the issue.
Morris's captaincy potential has been tacitly, but very publicly condemned by his own club.
The England management, try as they might, can hardly ignore such damning evidence.
And that is a shame.
Maynard, who is, ironically, still banned from Test cricket, had an extended early opportunity to prove his worth as Butcher rested a calf injury.
At first he was only thought likely to miss a game or two but as April became May the injury persisted worryingly.
Accession may be brought about rather quicker than planned.
Morris may be a two-time loser.
Durham deliver
PRE-SEASON thoughts on the prospects of newcomers Durham making the grade were borne out in the early weeks.
They were comfortably beaten by Leicestershire on their Championship debut and will plainly find it hard to bowl sides out, but against that they won four of their first five one-day matches and indicated they could be serious contenders for a trophy.
The big money has evidently been well spent.
Dean Jones announced himself with a century in the opening Sunday League game, a stirring win over Lancashire, and Ian Botham interspersed some big one-day scores with a vain but valiant century in the opening Championship match.
Although Botham's sponsored Mercedes was the victim of a nocturnal break-in on Newcastle quayside within days of him taking delivery, both superstars were in great heart during the early weeks, Jones's infectious enthusiasm extending to initiating some dumbfounded team mates in the incomprehensible fielding routines practised by the Australians.
They may not catch on in the north-east!
The team assembled by Geoff Cook is essentially longish in the tooth as the older, disenchanted players were, by definition, the most readily available.
But Cook has chosen well, gathering men to whom the move is an irresistible challenge.
Paul Parker, the vice-captain, amassed 297 runs in his first three first-class innings, during which he batted for 14 hours.
The commitment was apparent in his every move.
Wayne Larkins did not begin quite so strikingly but was an undeniably happy man.
He has moved house to Sedgefield, close by the National Hunt racecourse and so Utopia to ‘Ned,’ and he remarked of the Durham atmosphere: ‘It is just like starting my career all over again, everyone is so keen.’
On David Graveney fell much of the strain during the early weeks, both metal and physical.
As captain, he had to deal with endless media attention, and did so with his usual charm.
In addition, he had to mould a group of individuals, some of whom barely knew each other , into a team.
There could have been no better man for the job and Graveney, whose equable temperament has survived a good deal of adversity in recent years, managed to keep everyone content during some trying early days.
Sadly, his body, which never was that of an athlete, began to let him down.
The back condition which troubled him sorely  during the club's invaluable spring tour of Zimbabwe, returned with a vengeance and he was obliged to miss some cricket while under constant treatment.
That Durham were able to make such a smooth start to their first-class life was an administrative triumph, and the fact that a fresh pile of membership applications arrived daily on the desk of the chief executive, Mike Gear, was its own tribute.
By the end of April, Durham had more than 6,000 members and Gear confirmed that no ceiling was to be set.
Most of them apparently turned up for the first Sunday game at the picturesque University ground.
This caused problems.
The ground has only one entrance, so long queues developed, and although the players all arrived on time, one of the staff was stranded at the back of the queue.
He had in his pocket the key to an office where 5,000 match programmes, a historic souvenir eagerly sought, were stacked.
There were other hiccups.
A raid on the adjoining rugby club meant that the phone lines at the University ground were cut for a day.
And then there is the catering, which is no worse than some other county grounds but certainly no better either.
Durham are missing a chance to impress in an area where cricket remains primitive.
In general, however, the hospitality and enthusiasm is overwhelming and anyone who does venture to the far north will want to return.
Mike Gear: no ceiling on membership.
Raging Ramprakash
THE return of both Des Haynes and Angus Fraser had the desired effect on Middlesex's fortunes during the early weeks of the season as they ran up a sequence of one-day wins.
Perhaps the dressing down, promptly and properly administered to Mark Ramprakash, was also beneficial.
Middlesex acted swiftly after an unedifying scene at Fenner's in mid-April.
Ramprakash, for reasons best known to himself, treated a Cambridge batsman, Marcus Wight, to a stream of verbal abuse and then had a stand-up row with his own captain, John Emburey, which allegedly continued later.
The following day, Mike Murray, the Middlesex chairman, fined Ramprakash the maximum allowable figure and warned him as to his future conduct.
The club dealt with the matter commendably but men like Murray must inwardly have been dismayed.
Ramprakash has long been known to have a short fuse but after a year in the England set-up, it was to be hoped he had matured.
Apparently not.
He is not a man who courts company, often cutting a solitary and somewhat broody figure, but colleagues say he was frustrated by his lack of opportunities with England in the winter and, more recently, by his inability to build big innings for Middlesex.
If so, perhaps the explosion and the subsequent punishment have brought him to his senses, for an upsurge in his form was highlighted by a violent century against Leicestershire.
Still only 22, Ramprakash has the cricket world at his feet.
This year he could help Middlesex win trophies and establish himself in England's Test side.
Then again, he could self-destruct.
The choice is between him and his temperament.
Smith P. winters well
In assessing why an apparently average side like Warwickshire made such a persistent challenge for the Championship last year, one thing stood out.
Their four regular seam bowlers — Allan Donald, Tim Munton, Gladstone Small and Dermot Reeve — took no fewer than 244 Championship wickets between them.
Case answered.
It follows, then, that Warwickshire's uncertain start to the new season can, to a large degree, be put down to absenteeism among these very bowlers.
The quartet managed to stay fit all last season, missing only five Championship games between them, but both Reeve and Donald were missing when the new campaign began, while Small and Munton had already suffered injuries.
Donald was soon to return from his Test debut in Barbados but Reev's condition was worrying.
He had failed to recover from the structural hip injury which troubled him throughout the World Cup and the date of his return could not be forecast.
According to one Birmingham newspaper, Reeve came up with a novel way of ensuring he was not forgotten, appearing in a city restaurant wearing his blue England shirt, name across his shoulder-blades.
Brazen or not, Warwickshire and England needed him fit again.
Amid the problems, Paul Smith re-emerged as a seam bowler demanding respect.
Warwickshire unsurprisingly lost to Notts in their first four-day game but Smith's five first-innings wickets kept them in the game until the final day.
Smith is 28 now and made his Warwickshire debut ten years ago, raw and wild but evidently gifted.
Much was expected of him.
Last year, it seemed he had matured enough to fulfil himself but a cruel succession of injuries denied him.
First, it was his knee, then an achilles and finally a broken finger.
He missed almost half the season and admits: ‘From a mental point of view, I was very disillusioned,’
Paul Smith: demanding respect again.
His break came through Bob Woolmer, director of coaching at Edgbaston.
Woolmer used his many South African contacts to obtain Smith a winter job with a coloured club in Cape Town.
‘I trained as hard as I could and spend 2½ hours in the gym every day for six months,’ said Smith, adding confidently, ‘the winter has done its job.’
On early evidence, he is right.
…while Smith B. blossoms in Spring
Jack Birkenshaw, back where he has always felt he most belongs, has a hard job ahead in trying to restore Leicestershire to their long-lost glories.
But, in tandem with his captain, the bubblingly enthusiastic Nigel Briers, he has already created a strong team spirit, quite possibly thriving on the absence of such departed stars as Chris Lewis.
Grace Road has a ‘starless’ society now, though that may change in time with the development of 20-year old Ben Smith, who justified the high opinions held of him by making his maiden first-class century in the first game of the season.
Smith was a regular in the England Under-19 side last year but still played 15 games for Leicestershire and was out in single figures only once in 23 innings.
He never quite went on to the big scores but has now begun to put that right.
He has a pleasing, busy batting style but his fielding alone is worth the admission money.
Only 5ft 8ins tall and under 10st in weight, he covers the ground quicker than anyone I have recently seen, with the exception of one he resembles, South Africa's Jonty Rhodes.
An ankle tendon injury, suffered at practice on the very day he completed his century at Durham, side-lined Smith for a fortnight but he is most certainly a name to watch this summer.
1 Peter Roebuck Leaving the stage
NOW THAT‘well apparelled April’ has trodden on the limping heel of winter those of us who, last autumn, joined the ranks of retired cricketers face the obscurity attendant upon our decision.
Some, of course, had no choice in the matter, and like discarded Members of Parliament moved reluctantly towards an unwanted destiny.
But retired or sacked, it as a tumultuous time in a county cricketer's life, much more so than the leavings of September, for then players were tired of it all and ready enough to depart.
Now the buds are blossoming and the cricketing itch is gnawing at our stomachs.
For few of the departed will life afterwards be easy.
Oh we will protest, too much methinks, that we do not miss it, will recall the struggle, the failures, the inadequacies; recall life as it was on the road, for a time anyhow, though I daresay soon enough out imagination will take over transforming us into giants.
Suddenly, though, we are anonymous, most of us, most of this ‘happy breed,’ rather like champions of the junior school who find themselves overnight turned into mites of the first form.
Already, and it is hardly May, I have wandered down to the County Ground at Taunton to see old chums, and some not so old, and to see if I any longer belong.
A part of the difficulty in leaving county cricket lies in its consuming characteristic.
So much time does it take, day after day after day, and nights too, nights in cars, that it becomes your life rather than merely your occupation, especially for those who winter abroad and accordingly know of England little other than cricket.
To leave it is to lose a family, an adopted family if you like, and many feel empty afterwards, which is one reason so many become umpires or coaches or managers or whatever.
It is also why so many return, in all sports, for suddenly and traumatically they feel naked, unimportant.
Australian sprinter Raeleen Boyle once said that she didn't think she'd ‘ever felt totally comfortable with my lifestyle since I gave up running.’
In her case, perhaps, it was not so much leaving a group that hurt as leaving a stage.
It is quite something to walk out as a batsman, even a county batsman, in front of a crowd, quite something to be clapped.
Does an actor ever retire?
Or a politician?
Or even a rock star?
The Rolling Stones, George Harrison, Bob Dylan and Rod Stewart are still strutting and fretting away, postponing the time when they are heard no more.
But sportsmen must retire; their bones insist upon it, and most try to do so if not at the height of their powers—that is too much to ask, no matter how determined the vows of youth — at any rate a day before they are asked to go rather than a day after.
Few find it so easy, and even champions return, as Sugar Ray Leonard, George Foreman, Muhammad Ali, Joe Bugner, Bjorn Borg and so many others have done, once more to hear the cheers and to wear the tinsel of fame.
It is simpler for golfers, of course, because there is an over-50 competition, besides which golf does not depend so much upon eye and agility and by using the wrinkles picked up over the years a player may still be competitive in his 50th year, as Raymond Floyd conclusively proved in the Masters at Augusta.
Behind all of this lies the sportsman's desire to avoid entering the world of common man, a world in which he clocks in and out and collects his wage packet, a world that seems grey, though he has never known it, a world in which he is not stretched, a world that does not bring such pain or pleasure.
Years ago a young Somerset cricketer said he didn't know why he played this wretched game ‘because I worry about it so much.’
I told him that was precisely why he should play it, because it touched him, reached into his character, asked questions as boxers do when staring each other down.
Leaving this community, this stage, this examination is a wrench even for an old-timer fortunate enough to be born with other, and complementary, skills.
Friends are always saying how frustrated I must feel, how unfulfilled, never to have played for England.
Curiously they are mistaken, for though a man may have unsatisfied desires he keeps them out of sight and soon enough he masters them.
No. it's not a lingering sense of failure that leaves a player hanging around the fringes of the game, or not entirely anyhow, it is a sense of loss as the private world of a county cricket club is left, as the dreams of youth, partially realised, are broken, and the unsteady step towards a different life begins.
Good luck to all those, and there are dozens, who this spring find themselves beyond the dressing-room doors.
For most it will, for a time, hurt though few will show it.
County clubs, meanwhile, can help by welcoming former players, be they great or small, and in particular by forming old player associations, as Somerset has done in the last few seasons, as some have been doing for decades.
And, really, there is life after cricket.
I mean for heaven's sake, it is only a game.
Isn't it?
BOUNCER
The Spread of Calvinism
SACHIN Tendulkar.
There is a name to conjure with and let slip easily of the tongue.
It is a name that has certainly had its share of exposure ever since the 19-year old batsman arrived in England to take the place of Australia's tearaway fast bowler Craig McDermott, The editorial in the May issue made passing reference to the volte face implicit in a very good batsman taking the place of a very good bowler.
But then we should all know by now that purely cricketing considerations are less of a priority than once they were.
In Yorkshire, and elsewhere, the public relations and promotional aspects are now in the ascendant.
Yorkshire's decision to opt for Sachin was an inevitable product of the school of thinking which seeks to limit the number of first-class cricketers on its committee.
Nor should anything especially sinister be read into reports that the money to pay for little Sachin has been provided by commercial concerns not averse to a little of the old quid pro quo .
It was, of course, an excellent story.
The cricketing press, without exception, treated it rather like a fairy tale.
Yorkshire, for so long the ugly sister (fancy clinging to the extraordinary notion that you wanted Yorkshiremen to play for Yorkshire) had overnight turned into Cinderella, with Tendulkar cast in the role of the Prince who found the shoe fitted perfectly.
It was such a good story that some of those allrounders — you know, the chaps who cover everything from ice hockey to cricket, to snooker to racing to athletics — homed in on it.
Normally termed as chief sports writers, and these days handicapped by colour mug shots appearing over their work, they appear wherever the going is toughest.
The Daily Telegraph's jack of all trades is Michael Calvin.
Not prone to understatement, our Michael, as witness the opening paragraph of his colourful piece on the day Tendulkar took the field for the first time:The ghost of Lord Hawke failed to rise from the grave.
The Four Horse Men of the Apocalypse apparently felt it inappropriate to arrive as a messenger of divine retribution .
To be fair, he did also point out that neither did Yorkshire's Asian population flock in droves of more than three or four to see the hero from the subcontinent in action; but then he may be aware, as so many apparently are not, that the prospect of seeing a Hindu lad from Bombay doing well for Yorkshire — as he assuredly will — is not exactly high on the agenda for the Pakistanis who form the greater part of the Asian population in those parts.
As one of them was heard to remark recently, ' as far as ah'm concerned, that lad is Tendulkars too many.’
Meanwhile Abdul Kaizer, founder of the Quaid-e-Azam League, not exactly, one imagines, from Tendulkar's part of the world, has announced to Calvin, ‘I'm willing to promote Yorkshire cricket.
Before this I told my people not to watch Yorkshire.’
Well, bully for him.
Let's hope he provides them with the money to do so.
The bottom line is, of course, that Yorkshire have signed a fine cricketer who is good enough to do well wherever he is either on or off the field.
But what Yorkshiremen want above all is a winning team.
Whether Tendulkar rather than McDermott will be the best bet in that direction remains open to question.
Whatever happens, Tendulkar is no doubt resting easily at night safe in the knowledge that Geoffrey Boycott has already emerged as a sort of godfather figure, willing to be called on to help at any time, to be party to any photo opportunity that may be at hand.
Sachin is indeed in good hands.
In the Headington nets: Sachin goes under the scrutiny of his new public.
MEANWHILE, back at the ranch, Michael Murray, a banker, Ian MacLaurin, chairman of Tesco, the TCCB accountant, Brian Downin, the promotional and marketing man, and three others, including one isolated first-class cricketer, have been looking at the structure of the first-class game and the counties' verdict will be known by the time you read this.
Quite the best reasoned stuff on the subject, bar none, has been written by E.W. Swanton in the The Daily Telegraph .
Instead of considering only the recommendations in the sub-committee's report and deciding on that, the counties should have been assessing E.W.'s articles and trying to find arguments to put against them.
They would have been hard pressed to pick holes in what he says.
History, especially in cricket circles, is not always bunk.
At 85, Swanton can claim to have seen it all, including those dire days in the mid-6o's when the county game was in such a mess.
Then, the PR and marketing boys were largely instrumental in helping it find its seat again.
Now, it seems, the counties have been asked to approve a formula which will endanger their ability to stand upright of their own accord.
AS FOR Durham — well done!
The 18th county has set off on its long journey in promising style, aided by a good press.
According to natural law, the journos were there in force to see them play, sans ‘Beefy’ in The Parks where the scribblers and photo journalists and cameras apparently almost outnumbered the spectators.
Then there were those first matches against other counties, with ‘Beefy’ present and apparently firing on all cylinders.
Rather like his brand new sponsored Mercedes, in fact; but one of a strange series of incidents reported in the press, and not always on the cricket pages, was the fact that Beefy's car was broken into and the radio stolen the night before he scored a century.
Almost concurrently came the report of Geoffrey Boycott having his golf clubs lifted from a train and chasing after the thief as though in pursuit of one of his own runs.
History does not relate whether Geoffrey also went on to score a hundred, with his golf clubs.
PLAYING BY NUMBERS (2)
UNSURPRISINGLY recession is the theme of most Treasurers' reports for the 1991 financial season.
Although total revenues generated in the first-class game increased in actual terms, by seven and a half per cent, to the £24.5 million mark, the inexorable rise in costs has taken over £1 million out of the combined surpluses of the counties, which have descended to a dangerously low level of just under
250,000.
Whether the cries of anguish for 1991 alone are justified remains to be seen.
Despite the recession total marketing and commercial revenue, which includes an increasing element of catering activity, advanced by almost ten per cent.
A higher TCCB dividend reflected the public interest in the hard fought series against West Indies.
Even membership subscriptions and gate receipts held up.
One section untouched in 1991 by the recession appears to be the playing fraternity.
The combined cost of playing staff was 28 per cent of total costs, and in 1991 these costs increased by 13 per cent to £6.7 million.
This accounts for over 70 per cent of the combined reduction in annual surpluses, so if revenues fail to grow it is obvious where the axe will have to fall.
Most counties carry a professional playing staff sufficient to fill two full elevens plus a few to cover for injuries.
In 1991 only Gloucestershire and Leicestershire were unable to do this.
Lancashire fed 30 mouths and Northamptonshire 29.
The time might be approaching when the viability of employing these vase armies of professionals needs to be reappraised.
However, the counties have locked themselves into a zero sum game as the competitive drive for success at the playing level, in the belief and expectation that it is this which will increase and sustain revenues, together with accompanying bonus incentives inexorably bids up the price of labour.
The competitive nature with which most counties have come to contest the Second XI competition adds to the pressure.
COST STRUCTURES
Some bloodletting is already evident for the 1992 season.
Notably Kent, whose player costs soared by 27 per cent between 1990 and 1991 and account for over 40 per cent of its total costs, have been forced to cut to 20.
One of their unfortunate discards, Christopher Cowdrey, has been grabbed on a part-time basis by Glamorgan, who continue to question the worth of the extensive second XI structure and also reduce playing numbers for 1992 by five to 18.
The length and depth of recession will determine how long counties can hold playing staffs at present levels.
If it were to continue throughout the decade the structure of the game could change significantly, by forcing counties to employ only a small force of top-class full-time professionals supplemented with part timers and the many amateur cricketers thrown up in the recreational game.
THERE are changes to be made to the Financial Five table.
This order of merit is subjectively derived from an amalgam of the financial performance factors, profitability and solvency.
Essex as well as being the champion county take the top spot from Middlesex.
It is a difficult choice to make for what is the more admirable about Essex — their financial or cricketing performance.
With liquid assets of £1.3 million, a profit margin of 18 per cent and a return of 15 per cent on capital the county must be the envy of many businesses totally unconnected with cricket.
Leicestershire enter the table, and might have qualified last year if an adjustment had been made then to bring their figures into line with practices adopted by all the other counties.
Leicestershire is the only county to account for its distributions from the TCCB on a cash as opposed to an accruals basis.
Accordingly their annual surplus is understated by almost £200,000.
The club has low costs and is liquid.
THE FINANCIAL STRUCTURE OF THE COUNTIES IN 1991
Source: Counties' Annual Reports and Statements of Account for 1991.
Adjustments to 1991's figures have been made wherever possible to reflect gross revenues.
Notes: Adjustments to the figures have been made for the purpose of comparison where appropriate.
Comparative figures for 1990 have been restated to reflect additional information received and the 1990 figures in the audited accounts.
Leicestershire do not separate sponsorship revenues from match receipts.
The amount itemised under this heading of £161,481 (1990: £130,728) has been included under Commercial Revenues.
denotes 14-month period.
Surrey drop out, although probably temporarily.
The club's financial performance has been shattered by the incurring of revenues expenditure approaching £1 million over a two-year period to make good various defects, including gas leaks, to the new Bedser Stand and Ken Barrington Centre.
The results are also adversely affected by the costs of meeting enhanced safety requirements and a switch of accounting date to November, the 14-month period bearing the full costs of a non-income producing extra two months.
1.
Essex (3)
2.
Middlesex (1)
3.
Sussex (4)
4.
Leicestershire (±)
5.
Northamptonshire (2)
THE FINANCIAL FIVE:(last year's position in brackets)
The Metropolitan Businesses: Lancashire, Nottinghamshire, Surrey and Warwickshire.
SURREY apart, these clubs had a reasonable year in 1991 and remain profitable, although the margin on their activities is wafer thin.
All these clubs generate around 60 per cent or more of their total revenue from trading or commercial activities, which include sponsorship and advertising.
They have high costs which are likely to remain so because of the need continually to upgrade facilities and amenities for spectators to retain Test match status for their grounds.
In doing so they have to meet increasingly stringent safety requirements following legislation consequent upon the Taylor Report on Safety in Sports Grounds.
Moreover, facilities have to pass the severe scrutiny of the Public Health authorities, a matter of increasing application to catering, which is becoming an important business area.
Warwickshire report that the annual cost of maintaining Edgbaston as an arena for Test matches — the ground, buildings and equipment — has reached £436,000 per annum.
Furthermore, in a five-match Test series one of the northern or midland venues must forego.
Judging by Lancashire's performance, whose surplus fell by £100,000 in 1991, the effect of this can be savage.
However, there has been a considerable improvement in that club's cash flow and its level of indebtedness is better supported than it appeared to be at the time of last year's review.
The Members' Clubs: Essex, Kent, Middlesex and Yorkshire.
THESE clubs are characterised by having an above average proportion of their revenue deriving from cricket.
Essex and Middlesex are similar in membership numbers, 8,500 and 9,000 respectively, and in relative performance although Essex is larger in absolute terms, having successfully exploited the scope from ownership of its own ground.
The county is awash with funds.
£350,000 is earmarked for a new cricket school at Chelmsford, to focus on the development of the county's youth, and £150,000 has been invested in the equity market.
The faded beauties, Kent and Yorkshire, are facing declining memberships — now down to 4,700 and 8,000 respectively.
Amongst these four Kent are alone in having little money.
However, things could be about to change with the new indoor cricket school and multi-sports centre becoming fully operational and revenue generating.
Meanwhile Yorkshire's liquidity has held up and should guarantee the county at least another seven years' existence, time enough for the new management and its overseas players to wave their collective wands.
2 RELATIVE PERFORMANCE RATIOS
The Low Earners: Glamorgan, Gloucestershire, Leicestershire, Northamptonshire and Sussex.
THESE counties are characterised by below average revenue and the need to generate more income.
Accordingly some have radical developments recently completed, on hand or in the pipeline, and others wish they had.
They rely proportionately more than most on TCCB distributions for their revenue.
All have some money, though in the case of Glamorgan it is disappearing fast.
Of these counties Glamorgan is the weakest.
It lacks a ground of its own and therefore the opportunities open to it are limited.
Gloucester's redevelopment of the pavilion and other amenities at Bristol, due to be completed for the resumption of cricket in mid-June, secures the club's relationship with the owners of the ground, the Sun Alliance Insurance Company, which will have its own facilities for its locally based staff on the new premises.
A new mood of optimism prevails at Grace Road, where fundraising has been successfully completed for an indoor cricket school, building work on which will start in September.
£750,000 is to be spent to include development work on the main pavilion and a redevelopment and refurbishment of The Meet.
Northamptonshire's pavilion redevelopment and refurbishment was completed in readiness for the start of the 1991 season.
The immediate effect of the revenue enhancement however, brought with it a more than proportionate increase in costs across the board and a surplus deflated by approximately £100,000.
Gloucesterhire's redevelopment.
The pavilion and new sports hall at Bristol being prepared for the resumption of cricket in June.
Sussex's sound position is at variance with their performances on the field of play, which apart from their NatWest triumph in 1986 have been short of expectation.
However, ownership of the Sussex Cricketer has proved itself a much higher quality asset than a promising ream, and the £62,500 rental from it flows straight through to the bottom line, as do some  handsome donations.
An appeal has been launched for 1992 to raise a targeted £100,000 for youth cricket development, which will strengthen finances further at the same time as hopefully assuring a supply of talent for triumphs in the future.
The Borrowers: Derbyshire, Hampshire, Somerset, and Worcestershire.
A change of nomenclature from last year's ‘cinderellas,’ these clubs carry a burden of debt, which becomes increasingly onerous in times of low inflation.
Hampshire and Worcestershire are profitable and have a positive cash flow, Derbyshire and Somerset are negatively positioned.
None have much cash beyond the petty.
The small size of the Southampton ground is a limiting factor for Hampshire which is currently thwarted in its development objectives by unsolved problems concerning a proposed move.
Results were bolstered to the tune of £36,000 by winning the NatWest Trophy.
Otherwise a loss would have been recorded.
Derbyshire is probably in the most parlous state of all the first-class counties.
Kim Barnett's team has a degree of success to its credit, which has yet to be translated into prosperity on and off the field.
Gate receipts dropped by 40 per cent.
Facilities within the pavilion at the County Ground in Derby continue to be problematical, and all depends on the success of the proposed ground development scheme, which will comprise a multi-purpose sports hall, undercover seating, catering and hospitality boxes.
Funding will depend on the sale of extraneous plots for other developments, not an easy matter in the current climate.
Meanwhile the county has revalued its assets to reflect its long lease and the planning consents obtained.
The resulting £1.5 million is some comfort, on paper anyway.
Worcestershire's ground developments are at the contemplative stage.
An indoor cricket school is a possibility.
There are other signs that the club is stirring itself commercially as it responds to the needs of its growing membership.
In 1991 it assumed responsibility for its own catering, with total revenue increasing by 60 per cent partly as a result.
An above average dependence on donations hit Somerset in 1991 when only £6,000 emanated from that source compared with £57,000 in the previous year.
This together with costs incurred in fulfilling catering responsibilities resulted in a sizeable loss, repetition of which is beyond the club's meagre resources.
FROM THE INSIDE Tim Curtis
WORLD cricket has distilled itself into the English game: the World Cup is over, South Africa have played their first Test match against the West Indies and now the far flung stars of these international matches have flown in to fill the last few places in the carousel of English county cricket.
All the major Test playing nations are represented (save Pakistan of course), the West Indies dominating with nine overseas professionals, of whom only three were actually playing against South Africa.
Such strength in depth makes it hardly surprising that England A struggled in their recent ‘Test’ series over there.
Batting was a hazardous business against another variation of the West Indian pace quartet of whom the quickest was Linden Joseph.
At Queen's Park, Trinidad in the First ‘Test’ contact was proving particularly elusive for Ian Salisbury, causing Clayton Lambert at short leg to comment: ‘Hey, you man, bowl him a straight one.
This man would miss his own funeral.’
Back in England the A team were reassembled at Lord's to take on champion county Essex.
With rain keeping both teams off the pitch for long periods, the ‘corridor of uncertainty’ took on a new meaning as Keith Fletcher commuted between the two teams' dressing-rooms, unsure of where his priorities as coach lay.
He will have been pleased, from an Essex and England A point of view, to see Mark Ilott's successful return from the stress fracture of the back, and injury all too common these days among young bowlers, including Pakistani ones.
Although the England Under-19s, touring Pakistan last winter, had some cause to question just how young their opponents were when they discovered the ease with which birth certificates could be bought locally for just £2.
Injuries and fitness have been topical issues for some time now.
The ‘bleep test,’ the faceless, metronomic PT Instructor which cannot be cursed or cheated, has honed the squads to a peak of measurable athletic performance, suggesting that our cricketers are fitter than our rugby players.
Yet the physios have been busier than ever on tour.
So much so that their warm-ups, conducted in brief escapes from the treatment room, have been dubbed ‘around your body in 80 seconds’.
One bowler who didn't trouble Laurie Brown too much was Richard Illingworth.
He attributed his lack of injury to having been measured with the highest body fat content during the winter testing!
The new season has brought us a new county and a few new rules to keep us on our guard.
Durham's advent provides a new lease of life for a few senior pros whilst the local talent is gradually integrated.
No doubt they will get to know each other soon.
Paul Parker, captaining the side in David Graveney's absence, had the following conversation with Simon Hughes: ‘Let's have ‘Bains’ in the circle’‘That's not ‘Bains!’
‘Well, whoever it is then.’
They form a happy band of adventurers, their team meetings conducted by Paul Parker's guitar with a rich accompaniment of Geordie voices.
Malcolm Marshall, one of nine West Indian overseas professionals on the county circuit.
(Right) Richard Illingworth: high fat content but injury free.
The pervasive influence of the ICC is being felt again as TCCB rules on short pitched bowling come into line with ICC ones.
One per over per batsman is the ration, with a bouncer being defined as a ball passing over the batsman's shoulder as he stands upright at the crease.
The same definition applies to a beamer, the law previously having taken as its height gauge the batsman's shoulder as he crouched in his stance.
Thus the effective legitimate target range f the beamer appears to have been raised by anything up to about two feet depending on how tall your are.
Whilst the umpires are counting bouncers at one end they could find themselves assessing ‘pad play’ at the other.
New instructions this year are encouraging umpires to be strict in their interpretation of what constitutes a shot when playing against the spinners.
The South Africans were asking the umpires in the West Indies whether they had received their one for the over.
There seems the possibility of a regular dialogue between umpires and batsmen as the batsmen seek confirmation as to whether they have played a shot, or on the likely height of the next delivery.
THE CLEVER MONEY
IN ALL the ballyhoo over Durham becoming the 18th first-class county, strangely little has been offered in respect of their chances of actually winning something.
On paper their bowling looks a trifle thin, particularly with regard to the demands of the Britannic Assurance County Championship, even allowing for the wit and wisdom of Messrs Hughes and Botham.
However, with their formidable array of entertaining and experienced batsmen they would look to have a distinct chance in two the one-day competitions.
It would surely be tempting providence to suggest a prominent showing in the Benson & Hedges because they will require, to use gardening vernacular, ‘a little time to bed down.’
For the Sunday League Durham were 40–1 with Victor Chandler, ¼ the odds first three, and 40–1 with The Tote for the NatWest Trophy, and so the suggestion is a little each way for both possibilities.
For the winner of the Benson & Hedges Cup, the suggestion lies in the south east.
Upheavals of all sorts, which need not concern this column, have regrettably seen Kent perform inconsistently and only occasionally anywhere near their full potential during the last two seasons.
They have also suffered dismally with injuries.
This season they appear to have everyone fit, most particularly their bowlers who include Ellison, Igglesden, Penn, Ealham, McCague and Fleming, and they look powerful enough to trouble most sides in the competition.
In Fleming they have a one-day match winner who can change the course of a game in a few overs, while the first three of Benson, Ward and Taylor are as dependable as any top three in the competition.
An unbelievable 40–1 was available with Surrey Racing and this column, for what it is worth, believes this to have been the most outstanding each-way value of the season and a serious each-way proposition.
Mervyn Wilson gives a good service to his cricket clients and it is hoped that he was able to put his money where his mouth is and lay this price to all that wanted it to reasonable limits.
Last year's Benson & Hedges winners Lancashire, without the mercurial Akram, on tour with the Pakistanis, but with the ever improving DeFreitas will have their supporters keen to take the 8–1 on offer with Coomes and Dennis., Hampshire, now able to welcome Malcolm Marshall back and as vice-captain, have the combined batting and bowling talent to make any opposition shudder.
It will be something of a surprise to cricket lovers in the ‘Strong Country’ if Mark Nicholas's team doesn't go close again in either the Benson and Hedges or the NatWest, and the advice is to have a little saver on both eventualities (20–1 with Surrey for the Benson & Hedges and 14–1 with Chandler for the NatWest).
The main selection for the NatWest is also the main selection for the Championship.
It is almost impossible to pick holes in the Essex claim to be the best county side especially for three and four-day cricket.
For 1992 they re-employ the services of Australian Mark Waugh, who returns after a year's sabbatical during which the county was well served by Salim Malik.
It would certainly not be over stressing the point to say that Waugh returns a maturer player than when last seen sprinting up and down the wickets of Colchester and Southend.
Ilott, the promising left-arm seamer, has returned from injury to support Foster, Pringle and Topley, while that much underrated spinner Peter Such in harness with John Childs provide excellent balance.
At 4–1 for the County Championship, Essex look like solid bankers and the 6- 1 with Chandler to win the NatWest also looks an attractive bet.
An outsider to consider in the County Championship at attractive odds would be Derbyshire, who are rather over priced at 16–1 with Coral-Ladbrokes for instance go 8–1.
Kim Barnett's side has West Indies pace man Ian Bishop back in the ranks and the pace attack of Bishop, Cork, Malcolm and Mortensen looks as formidable as any.
Barnett will however know in his own mind that he has to replace the 2,000 runs scored by the departed Azharuddin if Derbyshire are to be effective challengers.
In summary, the bets of the season at the time of writing were Kent at 40–1 to win the Benson & Hedges, Essex for the County Championship at 4–1 and the NatWest at 6–1, and Durham at 40–1 to win the Sunday League Bon chance .
Matthew Fleming: a potential match-winner for Kent, who were value at 40–1 to win the Benson and Hedges.
THE SEASON'S ODDS
In last month's issue, we misprinted the Rapid Cricketline number for Middlesex.
The correct number is (note number omitted
Former England and Northamptonshire fast bowler FRANK TYSON, now domiciled in Australia, sends some home thoughts on the 1992 World Cup…
A Modern Midsummer Night's Dream
IN ERA when free enterprise advocates deregulation, Australian limited-over cricket seems to be heading in the opposite bureaucratic direction.
Perhaps this a characteristic to be expected of a country where it is said that one person in every three is a civil servant and that it requires 72 government permits to open a mild bar.
The rules which govern the Australian limited-over game — and particularly the computation of the result of a match interrupted or curtailed by weather — permit no latitude of interpretation.
Importantly they ignore one important principle of cricket: a game should be allowed to flow to a natural conclusion within a time framework which makes allowances for rain interruptions.
In previous World Cups, two days were allocated to each match so that contests which were not concluded on the first could be decided on the reserve day.
In South Africa, domestic limited-over games shortened by rain can be legally extended beyond the scheduled hours to reach a result.
Umpires are even empowered to use their own initiative to ensure that a game reaches an equitable outcome.
The 1992 World Cup in Australia tolerated no such licence.
The World Cup Committee adhered strictly to the letter of their own rain-laws that ‘in matches where play is interrupted or delayed the number of overs are to be rearranged so that both teams have the opportunity of batting for a minimum of 15 overs (25 overs in the semi-finals and finals) according to the number of overs calculated on a basis of an average rate of 14 overs per hour.’
And ‘if the tam batting second has not had the opportunity to complete the required number of overs their target score will be the runs scored by the team batting first from their equivalent number of highest scoring overs.’
No extension of time was permitted beyond the scheduled hours of the games.
The $64,000 question which one has to ask about this inflexible regulation is —WHY?
One can only surmise that this arrangement was for the programming convenience of the television station which covered the matches.
As a result the outcome of matches revolved around complicated mathematical niceties and since, in the words of Carlyle's witty statesman, ‘anything can be proved by figures’ anomalies were bound to occur.
Two major injustices eventuated in India's game against Australia in Brisbane and England's semi-final against South Africa in Sydney.
In both instances, India and South Africa, the sides batting second, could have faced their full quota of overs.
But because the law as an ass, overs were arbitrarily taken from their batsmen and games which should have gone their way were lost.
What made the Sydney fiasco even more ludicrous was the fact that when the umpires halted play, there was still time for South Africa to face the two overs which were stolen from them!
Under such intellectual pressures captains need a degree in mathematics to steer their teams towards winning totals or targets.
Scorers have to be micro-Einsteins to calculate the outcome of a rain-interrupted match.
Moreover, the necessity to control games according to the laws of probability, dammed statistics and Hoyle have reduced many captains to predictable stereo-types.
The local bye-laws have diminished the flexibility of matches to such an extent that I often feel that I could write a script for them, observing the necessary theatrical unities and climaxing the set piece with a compulsory exciting denouement — a bit like and episode of Neighbours .
Act One, Scene One:
Opening bowlers begin with two new balls at military mediumpace, concentrating on line and length, reluctantly placing two fieldsmen, who could be more usefully employed to save runs, in catching positions.
Quixotic ideas of dismissing the batsmen are largely ignored as comparatively irrelevant.
However, in view of the fact that the fielding team is compelled to position two attacking fieldsmen, bowlers bowl either just short of a length hoping for a slip catch, or well up angling for a driven chance to short cover or mid-wicket.
While the bowlers are in their most attacking mode of the contest, the concession of runs is regarded with the same distaste that Ian Botham showed toward Jimmy Connolly's impersonation of the Queen at the World Cup Dinner.
Act One, Scene Two:
The opening batsmen concentrate on nudging singles, hitting the bad ball for four and keeping their wickets intact, to give their side ‘a platform’ from which to launch a later assault with ample wickets in hand.
Occasionally, knowing that all but two fieldsmen must patrol the area within the 30-yard circle centred around the stumps at each end, they chip the ball over their heads into the ‘no-mans's land’ beyond them.
They aim to score 40–60 runs in the first overs of their innings.
In the wings, the fieldsmen begin practising the dives which they will need to save future runs.
Act Three, Scene One: Imran lofts Illingworth for six.
Act Two, Scene One:
Fifteen overs have elapsed.
The batsmen now change gear and for the next 25 overs try to raise their run-scoring —‘strike-rate’ in television jargon — to five or six an over without conceding more that three of four wickets.
They take greater risks.
They make room for themselves to play strokes deflecting balls off the line of the stumps and deliberately playing ‘educated edges’ through the now unpopulated slips area.
They drive at good-length balls without getting to the pitch and loft strokes over the heads of the inner ring of fieldsmen.
They still try to despatch the bad balls and the safety of quick singles often depends on the inability of the converging fieldsmen to make a direct hit on the stumps.
Act Two, Scene Two:
By this stage the fielding captain has been compelled to resort to his second and third string bowlers, keeping his main strike men back to stem the batting slog over the last 10 overs.
His reserve trundlers — usually in the mediocre medium-pace category and fully aware of the aggressive intentions of the batsmen — try to keep the ball on a full length and in ‘the channel’ which lies approximately in a straight line between the stumps.
They attempt to direct the ball ‘close to the batsman’ so that he is denied the room to swing the bat freely and hit the ball hard.
A bowler who strays wide of the off or leg stumps gives the batsman ‘width’ and enables him to glance, cut, and deflect, opening up scoring opportunities in a 360 degree circle around the bat.
By pitching the ball up and bowling in the channel he makes his opponent hit back along the line of the approaching delivery and play the ball into the ‘V’— the arc of the field which lies between extra cover on the off side and a straightish mid-wicket on the leg side.
If the batsman seeks to score behind the wicket off a full length ball which is in the channel, he must hit ‘across the line of the delivery,’ minimise his chances of making contact and increase the risk of his being bowled or dismissed lbw.
The beauty about making the batsman hit into the V is that the bowler can pack his fielders in that area of the field and make it extremely difficult for the batsman to score more than a single.
It is even more difficult to find the boundary in front of the wicket since ‘the sweepers’ are out on the mid-wicket and cover boundaries, cutting off the strokes which penetrate the inner ring of fieldsmen before they reach the ropes.
This is the period of the game when the television commentators repeat ad nauseam that the ‘pressure’ or ‘tension’is mounting.
In the stands, spontaneous combustion provokes smouldering enthusiasm amongst the spectators, while on the playing area fielders fling themselves at the ball and into the advertising hoardings around the boundary in frenzied attempts to save runs.
Act Three, Scene One:
The 40-over milestone has been passed.
The batting side with wickets in hand — whether it is chasing a target score or seeking to maximise its own total—now launches an all-out assault on the bowlers trying to raise the scoring tempo to seven or more runs per over.
The goal of a side batting second and chasing a total is to maintain ‘the asking rate’ for victory — that is the number of runs which it needs per over to win.
Batsmen not only ignore the defence of their stumps but also the very presence of the wickets behind them.
Like free spirits they move to the off or leg side, improvising and manufacturing strokes.
Deliveries pitching outside leg stump are pounded through the covers; balls directed at off stump are glanced to fine leg.
Scientific batsmanship goes by the board.
Aesthetic appreciation is thrown on the scrap heap.
Wickets are sacrificed to the sacred cow of runs.
An agricultural hoick to mid-wicket receives the imprimatur of the television commentator: ‘good shot!’
A stroke which fails to make contact is consigned to baseball oblivion as a ‘swing and a miss.’
Singles become kamikaze excursions down the pitch as soon as bat makes contact with the ball.
Occasionally sensible singles and classical shots intrude unexpectedly on to the scene.
It is not unheard of in these anarchical circumstances for batsmen to score 20 runs in an over.
And all the time the tension around the ground is still mounting and the smouldering excitement of the spectators finally bursts into flames as the commentators announce that ‘the ground is on fire.!’
Act Three, Scene Two:
The main strike bowlers re-enter the scene from the wings, intent on curbing the batsmen's final fling.
They keep a full length to make their opponent hit into the V and monitor his movements very closely.
If the batsman moves either to the off or leg side to improvise a stroke, they must be able to redirect their line — to follow his movement — even though they are in the very act of delivering the ball.
Their aim is to deny the batsman room to play the ball away square of the wicket and wide of the fieldsmen in the V. They occasionally bowl a slower delivery to upset the timing of the batsman who swings uniformly at the ball in the expectation that it will always come on the bat at the same speed.
The denouement of this three-act drama can be very exciting if the restrictive and scoring abilities of the bowling and batting teams are evenly matched.
On the other hand, if either side gains an irreversible advantage before the 40th over, the result becomes an anti-climax and as flat as stale beer.
But whether the outcome of the match is close or one-sided, it always predictable if the captains adhere to the script.
Iconoclasts, however, can upset the best laid plans of stereotyped one-day skippers.
This was the clear lesson which emerged from the successes of New Zealand and Pakistan — and the disappointing performance of the pre-tournament favourite, Australia — in the 1992 World Cup.
Indeed some people in high places in Australian cricket administration now admit to the opinion that their team's inability to scale the peaks of their expectations stemmed from its failure to adapt and meet unusual challenges.
Border's batsmen lost their stride in their very first game against New Zealand when the Kiwi skipper, Martin Crowe, opened his bowling with Kipak Patel's off-spin.
Marsh Jones, Border, Moody and Mark Waugh seemed fazed by the fact that they could no longer employ the speed of the normal opposition of medium-pacers to run the ball behind the wicket.
To score runs they had to put bat to ball — a realisation which came all too late.
Similarly some measure of Pakistan's eventual triumph was due to Imran Khan's unconventional tactics and the confidence which he demonstrated in his leg-spinner Mushtaq Ahmed by slotting him into his team's battle plan at an early stage of proceedings.
So that's it — we deduct five overs and three runs for the rain interruption, plus another eight overs and four runs to make up for the time it's taken us to work it out.
There was no big deal in these so-called innovations.
Crowe and Imran were merely re-inventing the wheel.
Their opponents' difficulty was that they had not even read the original patent.
At the turn of the century, slow left-arm spinners Wilfred Rhodes and Colin Blythe regularly opened the England bowling.
Off-spinners Trumble and Noble performed the same service for Australia.
In 1905/06 Reggie Schwartz, Bert Vogler and Aubrey Faylkner — wrist-spinners — all were the first three bowlers used by South African skipper, Percy Sherwell, against England.
In the post Second World War days it was not extraordinary to see Laker and Lock open the attack for Surrey in county matches.
Leafing through the pages of Wisden , one can discover that even on the so-called fast bowlers' pitch at Lord's, spinners were regularly brought to the bowling crease as first change: slow bowlers such as Titmus of Middlesex, Dooland of Notts, Tribe of Northants, Wardle of Yorkshire, Walsh of Leicestershire, Hollies of Warwickshire, Mortimore of Gloucestershire and Marlar of Sussex.
The principle behind this tactic was simple: use bowlers of different pace and styles to provide unexpected contrasts and surprise the batsmen.
As I recall, the French poets of the late 19th century said that the same motivation lay behind their startling verse: they wanted to epater la bourgeoisie .
And it was not Field Marshall Viscount Montgomery who once stated that: ‘I once saw a bowler in Australia thunder to the wicket and bowl a flatout underarm to the batsman.
No warning given.
Quite rightly 18 too.
In my profession you have to mystify the enemy?’.
Of course, the main criterion governing the probability of success in such a strategy will always lie in the ability and the accuracy of the spin bowlers used.
Erupting excitement at the Sydney Cricket Ground.
As in bowling so in batting.
Martin Crowe set the South African bowlers back on their heels by ignoring his safety-first opener John Wright and sending the pugnacious left-hander Mark Greatbatch in first with Latham.
Together they compiled 128 in 129 balls, setting up a Kiwi win with 15 overs to spare.
Greatbatch followed this score with innings of 63 against the West Indies and 73 against India — both knocks producing almost a run a ball.
Again there was nothing new in this ploy.
In the years after the Great Interruption, Danton's motto of De l'audace, toujours de l'audace was always the battle-cry of English county players like Harold Gimblett of Somerset, Roy Marshall of Hampshire and Dicky Dodds of Essex.
The history of Test matches is not without opening batsmen who successfully carried the attack to the enemy.
What of Trumper's century in 108 minutes before lunch in 1902 at Old Trafford?
Or Charlie Barnett's 98 before the first interval at Trent Bridge in 1938?
The West Indian openers Cammie Smith and ‘Shotgun’ Williams were also men who believed that attack was the best form of defence — but sadly never reached the sunny uplands of consistent success.
What was an interesting development in the recent World Cup was Imran Khan's confession that he used his bowlers in an attacking mode.
This was heresy.
Attack is a no-no for bowlers in limitedover cricket; they should be resigned to being the chopping blocks for the batsman's run-scoring and entertainment propensities.
Their assigned role is best exemplified by the fact that in the 1992 World Cup in Australia, the bowling side was afforded the advantage of two white new balls.
But the raison déacute; etre behind this concession was not so that the bowlers could swing the ball more: it was to prevent one ball becoming so discoloured that the batsman could not see it easily under the light of day-night games!
If Imran sows the seeds of a five-man Pakistan attack capable, in years to come, of dismissing sides consistently within 50 overs, he could easily revolutionise future World cups — certainly in Australia.
He would set the television programmers' schedule on its head!
What will the Pakistani captain be proposing next?
Perhaps the replacement of the flawed philosophy which permits the best batsmen in a team to bat for an unlimited number of deliveries, but restricts the number of overs the best bowlers in a side can send down?
Surely he would not dare to ask that Akram and Waquar Younis be permitted 25 overs each and that a little life be left in pitches which are now the equivalent of a moribund second-day Test strip?
Certainly these two amendments to the limited-over script would restore the World Cup Organising Committee to the status of an Equal Opportunity Employer.
They would also redeem the balance between bat and ball and make the batsman's task more daunting.
But what would we watch on telly when bowlers finished matches early?
Perhaps the apposite filler would be Another Modern Midsummer Night's Dream .
Ah well, as far as the pyjama-game players are concerned it's a case of: ‘On with the motley and on with the motley!’
South Africa's dream rudely shattered
Tony Cozier reports from Barbados on the first ever Test match between West Indies and South Africa.
Pictures by Shaun Botterill/Allsport
SOUTH AFRICA'S return to Test cricket after 22 years was marked by a match as tense and as fluctuating as any they could have played in their former life.
They consistently held the initiative but seemed overwhelmed by the vision of victory and, when they twice had it in their grasp, they froze.
They began the final day on 122 for two, needing only 79 more to complete their historic triumph, but the dreams of their players, officials and supporters at Kensington Oval and the millions back home watching live TV coverage in late afternoon disappeared in the space of an hour and 40 minutes as eight wickets tumbled for 26.
The dramatic decline was caused by accurate, high-class fast bowling by two bowlers with more than 300 Test wickets between them, Courtney Walsh and Curtly Ambrose, a pitch increasingly inclined to produce what Barbadians graphically term groundeaters, and timid batting.
There was another significant, invariable factor — the phenomenal West Indies' record on the unpretentious little ground on the outskirts of Bridgetown where they now swept to their eleventh consecutive victory in its 28 Tests.
Only once have they ever been beaten, by England in 1935 on a treacherous, uncovered, rain-affected surface.
They did so this time without the usual, drum-beating, bugleblowing support of a packed ground that Vivian Richards had identified as a vital source of inspiration to his teams.
The omission of Barbadian fast bowler Andy Cummins from the squad of 13 triggered such an angry response from the public that the largest attendance was 3,000 on the opening day, Easter Saturday, when a full house of 13,000 could be anticipated.
It dramatically dwindled so that fewer than 500 were on hand to see the final drama unfold on the fifth morning.
There was more than the selection of the team to the boycott of a Test match by a people to whom the game has always been almost as precious as life itself but it again highlighted the fragile nature of West Indies cricket.
The West Indies Cricket Board of Control (WICBC) estimated losses of £100,000, a substantial setback even if all tour expenses for the South Africans were being paid by the sponsors, British Petroleum of South Africa (BPSA).
Ironically, the protest had nothing to do with the South Africans who were as warmly received as they had been in Jamaica and Trinidad, greeted and feted by the government and watched by Prime Ministers Erskine Sandiford of Barbados and P.J. Patterson of Jamaica who came specially for the historic occasion, the first Test ever played between teams previously kept apart by the ideology of racial superiority.
If this a new beginning for South Africa, their first Test since their isolation from international cricket in 1970, because of their government's apartheid policies, so it was for the West Indies.
Richie Richardson was in his first Test as captain, leading a team minus Richards, Gordon Greenidge, Jeffrey Dujon and Malcolm Marshall for the first time in a Barbados Test since 1983 and, with Gus Logie and Carl Hooper eliminated by injury, showing six changes to that in the previous Test on the ground against Australia a year earlier.
South Africa demonstrably adjusted better to the more disciplined requirements of the longer game after almost two months of the uninterrupted frenzy of the World Cup.
But the new West Indies proved encouragingly resilient, repeatedly getting up off the canvas to deliver the final knockout punch.
South Africa appeared to have gained an immediate advantage when Kepler Wessels won the toss and followed the example of captains in the previous 10 Tests on the ground by bowling first.
As Desmond Haynes and Philip Simmons added 99 at better than a run a minute with a volley of boundaries, he must have wondered what he had let himself in for.
Suddenly, Richard Snell, interspersing half-volleys and long-hops with difficult, late-moving out-swingers, removed both in the space of nine balls just before lunch and the South Africans began to believe in themselves.
History in the making at Barbados: West Indian and South African players and officials meet for the first time in a Test match.
Simmons entered the Test with two centuries in his two innings in the One-Day Internationals but he did nothing to erase the doubts over his credentials as a Test batsman, airily driving a low catch to mid-off.
Haynes edged to slip and, even though the luck went against them, the South African attack, based purely on pace, kept pegging away.
Brian Lara was dropped low down at first slip by Wessels off his first ball from Snell, and Keith Arthurton, in his first Test for three years, survived two slip catches off no-balls and another actual chance in his top score of  59, filled with 10 exciting on-side boundaries.
But no one stayed much longer than two unconvincing hours.
A blisteringly quick Allan Donald removed Keith Arthurton's stump to put South Africa in command of the match on the third day.
South Africa got to the extended West Indies tail, starting with wicket-keeper David Williams at number seven, just after tea and encountered little resistance after that.
The last six wickets tumbled for 22 and the West Indies were all out for 262, and inadequate total on a hard, true pitch.
Andrew Hudson and Mark Rushmere completed a satisfying first day back for the visitors, batting through the last nine overs no bother.
With a solid, straight-batted technique and a calm, unruffled temperament, Hudson proceeded to bat them into a commanding position on the second day, remaining through the 90 overs to finish on 135.
It was an innings with which Geoffrey Boycott and Gordong Greenidge, passing their comments from television and radio boxes, could identify.
The 26-year-old University of Natal graduate, credited his god with giving him the concentration he needed for his marathon.
Divine intervention might also have allowed him two straightforward chances; a top-edged hook off Ambrose when on 22 spiralled to long-leg where Walsh got both hands to it without holding onto it, and at 66, two balls after the end of his 125- run second wicket partnership with Wessels, he edged Patrick Patterson and Williams made a hash of a regulation catch.
His association with Wessels was the first of his two important stands.
Wessels launched an immediate counter-attack when he entered in the day's second over, mostly with pulls and cuts, and counted eight fours and a top-edged pull for six off Ambrose who removed him for 59 to a sharp low catch at point 35 minutes after lunch.
In spite of William's immediate miss that allowed Hudson his second escape, the West Indies still made up some ground when Kenneth Benjamin and Jimmy Adams acquired their first Test wickets just before tea through cut shots that were edged to Lara at first slip; Peter Kirsten off Benjamin, a powerfully-built fast bowler with a method not unlike Colin Croft's in the wide angle of delivery, and Hansie Cronje to the fourth ball from Adams, whose left-arm spin had been restricted to seven wicketless overs all season.
West Indies' second innings saviour: Jimmy Adams, on his Test debut, making a defiant and unbeaten 79.
With a tail as fragile as the West Indies', South Africa were uncomfortable at 188 for four at tea on the second day but the durable Hudson and Adrian Kuiper saw them through to the  close without further loss against a lacklustre attack.
Hudson, 93 at the interval, soon became the first batsman to score a century on Test debut for South Africa — Wessels had achieved the feat for Australia — and he prevailed over the partnership that carried South Africa to within eight of the lead entering the third day.
To a backdrop of deserted stands, Andrew Hudson becomes the first South African to score a hundred on his Test debut:(below) Curtly Ambrose mops up on the final day, bowling Meyrick Pringle.
Hudson and Kuiper extended their stand for an hour until Kuiper, battling for form, was caught behind off Patrick Patterson for a laboured, but vital 34 spanning three and a quarter hours.
The value of his contribution was emphasised as the last six wickets fell for 66.
Hudson, who held the innings together for eight hours 40 minutes, was finally yorked off-stump by Benjamin, seventh out after facing 521 balls from which he hit 20 fours.
Adams benefited from the tailenders' intention to belt him out of the ground, taking three of the last five wickets for final figures of four for 43 from 21.4 overs.
Drafted into the final eleven when Hooper was ruled out on the morning of the match with a hairline fracture of the finger sustained in the nets, the 24-year old Adams would soon be called on to intervene on his team's behalf with the bat.
Trailing by 83, the West Indies declined to 184 for seven and seeming defeat by the end of the third day, even with two considerable slices of luck.
Blocking Allan Donald's second ball of the innings, Haynes could only watch it roll back onto his of stump without dislodging the bail.
He did not benefit much, scoring 23 before he snicked Snell's out-swinger, as he did in the first innings, to be caught by the keeper.
Lara was 51 of his eventual 64 when he stepped back onto his stumps playing to leg against Bosch at the opposite end and this time the off-bail did fall.
Umpire David Archer, in his 28th Test, was following the flight of the ball and could not give the decision, obvious by instant TV replay to viewers as far away as Johannesburg and London and, more pertinently, to reserve umpire Lloyd Barker and match referee Raman Subba Row in the pavilion.
After Simmons stabbed at a lifter from Bosch and was caught off the shoulder of the bat in the gully in the fourth over, Snell made the vital breaks, removing Haynes and, first ball after tea, Richardson.
Lara and Arthurton raised West Indian hopes with a left-handed partnership of 52 for the fourth wicket but both were undone by Donald's speed in the final session and the match seemed all but signed, sealed and delivered to South Africa entering the rest day.
If they were held at bay longer than they anticipated and carried into the final day, it only seemed a stay of execution for the West Indies.
Adams supplied the application and concentration absent from the other batsmen and coaxed another 99 from the last three wickets with improbable but important help from his fellow Jamaicans, Walsh and Patterson.
With the temperament and much of the left-handed style of Larry Gomes who so often acted as foil to the dynamic stroke-makers of the early 1980s, Adams moved from 23 to 79 before running out of partners.
He was in for three hours 40 minutes all told, an hour longer than any other West Indian managed, and gave only one chance, a difficult caught and bowled to Meyrick Pringle when 59.
Walsh kept him company for 45 minutes for 27 runs, Patterson for an hour for a partnership of 62 until the second new ball was required to finish off the number eleven.
Adam's main scoring strokes from 170 balls were 12 fours including one all run.
A target of 201 presented a definite challenge and when Ambrose immediately had Hudson deflecting a catch to first slip second ball and bowled Rushmere off the bottom of the bat in his fourth over, the balance was, if anything, slightly tilted towards the West Indies.
But no one else could sustain Ambrose's pressure, stomach cramps that forced Patterson to leave the field after seven overs was a further handicap and Wessels and Kirsten, the two most experience batsmen, dug in to remain together till the close, their stand then worth 95.
Those who expected a predictable finale to this unpredictable match got far more than they anticipated.
South Africa never got close.
Slick catching aided the West Indies effort, Lara setting the pattern by swooping low to his left as the solitary slip to despatch Wessels off the last ball of the day's third over, and their captain gone, the South Africans never appeared to have the conviction that they could achieve their moderate target.
Walsh, chugging along on two cylinders for most of the match, suddenly sparked to life, making the ball cut both ways and always liable to produce one that scuttled through.
He collected four of the first five wickets and, on the day, had figures of 11–7–8–4.
In addition to Wessels, he also accounted for Kirsten who diverted a sharp off-cutter into his stumps in the day's 15th over, the fourth wicket of the morning and the decisive one.
Ambrose, with the wind at his back at the southern end from which he had terminated England's dogged resistance on the last afternoon of the 1990 Test, also had four wickets on the day, completing the latest West Indian triumph at Kensington by having David Richardson caught at the wicket and bowling Allan Donald with successive balls 20 minutes from lunch.
His match figures of 60.4–26–81–8  were phenomenal, even by West Indian fast bowling standards.
At the conclusion, Richardson's young, reconstituted team took off on a joyful, hand-in-hand lap of honour around the outfield in a significant show of unity.
Following the disappointing returns in the World Cup, Richardson and his players had been under intense pressure.
He himself had been roundly booed in Jamaica and whatever the reasons, the Barbadian public could not bring themselves to come out in support.
The result was most timely for the West Indies even if it left the South Africans in a state of some shock.
It revealed their inexperience, captain Wessels admitted, and showed them that standards in Test cricket were very high.
For all their disappointment, they would be proud of being involved in an epic Test first time out.
May the force be with you: West Indies' bowling heroes Curtly Ambrose (left), who had match figures of 8–81, and Courtney Walsh, whose spell of 11–7–8–4 on the last morning was decisive.
2 Prior to the Test, West Indies convincingly defeated South Africa 3–0 in the One-Day International rubber.
TONY COZIER watches
A ONE-SIDED AFFAIR
PITCHED into the cricketing cauldron that is Sabinal Park only three days after their SAA jumbo jet touched down at Norman Manley International, their adrenalin expended in the World Cup and their concentration on the solitary Test, the South Africans were utterly outplayed in all three One-Day Internationals.
As their only match preparation for the Test, it was patently inadequate but it did alert them to the vast difference between the cricketing conditions and environment in the Caribbean and those in Australia and New Zealand where they had performed so impressively in gaining the semi-finals of the World Cup.
The colours changed back to the traditional, the ball from white to red, the pads and clothing from kaleidoscopic to white, there were no floodlights, the pitches and outfield were hard and bare and the temperature consistently in the low 30s celsius.
The West Indies were back home and they restored some of their public's faith that had been so shaken by their failures in the World Cup.
Its dissatisfaction at several matters that had bruised West Indies cricket in the previous few months, on and off the field, was vented in the angry reception accorded Richie Richardson in the first match at Kingston's Sabina Park.
Richardson's widely-quoted comment prior to the historic World Cup encounter against South Africa that it was ‘just another cricket match
rankled with the Caribbean public on whom the social and political significance was not lost.
He was also said to be personally responsible for the omission of the Jamaican, Jeffrey Dujon, from the World Cup squad.
Whatever the reasons, he was constantly booed and heckled throughout his struggling, hour-long innings and, later, in the field.
It was an instant education for the South Africans into the intensity of the West Indians’ feeling for their cricket that was also demonstrated later in Barbados.
Retaining all 12 available World Cup players, the faith of the West Indies selectors was thoroughly vindicated.
Philip Simmons, their only World Cup century-maker, added two more the only times he batted, smashing five sixes and 12 fours in 122 off 113 balls in the first match and two sixes and 10 fours in 104 off 139 balls in the third.
Brian Lara (86 off 91 balls with two sixes and 13 fours) and Desmond Haynes (59 off 71 balls, a six and seven fours) wiped off the 153 needed to win the second match from just 25.5 overs.
In contrast, Andrew Hudson's pedestrian 50 off 70 balls at Sabina was South Africa's highest score and 189 for six their highest total in the three matches.
As one sided as the result of the third match was, the margin did no accurately reflect a gripping struggle at the start of the West Indies innings.
Requiring 190 to complete their clean sweep, they lost Haynes first ball, bowled off stump by Meyrick Pringle who, along with Tertius Bosch, proceeded unsuccessfully to claim for nine lbw decisions against Simmons and Lara in the first eight overs, some more authentic than others.
A rib cage injury forced Pringle to leave the ground after five overs, in which he conceded only six for Haynes's wicket, and Simmons then broke free for the second time with devastating effect.
All three matches attracted large crowds and those at the Queen's Park Oval were in carnival mood throughout, delighting in the stroke-play of two Trinidadian batsmen, Lara and Simmons, who claimed the Man of the Match award on successive days.
It was a refreshing change from jeering in Jamaica, and the general depression after the World Cup.
Life Lines Jonty Rhodes
Most memorable day's cricket
My first-class debut for Natal in December 1988 I scored a century in the first innings.
Worst Day's cricket
The semi-final of our first World Cup It was very disappointing to go out of the competition knowing that we had a chance, even though it was a slim chance, to reach the final.
Cricketing heroes
Peter Kirsten, Ian Botham.
Greatest influence(s)
My father and mother both provide invaluable support.
Current players admired
Peter Kirsten, Ian Botham, David Boon.
Young Cricketers for the future
Sachin Tendulkar is young but is already  established In South Africa 6  there is a youngster.
Hershelle Gibbs, who is a fine athlete and has a lot of cricketing potential.
Cricketing ambition
To establish myself as a Test player and not only a one-day player.
I would love to win the World Cup.
Favourite grounds
The Sydney Cricket Ground.
It is not difficult to fill the stands and this creates an  electrifying atmosphere, which is something I thrive on.
Least favourite
Eden Park, Auckland.
I don't like the place of the wicket or the shape of the park.
Main complaint about cricket
The weather can't be controlled and I hate sitting around waiting for it to clear up because I can't sit still for too long!
Funniest moment in cricket
Natal needed seven runs to win off the last ball against Transvaal in the semi finals of our Benson & Hedges day/night series.
Snell bowled me a no-ball which I hit for six, then hit a four off the extra!
How do you like to spend your spare time
I play so much cricket and hockey that I don't have too much spare time between my studies at university.
But I relax with a good book whenever possible.
Special hobbies and interests
Hobbies — sport.
Interests — my girlfriend, Kate McCarthy.
Other sports people admired
Pele, Gary Player, Colin Bland.
Favourite actors and actresses
Michael Caine, Dudley Moore, Jessica Lange.
Favourite television programmes
I don't usually watch, apart from sport or the odd movie.
Favourite films
Tootsie, Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, Ghost.
Favourite music
Eurythmics, UB40, U2, Police.
Pet hates
People who smoke at meal times.
Motor car
Volkswagen Golf.
Favourite food
My mother prepares a fantastic chicken dish for me every now and then.
Favourite holiday places
The Dreakensburg Mountains or the Natal North Coast.
Favourite hotel
Parkroyal Dockside in Brisbane.
There is a lot of space, which is needed on a long tour!
Favourite restaurant
Legends.
Clothes
I feel most comfortable in casual attire, ie: shorts, T-Shorts, tennis shoes.
How in your wildest dreams would you most like to spend a day/night
I would like to be able to attend a gathering with all the sporting greats who have provided hours and hours of exciting achievements.
Newspaper read
The Natal Witness
Favourite authors
Have a wide variety — Robert Ludlum, Jeffrey Archer, Desmond Bagley.
Favourite magazine
SA Sports Illustrated.
Future career
Play cricket until I no longer can smile and enjoy myself, on and off the field.
I will hopefully complete my Bachelor of Commerce Degree this year and will have a future career in marketing.
Motto in life
We have God-given talents for a reason so play to the best of your ability at all  times Never be satisfied until you have given 100 per cent.
David Munden 
Nothing Bland about Jonty
The first thing that strikes you about Jonty Rhodes is his effervescence.
In part it is nervousness, but mostly is youthful exuberance, an exuberance that has so far made his career and yet paradoxically also threatens it.
On the day I spoke to him, his  wizened granite-faced skipper Kepler Wessels (who is almost the antithesis of Rhodes) had sat down and spoken to the 22-year-old from Natal about his game.
He's worried that I'm getting too excited, but unfortunately that's my personality,’ he reflected with a shy but broad grin.
I get carried away, but I must learn now it's the big league.
For instance, against India my emotions got away from me.
I hit one six and then instead of just trying to hit a single from the next I tried to hit it for four and was out.
It's a learning experience,’ he concluded ruefully.
Rhodes, in fact, had a fairly lean time as a batsman in the World Cup, with the one exception being a stirring 43 off 36 overs in the semi-final game against England.
His three fours in an over from Gladstone Small were perhaps the statistical highlight, but it was his running between the wickets that really caught the eye.
Once again his innings ended disappointingly, with another slash through point finding Chris Lewis, at a time when the South Africans needed some gutsy determination and level-headedness to get close to England's 252.
‘I've been playing it quite badly,’ said Rhodes candidly.
‘My strength is running between the wickets, especially the twos.
In Australia, with the grounds being so large, there are plenty of twos on offer and I'm not really a big hitter.
I was playing against the West Indies and I scored eight off a Cummins over without hitting a four, and for Natal |I've build some 80s and 90s that have been matchwinning performances, but this time I've just got far too excited’.
Rhodes was not overawed by the bowling during the World Cup, feeling ‘comfortable’ against Curtly Ambrose and the other West Indians, but he appreciates the difference between one-day cricket and Test cricket and knows that his record of just two centuries in 40 first-class games is not enough to guarantee him a place in the Test side.
But if Rhodes hasn't set the world on fire with his batting, he certainly has with his fielding.
Not since England's Derek Randall has a cricketer been so feted for his work in the field, and inevitably comparisons were being made with the legendary Colin Bland, his fellow countryman with the Exocet-like throwing arm.
Rhodes, however, dismisses such comparisons: ‘I never saw Colin Bland, but from everything I've heard he'll be one level higher than any other fielder, just like Bradman and the rest when it comes to batting.
You can't aspire to that degree of quality, but Peter Kirsten, who was my schoolboy hero,…well I think I can get to his level as a fieldsman and, perhaps, batsman.’
Kirsten proved a fine role model for the impressionable Rhodes throughout the tour, and while on the surface the pair couldn't be more contrasting in appearance or temperament, there is no doubting that they shared the same total commitment to their game and country.
It was this fierce commitment that — for me — provided the highlight of the World Cup.
Pakistan and South Africa were playing a crucial game at the Gabba in Brisbane when rain intervened to make South Africa's total of 211 appear almost invincible.
But with the vastly experienced Imran in tandem with the brilliantly fluent Inzamam-ul-Haq the revised target of 193 off 36 overs suddenly looked possible.
A loss would have almost certainly ruled out a semi-final berth for South Africa.
The Pakistan duo had smashed 61 runs from just nine overs, taking the score to 135–2 in the 31st over, when Imran called for a cheeky single…
Jonty Rhodes, whose fierce commitment and exuberance in the field made him one of the ‘stars’ of the World Cup.
‘I hadn't hit the wickets for a while and I wasn't going to throw it because it was a rather tense moment and it would have given away at least one run if I had missed’ Rhodes recalled.
‘It was quite wet and Imran went quite far down the wicket — he may be a great player but he's not a great runner — before sending Inzamam back.
He was getting back quicker than I thought because he is quite a tall guy, so I had to knock the stumps down as quickly as possible and the quickest way to get there was through the air — and I took it.’
I mentioned to Rhodes after the game that the image of him spearing kamikaze-style into the stumps would adorn front pages around the world the following day, but for him there had been no theatrical ambition inherent in his actions, it was sheer practicality.
He calls himself a ‘stopper,’ with his greatest ability being able to pounce on anything earthbound that should cross his territory, but he also has a fine pair of catching hands, and he took many full-blooded cuts and slashes through the expansive point area during the World Cup.
So what makes Rhodes such a sensational fielder?
‘Well, I'm short and I've got stocky legs and a big backside — I'm very close to the ground!’ he answers in typical self-effacing style.
‘I play a lot of hockey as well and that's all bending down, so I can approach the ball much more fluently than a bigger guy.
Hockey is a very low game and it's all in the quads in your upper legs and I can move into  the ball without slowing down, where as a bigger guy has to run in and stoop down’.
Rhodes could well become a double international as he is in the South African national hockey squad, but so far the hockey union hasn't followed cricket down the integration path and cricket at the moment takes first place on his agenda.
He is also trying to finish a commerce degree at university, but the remarkable series of events which has seen South Africa catapulted into the cricketing limelight means that studies might have to take a back seat for at least 1992.
Such has been the pace of South Africa's re-entry into the world arena that Rhodes and his team mates have had little time to be overawed by the situation, which for a youngster from a small town in Natal is quite remarkable.
‘The trip has really broadened by horizons,’ he said during the World Cup.
‘I've had a very sheltered upbringing, so this has really been an eye-opener.
I'm really a very shy person and I'm not that confident conversing with people I don't know — and girls as well.
I've had a girlfriend for two and a half years, but before that I'd never spoken to a girl in my life.
I had no sister, I went to all-boys schools, I lived out of town, never went to parties and while for others girlfriends were the in-thing, I lived for sport.’
The world has changed completely in a matter of just six months for the engaging Rhodes.
It has changed also for his parents.
The couple had encouraged and followed their son's sporting progress right across South Africa, but they weren't able to afford the trip to Australia to see the World Cup challenge.
However, thanks to sponsorship from Natal Building Society and public fund-raising both parents flew to Sydney to see the exciting but frustrating semi-final against England.
The fact that the South Africans even reached the semi-final is a reflection of their spirit and commitment, but Rhodes knows that the world of Test cricket is markedly different to facing Dipak Patel with the new ball in a one-day game.
To complicate matters he was diagnosed as having reflex epilepsy as a youngster, a condition which can lead to concussion if he sustains head injuries.
T prevented him from playing rugby, but even a few knock-out blows from bowlers like Allan Donald have failed to temper his international cricketing ambitions.
Jonty Rhodes in the field: ‘I'm short and I've got stocky legs and a big backside — I'm very close to the ground.’
The current South African team is still a long way from emulating the 1960s side which could well have claimed World Championship status if they had been able to test their strength against Garry Sobers' West Indies.
But a crucial ingredient in their success was the fielding of the team (with Bland at the forefront) and if Jonty Rhodes can inspire his team to come even close to such heights then the South African team of the 1990s may well go one step further than their illustrious predecessors.
ELLCOCK'S SAD SURRENDER.
‘NEARLY man’ is an overused term in sport, a label that is often attached to anyone who has come remotely near to making an impact in their chosen vocation before failing to reach the exalted heights expected of them.
For Ricardo Ellcock, however, it is particularly appropriate.
When Ellcock announced his retirement from first-class cricket at the age of 216 after Middlesex's pre-season tour to Portugal, he was finally admitting defeat in a struggle to overcome back problems he has been fighting for much of his 10-year career.
Only the knowledge that, by any modern standards, he was a genuinely quick bowler persuaded Ellcock to stay in the game and continue the battle for fitness when he was forced to return to his adopted London home from England's tour of his native West Indies in 1990 without bowling a competitive ball.
Two years and two back operations later he has been forced to call it a day.
In those two years since his world fell apart on the paradise island of St Lucia when he left the England tour —‘I handled it really badly,’ he reflects, ‘I cried my eyes out’— Ellcock has put up with more adversity than most people expect in a lifetime.
On returning to London he found the entry lock to his block of flats had been changed to keep out squatters from a neighbouring residence, forcing him to wait outside with his suitcases and ‘coffin’ for hours, and then he learnt that his house in Worcester had been vandalised by his tenant.
17-year old Ricardo Ellcock in action for Worcestershire in 1983.
Ricky Ellcock: 117 wickets (avge.29.01) in a first-class career of 46 matches.
All this on top of the irony of an innocent request he made to a man with a radio listening to the cricket immediately he arrived in England after spending time with his family in Barbados.
‘How are England doing?’ asked Ellcock.
‘Not bad’, said the man, unaware of the identity of the questioner.
‘Lewis is playing well.’
As Chris Lewis was the man who replaced Ellcock in the England party, his was not the name he most wanted to hear.
Yet Ellcock, an intelligent man with strong views on the game, graciously allowed the Daily Mail to photograph him ‘celebrating’ at home watching Sky TV as Wayne Larkins hit the winning run in the Jamaica Test when he probably felt like crying again because he was not at Sabina Park to share the moment.
And he rarely complained during his recuperation from the first back operation, to repair a number of fractures, which looked like being successful when he returned for Middlesex at the start of 1991 and took four for 60 against Somerset with a performance which particularly impressed his own wicket-keeper Paul Farbrace.
‘I had to take most of the deliveries near my head’, said Farbrace.
‘Ricky was so quick.’
Soon afterwards, however, Ellcock became the ‘nearly man’ again, entering hospital for further surgery to remove the screws that had snapped in his back, ruling him out for the rest of the summer and, ultimately, despite encouraging practice sessions with the England A party last winter, the immediate future.
Now he has time on his hands to reflect on a career which started so promisingly when he made his Worcestershire debut while still at Malvern College in 1982, but never lived up to those aforementioned expectations simply because of injury.
the legacy Ellcock feels, of being forced to play too much cricket too young — something that the game should consider carefully in this age of the injury stricken bowler.
‘It's a sad time for me, but this is something for which I've been trying to prepare myself for some time,’ he said.
‘My surgeon says further surgery would be morally wrong as it could affect my future health but I had to make an effort to get back after the England tour went wrong.
Having got that near to international cricket I owed it to myself to try again.’
At least Ellcock, who took 117 wickets in 46 first-class matches at 29.01 apiece, has other career strings to his bow.
Already a qualified pilot, he may follow in the flightpath of former West Indies fast bowler Colin Croft and pursue a flying career in America in conjunction with a two-year degree course.
He is also a keen writer, having contributed to The Daily Telegraph and is working on his first book, a fictional work based loosely on his life story, which is already attracting interest from Central Television , who may serialise it.
‘I can't see myself going into coaching,’ says Ellcock, ‘That's just not me.
But my surgeon says my back should be considerably stronger in two years time so who knows, maybe I'll be able to make a comeback after sorting my life out.
I'll only be 28 then.’
He is wise not to rule out totally a return to the game.
Ellcock looked like a thoroughbred in 1989, his first season for Middlesex, and impressed enough to earn that surprise England call-up.
Micky Stewart has since kept him involved in international get togethers and is clearly an admirer.
‘I'm very shocked and disappointed for Ricky,’ said Stewart when I told him of the retirement news.
‘He had the potential to have a very bright future in the game.’
It is a potential which, sadly, has been ruined by the modern demands on young fast bowlers.
MASTER CLASS
Lindsay Moody enlists the expertise of TOM GRAVENEY in advising the taller player in the art of facing short-pitched bowling, drawing on the difficulties encountered by GRAEME HICK
THE playing of fast bowling, particularly the short-pitched variety, is an emotive subject.
It is also one of great concern to all cricketers, first-class, club and schoolboy.
In some quarters the inadequacy of pitches presents just as terrifying a prospect as the pace of the bowling.
It is also a subject which has troubled the taller batsman.
Generally it is the shorter, smaller player who has been the more adept at handling fast, short-pitched bowling.
He has less body area to protect, is less prone to habitually lunging forward, and may possess greater rapidity of foot movement for getting into position to play the hook, pull and cut shots safely.
Of the current crop of leading Test batsmen Graeme Hick is the one most at risk to the fast, short-pitched ball.
As a tallish man he is a natural front-foot player.
Tom Graveney was similar.
However, he successfully adopted his style in more than adequately coping with the West Indian fast bowling of the 1960's.
Generally top players cope with the fast, short delivery by moving back and across the crease or, as Graham Gooch, by standing his ground and putting the wight on the front foot so that the head is over the front knee.
These are the two accepted ways of playing the rising ball.
Increasingly Hick is having the same problem at county level as bowlers realise a potential flaw.
Why has it taken so long for this in his technique to be exposed?
Graveney feels that in county cricket there is not the same class of speed attack as is found in Test cricket.
Add in the slower pitches ad lower bounce and Hick was able to take full advantage.
Let us at this point, though, not take anything away from Hick.
He has immense talent, a good eye, strength and wonderful timing.
He has already scored over 60 first-class hundreds.
Graveney thinks that this figure could be easily be nearer 80 if he were to change his stance.
It makes sense that if he were able to play as well at Test level as in county matches he may well have scored 80 first-class hundreds already.
So let Tom Graveney look at Hick's stance and how it affects him.
At the start of the bowler's run-up.
Hick has a classic stance, but by the time the bowler has reached the crease he has come up into the familiar upright position with the bat raised.
Thus, from a classic, relaxed position he has changed to a statue like figure.
His feet are wide apart, legs straight, and his head is looking down the pitch over the left shoulder.
He is not in a position to deal effectively with the fast, short delivery bowled at his body.
1
The legs being straight means there is no flexibility to move freely forward or back.
2
The feet being wide apart means that he cannot move his feet properly to the short, or for that matter the full-length, delivery.
Rarely does one see Hick driving off the front foot in the classic style with head and shoulder ‘over the ball.’
This is because his present stance does not allow him to move freely into the ball.
When he drives his head is usually a little behind his front knee.
This explains why he is vulnerable to the ball which moves away from him because he cannot get properly into line  or lean into the ball.
The short-pitched delivery bowled at him causes problems because of this fixed stance he has developed.
Add the position of his feet being wide apart and he is unable to get out of the way or play down the line.
The crease is there to be used, but he does not use it.
3
He does not ‘look’ at the ball with both eyes level.
There is no way he can focus on the ball properly with him looking over the front shoulder.
It is crucial for any player to look at the ball with both eyes level, so as to judge the line and length properly.
4
He closes face when he picks up the bat.
This was a tip given to him by an extremely well-known Test player.
One presumes this was to help him keep the short ball down when it was bowled at the line of middle to leg stump.
It is not helpful because it restricts ability to play with the full face of the bat.
His fixed, raised backlift affects timing and causes him to play late.
He has the habit of lifting the bat again from the raised position, thus coming down late on the yorker-type delivery.
Graeme Hick illustrates the transition from classic stance (left) to statue-like figure with raised bat (right).
All these factors have affected his confidence to the extent where even medium-fast bowlers can cause him problems with the short delivery.
So what are advising Graeme Hick and others with similar problems to do?
Graveney insists that Hick should go back to basics, and remain in that classic position he is in at the start of the bowler's run-up — to stand sideways-on, bat on the ground, knees slightly bent, feet about shoulder width apart, and head up and still with both eyes level.
This is the classic position, and with only the bat to be raised the batsman is in position to move back or forward while at the same time able to focus on the ball.
From this position he has two options on how to play the short ball.
In my prime I shifted my weight onto the front foot as the bowler approached the crease, being careful though not to commit myself to the front foot.
I kept my head up and still, and looked at the bowler with both eyes.
From this position I was able to pull or hook the short ball by being well balanced able to lean into the stroke.
Graeme's other option is to move his back foot back and across towards the off stump, but at the same time keeping his head forward over the perpendicular with the front knee.
Now he is in a position to judge line and length, can focus properly and is able to move freely.
This is a favoured technique with many great players of fast bowling, not least West Indies' Gordon Greenidge.
All the club and school players take heed.
Your stance is crucial to how you move into or away from the ball.
Take a look at yourself in a mirror and judge for yourself if you measure up.
Lindsay Moody is an NCA Advanced Coach and Cricket Coach at King's College, School, Wimbledon.
Wisden in Fresh Hands
THE editorship of Wisden is a post of such significance in the cricket world that a third change in 12 years is noteworthy in itself.
What is disturbing about Graeme Wright's resignation after only six years in the chair is his stated disillusionment with too many aspects of the modern game.
There is much about cricket today that disturbs all of riper years and many who are much younger.
Mr Wright has been responsibly critical, having served his apprenticeship under John Woodcock, his predecessor, who in his six years (1980–86) brought to the editorship an authority it had not enjoyed since the great Sidney Pardon.
At the age of 60 Mr Woodcock found that the combination of Wisden and his Times writing was too much.
Mr Wright now wants to do other things and if his heart is no longer in the job so be it.
My only reservation about Matthew Engel, which only time will decide, is whether his roots in cricket are sufficiently deep and strong.
From the Northampton Chronicle and Echo and then Reuter's he arrived at The Gaurdian aged 28 in 1979, and is said to have covered 50 sports.
It was however during his years as The Guardian's cricket correspondent in the mid-1980s that he was crowned Granada's Sports Writer of the Year.
Mr Engel is a journalist of rare erudition and humour, and cricket is a pastime and an art form which has won the devotion of a vast public, including great men of many sorts from generation to generation.
It stands today in need of rescue from commercial interests to whom its traditions mean nothing, and likewise from administrators who would subordinate all else in deference to the supposed interests of the England squad .
The editor of Wisden is in a sense the conscience of cricket.
May Mr Engel (the 14th incumbent, by the way) see its problems in fair perspective.
All cricketers will wish him well in his labours.
HAVING long admired The Cricketers ‘Who's Who , edited annually by Ian Sproat, MP, I am pleased that The Cricketer is now and henceforward to be associated in its promotion with Lennard, the publishers.
The editor, I am also relieved to see, seems to have got out his 1992 book in advance of the election, without detriment to his political responsibilities since the burghers of Harwich elected him with a massive majority and a three per cent swing in his favour.
With so much more of the limelight concentrated on the Test team than used to be the case, pen sketches of every member of the county cricket circuit, along with actual photographs in each case, are a welcome addition.
So is an appendix devoted to the umpires, from which it emerges that of the list of 31 only six have not been first-class cricketers: a healthy ratio surely.
Since the entries are edited versions of a round-robin pro-forma some of the detail is distinctly idiosyncratic.
There is a suspicion that here and there among the 20 or so items requested the editor's leg has been mildly pulled.
The overall picture however is of an agreeable, reasonably educated bunch — many going on to universities or training colleges, sadly few coming from state schools.
Most have family cricket links.
Overseas clubs claim surprisingly many in the winter.
Much esoteric information: who knew that Mike Gatting won a bronze medal for ballroom dancing at the Neasden Ritz All can be the wiser for £10.95 
Mike Gatting: waltzed off his feet after dancing the night away?
THE news that Peter Cranmer after having long been confined to a wheelchair, has had both legs amputated in Brighton General Hospital will sadden all who recall with admiration that famous sporting figure of the 1930s.
His brother Philip reports in the newsletter of the Lord's Taverners that he is in ‘remarkably good spirits,’ a fact that will come as no surprise to those who known him either personally or as a BBC broadcaster.
On leaving St Edward's School, Peter walked straight into the winning Oxford and England rugby football teams of 1933/4 as a fast, strong-running centre-threequarter.
He was no such prodigy as a cricketer, but made the Warwickshire side as an attacking bat and top-class fielder.
He won 16 consecutive international caps, the most famous occasion being the All Blacks match of 1936, remembered for two thrilling tries by Alex Obolensky, the Russian prince.
In each case it was he who sent ‘the flying prince’ away, beside making another try and dropping a goal in England's sensational 13–0 victory.
At the age of 23 in 1938 he captained his country at one game and, more surprisingly, his county, Warwickshire in the other.
To Bob Wyatt's dismay Warwickshire, after eight years of his leadership, opted for, as they put it, a more adventurous captain.
Peter performed this function with maximum cheerfulness for the last two pre-war years and the first two afterwards.
Peter Cranmer: cheerful captain.
IN June 1910 J G Fawcus and three other undergraduates of New College, Oxford decided they wanted to form a cricket club.
Seeking a name, John Fawcus opened a book and the first word that caught his eye was ‘cryptic’ So, as established institutions are apt to spring from casual beginnings, was born the club that has prospered peripatetically ever since.
Having enjoyed much Cryptics cricket for many years one was reassured at the recent annual dinner that the 1992 fixturecard still runs to 50 matches, including three of two days, I was delighted to note.
The Southern and Northern tours in August remain well subscribed.
Dining in the perfect Jacobean hall of Trinity it was only fitting that we should wear dinner jackets (Hooray for a touch of elitism!)
Pyjamas and track-suits and Ian Botham's ridiculous dark spectacles under the Melbourne floodlights seemed mercifully remote until Michael Melluish, MCC's youthful-looking president, just back from Australia, brought our thoughts gently back to the world scene of the '90s.
The chosen tie of Oxford blue with narrow stripes of dark green, magenta (for New College) and Cambridge blue reflects a club of quiet distinction with an abiding scholastic flavour.
John Fawcus, a schoolmaster all his life, established it, and continued as honorary secretary until his son, H.J, likewise a pedagogue, was ready to carry on.
Yes, and Harold is still doing the job today, having outstripped his dad's term of office, still going strong with 42 not out: 82 years' service between the two of them.
Dear Sirs, is this a record?
A TWO-EYED STANCE
ALAN FORDHAM talks to Neville Scott about approaches to professional cricket
IN THE summer of 1990, whenever Northamptonshire matches were halted by rain, an unexpected but very welcome pattern began to develop.
Within 15 minutes or so, Alan Fordham would turn up at the commentary box, ready to resume discussion on the latest of the batch of modern drama texts through which he was picking his way.
At pains to point out that ‘O’ Level Eng Lit. was the sole exam he had ever failed, Fordham's continuing interest in these bizarre tutorials — in the face of ribald comment both from his colleagues and mine — was but one of the many facts which confirmed a certain singularity amongst cricketers.
An ability to combine flamboyance as an opener with consistent run-scoring through two succesive seasons had, by last July, led elements of the press to strike the first chords of a fateful theme —‘Fordham for England’ was its general, ominous import.
The British media's peculiar psychological tendency to build up sportsmen only to make them scapegoats, at a later stage, for wider national ills is well enough recognised by cricketers.
It was nevertheless something of a relief to find Fordham notably unmoved by such distant calls to glory.
This itself tells us something more of his attitude to the game.
It is a stance which has been nurtured by several things, family bereavement and an intelligent, contemplative nature amongst them, but was perhaps most impelled by the experience of coaching in Bangladesh in the winter of 1989–90.
The four months I spent there were really one of the best things I've ever done.
It brought home the obvious points, I suppose.
There was I, living like a king, whilst literally on the other side of the fence was somebody grovelling in the gutter.
Sights like that must make you  think a bit and make you realise you are very lucky,
a.
to live in an affluent country and,
b.
to have a pretty good job there as well.
I'd think that I have seen enough to say that cricket could never be the be-all-and-end-all of life for me.
How, then, might he describe his view of the game?
Basically that it's there to be enjoyed and that it is only when you enjoy it that you play at your best — I always enjoy my cricket.
This sounded alarm bells.
‘Enjoyment’ is one of those highly ambiguous terms; for many it will carry images of cavalier self-indulgence.
What about those occasions when, on the surface the difficulties of cricket demand something more?
At what point does enjoyment descend into irresponsibility?
It never should do, as I understand it.
You enjoy yourself by performing to the best of your ability — as soon as you become irresponsible, you're not performing to that level and, if you're honest with yourself, you won't enjoy it.
Is there perhaps a more significant conflict, however, between a conscious determination to enjoy your work and the need to think all the time of team requirements and of the specific obligations these impose?
No.
Satisfaction in the game comes from playing a lot of what I would call ‘appropriate cricket’ for the team.
Enjoyment obviously does derive from performing successfully for the side but being determined to enjoy the occasion, be it a wet Northampton Monday or a NatWest Final, shouldn't be reliant solely on personal success.
By definition, you cannot do well all the time, you can only try to — your attitude is that you could be a hell of a lot worse off in life than getting out for 30 as opposed to 75.
Being able to rationalise everything when you come off the field is, I suppose, part of being able to enjoy it all.
If it was the be-all-and-end-all then it would probably be difficult to talk to you objectively about failure, for example.
It's not a matter of distancing yourself, I would stress that — cricket is a very emotional game which stays with you long after the hours of play — but it is a matter of being able to get everything into a context.
Fordham was both honest and realistic enough to concede that the most severe examination of his outlook possibly still awaited him — to date, his career has known no period of prolonged failure and the misery this can induce.
It remained his belief, though, that a firm grasp of wider realities would serve him well.
You cannot become a bad player overnight in terms of technique but undoubtedly you can become so mentally — if you start doubting yourself, for example.
That is when I would hope to be able to draw upon this philosophy and see the bad times through.
Most of the game is mental — being able to keep your head clear and retain a certain outlook on life should mean that bad times are neither so frequent nor so lengthy as they would be if you start examining your technique or doubting your ability.
For the onlooker, one of the game's fascinations, even perhaps a cruel fascination, lies in the complex interrogation of character which cricket so relentlessly and uniquely pursues.
I wondered to what extent Fordham thought that his own response to this scrutiny was shared by his fellow professionals.
Essentially, what makes the professional cricketer tick, what makes him different even, is a deep-rooted, intense pride in his own performance.
Yet obviously there have to be reasons why people with talent oozing out of them don't fulfil it.
Perhaps they're not channelling this pride in the right direction.
I think, possibly people who don't make it have become a little starstruck.
Ideas become a bit confused by the fact they feel a dream has come true.
Talent can be overcome by material things, certainly.
It is a process, I suggested, which the very nature of English professional cricket compounded.
The familiar pattern of travel, hotels and the company of on's peers invited a certain insularity, a tunnel vision indeed, either in terms of artificial detachment or, at the other extreme, of a debilitating introspection.
When you start playing your cricket at 18 or 19, or even earlier, it's very easy to get bowled over by the way of life you adopt — there are always a lot of people who want to know you and you can be carried along by that.
This extends itself to winters very often — the types of winters that can be available are obviously very attractive, not just to professional cricketers, I mean, but to the vast majority of the population.
Who wouldn't jump at the chance of spending a free six months in the Southern Hemisphere, flights paid, car provided and all for a few afternoons coaching?
Frankly, you'd be crazy not to want to go and do that.
? The problem is to bring a sense of perspective to what you're doing.
A sense of perspective can also be undermined in the other direction — is not pride in performance sometimes dangerously close to obsession?
Yes, obsession is the total extreme of pride in performance, isn't it?
When you have a bad spell, the natural temptation is probably to become tied up in excuses.
In the end, though, there's only one person you can blame and that's yourself.
Of course if you get a good ball there's much justification for failure but there's probably always something more you could have done.
When you don't get the best ball of the day and you still get out, the tendency can be to try to satisfy yourself by claiming good intentions — if the attitude is that ‘there are no excuses: then you accept responsibility and responsibility is always judged in the context of what, to repeat myself, you can call ‘appropriate cricket.’
We had returned to our starting point.
At 27 Fordham is a capped county batsman of deep promise entering what should be the six years or more of his mature best.
At some stage, disappointments will certainly beset him.
And, should he ever graduate to captaincy, the most searching trial — of leading men who do not necessarily view the world as he does — is still perhaps ahead.
With all the genuine, yet inherently easy, sympathy of the committed onlooker, it is a prospect I anticipate with profound interest.
And with something also, perhaps, of the observer's inevitable guilt.
This is not, after all, the stuff of drama texts but of matters rather closer to reality.
THANK YOU JEEVES…
70 years on, Eric Midwinter recalls county cricket's most astonishing game
CRITICS claim that P.G.
Wodehouse's yarns of an omniscient butler saving his aristocratic master from humiliation are timeless ventures into unreality.
Seventy years ago this June, the Hon L.H. Tennyson, later Lord Tennyson, grandson of the laureate, of Eton and the Rifle Brigade, was in a spot of bother.
He was salvaged from this desperate scrape by his chauffeur-valet, Livsey, thus proving that truth is stranger even than the fiction of Bertie Wooster and Jeeves.
It happened in this manner.
It was Wednesday June 14, 1922, and Hampshire were the visitors at Edgbaston.
Spring had a spring in her lithesome step; the birds were trilling in what, over Birmingham, passes for sky; and the wicket was, according to Wisden , in decent condition.
Tennyson, known familiarly as ‘Lordship.’
won the toss and invited Warwickshire to bat…
Warwickshire, the county of Percy Jeeves, killed in the First World War, and after whom the resourceful butler was named; Warwickshire whose tie P.G.
Wodehouse was always proud to wear.
The home side made a rather disappointing 223 their skipper, the Hon F.S. Gough-Calthorpe (shades of Blandings Castle) contributing 70, and the amateur, F.R. Santall, 84, both in quick time.
Then followed what even the phlegmatic Daily Telegraph termed ‘sensational cricket.’
In half an hour, in eight overs, Hampshire were dismissed for 15 runs, their last scoring item being four byes.
Philip Mead, with six not out, was what one might diffidently label their top scorer, and only two other batsmen made any runs at all.
Only three counties have scored less than 15 in Championship history.
Harry Howell, finding pace off the pitch, took 6 for 7, and Calthorpe, 4 for 4.
It was then that the prefix ‘melo’ was added to the drama.
Innocent as any Bertie Wooster, Freddie Gough-Calthorpe commiserated with ‘Lordship,’ languidly saying, ‘never mind; well have a round of golf on Friday’.
‘Lordship’ had the belligerence of Bertie's Aunt Agatha, even if he retained her nephew's lisp.
‘Golf on  Fwiday?’ he howled irascibly.
‘Golf on  Fwiday/ We shall be winning the damned game on  Fwiday .’
 Fweddie,sorry, Freddie saw his golden opportunity, and sought a wager with his spluttering opponent.
Reports of the stakes vary, but the odds were undeniably high.
Following on, Hampshire were 98 for 3 at the close of play, ‘still,’ as The Daily Telegraph had it, ‘110 to the bad.’
Wickets continued to fall on the Thursday, the usually reliable Mead managing only 24, and Tennyson himself out for 45.
At 186 for 5, Hampshire were still behind.
The story circulated that the Warwickshire committee asked Calthorpe to delay taking the new ball to prolong the entertainment: certainly W.G. Quaife, the aging Warwickshire star, bowled luxurious legbreaks throughout the afternoon, ending with 3 for 154.
It was George Brown, the vigorous allrounder, who led the rearguard action with a hard-hitting 172, helped in a goodish partnership with the amateur, W.R. Shirley.
However, it was the serious Gentleman's Gentleman, Walter Livsey, a most efficient wicket-keeper, who, arriving at number ten, proceeded to make his highest-ever score.
Hampshire were only 66 ahead when he took earnest guard, but he shared in stands of 170 with Brown, and 70 with Stuart Boyce, and remained undefeated on the Friday morning with 110.
It amounted to unlikely total of 521, and Warwickshire required 314 to win.
They were buffeted psychologically as well as physically, and, although W.G. Quaife batted tidily for undefeated 40, the crafty Hampshire pair, Alec Kennedy (4 for 47) and Jack Newman (5 for 53) ran through Warwickshire for 158, the last wicket falling at 4.20pm.
It was not even a close-run thing: not the least astounding feature of this remarkable game was the huge margin — 155 runs — of victory.
It was the Livsey century that had finally broken the Warwickshire resistance — Jeeves to the rescue once more.
Epic were the memories of the subsequent hearty celebrations, with the Hampshire players soaked in ‘Lordship's’ champagne; with the train back to Southampton ‘virtually rocked’by the near hysterical merrymaking; with, in a final Wooster-like-oddity, Tennyson having first led his team to the train for Northampton, where, indeed, Warwickshire were playing the next day.
Thus ended the most astonishing match the County Championship has witnessed: even the reticent Wisden agreed the game ‘must surely be without precedent in first-class cricket.’
It was of a piece with the times.
Those inter-war years were an age of fidgety unease, following the buoyant confidence of the late Victorian and Edwardian era: witness the constant nervy fiddling with the Championship points system between 1919 and 1939, yet with never an assured reappraisal of the basic structure and apparatus of the game.
It seems apt that a match of such vacillation should have been staged in the anxious 1920s, that decade of flappers and bizarre dances.
Livsey himself, not surprisingly, given ‘his master's voice.’
suffered nervous depressions, although, happily, he lived to be 85.
The Gentleman's Gentleman: Walter Livsey.
The bibulous and imperious Tennyson captained Hampshire until 1933, and lived until 1951, dying, it has been said, ‘like an English gentleman, sir; sitting up in bed, reading The Times newspaper.’
It was June; it was Bexhill-on-Sea; he may have been reading the county scores.
His funeral took place during the First Test at Trent Bridge, with South Africa the tourists: play was halted as a tribute to the man whose valet helped him to contrive county cricket's most amazing victory.
Eric Midwinter's recently published ‘Bass Illustrated History of County Cricket’(Kingswood Press) is reviewed on page 55 .
Yorkshire Cricket's Ice Champion
THE Crucible Theatre in Sheffield, host to the World Snooker Championships, stands on the site of the once famous Adelphi Hotel, birthplace in 1863 of the Yorkshire County Cricket Club and home for some 20 or so years of Henry Sampson, who holds a special place in the annals of Yorkshire cricket.
His career spanned 25 years (1832–1857) and he achieved lasting fame by scoring no fewer than 162 during a match played on ice in 1841.
It remains a unique and curious cricket record.
Harry (as he was better known) Sampson was born in Hallam, Sheffield on March 3, 1813.
As a youngster he spent many hours playing cricket with his good friend John Turner and several other boys on a piece of waste ground at the top of Young Street.
He trained as a teenager to be a file forger and was employed by Messrs Cammell and Johnson in Furnival Street, but his first passion remained cricket.
He learned quickly and at the age of 19 met Samuel Bradbury, a noted local cricketer, in a single-wicket contest, so popular in those days, for a ‘substantial wager.’
He was beaten by an innings, scoring only 3 and 31 to his opponent's 75, but in 1833, when Yorkshire played their first county match against Norfolk, he met Bradbury again and ‘exhibited such ability with the bat that he almost ran his opponent off his legs.’
In fact he won the contest by 137 runs.
Sampson was a small but stout man, standing 5ft 4in tall and weighing 12 stone 7lbs.
He was described as being a fine back player and had a splendid defence, similar in style to the legendary Fuller Pilch.
In addition he was an excellent medium pace round-arm bowler.
Until 1840 he played all his cricket for Sheffield and Sheffield Wednesday alongside J. Dearman and Tom Marsden.
The year of 1841 proved the turning point for Harry Sampson.
On February 8 he played in a remarkable game of cricket on the ice on Little London Dam in Sheffield.
The stumps were pitched at 12 o'clock after a firework display.
The first three batsmen were all dismissed without scoring but then Sampson built a score which ‘gained the admiration and praise of hundreds of delighted spectators.’
His side ended with a total of 311, he having contributed 162.
The opposition quickly lost four wickets with only eight runs on the board but fading light saved them from defeat.
In May he met Yorkshire's champion cricketer of the 1820s and '30s, Tom Marsden, now well past his best, in a single-wicket game played at Hyde Park for a purse of £50.
Marsden batted first but was dismissed for 15 and after a short rest Sampson went in to bat.
The game lasted three days mainly because Sampson batted so well and for five hours, making 81 (68 runs with the bat and 13 wides).
Marsden was bowled early on the third morning for 16 so losing the match by an overwhelming innings and 50 runs.
Henry Sampson: 162 on the ice of Little London Dam
The scorecard of a famous match played on Little London Dam, Sheffield, February 8, 1841 when Sampson scored his remarkable 162 on ice!
Sampson became the second (Marsden was the first) Yorkshire player to represent the Players against the Gentlemen when he played in the Lord's fixture of 1841.
He was dismissed in both innings by the ‘Lion of Kent,’ Alfred Mynn, for scores of three and 11.
He was briefly engaged as a ground bowler at Lord's but from 1842 to 1844 he was cricket instructor and groundsman at Reading Town CC as well as being a local innkeeper.
On August 29, 1843 he top scored with 30 for Reading against Clapton and in 1844 appeared for Berkshire against Buckinghamshire.
He returned to his native Sheffield in 1845 and took the Crown and Anchor Hotel at the top of Bright Street before becoming landlord of the Adelphi.
He took in hand the recently formed Broomhall Club and developed it.
He leased a field in the area and turned it into a cricket ground.
Edwin Stephenson, who played for Yorkshire between 1858 and 1873, was one of the youngsters who spent many hours ‘pegging’ away, bowling at Sampson on the Broomhall pitch.
It was there that he improved his batting and between 1845 and 1857 he represented Sheffield and Yorkshire in many games.
In July 1845 he scored 56 for Yorkshire against Manchester and the following season hit 118 for Sheffield Wednesday against Sheffield Broomhill Club.
In 1847 he made scores of 79 and 52 for Sheffield against Manchester at Hyde Park and turned in a number of notable feats in 1848 including 31 not out and 22 at Manchester, 41 against Nottingham at Hyde Park and 55 in the return fixture at Trent Bridge.
William Clarke's All-England Eleven played 15 of Sheffield at Hyde Park in 1849 and won a closely fought match by just 10 runs.
Sampson top scored for Sheffield with 12 and 13 not out having been kept in reserve too long in the second innings.
His scores may not sound impressive but Clarke was obviously impressed by the Sheffielder's effort against John Wisden, Hillyer and himself and asked him to join the ranks.
He played only a few times for Clarke's side before leaving to join the United All-England XI upon its formation in 1852.
Sampson and Clarke certainly did not see ‘eye to eye’ and they had the utmost contempt for each other as cricketers.
Clarke said of Sampson, ‘Harry, could not bat at all,’ being what he termed a ‘poter,’whilst Sampson retorted that ‘Bill didn't know how to bowl,’and that ‘a child  could play him.’
In the early 1850s Sampson continued to contribute for Yorkshire and Sheffield.
At York on September 23, 1850 he scored 45 not out for Players of Yorkshire versus Gentlemen of Yorkshire (with three players).
In 1851 he made 48 for 14 of Yorkshire v England XI at Hyde Park, 58 against 16 of Nottingham Commercial Club, and 5 and 58 against Dalton.
In 1852 he again played well, hitting 24 and 40 not out and 60 against Dalton.
After 1852 his appearances declined in number and 1857 he appeared in his last match, top scoring with 29 and 14 for 16 of Sheffield against Nottingham at Sheffield's new Bramall Lane ground.
The Adelphi Hotel in Sheffield, birthplace of The Yorkshire CCC, home of Henry Sampson, and now the site of The Crucible Theatre, host to the World Snooker Championships.
Before we leave his cricket career two particular stories deserve a mention.
The first concerns Nicholas Wanostrocht, better known as Felix, a talented man as well as a cricketer and one time President of Clarke's All-England XI.
During a match against Parr's XI Felix was fielding at point for Sampson's batting and he persisted in approaching to within a few feet of the batsman.
This greatly annoyed Sampson —‘Now Felix, if you stand there I shall lash out at the next off ball and knock you down.’
Felix did not move and true to his word the batsman knocked him down.
The second story also comes from a game involving Parr's XI.
Sampson used to tie his gloves with straps and whilst batting in this particular game they came loose.
When receiving a ball from Clarke, he missed it but it caught the straps and was taken by the ‘keeper.’
The batsman remained at the wicket as no remark was made to the umpire.
Clarke sent down another ball.
The wicket-keeper looked closely at Sampson and cheekily asked, ‘Were you not out then Harry?’
The reply was, ‘Yes, the ball touched by glove but I said nothing.’
He went on to score a further 100 runs, shades indeed of the modern trend!
Henry Sampson was a popular character and the Adelphi Hotel became the cricketing centre of the town.
It was there on March 7, 1861 that the Sheffield Public Match Fund Committee was established.
Two years later The Yorkshire CCC was officially formed.
When he finally relinquished his business in 1868 Sampson moved to 165 Whitham Road, Broomhill where he enjoyed a long retirement as the Sheffield Telegraph noted:
‘He is the model of what a retired cricketer should be — a white haired, white whiskered, florid country gentlemen, close upon his three score years and ten, comfortably off, well-informed, and interested in and full of information about cricket in general, his own shire and town in particular where he is much respected.’
He died on Sunday March 29, 1884 after a short but severe illness resulting from a paralytic stroke.
He was buried at the General Cemetery in Sheffield.
The local newspaper summed up his life with the simple but glowing lines:
‘As a man he was kind, genial and respected by all who know him.
Mr Sampson was, in his day, one of the foremost cricketers in England, and worthily upheld the credit of his native town ’
SIGN OF THE TIMES
Grahame Booker takes a nostalgic look at the everpopular pursuit of autograph hunting
Recent pictures on television showing young Kiwi enthusiasts pestering Test cricketers for their autographs as they left the field of play — and this actually during a Test match!— have led me to ruminate on the lasting attraction of the pursuit of cricketers' signatures.
It must surely be easier now than it was half a century ago, thanks to the greater contact the public have with sportsmen generally.
And what wouldn't one have given in those distant days for a ball-point pen!
I also recall that some cricket grounds displayed notices curtly stressing: ‘No Autographs’ and over-zealous groundstaff and sometimes local police had a high old time trying to keep the hunters away from the hunted.
The compensatory factor was that old-school professionals did not usually have their own transport and many a signature was cajoled out of them on their way to nearest railway station or tram or bus stop.
My own autograph hunting was conducted with boyish enthusiasm at Trent Bridge in the late 19920s and early 30s and began in inauspicious circumstances.
My family in Nottingham entertained a friend who stayed with us for several days.
The visitor came from Surrey and brought with him a bat, which was duly presented to me — my first cricket bat!
And not simply a bat, but an autographed bat, for on the ‘hump’ near the splice was written, in ink, the hallowed signature of J.B. Hobbs.
The euphoria, alas, did not last long.
Our visitor had little knowledge of the passions or indeed the psychology of small boys, for he casually admitted after a day or two that he had inscribed the Master's name on the bat himself!
My distress when this bombshell was dropped must have left its mark, for some time later I received a letter enclosing a card signed by a number of Australian cricketers, including Bradman, at a private dinner party.
But even that conciliatory gesture never really convinced me that Don Bradman's signature could make up for that of Jack Hobbs.
Happily, I was able to acquire the latter's autograph myself shortly afterwards, but the disillusionment still lingers to this day!
As I turn the pages of my dog-eared autograph book now, each name encapsulates its own little bit of history, and not only the famous names, either.
Who remembers G.A. Pennington of Northamptonshire?
Beside the flowing signature is a newspaper cutting:Captain G.A. Pennington, whose tragic death in an aeroplane at Doncaster was reported last week, was the son of the vicar of Ashburnham in Sussex .
After detailing his career in the Royal Naval Air Service, the RAF and in civil aviation, the report concludes:He played both for Yorkshire and Northampton County Cricket Clubs, and on one or two occasions by his batting achievements saved the Champion County from defeat .
And H.R. Sprinks of Hampshire?
He played little first-class cricket, but was later to become better known as the founder of a very substantial and internationally-known insurance broking business in Paris.
During the era in question, several county sides relied heavily on amateur talent.
On the Essex page, for example, appear the signatures of F.W.W. Nicholas, H.W.F. Franklin, R.J. Stuart-King and R.C.G. Joy.
Of these, I believe the last two could be classified as ‘irregulars’.
Somerset provided the supreme example of the amateur emphasis and my collection includes the autographs of W.T Creswell, G.F. Earle (that mighty hitter!).
R.B. Marsh, L.St.
V. Powell, C.T.
Mayo and C.C.C.
Case, who did his best to convince his schoolboy admirers that his initials stood for Charles Christopher Columbus.
Many of the illustrious are there too, their signatures sometimes smudged or rain-spotted, but nonetheless memorable for that: Hobbs, Sandham, and Strudwick; Nichols and O'Connor; Hammond and Charlie Parker; Hallows, Watson and Makepeace; Freeman and Woolley (the short and the tall); the 1928 West Indians, including Learie Constantine; and the ‘All-Indian’ tourists of 1932.
Signed cigarette cards of Geo, Gunn and Tate.
Needless to say, the first page in my book of nostalgia is devoted to my native county, Nottinghamshire.
All my boyhood heroes' names are there — Larwood and Voce; Gunn and Whysall; and, written in bold capitals (surely indicative of the character of an aggressive captain), A.W.
CARR.
George Gunn, incidentally, always signed himself Geo.
Gunn.
There are also some interesting names under the heading ‘Notts.
2nd XI’, including W. Keeton, C.B. Harris and S.H.
Copley, the last-named the heroic substitute of the 1930 Trent Bridge Test.
I notice that present day cricketers usually write their first name in full, thus adding to what must be a considerable chore, especially for those in the Test party.
In my little collection, there are few christian names: Arthur Gilligan, Maurice Tate, Fred Root, Frank Ryan (Glamorgan's American exile) but that's about all.
Illustrious Australian names; 50 years on Bill O'Reilly obliges youngsters at Lords's
The last pages in the book have the intriguing heading, Sir J. Cahn's XI.
What a lasting pity it is that Sir Julien himself, so passionately devoted to the game, was such an abysmally poor performer.
Padded to the eyebrows and looking like the Michelin Man, he would make his tentative way to the crease, usually at number 11, and woe-betide the visiting fielder who held on to a catch put up by him or the bowler who failed to stifle an lbw appeal at birth.
His fielding was also, to put it mildly, pedestrian, and for many years, in local club cricket, a leisurely single to a none-too-agile mid-on was referred to as ‘One to Sir Julien’!
But Cahn's team was certainly no joke and usually gave the visiting tourists a worthwhile and high-scoring game on the pleasant Loughborough Road ground in West Bridgford.
I have the autographs of,inter alia , John Gunn, who acted as umpire for Sir Julien's XI after retirement from the county side; G.F.H. Heane; I.A.R. Peebles and F.C.W. Newman.
Many international cricketers played for Julien Cahn's team in the 1920s and '30s and R.W.V. Robins (who also played football for Nottingham Forest), C.S. Dempster, R.C. Blunt, R.J. Crisp, D.P.B. Morkel and the Australians Vic Jackson and Jack Walsh were all involved from time to time.
During one of the hold-ups in play in the Centenary Test at Lord's in 1980, I met a splendid young man (then aged about 14) from Yorkshire, who showed me his foolscap-size autograph book, beautifully kept, with separate pages for each country and county, adorned with photographs, magazine pictures, statistics and coloured inks.
I hope that he and his fellow enthusiasts of today will derive as much pleasure from looking back in 50 or 60 years' time as I do from my battered old album.
I have a feeling that they will.
LETTERS
More Princes of Wales
PRINCES of Wales have had rather more links with cricket than the entertaining mini-quiz in the Spring Annual suggests.
There is, for example, the familiar reference to ‘playing at Creag’(i.e. Creag-et) in the wardrobe accounts for the first English Prince of Wales for March 1300.
And ‘poor Fred’ is known to have captained a Surrey side at Moulsey Hurst 11 summers before the unfortunate accident at Cliveden.
Can his death really be blamed on a cricket ball?
He was hit on the side of the chest in 1748 but did not die until March 1751, having contracted pleurisy four weeks previously when he was ass enough to inspect landscape gardening at Kew in icy weather.
The legend owes much to the testimony of his friend Bubb Doddington, who blamed the Prince's death on ‘suffocation’ caused by the breaking of an abscess which had originated in the bruising made by the ball.
‘Poor Fred's’ grandson — the 17th Prince, 'Prinny’(later George IV)— showed enthusiasm for cricket at Brighton in 1791; reports suggest, rather surprisingly, that he was ‘agile’in the field.
The blackest cricket day for Princes of Wales was the occasion (date unspecified in Wisden ) on which the 18th, 19th and 20th Princes of Wales — Edward VII, George V, Edward VIII — were hat trick victims of the future King George VI ‘on the private ground…below Windsor Castle’.
Looking Forward
WITH the World Cup still fresh in the minds of a wider public and an exciting summer to look forward to this is an ideal time to market the longer game in a positive, attractive light.
‘Light’, in fact, plays perhaps the largest single part in keeping the public happy.
Teams traipsing off the field under little or no threat of rain when the medium pacers are on is the bitterest pill a spectator has to swallow; closely followed by the frequent inability to restart the game promptly.
Umpires must interpret the bad light law correctly for the sake of the crowd.
I would agree that the game is played by professional sportsmen, but they are only ‘professional’ because the public are prepared to pay to watch them.
Players and officials should not forget that.
Allowing play to continue for an hour if such time has been lost during the day is splendid; but the idea must be extended to ensure that any time lost up to that hour is added on.
The 90 overs a day ruling is to be commended.
However, one rarely sees a completion of those overs in the allotted time.
If the same ruling was applied to each session, e.g. 30 overs between lunch and tea, the regularity of enforcing the law would surely lead to a natural increase in over-rates.
Fining teams for not completing their overs (in one-day matches) is inconsequential.
The team batting first can never be quite sure when to go for the final, all out slog.
If a motion was suggested for reducing the team's innings by five runs every time a player was out it would encourage the taking of wickets, which would in turn reduce the role of the leg stump ‘spinner’ and medium pace ‘dobber’, place greater emphasis on attacking fields, potentially creating more runs — particularly boundaries — for the batsmen and recreating the ‘traditions’of one-day cricket.
Those traditions — the ‘crash, bang, wallop’, the nail biting excitement of the last ball finish that created the huge swell in popularity of the one-day jamboree — were conspicuous by their absence in the World Cup.
Unfortunately the same could not be said of the bad weather ruling which reared its ugly head too often.
One more match played under this ridiculous rule would be to many.
Ironically it was only a factor due to Australia's crazy decision to stage the contest in February and March.
It meant bad weather played a bigger part than in any of the previous four competitions.
No game can survive on history, even a history as glorious as that of cricket.
So, even amid the fading glow of the MCG's floodlights, and the successful reintroduction of South Africa, it is not the time to sit still and just ponder the future.
The success of American Football in Britain illustrates a growing antipathy towards our national games for failing to change with the times.
Hearne's Recall
ROBERT Brooke's comments in May issue's Milestones about the ‘recall’ of J.W. Hearne for the Oval Test match against South Africa make more sense if it is appreciated that, with the rubber already won, the England side for the Fourth Test at Manchester was an ‘experimental team’.
Apart from Gilligan, who was injured, being replaced by Douglas as captain, J.C.V. McBryan for J.W. Hearne and Andy Sandham for J.B. Hobbs.
The ‘funny’ Hearnes were all related, a fact which is clarified in my forthcoming book on the family which I hope will be published in autumn 1993 and will also dispel several other myths about this numerous band of cricketers.
From Five Yards
THE articles in the Spring Annual concerning the Central Lancashire League brought back many memories.
One of these concerns a match in which Cec Pepper and Roy Gilchrist were in opposition.
Cec told ‘Gilly’ that if he (Gilly) bowled any beamers at Cec's team he (Cec) would bowl them at Gilly's team.
‘But you are not a fast bowler’, said Gilly.
‘I am from five  yards’ said Cec.
NZ Media Coverage
MR DICKINSON'S preference (April issue) for English-style radio commentary stems entirely from familiarity with this format.
Telling Radio New Zealand that their commentary style is not an exact copy of the BBC's is no more than an acknowledgement that different countries have different cultures and that a format which suits New Zealand listeners may not sound so comfortable to the English ear.
The Radio New Zealand commentary is provided principally for New Zealand listeners, and anyone listening overseas is a guest of that transmission.
Secondly, Mr Dickinson implies that the Wellington ‘cameraman’ incident involving Micky Stewart was entirely the result of a lack of judgement by TVNZ .
Their coverage of an injured player was very much in keeping with live sports coverage the world over, and players realise that media exposure they receive as Test cricketers may not always be positive.
What is incontestable is that Mr Stewart's conduct during the whole affair was entirely unbecoming of a representative of a national sports, and his claim that the TVNZ cameraman was obstructing the removal of David Lawrence from the field of play was proved by television evidence to be false.
While I accept that the incident took place in the ‘heat of the moment’, a swift apology from Mr. Stewart would have defused a tense situation instead of a letter expressing ‘regret’ belatedly sent to TVNZ .
Yorkshiremen Don Mosey (left) and Fred Trueman demonstrate their own culture, using the microphone as a plate whilst commentating.
Spots Before Your Eyes
IN RESPONSE to S.W. Tracey's letter,Standing on the Spot , in the March issue, umpires are not all the same height.
I am 6ft 2ins and stand much further back than his recommended distance of five feet, and from approximately 1- to 12 feet do not ‘require an exaggerated upward movement of the head’.
Nor do the majority of umpires when having found a satisfactory distance at which to stand.
Obviously there are occasions in which we are asked to reposition ourselves and this is covered by the laws.
Does the honorary scorer appreciate that on an average sized square ‘a permanent spot at square leg’ would involve literally dozens of ‘spots’, only four of which would relate to the pitch in use, unless the suggestion is for removable plastic markers positioned for each game, but those wouldn't be permanent would they?
Despite the reported remarks ‘to scorer colleagues…it must be very difficult to give a decision so far out’, it isn't; we stand at a distance from which we can see.
Constant Flashing
HAVING been among those fortunate enough to be in Australia for the World Cup — and most enjoyable it was — there was one aspect of the television coverage which was extremely irritating.
This was the constant flashing on the screen of statistics of various kinds.
The figures were laboriously commented upon by the commentators and detracted from one's concentration on the game.
Something similar has started appearing on British television, so if they have to be shown surely the details could be kept to a minimum and shown for the shortest possible time.
In Australia the television coverage was also marred by advertisements at the end of each over.
Declarations
REGARDING Mr E.W. Swanton's interesting piece on A.E.J. Collins (Watching Brief , April issue) may I be permitted to put the question of declarations into perspective.
Declarations did not come in until 1889, so that Stoddart's innings was three years before, and that of Collins 10 years after.
The records of the Clifton Club (for Whom Collins played the occasional game) show four instances of a side batting throughout the period of play.
No unpleasantness seems to have been caused, but in one instance the opposition went home giving their names for the records.
The Overseas Debate
I HAVE been commissioned to write a history of overseas players in English cricket.
The book will concentrate on the period since the mid 1960s during which foreign stars have become a fixture in every county and many league teams.
I am interested in readers' experiences of this phenomenon, their encounters with the players and the stories that have grown up around some of the longer serving recruits.
I am particularly keen to learn whether readers believe the employment of these cricketers has benefited the English game at domestic and national level.
Photographic and other material submitted by readers will be returned as soon as possible and any information used in the book will, of course, be duly credited.
Reward from a sponsor for overseas players' jobs well done:(left to right) Peter Kirsten of Derbyshire and Gloucester's Zaheer Abbas and Mike Proctor.
Fairer Average
IN the recent World Cup, in changing the rules concerning the weather-affected matches, a system which unjustly penalises the side batting second was substituted for one which was usually disadvantageous to the side batting first.
The justification for the change was founded on the need to provide an exciting finish for the television audience rather than the interests of cricket of the fairness of the result.
Leaving aside the farce of the England v South Africa semifinal, where the complete lack of basic common sense applied would probably not have been salvaged by any rules, surely a fairer solution is to use an average of the target under the old and new systems.
As an example consider the round-robin England v South Africa game, where South Africa scored 236 from 50 overs at 4.72 per over.
Having made 62 from 12 overs, England lost nine overs to rain and required 175 off 38 overs, a rate of 4.61.
Under the old rules England's revised objective would have been 194 off 41 overs (41 × 4.72), requiring a further 132 from 29 overs at 4.55 — not only less than 4.61 but having to be maintained for fewer overs.
With the new system, the target was reduced by just 11 runs, implying a rate of 5.65 in getting 164 in 29 overs, by far the fastest rate of the match.
Under the proposed mean average of 132 and 164 the target would be 148 from 29 overs, a rate of 5.10.
This is fairer as it allows for the fact that fewer overs remain in which the chasing team can attack, but does not set a rate out of proportion with the course of the match up to the time of the stoppage.
CLUB NEWS
Foresters New President
PHILIP Whitcombe has succeeded Colonel N.J. Wilson as PRESIDENT OF THE Free Foresters.
P.A. Whitcombe played for Winchester, Oxford University, Middlesex and the Gentlemen, and in 1948 he headed the University's first-class bowling averages, taking 38 wickets at an average of 13.16.
Colonel John Wilson has given the club immense service, having been President for the last 10 years immediately following 23 years as Match Secretary.
‘Gift of Life’ Quiz
AFICIONADOS of the BBC's Test Match Trivia programme will soon have a chance to pit their wits in a contest of similar format.
Over 500 cricket clubs from 32 counties are being invited to enter a knockout competition, commencing in September and progressing through six rounds, quarter and semi-final stages to a grand final to be held at Lord's Cricket Ground in April 1993 and chaired by Brian Johnston — ably assisted by Tim Rice and Bill Franklyn as team captains.
The first four rounds are designed to produce 32 prize-winning county champions, who will then go forward to the national rounds.
The scheme is the inspiration of David Furnell, who has close connections with Hemel Hempstead CC and whose company's sponsorship of the Hertfordshire League's knockout competition, the Furnell Transport Cup, is in its seventh year.
Through his involvement with Round Table David Furnell has been associated with the Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust for the past 12 years, and six months ago was appointed National Events Manager.
The charity was started by Shirley Nolan, the mother of Anthony, in 1973 when it was realised that his life threatening disease could be helped by a bone marrow transfer — if a match could be found.
Because there was no register of potential donors at that time, no match was found and Anthony died at the age of seven.
In 1991 the register of potential donors in the UK stands at 160,000 — a remarkable achievement.
Nevertheless, the Trust is always looking to increase the register as the larger the number of donors, the better the chance of a successful match and transplant operation.
It is hoped that cricket clubs will use the competition as a social evening to raise funds, to be shared between themselves and the charity.
Cricket-based questions within the quiz will be sourced from information contained in The Cricketer , and as the competition progresses we shall be giving annual subscriptions to the magazine to winners of the various stages.
THE GUNN & MOORE/CRICKETER AWARD
John Carr of Radlett CC, who has rejoined Middlesex since becoming the 1991 season's winner, is the recipient of $200 worth of equipment, being presented with a bat by Richard Hutton (far right).
14-year old Radlett Colts cricketer, Andrew Homan, who will be a beneficiary of the award to the club of £300 worth of equipment is presented with a bat by Peter Johnson of Gunn & Moore (far left).
Irish Summer
FIFTEEN days cricket loom up for the Irish team in the coming summer.
Middlesex come to Malahide, near Dublin, in early June for two days.
A week later it is off to Dundee (for the first time since 1924) for the annual three-day joust against Scotland with the wins equal at nine each in the series that started in 1888.
There will be a hurried return to Dublin two days later for the NatWest match against Durham, the latter's first in this competition as a first-class county.
MCC come to Downpatrick in early July for three days.
Then comes one of the two innovations of 1992.
England's amateurs come to Eglinton and Coleraine in North West Ireland for two limited-overs matches.
Ireland had hoped for a three-day match but this was not possible.
College Park, Dublin University's lovely ground, has been much improved and will stage the three-day match against Wales in late July.
It will be the 50th Irish match at this venue since the first in 1868.
Somerset's visit to Orneau, Belfast in mid-August will then reduce to only two the counties that have never played Ireland.
It is to be hoped that Essex and Kent will soon assist in further reduction!.
The Victorian brick reservoir, built in 1856, upon which stands the Putney home ground of the Metropolitan Water Board, Western Area CC.
The club is having to play all its fixtures away from home for the second successive season because a new roof is being built at a cost of £1.3million.
Renovations started in November 1990, and although work is nearing completion, the pitch is unlikely to be fit for play before the end of the season.
Bob Harragan's WELSH RAREBITS
The South Wales Cricket Association XI came within a raindrop of becoming the first British team to meet South Africa during their tour of Australia and New Zealand.
They were due to meet a Bradman XI at Bowral the day after South Africa were playing there in a World Cup warm-up match.
When the first game was washed out as well.
The highlight of the tour in which the Welsh team won five games out of six in Australia, but lost four out of four in New Zealand, was 110 by young Glamorgan batsman David Hemp against Marly in Sydney.
Former world snooker champion Terry Griffiths , who plays for the South Wales CA Division Five side Burry Port , is spearheading a campaign for a new sports stadium in the town.
The complex, which would be built on the site of the recently demolished Carmarthen Bay power station, would provide facilities for cricket, soccer, bowls and badminton.
CRICKET OUTPOSTS
The Leewards: MCC's ISLAND HOP John Barclay
FOURTEEN cricketers of considerable first-class experience formed MCC's team to tour the Leeward Islands for three weeks at the end of February, captained by Nigel Briers and managed by this correspondent.
The main purpose was to introduce to the smaller islands some strong, competitive cricket that would help them to raise their playing standards further and improve their facilities.
The schedule was hectic.
Seven tiny islands, including the United States and British Virgins, were visited, and six one-day matches of 50 overs each and two three-day ‘first-class’ matches against the Leewards were played.
This was a challenging task even for an accomplished side which had little time to acclimatise or practise.
We managed only one practice session, on a school playing field in St Thomas which we shared with a tense local football match.
It was surprising to see two sports being played side by side in such harmony despite some savage tackling at short extra-cover.
It was to hot for practising anyway and despite our limited preparations we won both matches in St Thomas and Tortoal quite comfortably.
The spinners — Maru, Cook and Donelan — did most of the damage, and in Tortola we were guided to victory by the calm authority of Fordham who steered us through potentially troubled waters.
We were the first British team ever to play in St Thomas and Tortoal; in Anguilla we made history again because we played the first ever ‘first-class’ in England but it certainly will in Anguilla!
Before the match we all looked quizzically at the pitch.
It was grassless, shiny as though polished, and solid.
But how would it play?
Had it been watered?
Would it have pace?
What about the bounce?
Would it take spin?
What sort of team did they have?
Who should we leave out of our side/ What about the toss?
Who would ever want to be a captain?
But Nigel Briers acquitted himself very well, won the toss and elected to field.
Halfway through the second day we got our chance to bat after bowling 132 scalding overs.
Confronted with a score of 350 we then had to contend with their venomous opening attack of Vaughan ‘Hungry’ Walsh (very fast) and John ‘Dentist’Maynard (quite fast), who were formidable by any standards.
MCC's batting showed courage and initiative with brave contributions from Fordham, Briers, Ward, who was the most dashing, Moores, Donelan and Lefebvre — in fact just about everybody who ventured out to bat.
The match was thus stubbornly and honourably drawn.
Having survived ten days in the Caribbean unbeaten and relatively unscathed, in St Kitts we came down to earth with a large thump and were soundly thrashed by the island's powerful side, which contained several hard hitting batsmen.
This was not one of MCC's more glorious days.
Fortunately, we had no time to feel sorry for ourselves because an early morning ferry journey took us to Nevis where we played the current Leeward Island champions.
To our amazement they made a complete hash of their batting and to our even greater surprise were totally baffled by Cowdrey's rich cocktail of medium pace.
He created havoc and caused many long faces amongst the island's hierarchy by taking six for 16 in 6 overs.
Their total of 134 was overhauled without much trouble and pride was restored.
We travelled to Antigua full of confidence again but were greeted by heavy rain.
The Recreation Ground was saturated but having given up hope the hot sun came out, covers were unravelled and a suspiciously soft pitch was revealed.
‘Oh help’, we thought to a man, but we had to play.
The umpires said so.
We lost the toss in a 30-over contest and spent an undignified two hours being peppered by Antigua's formidable array of fast bowlers on a ‘flying’(if you know what I mean).
Balls fizzed into ribs and past noses (just) which had earlier spent a happier morning in the sun on the beach.
We didn't make many runs despite Ward's gallantry and lost easily.
We quickly bounced back in Montserrat, yet another heavenly island.
Cowdrey once more dominated the one-day game.
His batting was spectacular and the success of his bowling was a mystery to both teams.
He mesmerized the opposition with his pace — quite slow at times.
A jolly smile, I think, disguised the mean nature of a ruthless campaigner!
Anyway, for whatever reason, he got them out and we won the match.
The final three-day match against the full  Leewards side was a slight disappointment.
Although rain ruled out any real chance of a positive result on the last day the Leewards batsmen never batted with enough urgency having established a first innings lead.
MCC also squandered the marvellous start provided by Fordham and Briers on the first day and so relinquished the initiative.
Thereafter only Ward on the final afternoon played with any real confidence and it was fitting that he should score the only century of the tour just before the end of the match.
Portugal MEN O' CRICKET Alf Gover
IN recent years I have made several trips to Portugal's Algarve coast and on my last visit in January this year was presented with a booklet entitled ‘Cricket in Portugal’.
It makes fascinating reading, commencing with the work of British businessmen who pioneered the game in their adopted country.
The first recorded game took place as far back as 1851 with a match between Oporton and Lisbon.
Further games between the two sides took place between 1866 and 1870.
Oporton was founded in 1861 and Lisbon in 1871.
It is interesting to note that several Portuguese nationals were included in the Lisbon membership list.
In 1871 employees of the Eastern Telegraph Co. started their own club naming it Carcelvos CC.
The three clubs played against each other with the season's fixtures being augmented with games against the Royal Navy ships when paying courtesy calls.
In 1902 Lisboa CC was formed and in common with other cricket clubs played soccer in the off season.
It is recorded that they began by purchasing a second hand soccer ball from Lisbon CC.
Lisboa went on to become the leading soccer club of the day and eventually changed its name to Benfica, the club renowned today in world soccer.
Lisbon purchased a new ground and in 1924 built a first-class pavilion as visiting sides started coming over from the UK.
The Cryptics went regularly, and, in subsequent years up to the outbreak of the 1939 war, other first-class club sides were brought by Leveson Gower and P.G.H. Fender.
After the war many other sides enjoyed Portuguese hospitality; The Law Society, Eton Ramblers, Dorset Rangers, British Airways, The Frogs, Tom Pierce's Wine Trade XI (sic,) and Rhodesian Ridgebacks were among the clubs making annual visits.
In 1988 the Lisbon club organised a six-a-side tournament played under floodlights and cricket now spread to the Algarve with floodlit six-a-side matches at the Rock Gardens Club.
The Barrington Sports Centre in the Algarve laid down a first-class pitch and I arranged a game for the Lord's Taverners against a Portuguese Invitation XI to open up the ground.
The two-day game realised £13,000.
Middlesex in the last two years have carried out their preseason training at the centre.
Menorca THE SPANISH MAIN Christopher Berriman
FOUNDED in 1985, the Menorcan Cricket Club has become one of the Mediterranean's most progressive cricketing outposts.
The club is run by a group of 40 dedicated ex-patriots from all walks of life, including plumbers, teachers, restaurateurs and businessmen, whose love of the game has inspired them to establish a well-organised and competitive club.
Its main aim is to stimulate the growth of cricket amongst both the ex-patriot and local Spanish communities.
The club is affiliated to the Assocacion Espanola de Cricket, founded in 1987, whose members include, amongst others, Madrid CC, Barcelona CC, and Seville CC, and eventually hopes to persuade the Spanish government to recognise cricket as an ‘official’ sport, bringing much need grant-aid.
Spanish cricket wishes to join the ICC, and their application for affiliate membership was submitted in October 1991, supported by Zimbabwe, Argentina, Denmark and USA, for consideration at the July 1992 meeting.
The history of cricket in Menorca is closely linked with the island's colonial past.
Menorca's commanding Mediterranean location and natural harbours encouraged the British to establish military bases on the island during the 18th and 19th centuries.
Not only did the occupiers introduce gin to the island, which remains one of the locals' most popular drinks, but in 1813 cricket was recorded as having been first played in Menorca by the surgeon of HMS Scipo — a match which received the patronage of Admiral Lord St Vincent, the Commander in Chief of the British Mediterranean Fleet.
When the British left the island, unlike the taste for gin, cricket left with them.
Yet, as the British returned to Menorca as holiday-makers and emigrants during the 20th century, cricket returned with them.
Following the foundation of Madrid CC in 1975, Barcelona CC in 1982, the Costa Del Sol CC and the Menorcan CC were established in 1985
Initially, the club's games were held on non-grassed football pitches and were played against opposition sides comprised mainly of visiting holiday-makers.
The fine weather enjoyed by the island ensures that cricket is played all year round.
Yet, without a ground and adequate pitch, the sport was unlikely to flourish.
The popularity of organised tours visiting the Balearics and the interest of the locals has encouraged the club to expand.
As a result of the growing interest in cricket, the inaugural Inter-Island Balearic Championship was held in Mallorca and saw Menorca triumph.
The current Menorcan side includes local Spanish players, whose numbers are rising.
Furthermore, Paul Downton, the former England and Middlesex wicket-keeper, has recently become an honorary member.
The potential for growth has become clear.
With this in mind, the Menorcan CC has acquired and is developing its own ground.
16,000 square metres of agricultural land have been purchased at a cost of 3,000,000 ptas (c. £15,000).
Members have spent many back-breaking  hours painstakingly clearing the site of an estimated one million stones and boulders.
Plans have been prepared by a local architect for a clubhouse, traditional pavilion and all-weather nets.
The ground will be the first all-grassed cricketing venue in Spain, and both the installation of an irrigation system and the seeding of the site have been carried out by the members themselves.
Despite the efforts of hordes of gluttonous ants who dined on much of the grass seed, the first game on the first Spanish cricket ground was played there on Saturday, January 11 and the club hosted the Inter-Island Balearic Championships over the first weekend of May.
The ground is delightful and has the potential to become a Mediterranean cricketing haven, retaining much of the charm associated with the typical English village ground, but not, of course, its weather.
The project has been somewhat hindered by financial restraints and much remains to be done.
The club relies solely on the support of members and friends for its funds, although sponsorship has been obtained from Sa Nostra, the premier Savings Bank in the Balearics.
As well as support from Prime Minister John Major, a donation of £750 has just been received from that other MCC, in St John's Wood.
Yet further help is required and the club has introduced a life membership scheme, to complement the corporate and business schemes designed to raise much-needed funds.
The dedicated effort of the members is creating an enchanting base from which Spanish cricket will flourish.
Not only does the Menorcan CC hope to encourage the development of cricket in the Balearics, but looks forward to welcoming British touring sides to the island in the near future.
ROUND THE WORLD
West Indies: ADAMS & BENJAMIN STAKE THEIR CLAIM Tony Cozier
WITH West Indies cricket in a period of transition, the 1992 season carried added significance.
In the absence of a full Test tour, public attention was focused on the World Cup but the Red Stripe Cup and the England A team tour, the first of its kind to the Caribbean, offered chances to those aspiring to replace the greats who have now gone into retirement.
The World Cup limited the domestic appearances of the leading players so that an unusually high number of 103 turned out for the six first-class teams.
Several advanced their claims and two, the Jamaican left-hander Jimmy Adams and the Leeward Islands fast bowler, Kenneth Benjamin, earned places for themselves in the West Indies team for the solitary Test against South Africa that ended the season.
Others in their early 20s will obviously feature in the selectors' deliberations for the full tour of Australia, starting in November, that marks the beginning of a new era for West Indies more appropriately than the proliferation of one-day tournaments to which Richie Richardson's reshaped team has been almost exclusively confined.
Adams, a naturally gifted ball player who has batted, bowled spin and kept wicket for Jamaica, was earmarked as a future Test player since chosen on the B tour to Zimbabwe in 1986 aged 18.
He has been given every chance to develop, for the West Indies youth team's tour of Australia in 1988, another trip to Zimbabwe in 1989 and every representative President's XI or Under-23s going in the Caribbean against touring teams.
With a temperament and technique reminiscent of Larry Gomes, who was such a valuable member of the West Indies middle-order in the early 1980s, Adams showed he was indisputably ready for his promotion to the highest level with three centuries in five Red Stripe Cup matches and a Jamaica record of 586 runs in the tournament (average 97.66).
He added another century in the one day Geddes Grant Shield and, if his form declined against England A, he emphasised his credentials in his debut Test against South Africa.
He and another left-hander, the more dashing 21-year-old Robert Samuels, provided Jamaica with the batting stability they have so often lacked and captain Courtney Walsh gave them the bowling penetration with a tournament record 36 wickets at 11.30 each that combined to regain the Cup for Jamaica from Barbados, their third success in the last five seasons.
Kenneth Benjamin claims a stump following West Indies' victory, in the Test match against South Africa.
Samuels was with Adams on the 1988 youth tour of Australia and his Cup returns of 426 runs at 47.33 earned him a place in the West Indies team for the series against England A as opening batsman.
His attitude is aggressive, perhaps too much so for his own good, but his consistency this season was an encouraging sign for selectors searching for batsmen of the future.
So, too, was the form of Roland Holder.
The 24-year-old Barbadian captain has followed a similar path to Adams and Samuels, through the West Indies youth team for whom he first appeared in 1985, against Young England (including Philip DeFreitas and Phil Tufnel) and into the full Barbados team at 18.
He had not fulfilled early expectations until this year with 376 runs at 41.77 in the Cup and heading the averages against England A at 42.75.
A well organised right-hander, he, too, seems ready to advance to higher things.
As usual, pace dominated the bowling, both in the Cup and in the A team series, and it was only fitting that Kenneth Benjamin should have been the latest addition to the Test attack.
His two other Christian names are Charlie Griffith and, if he lacks the sheer hostility of the feared barbadian of the 1960s, he does have his strength and stamina.
His 17 wickets in the three matches against England A were the most by a West Indian bowler and were gained through persistence of line and length.
Linden Joseph, the lithe Guyanese who spent a disappointing season with Hampshire in 1990, might well have won Test selection as well but injury, consistently his nemesis, struck him down during the A series.
He was the second highest wicket-taker in the Red Stripe Cup with 23 (at 17.61) in the five matches and surprised the Englishmen with his lively pace and out-swing.
At 23, fitness seems the only barrier between him and a Test career.
The exit of Jeffrey Dujon, who filled such a pivotal position as a high-class number seven batsman and wicket-keeper for 10 years, has thrown the balance of the team out of joint, as was obvious in the World Cup and in the Test against South Africa a problem likely to send the selectors searching for a ‘keeper ’who can contribute with the bat as well.
Junior Murray could be their man.
Dedicated work in the nets resulted in such an improvement in his batting that he was among the top five scorers in the Cup with 383 runs at 47.87, including his maiden century against the Leewards, Curtly Ambrose et al .
He followed this with two good 40s against England A to add to his agile if not entirely flawless ‘keeping ’.
Although two other Murrays, the unrelated Deryck of Trinidad and David of Barbados, have kept wicket for the West Indies no one from Grenada has yet earned a Test place.
That moment may not be far away.
Sri Lanka: DROUGHT TO END Mahinda Wijesinghe
THE last Test match played in Sri Lanka was five years ago, when the New Zealanders aborted their three Test tour after playing just one Test due to civil unrest in the country.
From April 1987 to now seems a long time, but the barren spell seems over.
Beginning in the first week in August, Sri Lankan fans will, in the course of six months, see Australia, New Zealand and England perform here.
With this news, even the devastating drought in the country appears secondary.
The Australians will be here in mid-August to play three Tests and three one-dayers.
The Kiwis will follow with a similar itinerary between November and December, while England are expected to make a short tour in January 1993, hopefully for two Tests and a couple of One-day Internationals, on their way to India.
Secretary of the SL Board, Neil Perera, states: ‘We have told the TCCB specifically that we are not interested in one-off Test matches and they have said they would reply shortly’.
Meanwhile an Under-19 ram will also take wing to England this summer under the management of former Sri Lanka Test skipper Bandula Warnapura.
Trials are presently on for selections.
The itinerary for the Australia squad of 13, to be led by Allan Border, is:
Pakistan: RAMADAN'S VALENTINES Z.H. Syed
PAKISTAN'S victory at Melbourne against England in the World Cup final produced unbelievable scenes of happiness and jubilation all over the country.
Despite the fact that the victory came during the fasting month of Ramadan, tons of sweets were distributed by people from all walks of life starting with school children and ending with industrial tycoons.
In fact Pakistan's triumph was like an Eid, the religious festival which Muslims celebrate with great fervour at the conclusion of Ramadan.
Even the decoits in the interior of Sind who had been closely following Pakistan's victory march in their hide-outs expressed their joy by firing their weapons in the air without fear of being discovered.
In two separate instances, at least four persons were reported to have been killed Peshawar and Karachi after being hit by stray bullets as a result of aerial firing by trigger happy individuals.
As expected the reception given to the Pakistan team on its return was unprecedented.
In Lahore.
the team was hoisted onto open trucks which took five hours to crawl the three mile distance from Lahore Airport to the   Fortress Stadium with thousands and thousands of fans running alongside the procession.
Similarly, every city where the team went tried to tried to outdo the others in showering their generosity and their affection on the players resulting in a bonanza for the team and Imran's cancer hospital.
Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif, while holding a reception in the team's honour at Islamabad, urged the entire nation to follow the disciplined dedication of the cricketers in all walks of life.
State President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, who is also the patron-in-chief of the Board of Control for Cricket in Pakistan, in awarding gold medals said, ‘Cricket, to borrow someone's words, is a subcontinental game accidentally invented by the British!
It is one of the several subcultures we learned from our colonial teachers.
We may have made a mess of most of them, including parliamentary democracy, but the cricket culture we have successfully assimilated and, as Graham Gooch may tell you, perfected.
That explains why for six months in a year we watch cricket and for the next six talk about it.
And now that we have snatched trendy World Cup in Waterford crystal from under the very proper nose of the Englishmen, we have won an additional right to talk about it.
And the world has to listen.
After all, we are the new champs and talking is what we do best, next to playing cricket!
(You may reverse the order if you wish!)’
Javed Miandad receiving from Prime Minister Muhammad Nawaz Sharif documents entitling him to a 660 sq.
yd. plot of land in Islamabad, having a market value of three million rupees (£67,500), and a cheque for 200,000 rupees.
South Africa: LIFE WITH THE LIONS Michael Owen-Smith
EDDIE BARLOW is on the move again!
The Springbok all-rounder of the 1960s and 1970s has been appointed coach of Transvaal in what can be seen as a determined bid by the lions of the north to regain their position as the top dogs of South African domestic cricket.
Barlow, who helped Freed State win the Nissan Shield for the first time during the past season, has taken up his appointment in time to lead Transvaal in partnership with captain Jimmy Cook on the short tour of England in July.
The new Barlow era in the Transvaal looks like coinciding with the official end of Clive Rice's Transvaal career.
It is no secret that there was great division among Transvaal administrators in releasing Rice from his contract to enable him to join the Channel 9 TV commentary team for the World Cup that clashed with the latter stages of the South African season.
At that stage Transvaal were still in the running for the night series trophy and his presence would obviously have made a difference.
In the end, the night series final was played between Eastern Province and Western Province at the Wanderers Stadium as neither Port Elizabeth nor Cape Town was able to provide a venue.
Floodlight pylons have had to be taken down at St George's Park and Newlands as part of the crash building programme to have the new stands ready for next season's Indian tour in November.
Not surprisingly, the stars of the night series final were the player who had come back from the World Cup.
Both Kepler Wessels and Adrian Kuiper, the respective captains, scored centuries as did Western Province opener Terence Lazard while World Cup squad batsman Mark Rushmere was also in the runs.
The match produced nearly 500 runs for the loss of six wickets in 90 overs under the most idyllic batting conditions possible and must have left Jimmy Cook wondering why the local groundsman could not produce such a benign batting strip for Transvaal's home matches as well.
Mark Rushmere: runs at night for Eastern Province.
Cook has every intention of getting back into the South African team next season although he will not find it easy following the success of Andrew Hudson at the World Cup.
Nevertheless he is one of the few batsmen available to South Africa who has a proven record of being able to put big hundreds together and this is a prime requirement for Test match cricket.
Cook said that if he did not make the South African team he would seriously consider a return to county cricket.
South Africa has such a congested international itinerary over the next few season that there is going to be little opportunity for this country's top players to even think in terms of county contracts.
Cook has incidentally been given a testimonial season by Transvaal for his outstanding services over a long period.
The South African domestic season thus finished with Eastern Province winning the Castle Cup (four-Day and the night series (45 overs), and Free State the Nissan Shield (55 overs), Eastern Province were the beaten finalists in the latter competition and could thus justifiably regard themselves as South Africa's champion team.
Like Transvaal, Eastern Province will be touring England later this year and have also been invited to the Scarborough Festival.
New Zealand: GOLDEN OLDIES Christopher Bazalgette
THE largest international cricket festival was played in Christchurch, New Zealand in March.
Two thousand people representing 86 teams from all over the world gathered together for a week's fun, friendship and fraternity.
Air New Zealand, creators and sponsors of the event, could easily adopt the motto ‘To make dreams, come true’, for the Fifth Golden Oldies was about dreams and such was the organisation by Clarrie Anderson and his team that the whole week went off without a hitch.
Golden Oldies are cricketers over 40 years of age and even if the legs don't run so fast, standards are still high.
Dreams came true in many ways; some made strokes which had not been played for the last 20 years, others took catches and some ran threes.
But to see the delight on the players' faces on their return to the headquarters marquee after each day's match for a glass or two of DB export and sumptuous food made for a highly successful occasion.
Every festival attracts yesterday's stars.
Bert Sutcliffe, New Zealand's prolific left-hander, led the Auckland Cricket Society, and Christchurch Old Boys were represented by Sir Richard Hadlee, together with his father Walter and brothers Wayne and Barry.
From Australia there was Ron Archer, Sam Trimble and Keith Ziebele while the English contingent included Alan Burridge, Alan Oakman and Peter Graves, the English golden Oldies organiser, and Dennis Carlstein, the former manager of south Africa, played for the Hertfordshire Gents.
The other English teams were Sussex Goldies, Derbyshire Friars, Brobdingnagarians and Downsmen Tofts.
The Golden Oldies' ideal is simple; each team plays three matches, there are no prizes, just good sportsmanship, the will to win very evident but more so the honour to participate, and after the game a drink with the opposition.
An example of this attitude Chris Kissling, who was bowling for Christchurch Old Boys, when he was no-balled several times in one over for his rear foot landing wide of the return crease.
When the over ended he took the umpire aside and explained ‘I have two artificial hips and I do not really know where my feet are going to land’— he was given a special Man of the Match award.
This typifies the ideals and sportsmanship of Golden Oldies cricket.
Before the final curtain some teams had registered and paid their deposit for the 1994 tournament to be held in Birmingham, preparations for which are already well under way.
Lord Mayor Bill Turner and Assistant Director of Public Relations Trevor Hines have expressed particular enthusiasm, and believe Birmingham's recent development will make the city an ideal venue.
The organising committee is highly professional and lends ability and experience to the planning of such an event.
The President is former MP and Minister of Sport Denis Howell and with him is Malcolm Willcox of the Midlands Club Cricket Conference, Warwickshire Chairman of Cricket Dennis Amiss and Alan Oakman.
The ground operator Gullivers Sports Travel will be organising accommodation, transport and social functions under the direction of John Davison.
See the advertisement (opposite) for further information .
1 BOOKS
THE ILLUSTRATED HISTORY OF COUNTY by Eric Midwinter (Kingswood Press in association with Bass Brewers, £17.99)
MUCH of the most thought provoking cricket writing over the years has been produced by authors whose major interests lie outside cricket.
In this, his fifth cricket book, Eric Midwinter, social historian and social policy analyst, has undertaken a review of the development of county cricket in the past 200 years.
Up to the mid-nineteenth century, the game was not formalized and consisted largely of cricket in the counties rather than county cricket as we now know it.
The formation of properly constituted county clubs, eventually leading to a county championship structure, has led Dr Midwinter to place these developments firmly in the context of the social changes then taking place.
(C.L.R. James would have approved!)
The Industrial Revolution and especially spread of the railways which enabled large numbers to migrate from country to town, meant that many more people were ‘going out on pleasure bent’.
County cricket in its early days appealed to both middle and working classes, many of whom enjoyed what we would now call ‘flexi-time’.
By 1914, the County Championship had reached a more or less permanent format and was ‘preserved in aspic’ during the First World War.
Between the wars, there was little change but county club finances were often sorely stretched and some of the less popular counties had to rely on local patrons for help.
The amateur cricketer still played a significant role in the game.
The changes since 1946 are thoroughly examined — the introduction of limited-over games, the disappearance of the amateur, the employment of overseas players — and the author does not hesitate to express his own views on some of the latest developments.
‘There is’, he writes ‘even a laughable suggestion that the county programme should be cut to 16 four-day games’.
‘A sledgehammer to crack the nut of finding…
Test players’, he says.
This first part of a scholarly and sometimes challenging book contains plenty to set the pavilions buzzing with discussion.
Part Two consists of an appraisal of each of the 17 counties — Durham are still too young to warrant more than a mention.
The histories of the counties are examined briefly but thoroughly, with comment on all the leading players.
Eric Midwinter also chooses his ‘best XI’ from each county, generally excluding modern overseas signings.
A statistical Part Three rounds off a well-presented book which includes over 160 photographs, a number in colour.
A few snicks have evaded the proof-reader's gloves; it is Arnold not Arthur Long and the Gunn who figured in Nottinghamshire's glory years towards the end of last century was not George but uncle William.
Grahame Booker 
GRAHAM GOOCH — THE BIOGRAPHY by Ivo Tennant (Witherby, £15.99)
AS HE EMBARKS upon what may well be his last Test series as England captain, and his zenith surely reached, one wonders why, apart from various ghost-written ‘autobiographies’.
no one until now has produced a biography of Graham Gooch.
Of all contemporary cricketers, there can surely be no more appropriate or eligible a subject.
The worthiest ‘biographees’ of course, are usually those whose achievement goes beyond the bounds of playing cricket, and in this respect Ivo Tennant's last book,The Cowdreys , was an excellent appraisal of an ideal subject.
Gooch's story is also a complex one, with the South African affair and its long-running repercussions, the perennial dilemma between touring and fulfilling family commitments, and the traumas and triumphs of his captaincy of Essex and England; this is more than an account of his Trojan feats on the field.
In the first two chapters, entitled ‘Essex Man?’ and ‘Leytonstone Boy’, inevitable comparison is made with Simon Heffer's semi-fictitious brute, and Gooch's origins are traced to the East End council flat where he grew up.
Indeed the first part of the book is by far the more revealing since his recent conquests are so much more celebrated than are the tales of his friendship form an early age with John Emburey, his innings of 87 at the age of 18 for the Ilford 1stXI against Trevor Bailey's Westcliff and his early days with Essex when he would arrive at 2nd XI matches on a moped, his cricket bag strapped to his back.
‘Leytonstone Boy’: Graham Gooch pictured early on in his now illustrious career.
Several themes recur throughout the book, grit and courage, an inexplicable sense of insecurity, a solemnity which Gooch has cultivated almost consciously as an image, and a love of playing for his county which the author suggests is not often seen elsewhere in county cricket (although one or two from Yorkshire might disagree).
Gooch's biography has been a long time coming but Ivo Tennant has been thorough in his survey of hitherto uncharted waters, and the wait has been worthwhile.
James Nicholson 
JACK IN THE BOX by Jack Bannister (Macdonald Queen Anne Press, £14.99)
LITTLE of the sweaty-palmed tension and frantic chaos of the BBC television commentary box is relayed to the viewers, but Jack Bannister provides a revealing insight into the mechanics of the box, using as his vehicle last summer's keenly contested Test series.
This is a book which, like the BBC itself, informs, educates and entertains.
Much of the humour derives from slips of the tongue, an occupational hazard.
Ray Illingworth refers to ‘Hall and Griffith coming out of the trees’ in an ambiguous reference to the inadequate sightscreens at Headingley in the '60s, although the ultimate faux pas was Tony Lewis’ill-timed use of the fourletter word when, unbeknown to him, he was still on air.
Topics of debate from the series are thoroughly discussed — slow over-rates and appropriated penalties, the Lord's ridge, and Ian Wooldridge's scurrilous criticism in the Daily Mail of Geoffrey Boycott's commentary.
But perhaps the most provocative comments pertain to an incident during the Oval Test in which umpire John Holder confronted Graham Gooch, with the ball ‘having been apparently artificially roughened’.
On the technical side, arguments include the ethics of analysing umpires' decisions, the pros and cons of double-ended coverage and the problems of cutting short a broadcast at a crucial stage in order to accommodate a news bulletin or racing from Ascot.
Bannister is candid in his views, vivid and thorough in his description, generous and perceptive in his praise of his colleagues and astute in his own observations.
It is a recipe which makes for a very good read.
James Nicholson 
ACSSI CRICKET YEARBOOK 1990–91 Edited and compiled by Anandji Dossa and Mohandas Menon.
(Available from Martin Wood Cricket Books,
THE Association of Cricket Statisticians and Scorers of India has compiled its yearly bible of facts, figures, records, tables, scorecards, lists, quirks and curiosities scrutinizing the Indian season in microscopic detail, and leaving no statistical stone unturned.
There is an overview of Indian cricket from the Asia Cup and the Irani, Deodhar, Duleep, Ranji and Willis Trophies to Test matches and One-Day Internationals, as well as an overflowing records section that will busy the statisticians for hours.
The presentation of the annual however is disappointing.
The colour photographs are of very poor quality and the text is printed on rather scruffy lilac paper, but it gives a thorough account of the 1990–91 season, and is an essential point of reference and source of knowledge for any buff of Indian cricket.
James Nicholson 
A TALE OF TWO COUNTIES by Nico Craven 
NICO CRAVEN'S 25th book draws refreshingly away from all that is tiresome or mundane about cricket, and tells instead of ladies playing bowls on an adjacent green, and of the hills and hollyhocks at Abergavenny.
Nor is Craven's reminiscence confined to his considerable experiences of watching his beloved Gloucestershire, although the tone of the book as a whole laments the county's continued failure to win the County Championship, and as a supporter of Sussex one sympathizes.
He tells with equal warmth and fondness of wandering club cricket in the Cotswolds, of bygone battles between those rugby Titans of the South West, Gloucester and Bath, and of the celebrated day in ‘77 when Somerset beat the Australians.
It is the last in a fine series says the author, ‘until Gloucestershire win that damned elusive Championship’.
Who knows how long we shall have to wait?
James Nicholson BY HIS own admission, Kapil Dev has ‘lifted’ chunks of a previous autobiography for inclusion in this one.
‘The World of Kapil Dev’ is therefore not very original, nor is it particularly fluent.
Kapil is clearly more at home with a bat or a ball in his hand than with a pen.
‘I could belt a ball real hard’ he says.
After a rather colloquial account of his rise to the Indian Test team and his heroics since, there follows an extensive gallery of colour photographs to illustrate his story.
It is not, however, a book which does justice to international cricket's leading wicket-taker in one-day competition.
James Nicholson.
THE WORLD OF KAPIL DEV by Kapil Dev (Published by UBSPD)
THE JOURNAL OF THE CRICKET SOCIETY-SPRING 1992 VOL. 15 NO.4 Edited by Clive Porter (available from Ardenlee)
THE Cricket Society continues to publish a quarterly journal comprising a varied selection of articles.
It is splendid company.
The range of subject matter is, as always, extensive; the Melbourne Cricket Ground, a history of Durham CC, the evolution of fast bowling, Gooch's milestone of 7,000 Test runs, the participation in cricket of women in Victorian England and a tongue-in-cheek press report from the year 2045 mentioning the 54 Tests played in the calendar year, striped uniforms for each of the four umpires, and stiletto marks on the floor in the Long Room at Lords's.
Heaven forbid!
James Nicholson TANGLED UP IN WHITE by Peter Roebuck (Hodder and Stoughton, £14.99), which was published in Australia in 1990 and reviewed in The Cricketer in April 1991, is now available in Great Britain.
COUNTY YEARBOOKS
KENT COUNTY CRICKET CLUB 1002 ANNUAL
(Edited by John Evans, available from  focuses on the 150th anniversary of Canterbury Week with a short history of the festival, and an editorial criticising the TCCB for beginning Championship games on a Tuesday, thereby interfering the structure of such festival weeks.
Carl Hooper and Neil Taylor are profiled and The Marquess of Aberdeen recalls childhood outings to watch Woolley, Ames and Bradman at Canterbury.
SOMERSET COUNTY CRICKET CLUB 1992 YEARBOOK 
(Edited by Michael Hill, available from ) has everything one expects from such a publication.
It opens with pen-pics of the players, obituaries, a summary of the season and various other articles including tributes to Peter Roebuck and Jimmy Cook whose retirements leave such a void for 1992 — only Gimblett and Richards have scored more hundreds for Somerset than either of them.
The core of this 208-page handbook is a match-by-match record of the county's performance in all competitions last year, accompanied by diagrams illustrating the centuries made by Somerset players.
A staggering 11 of these of course, refer to the prolific Cook.
Jimmy Cook: 11 centuries for Somerset last year .
GLAMORGAN COUNTY CRICKET CLUB 1992 YEARBOOK 
(Edited by Michael Hill, available from Somerset CCC,) is slimmer but similar with articles by Matthew Maynard, Mark Frost, Hugh Morris and Alan Butcher, but unexpectedly bereft of any contribution from the Club's literary Chairman A.R.
Lewis.
The 1991 season is recorded by way of notes and scorecards, enhanced by dozens of action photographs.
The 2nd XI and Young Cricketer competitions are also featured, as well as the pre-season tour of Zimbabwe.
THE YORKSHIRE COUNTY CRICKET CLUB 1992 
(Edited by Derek Hodgson, available from Yorkshire, CCC,) The late withdrawal of Craig McDermott from the Yorkshire staff has caused embarrassment and inconvenience in several quarters; at the ‘Welcome to Craig McDermott’ dinner which was held recently in Leeds United's banqueting suite, there was one conspicuous absentee, and now the Australian fast bowler has made rather a mess of the Yorkshire yearbook.
The other quibbles are the lack of photography and a shortage of contemporary comment save Richard Hutton's observations on Yorkshire's stance on overseas players and Derek Hodgson's anticipatory but now irrelevant portrait of C.J.McD.
Nevertheless, this hardback edition which will fit into the smallest of pockets carries historical reflections on Yorkshire cricket by Ted Lester and Anthony Woodhouse, and an immaculate and extensive records section.
LEICESTERSHIRE COUNTY CRICKET CLUB OFFICIAL YEARBOOK 1992 
(Edited by Peter Edwards, available from Essex CCC,) is the fattest and most thorough of the yearbooks received, probably because, as the editorial points out, last year ‘there were so many aspects of Essex's Championship success’.
Coverage of their season's conquests contains a 15-page review of the season and a match report on every game including those against Holland, France and Australian champions Victoria.
It is encouraging to see so much attention paid to the development of youth cricket with articles on the Essex Colts, the Indoor School, Kwik Cricket and the Essex Schools Cricket Association, while at the other end of the scale, there is an insight into the Essex Over-50 XI.
Also received are benefit brochures from DAVID HUGHES and IAN GREIG, two of this season's most deserving beneficiaries.
Both brochures include contributions from John Major (Greig's patron), Alan Lee, Tony Lewis and various other cricketing personalities, and are available from Lancashire CCC .
Young Cricketer edited by Amanda Ripley
Gerald Howat reviews Early School Form
FROM THE Thames estuary to The Wash a sizeable amount of schools' cricket is played.
Colchester RGS have set a magnificent example to the maintained sector by having over a hundred fixtures at all levels and by their enterprise in fulfilling 11 first XI matches before the examination period, including an Easter tour.
Andrew Kennedy, the Essex Under-17 hockey captain, hit powerfully (61 in 64 balls), in a drawn match against Berkhamsted and showed some promise as a seamer.
Against a strong Worcester RGS side, for whom last year's prolific scorer, John Phillips, made 61, the young Colchester side earned a draw.
Few schools can claim a cricket pedigree as ancient as that of Felsted (whose match with Colchester was rained off).
It was an old pupil, William Byrd, who introduced the game to Virginia in 1709.
Some 270 years later came Derek Pringle!
Their match with Harrow was an exciting affair and a victory for the sort of positive leadership which a writer in these columns urged last month.
Michael Martin, the Felsted captain, and William Cooper shared in a second wicket partnership of 239, both scoring centuries, before Martin declared half an hour after lunch at 246 for one.
Harrow had grounds for confidence at tea when they were more than half way there but Martin, taking six for 43 with his slow left-armers continued to attack and Harrow were out for 194 with a few minutes left, despite a valiant 97 from Charles Danby.
Perhaps giving the opposition two-thirds of the likely overs erred on being generous but all credit to Felsted's enterprising captaincy.
Norfolk was once called ‘the next club to Marylebone’ in the days of Fuller Pilch when the county could beat an All-England XI.
Then came the Edrichs and the redoubtable Rought-Roughts.
Gresham's School, Holt have made their contribution of players over the years and they are the current holders of the Henry Griserson trophy for the side which most impressed the XL Club by its performance on and off the field in 1991.
Their local ‘derby’ with the Suffolk school,Framlingham , had the game going anyone's way until the last ball.
Felsted's record-breaking pair, Michael Martin (left) and William Cooper, whose unbroken partnership of 239 helped to set up a crushing victory over Harrow
Gresham's made a promising start with contributions from Ivor Crampsie, Alistair Ponder and Hugh Semple but slumped from 131/3 to 169 at the hands of Ashley Cowan (4/33) and Richard Wilson (4/36).
Framlingham reached 60 without loss but the left-arm spinner, Daniel Jackson, broke through and it was left to the final pair to scramble a victory by one wicket.
Spectators on a blustery day not far from The Wash were rewarded for their dedication.
Elsewhere, on the south coast, the match between Ardingly and Eastbourne also reflected the open approach which deserves encouragement.
Ardingly, thanks to 67 from Adam Slight, set up a good declaration at 225/6 for their opponents who accepted the challenge and won by five wickets.
Despite the much-needed rain, schools have been able to play a substantial amount of cricket before turning to address the examiners rather than their opponents.
Gresham's School, Holt, current holders of the Henry Grierson Trophy, awarded annually by the XL Club, for performances on and off the field.
Young Cricketer of the Month
Fifteen-year-old schoolboy Adrian Clarke from Archbishop Tenison's School in Kennington, opposite The Oval, has won a school competition to paint a cricket themed poster.
Adrian's entry was selected from a short-list of 30 and is an abstract self-portrait.
It features the capped head of a cricketer with a ball whistling closely past his ear.
The poster has been displayed on Underground stations throughout London as part of the ‘Art on the Underground’ series, and on hand to help Adrian put up the first poster, naturally at The Oval station, was veteran commentator and director of The Cricketer, Brian Johnston (both pictured left).
Adrian, who professes to prefer football to cricket, will certainly be paying more attention to the game from now on, particularly as we are giving him a year's membership to the Young Cricketer Bunbury as our Young Cricketer of the Month.
ESCA's Excellence Continues
THE ENGLISH Schools Cricket Association (ESCA) has grown considerably since it was formed in 1948, and its diligent band of committee members have seen their tireless efforts forge many valuable partnerships to ensure the continued development of cricket in the schools.
High on the list of these successes is the Development Of Excellence Scheme which evolved as a direct result of the partnership between ESCA, the TCCB and the NCA.
This scheme includes inter-county representative games, the MCC Schools Festival at Oxford and Lord's internationals at Under-14, Under-15 and Under-19 levels, the Under-14 and Under-15 Festivals, and coaching courses at regional and national level from Under-12 to Under-17.
Various inter-school knockout tournaments are organised each year under the auspices of ESCA, including the Lord's Taverners Cricketer Colts Trophy.
This contest, for Under-15s, started in 1970 following a suggestion by The Cricketer's chairman, Ben Brocklehurst, to the ESCA President Hubert Doggart and, together with the invaluable financial help of The Lord's Taverners,The Cricketer has been proud to organise and support this competition ever since.
Another valued partnership, with support for the Under-15 Festival, is with Bunbury Enterprises run by David English, who was introduced to ESCA by The Cricketer in 1987.
The assiduous Cyril Cooper has stepped down as General Secretary to become vice-chairman and was recently honoured at a special lunch at Lord's.
He has been succeeded by the equally hard working Ken Lake, whose job among other things is to co-ordinate the various partnerships with the regional secretaries and keep ESCA's profile high amongst the school cricket fraternity.
If you are a keen, active cricketer of school age but are not yet involved with the ESCA network of regional or national activities, you can write to Ken Lake, enclosing a stamped addressed envelope, at  and he will put you in touch with your regional secretary — no area is left uncovered and no talent must go undiscovered!
Lancashire and England opener Michael Atherton presents Manchester Grammar School's Lee Marland with his prize in The Daily Telegraph Schools Cricket Awards.
The Telegraph , another valued supporter of ESCA's work, sponsors annual cricket awards, in two age groups, for batting and bowling performances.
The traditional ESCA-organised Wrigley Softball Tournament has this year attracted a record 2,500 primary schools, each aiming to become one of the 16 teams to reach the National Finals.
In order to do this ESCA divides the country into 16 regions which each runs its own mini tournament.
The winning team becomes that area's representative at Edgbaston on July 13, where the 16 finalists will play off to decide the Wrigley Softball Champions of 1992
Haberdashers' Aske's Far East tour report by Neil Folland
FOLLOWING two years of fund raising and six to eight weeks hard net practice we set off for the Far East on December 16, 1991 for a combined cricket and hockey tour.
In Hong Kong we enjoyed fixtures against Hong Kong University staff, Hong Kong Schoolboys Under-18s and Kowloon CC, and we won all four games.
The two principal venues Hong Kong CC and Kowloon CC are amazing places, Kowloon being without doubt the most expensive ‘real estate’ cricket club anywhere in the world; it is surrounded by skyscrapers!
All our matches were played on artificial or matting wickets.
Unfortunately heavy monsoon rain caused our first game to be abandoned against Singapore CC Sunday XI — we were 87 for one off 12 overs!
The rain put paid to our next day's match and consequently we didn't play until towards the end of the tour against the Jonor Rhinos, a team containing four Malaysian internationals, coached by a First Grade Australian (who also played).
They were too strong for us at this stage, and beat us by nine wickets.
This gave us an overall playing record of four wins out of six matches played, with one defeat and one match abandoned.
We were away for almost three weeks and in between the cricket we also played five hockey fixtures and one tournament.
The whole trip was a marvellous experience for us all and there was a terrific spirit amongst the squad, which set the scene nicely for the season ahead.
The outstanding performance of the tour was R Yeabsley's 201 not out against Hong Kong Schools — it was the first double hundred by a Haberdashers' schoolboy.
Haberdashers' batting against Johor State at Ceylon CC, Singapore, where they suffered their only defeat in six matches, four of which ended in victory for the touring school.
This year's Bunbury ESCA Under-15 Festival will be held at Charterhouse School from July 27 to 31 and anybody is welcome to go along and watch these England players of the future!
The following day, on August 1st, the South African Under-15 schoolboys arrive for a four-week tour of England.
This enterprising tour should be well worth following as it is the first time cricketers of this age from South Africa have toured in England.
Full details and fixtures are available from David English  Please send a stamped addressed envelope.
There is also a colour brochure for the tour, from the same address, for a suggested donation of £5 — all proceeds to ESCA.
Secondary sponsorships are still available for this event and any company or individual interested should contact David English.
OBITUARIES
by Robert Brooke unless stated
Stuart Surridge — Champion Captain by Alec Bedser
Walter Stuart Surridge , who died suddenly at the age of 74 while visiting his company's factory in Glossop on April 13, played 254 matches for Surrey between 1947 and 1956.
Although a useful county cricketer he will be remembered as one of the greatest county captains of all time.
He captained Surrey for five seasons from 1952 to 1956, winning the County Championship in each — a record.
When Surrey tied for the Championship in 1950 the county had the makings of a great side.
All the players were confident in their own ability and for that happy frame of mind they had to thank Stuart.
He believed in playing attacking cricket at all times.
If things did not go well he took full responsibility.
From the start of any game he insisted we should attack and play aggressively to win the match.
Nothing was considered impossible.
He was a great optimist.
Admittedly he had a fine attack but he welded it together.
He was positive in all he did and this approach helped us to win many games against the clock or the weather.
Against Warwickshire at The Oval on May 16, 1953 play started at noon after rain had delayed the start.
Warwickshire were dismissed for 45.
Surrey mad 145 quickly and Warwickshire were bowled out in 70 minutes for 52.
Stuart claimed the extra half hour and we won by an innings in a day.
Stuart Surridge leads out his great Surrey team at The Oval, followed by Peter May, his successor, the Bedsers, Peter Loader, Tom Clark, Bernie Constable, Jim Laker, Ken Barrington, and Micky Stewart.
Against Worcestershire on August 25, 1954 play started at 2pm due to rain.
Winning the toss Surrey put Worcestershire in and bowled them out for 25.
Surrey had made 92 for three when Stuart suddenly declared — we thought he had gone mad.
His aim was to beat the weather and bowl them out again, which we did for 40, thereby winning by an innings.
This was typical of Stuart — he had great faith in his team.
In 1955 we played 34 first-class matches of which we won 27 and lost seven.
We lost the toss 23 times in those 34 games.
His career record of 506 wickets and 3,882 runs does not convey his impact on the game because he was not concerned with his own performances — the team came first.
Probably the last of the true amateur captains, his decisions were not controlled by monetary or vested interests.
He was his own boss.
He paid great importance to good catching, especially near the wicket where he was himself outstanding.
He fielded in the shortest of positions, sometimes almost touching the batsman, and without helmet, visor or shin guards.
In this backward, square or forward short leg position he held most of his 375 catches, a startlingly high average of almost one and a half catches per match.
Stuart Surridge was born at Herne Hill, some two miles from The Oval, was educated at Emanuel School, Wandsworth, and lived most of his life at Earlsfield, five miles away.
He was born into cricket; his grandfather started manufacturing bats and cricket equipment in the 1890s, his father carried on, and Stuart and his brother Percy eventually took over and built on their foundations to make it internationally successful.
Eric and I first played with him in 1936 for the Young Players of Surrey.
Stuart would borrow his father's big Buick and take four or five of us to matches.
We were all great friends and from there developed the nucleus of the Surrey side of the 1940s and '50s.
His first-class debut was for the Minor Counties against Oxford University in 1939, but it was not until 1947 that he first played for Surrey, as an aggressive fast-medium bowler, who also liked to give the ball a good whack when batting.
In 1952 he took over the captaincy from Michael Barton.
Prior to Stuart's reign Surrey's amateurs always travelled by first-class rail.
They also stayed at different hotels to the professionals.
Stuart changed this so that he travelled with his team and stayed in the same cheap hotels.
Some members of the of the committee did not approve, but it made no difference to Stuart; obstinacy was part of his character.
Beyond Surrey he never received his deserved recognition for his contribution to cricket.
He should certainly have been asked to captain the Gentlemen at Lord's but his forthrightness was too much for some.
However, his permanence at The Oval was assured, and following his handover of the captaincy to Peter May in 1957 he gave a further 22 years' continuous service to Surrey, being Chairman of the Cricket Committee from 1968 to 1973, culminating his year of the Presidency in 1982.
Outside cricket his passion was game shooting; he was a fine shot.
At seaside venues he visited the funfairs where he won all manner of prizes.
At Weston-super-Mare the stall proprietor asked him to leave because he was winning too much.
He also played golf, trying to hit the ball further than anyone else.
W.D. (Bill Wickson , who died suddenly on April 15, aged 77, had been elected President of Surrey at the club's AGM only two days previously.
He will be best remembered at The Foster's Oval for his faultless administration of the Surrey Young Cricketers' programme.
His retirement in 1990 as Chairman of the Surrey Young Cricketers' Committee marked the end of over 15 years' association with Surrey Youth Cricket.
As a member of the National Association of Young Cricketers Executive Committee, he arranged the Esso sponsorship of the NAYC Oxford and Cambridge Festivals virtually on his own and was always on the lookout for promising young players.
As a founder member of the Surrey Cricket Council, he had been part of the framework whose aim is to ensure that cricket in Surrey, at levels up to the first-class game, will prosper.
His first love was association football and he was highly regarded within that game both as a player and an administrator.
He was a rugged but skilful wing-half, first for Oxford City where he had his roots, and latterly for Corinthian Casuals, a club embodying the Corinthian spirit he did so much to preserve.
He remained with the Casuals as an administrator, successively secretary, chairman and a vice-president, and during this time did much to foster the club's strong involvement with schools' soccer.
He was also largely instrumental in the Casuals' home ground becoming The Oval for a number of years.
By profession prior to retirement Bill Wickson was a schoolmaster, and for many years was Headmaster of South Norwood High School.
He inspired a genuine affection in both his pupils and staff, and many a young tearaway returned to the straight and narrow as the result of his firm but compassionate influence.
David Seward .
Edward Stanley Baker , who died at Great Dunmow, Essex on March 15 at the age of 81, played 32 matches for Worcestershire in 1933 and 1934 as an amateur wicket-keeper with 40 victims.
He attended King Edward's School in Birmingham and belonged to the Barnt Green Cricket Club.
Kurt Nielsen , who died in Aalborg, Denmark on March 26 at the age of 79, was responsible for giving cricket in Denmark the injection necessary to raise it from mediocrity to a worthy associate member of the International Cricket Council.
This he did by hard work, love for cricket and an exceptional organizing ability, which in 1953 resulted in the founding of the Danish Cricket Association of which he was chairman for 18 years.
In 1972 he was appointed Honorary President of the Danish Cricket Association and later was most happy and proud to accept the MCC's invitation to become an Honorary Life Member.
Douglas G. Steptoe .
Brian Chievely Phillips, M.C.,who has died aged 76, was a well-known and popular figure on the Kentish sporting scene and beyond, a robust striker of the cricket ball and lethal coverpoint, a good enough lawn tennis player to win the Kent singles title in 1948 and, most notably, for many years a leading squash exponent who played seven years for England, in 1948 as captain, and over 20 years for Kent.
Only the top honours at squash eluded him.
He was runner-up twice in the Open Championship, four times in the Amateur, losing usually to Norman Borrett.
At Tonbridge he had colours only for rackets, as J.R.
Thompson's partner at Queen's Club.
However he was soon scoring hundreds for Beckenham and enjoying wandering club cricket with the Yellowhammers.
He had a miserable war, after winning an MC with the Royal West Kents.
Wounded at Dunkirk he spent five years as a POW in Germany.
There his spot was to organize a Tonbridge v Clifton cricket match, news of which hit the national press.
He recovered quickly enough to win the Army squash championship.
A much loved man and most loyal of Tonbridgians, he served more than 50 years on the OF Committee.
Brian was an underwriting member of Lloyds and a director of Edward Lumley and Co.
E.W. Swanton 
Anton Perera , on of Sri Lanka's great sportsmen and journalists, died suddenly in Bangkok on March 21 at the age of 67.
A product of St Peter's College, Colombo and Ceylon University, both of which he represented at cricket, he was well known as a commentator and broadcaster before moving to Bangkok where he became Sports Editor of the Bangkok Post in 1963.
Until recently he worked for The Nation , Thailand's other English language newspaper.
He was a former cricket captain of the Royal Bangkok Sports Club.
It was largely due to him that, through his activities on and off the field, cricket in Thailand became established and flourished.
Phil Richardson,who died at King's Norton, Birmingham on April 18, aged 64, was a stalwart of Moseley Ashfield for more than 25 years after the Second World War.
Originally a good enough fast bowler to play for Warwickshire Second XI, Richardson subsequently moderated his pace to become ‘tight medium’ and took more than 2,000 wickets for the club.
Educated at King Edward's School, Birmingham, Phil Richardson had initially shown great promise as a goalkeeper and played professionally with Aston Villa before injury forced him into premature retirement.
He was also and excellent golfer whose handicap at one time reduced to one, and until his resignation due to ill health shortly before his death he was Secretary of Moseley Golf Club.
Leo Deamer , who died in Birmingham in March aged 87, was a stalwart of Midlands club cricket.
Born in Melton Mowbray, Deamer entered banking and represented the Leicester Banks CC and after transferring to Lloyds Bank in Birmingham he joined Knowle & Dorridge.
He was also a member of the XL Club and played for the local Lloyds Bank XI.
It was for the Bank team that he performed his most noteworthy cricket feat, when against Earlswood CC in 1981 he performed the hat trick with his slow off-spinners at the age of 76.
Robin Prentice , who died during the winter, became the Scottish Cricket Union's Administrator in 1982, retiring in 1990 and had a long association with the game in Scotland and as a wicket-keeper batsman with Uddingston in the Western Union.
He later became President of Bothwell Castle and Vice President of the Scottish Cricket Union.
In fact he was due to become President when he took up his post with the SCU.
He was also a long serving secretary of the Forty Club.
Keith Graham 
Paul Meridith Myrton Slatter , who died at Chalfont St Peter in March at the age of 81, was Treasurer of Buckinghamshire between 1956 and 1983, and Secretary from 1969 to 1984.
Slatter also served on the county committee for 30 years, edited the club handbook, and eventually became an Honorary member of both Buckinghamshire and the Minor Counties Cricket Association.
A banker by profession, Slatter also had an active interest in the theatre, and for 25 years produced stage musicals at High Wycombe.
Thomas William Stott , who became ill and died at Davenham CC's AGM in November 1991 at the age of 74, was one of the longest serving cricket administrators in the country.
He joined Davenham as a scorer in the late 1920s and became a player with the club in the early 1930s whilst still at school.
It was as an administrator that he gave immense service.
In 1939 he became Secretary, a position he held until 1964 when he became Treasurer, and had completed 53 successive years as an officer of the Club.
Alan T. Goodies 
George Boothroyd , a former professional cricketer in the Huddersfield and Bradford Leagues, died in Huddersfield on March 29, aged 73, after a short illness.
A vice-president of the Huddersfield League, he had been active in promoting junior cricket in Huddersfield for over 40 years and had been organising their Joe Lumb sides since the competition started.
A former goalkeeper on the books of Huddersfield Town and Halifax Town, he refereed at local level until just before Christmas and was also an active umpire.
His spare time took him to many of Yorkshire's fixtures.
Anthony Woodhouse 
Charles Ross (Sandy) Somerville , the oldest surviving member of the Canadian national cricket team died in May 1991 in Ontario at the age of 88.
He was a talented opening batsman.
In 1921 he scored 212 not out for the Ridley College XI against Hamilton CC to establish a schoolboy batting record for Canadian cricket which stands to this day.
He played for Canada against MCC at Lord's in 1922.
In later years he turned to golf and became one of the most successful amateur players in the history of the sport in Canada.
He won six amateur titles from 1926 to 1934 and became the first Canadian to win the United States amateur crown, in 1932.
Kevin E. Boller 
Brigadier Lorne Campbell of Airds, who was awarded the Victoria Cross in Tunisia in 1943 while a lieutenant-colonel in the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, died in May 1991 aged 88.
At Dulwich and Oxford University he was an excellent athlete and Rugby Union Player, while in later years he became a good club cricketer and a member of I Zingari.
Arthur Sidney Herbert , who died suddenly in hospital in April 1991 at the age of 78, was a member of Ealing for over 40 years and in his younger days was a good all-rounder for the first XI.
He continued to play for the club until the age of 65.
He was assiduous in helping Ealing Colts, amongst whom at the time were Simon Hughes and Keith Tomlins.
He was a devoted member of MCC, Middlesex, and the Cricket Society.
He spent a career as a local government officer and was active in the affairs of the Methodist Church.
Charles M. 