

Blueprints
AN INFINITE VARIETY
When people talk together about marriage they often assume they are discussing the same thing.
Women walking their children to and from school will talk of the trials and tribulations of married life as part of their everyday conversation.
Men propping up the bar over lunch will bewail the loss of earlier freedoms when they were footloose and fancy free.
Marriage will often be discussed with a kind of tolerant resignation as one of those burdens which have to be carried in life, the stuff of music-hall jokes: ‘Since I've had my wife behind me I've never looked back!’
And these casual conversations do not express a wish for anything to be different.
They act as a bond between people through providing amusement or an experience shared and believed to be held in common.
Frequently they are designed to suppress the different experiences people have of marriage.
To complain seriously about a partner, or even to wax eloquent, would be to break the rules of the game and to cause embarrassment.
In public debate marriage can take on a political significance as its supporters and opponents do battle over whether or not it is good for men, good for women and good for society.
In the heat of debate, when one side may accuse the other of not knowing what they are talking about, both sides will still assume they are talking about the same thing.
Even when the argument is over the impossibility of generalizing about marriage, an image remains strong, to be supported or dismantled.
It is when individual experiences of marriage come under scrutiny that differences emerge most strongly.
Most people consider themselves experts on marriage on the basis of their own experience.
And, in the ordinary course of events, everyone is reluctant to accept that others have an expertise  which is relevant to their personal situation.
People tend to believe, and sometimes fear, that their predicament is highly individual.
And this is both true and untrue.
‘All cases are unique, and very similar to others,’ declares Reilly about marriage in T. S. Eliot's The Cocktail Party .
‘All happy families are alike but an unhappy family is unhappy after its own fashion,’ observes Leo Tolstoy in the opening lines of Anna Karenina .
Only when things go wrong is the veil of privacy which normally conceals the workings of married life lifted, and usually in the hope of discovering that what is happening in one marriage is not, after all, so dissimilar from what is happening in others.
In the last chapter we looked at how the social institution of marriage has changed at different times in history.
We also looked at the diversity of living arrangements which operate between couples today, even before account is taken of our ethnically diverse, multi-cultural society.
Why do we continue to talk about marriage as if it were a commonly understood state when these differences so obviously exist?
Where do we learn how to behave in the intimacy of marriage?
Who teaches us what it means to be a man or a woman?
What are the primary influences upon our development as sexual beings?
None of these questions can be satisfactorily answered without taking account of individual histories.
History is an amalgam of fact and action.
It consists of verifiable events which took place in the past and the stories people tell each other to explain how they come to be where they are.
Everyone needs their own story.
Without an account of where we come from we cannot know who we are.
Until we know who we are we are not free to become fully involved with others.
Strange as it may seem, history is often discounted when marriage is threatened by crisis.
An unhappy marriage is more likely to be explained in terms of current stresses than in relation to what has gone on long before.
However, current stresses provide important but insufficient explanations of marital crises.
Some people are capable of weathering the most horrendous adversities and catastrophes and coming through relatively unscathed by their experiences.
Others sink in what outsiders might regard as a storm in a teacup.
It is not so much what happens to people that is important as what they think has happened to them.
It is less the events which matter than the interpretation placed on those events.
And the framework people use to make sense of their experiences is developed over time and so has strong connections with the past.
What complicates this state of affairs is that none of us has perfect recall of  the past.
About the earliest years, when we are most impressionable, none of us has a conscious memory.
The blueprints we draw up about the environment we inhabit and our place in it are sketched in outline when we are very young and least able to see the whole picture.
The process of modifying these bold early sketches so that they match experience takes a lifetime.
Even so, most modifications take place in childhood.
Conscious learning is only a small part of the process.
Rather, we absorb what is going on around us, especially from those who are most intimately involved with us.
We are most receptive during the tender, vulnerable years, the years which we have most difficulty in recalling.
Although this book is about marriage, this chapter needs to take the reader back into history because therein lie our roots and forgotten history has a tendency to be relived.
FORGOTTEN HISTORY
Take the case of John Ladbroke.
John Ladbroke married late.
Through his twenties and early thirties he had a succession of short-lived relationships with girlfriends which usually ended when they tired of his unreliable and generally difficult behaviour.
At the age of thirty-four he met and married within a very short space of time a widow who was four years his senior.
She had a young boy by her first marriage.
While he was courting her, John was very protective towards mother and son, and acted like a big daddy to them both.
One year into marriage he became irritable, demanding and critical, much as he had been in earlier relationships.
John was an only child whose mother had died when he was at the difficult and demanding age of toddlerhood.
His father employed a succession of nannies, who always left just when he was beginning to get used to them.
At the age of seven, he was sent away to boarding-school and this event more or less coincided with his father's remarriage.
The first seven years of his life, then, were peppered with separations.
How was he to interpret these events?
What effects might they have on his self-image?
What kind of predictions would he be likely to make about the behaviour of those he became involved with?
Perhaps not surprisingly, he was cautious in later life about committing himself in his relationship with others.
He alienated those he feared were becoming too important to him, and they rejected him in the manner to  which he had become accustomed.
His wife and his son, however, struck a different chord.
Maybe because of their bereavement, John felt a special bond of understanding with them.
Not that he could have put this into words.
He would just say that they evoked a great warmth in him.
This warmth was sufficient to help him over the threshold of marriage.
But one year later he was behaving towards his wife in the way he had treated, and tested, the other women in his life.
On the face of it, his wife, Jean, had a very different formative experience.
She came from a large family of seven children, of whom she was the eldest.
She would recall the boisterous rough and tumble of her younger brothers playing and fighting with each other in a tolerant but resigned way, rather like a mother talking about her unruly offspring.
And in some ways that was the position she had occupied in her family.
Her parents both went out to work, and from a young age Jean had been given the responsibility of looking after the other children.
In some ways she had enjoyed her position.
It gave her a special place in her mother's eyes.
All this had changed when she was thirteen and her five-year-old sister had died of a sudden illness.
Jean's precocious bubble of confidence, which had earned her the attention of her parents, was replaced by a sense of guilt about what had happened which lasted into later life.
She was reserved in her adult relationships, reluctant to make claims on others and inhibited from offering what she had to give.
When her husband died she became withdrawn.
John succeeded in breaking through this envelope of privacy.
His line of chat, and a bonhomie which could at times border on insensitivity, marked him out for her as a survivor; someone with whom she could risk herself; someone who could both carry and withstand her.
As she allowed herself to close the gap in their relationship, John became irritable and demanding.
She felt at one level that this was no worse than she deserved.
At another she was deeply resentful.
The most basic of all human drives is directed towards forming and sustaining attachments to others.
For the new-born baby, the balance between life and death depends upon the success of this enterprise.
Hunger, pain, fatigue and illness all require attention if the baby is to thrive.
But attachment is more than cupboard love.
Parents are needed to respond to the overtures of their offspring, to stimulate their interest and to provide a living presence to which they can relate.
Everything the young baby does is designed to interest and attract the attention of others, especially those who are in closest proximity.
The prolonged crying of a well-fed and recently changed baby cannot be ignored, however hard the parents may try to develop an impervious barrier against what might seem an unremitting  demand.
The gurgling noises and toothless smiles are enough to melt the resolve of the most hard-pressed mothers.
Rather like the proverbial granny in the attic, the baby in the nursery is usually capable of summoning an immediate response to his imperious demands.
Babies are, of course, very different from each other right from the start.
They come into the world not just as bundles of flesh and bone but with already distinctive personalities capable of initiating different responses from those around them.
They are not lumps of clay awaiting the potter's wheel of their parents' influence to fashion their personalities, but equal partners in taking initiatives and creating contretemps.
Unlike baby goslings which lock on to the first moving object in sight, the newborn baby will be relatively undiscriminating about who tends his needs for the first three or four months of life.
He will be content to be passed around a circle of admiring adults as if he were a parcel.
But thereafter, and certainly by the time he is six or seven months old, he will have developed a definite preference for the person who has a particular responsibility for him.
The attachment to a preferred person develops most strongly in the first year of life.
In our culture, mothers are most likely to occupy this favoured position.
Women suckle and tend the physical needs of their young, and are available to play with them and respond to them.
It is through these interactions that babies come to recognize the distinctive sight, smell and manner of their mother.
From eight months onwards they are likely to protest loudly about being passed around, and cling to the person they know best.
Although they may develop attachments to several people, one person will be preferred.
But from the age of a year onwards it becomes increasingly difficult for this preferred attachment to form because the infant's behaviour is then also governed by a fear of the unfamiliar.
When an attachment has been formed, there is a person the baby can turn to in threatening situations.
When no such bond exists, the position is more complicated.
With time, and the development of physical and mental abilities, babies are able to make their first moves towards independence.
They learn to crawl and then to walk, and the first direction in which they are likely to move is away.
They develop the rudiments of adult language, and the word they will use most frequently (after ‘Mummy’ and ‘Daddy’) is ‘No’.
These exploratory adventures are conducted in the safe knowledge that they are carried out within sight of a parent, and if there is ever any doubt about this the infant can throw the occasional backward glance for reassurance.
During the first three years of life the young child will venture out from  and return to the secure base of a parent's presence when conducting expeditions into unfamiliar territory.
The secure knowledge of a parent's presence is the precondition for such exploration, as it is for satisfying curiosity and for sharing new experiences.
Through repeated encounters with different people and different objects, the child becomes capable of making predictions about how others will behave, and learns that actions have consequences.
Very gradually, the secure base that the mother provided ‘out there’ becomes absorbed and assimilated within the young child so that she is ‘in here’and does not always have to be kept in sight.
This sense of security, derived from developing a basic trust in the people most closely involved in their upbringing, provides the fundamental outline of the personal blueprints children draw on to guide them successfully through the relationships they form in later life.
Without reliable guidelines there is no sense of safety in the unpredictable business of forming new relationships.
Secure attachments early on in life provide inner resources to manage stressful and threatening situations in later years.
John Bowlby, the man who pioneered what has become known as ‘attachment theory’, drew a military analogy to underline the importance of establishing and maintaining a secure base in handling unfamiliar and threatening situations:
The safety of an army in the field is dependent not only on defending itself against direct attack but also on its maintaining open communications with its base…we should be as much concerned with threats to the rear as with threats to the front.
Threats to the rear occur throughout life, although with less frequency and intensity than during childhood.
But the ordinary events of life — illness, bereavement, infirmity — all heighten our urge to behave in ways which echo our childhood needs.
Then we are likely to seek out people who can be close to us, sometimes clinging to them for support, as if our own security was dependent upon their actual and continued physical presence.
What happens if the conditions for establishing basic trust and security are unfavourable during the early years of childhood?
How do young children react to that situation?
What will be the consequences in later life?
In the 1950s some very powerful films were made about the reactions of children to separation from their parents when admitted to hospital or residential nurseries.
These films, combined with Bowlby's work, made a significant impact on hospital policy, discouraging the separation of sick children from their parents.
The films highlighted three phases of separation reactions.
First of all, children were likely to protest about their parents' departure.
They would show signs of acute distress, crying loudly and vigorously.
This attempt to call their parents back could last for hours, days, even for a week or more.
When this protest failed, despair would follow.
The children remained preoccupied by their loss and would continue to cry from time to time, but in an increasingly hopeless and dejected way.
They would tend to withdraw from their surroundings, showing little interest in those around them and making few demands upon them.
Finally came a state of detachment which could misleadingly be regarded as recovery.
Children would appear to adapt, would resume an interest in their toys, recover their appetite and smile at the staff.
But there was a detachment in their manner which shut people out, and frequently these children would refuse to take any notice of their parents when they came to visit.
The longer the period of separation, the more unfamiliar the environment, the more frequent the change of people offering alternative care and attention, and the more discomfort the child was in, the greater the trauma of the separation.
The experience was likely to be most harmful between six months and three years of age.
To compensate for their losses, children were likely to retreat into a private world and to form attachments to inanimate objects which were more securely under their control.
The fear of being on one's own applies beyond childhood, and for good reasons.
Individuals who are isolated are vulnerable.
We do not have to fear predators in the same way as do other animals, but because we are social beings and rely upon others for survival, learning and fulfilment in life, company is essential.
A basis of secure attachment enables people not only to get on with others but also to achieve a measure of autonomy in their lives.
And as Bowlby points out, autonomy does not supersede the need for close relationships as adults:
Paradoxically, the truly self-reliant person…proves to be by no means as independent as cultural stereotypes suppose.
An essential ingredient is a capacity to rely trustingly on others when occasion demands, and to know on whom it is appropriate to rely.
What relevance has the concept of attachment to the predicament John and Jean Ladbroke found themselves in?
We might surmise that the separations John experienced between the ages of two and seven years resulted in the development of an internal blueprint predicting that close relationships were unlikely to be sustained, and  cautioning against becoming involved with others.
Rather than contend with the pain of being left, he ensured that relationships broke down if they were in danger of becoming important to him.
Or the situation could be read another way.
With those who reached him emotionally he recreated the rejections he had experienced as a young child.
To what end, you might ask?
Later on we shall be suggesting that some CONFLICTS in marriage can be seen as an attempt to put right experiences which have gone wrong in the past.
For now it is sufficient to assert that John, having loved and lost, felt he would be tempting providence to allow himself to love again.
The blueprint based on his earlier experiences ensured that the old drama was played out time and time again, thereby validating its own predictions.
In toddler terms, it was as if he confirmed the pattern etched in his mind that the part of him which needed to be loved exclusively, and which could throw tantrums if this need was thwarted, was simply not acceptable to others.
His success in summoning up the devil he knew blinded him to any awareness of his own part in bringing about the final outcome.
Only through his marriage, which for him was unconsciously rooted in an identification with the bereaved, did he create the conditions where it became more difficult to drive out or cut off from the attachment he both yearned for and feared.
Through marriage he created the possibility of consciously knowing about and coming to terms with his own painful experience of loss.
And the same was true for Jean.
Behind the little girl who was so good at looking after others was another little girl longing to be looked after herself.
Part of her motivation in caring for her younger brothers and sister was the wish to earn a special place in her parents' affection.
There would always have been ambivalence towards her charges because they were not only a means to an end, but also rivals for the limited rations of parental attention.
Jean's reaction to her sister's death was complicated by this fact.
The death of a husband would almost certainly have resurrected for Jean the complicated feelings associated with her earlier bereavement.
Against the odds John succeeded in drawing her out of a withdrawn reaction.
He did not have to fear being overwhelmed by this recluse; she did not have to fear his vulnerability.
She was drawn towards the resilience of a man who offered the possibility of providing something which had eluded her during childhood — the exclusive love of a parent.
But perhaps she also identified in John the orphan she half recognized herself to be.
Their relationship offered a prospect of changing the blueprints drawn up by history.
Neither would consciously have recognized or construed their position in  this way.
As far as John was concerned women were untrustworthy and unpredictable.
And because Jean, quite irrationally, felt partly responsible for her sister's death, that hypothesis fitted both their internal blueprints at some level.
No one amends lightly something as vital as a blueprint.
Moreover, they would have been unlikely to make any connection between what was happening in their adult relationships and what had happened during childhood.
In this they are not alone.
While it is self-evident that childhood experiences must have a profound formative effect upon the beliefs we have about ourselves and upon our expectations of others, most of us fail to take them into account when we run into trouble later on in life.
Nowhere is this amnesia more likely to apply than within the intimacy of marriage.
THE DAWN OF CONSCIOUSNESS
So far we have considered the significance of attachment in relation to the fundamental but rather general issue of whether it is safe to rely upon others at all.
Establishing a degree of basic trust is a key foundation-stone upon which subsequent social development can build.
But development does not stop there.
There are many aspects of childhood which are affected by experience, and these change with time.
Parents are more responsive to some characteristics of their children than to others, and also to some stages of their development than to others.
The early years of life are intensely physical years.
Parents feed their babies, cuddle them, change their nappies, smooth cream on their bottoms, bath them, tickle them and generally communicate through bodily involvement.
If they do not feel easy about this physical closeness that, too, will form part of the communication.
Parents may hold their babies close and convey love for and admiration of their bodies, or they may hold them away and register distaste, even disgust, for some of their bodily functions.
In the early stages, the baby's mouth is an important point of contact with the world.
At first the world consists of the breast, then it extends to include the mother, and then other people and objects.
Oral satisfactions die hard.
Adults eat to excess to ease depression, turn to the bottle for comfort or suck contentedly on a pipe.
These are not baby habits, but they are habits which have a link with babyhood experiences.
As children grow older they will become more consciously aware of the likes and dislikes of those who care for them.
They will be eager to perform and so please parents who are appreciative of their efforts and admiring of what they produce from inside themselves.
They will give in the confident expectation that their gift will be well received.
They may behave differently towards parents who seem repelled by their efforts, and in learning to control may also learn to withhold.
As food can become the ammunition in a battle of wills between children and their parents, so, too, can the process of toilet training.
In adult life we talk about people withholding what they have in order to keep control; we talk about ‘shitty’ behaviour to describe what happens when someone ‘messes things up’.
Sexual development is closely linked with body language and bodily contacts of early childhood.
The way young children's bodies are handled, the way their bodily needs are attended to, and the physical ambience of this early intimacy prepare the ground for feelings encountered later in life, when genital maturity allows sexual expression to be added to the repertoire of ways of relating and communicating.
Genital interest occurs early in childhood.
Daddy's and brother's ‘thing’ and Mummy's and sister's ‘bottom’command great interest at bathtime from children as young as two and three years of age.
If observations and questions are not permitted, curiosity is stifled and frustrated.
Equally, too much frankness and bodily display can cause children to shy away or feel uneasy.
The atmosphere, whether it be one of confidence, inhibition or embarrassment, will contain a vital message for the child and leave its legacy in adult life.
In learning what is and is not acceptable to parents, children come to know when and how to harness their feelings and impulses, as well as how to control their bodily functions.
In the process they are vigorously engaged in discovering what belongs to them and what belongs to others.
Such distinctions are very difficult for the newborn baby, who has neither the experience nor the necessary mental and physical equipment.
As far as we can tell, babies regard their mothers as an extension of themselves, yet not quite connected, rather like those fingers and toes which, although attached, are happened upon in surprise.
They associate pleasure with the presence of mother and the fullness and satisfaction which follow sucking at her breast.
Pain and frustration are frequently associated with her physical absence.
Those who have paid special attention to the interactions of parents and very young children say that the confusion between what belongs to self and what belongs to others applies with even more force to feelings than it does to bodies, and for very much longer.
Frustrated and angry babies can cry  themselves into a state of fear as they interpret the absence of their mother as an attack upon themselves.
Their own anger with their mother for not being there is then attributed to her, and their fear results from believing she is in the rage that they themselves are in.
Adults have strong feelings too, susceptible to those of children.
There is something primitive about babies which can fill parents with intense feelings of love and hate.
It is as if the emotional umbilicus is never cut, and so magical transfers of feeling remain possible.
Such transfers are the basis of firm bonds and major misunderstandings.
The confusion between what belongs to me and what belongs to you (in emotional terms) goes on throughout life.
The degree of confusion usually reduces with the passage of time, although it can be heightened at any point in life as a result of threat or adversity.
How the unexperienced feelings of one person can be experienced by another is not an easy process to explain.
Indeed, the process is unconscious in the sense that neither party is aware of what is taking place.
Yet the phenomenon is familiar to us all, particularly when we discover we are responsible for something for which we had blamed others.
It can happen towards objects as well as people.
The man who kicks his car because it refuses to start (and he has not checked the petrol gauge) is not unlike the toddler who kicks the table for walking into him.
The logic of the unconscious creates a free trade area for emotional transactions.
Sometimes they are acted upon in violent terms; many atrocities are committed against innocents in the name of nationalism, religion or a personal crusade.
More ordinarily, they form the stuff of everyday relationships as we blame or criticize others for doing or saying the things we feel inside ourselves.
What is common to all these situations is the process of separating out ‘good’ from ‘bad’.
This distinction is usually socially determined and given momentum by the basic need to be attached to others, particularly during the impressionable years of early childhood.
In managing very strong desires and impulses the child has his relationship with his parents as a resource.
Parents have the means of satisfying and frustrating the child's wishes, of gradually checking a tendency to monopolize their lives and of encouraging steps towards self-reliance.
In this process, strong clashes of will are inevitable, but with luck parents and children will come out of the experience confident that their security is not jeopardized by conflict, and that seemingly unmanageable feelings and impulses can be harnessed and contained.
We depend upon others for this kind of social education throughout life.
We test our realities against those of others, and we modify them as we have to.
This process of learning takes place more rapidly and intensely during the early years of childhood than in later life.
For children, the world is one of extremes.
The ‘baddies’ are firmly distinguished from the ‘goodies’.
They take the form of witches and fairies, beasts and beauties, villains and rescuers.
The forces of good and evil are ranged against each other in a struggle for victory, and the future depends upon the triumph of good.
‘Good’ is the experience of feeling secure and fulfilled in a relationship; ‘bad’is the converse.
In this way children make the first crude distinctions between what is ‘me’ and what is ‘not me’.
Only later will they come to learn the shades of grey in which we are both what we would like and what we would prefer not to be.
At this early stage, however, life seems to depend upon expelling from ‘me’ all that seems to be bad, and later testing out how far others will tolerate or react to the bad in ‘me’.
Toddlers who kick and scream against the restrictions of their parents are unconsciously testing the limits of where they end and others begin.
As far as they are concerned, of course, they are simply wanting another ice-cream, or another go on the swing.
If they are over-indulged they will, as likely as not, feel unsatisfied.
What they may unconsciously be looking for is containment.
Containment relieves anxiety about strong feelings and impulses getting out of control.
Instead of the children being the monsters, the parents become the monsters who threaten to take over and exact revenge.
But if the monster parents do not act monstrously and succeed in containing the passion, the children are reassured.
They do not have to protect themselves from the monster.
They can even identify with it and incorporate it inside themselves in a less monstrous form.
With the help of others they have then learned to manage their feelings and not to be afraid of them.
Moreover, what they take back inside themselves is an experience of the relationship in which the monster was tamed.
And this experience modifies earlier drafts of their personal blueprint of the social world.
Toddlers may succeed in eliciting a punitive response.
Or they may fail to evoke a response at all.
They are then left on their own to worry about the threats from within and without.
They may redouble their efforts to provoke others to contain benignly what is bubbling up inside them or, if that fails, to secure punishment for being so bad.
But if an alliance cannot be made with the parents against what feels uncontrollably bad inside them, they may defect and identify with the ‘bad’.
From time to time all children do this as part of the process of discovering themselves.
Sometimes they fear  that the strength of their passion will so endanger relationships which are important to them that they will shut down parts in themselves from which they believe the threat comes.
This may buy some short-term security, but at the cost of limiting how much of themselves can be revealed and used in relationships with others.
These self-imposed restrictions may not be limited to the negative emotions.
The desire to love and be physically close may be repressed if it is seen to pose a threat.
Indeed, the positive emotions are frequently more threatening than the negative ones because they open us up to others, and they allow us to become lost in causes greater than ourselves.
Fusion, like separation, brings the fear of losing oneself.
Through play, and in the world of imagination and fantasy, children relive situations which both bring them pleasure and cause them anxiety.
Teddies are scolded, dolls nursed through illness and injury, play houses are constructed and play families arranged to live in them.
On a good day (for the parents, that is) children can be absorbed for hours in the imaginative construction of a world which depends on them alone for its realization and reward.
Through play children act out in miniature the adult dramas of life and learn how to master new situations.
They also give expression to their feelings about situations which worry them and by doing so provide some relief from anxiety.
Throughout life, a capacity to play, to symbolize, and to have access to the world of fantasy can assist people to come to terms with life.
Theatre, film, television and books can play a vital part in the process, providing a psychological service within our cultural heritage.
Play can increase the extent to which people feel able to involve themselves with others and extend the parts of their personalities they can use.
Material objects may become temporary substitutes for important relationships, like the mauled soft toy or ragged piece of blanket in childhood, but it is only when relationships with ‘things’ rather than people become an established pattern for ‘shutting out’that there is cause for concern.
It is only when the private world of fantasy becomes a hideaway from real relationships that our personally constructed blueprints fail to serve their proper purpose.
Personality development is impaired when an individual has shut down a broad range of feelings and ways of relating, in the belief, unconsciously arrived at, that it is unsafe to do otherwise.
Objects and fantasy are then used not as a means of venturing out, but to beat a retreat.
From the toing and froing of the social exchanges of the early years, exchanges which are imbued with misperception and misattribution, children construct blueprints of their world and their place in it.
At the  beginning of life the world is very small, and the infant's place in it very large.
This balance changes with the passage of time as experience fashions these blueprints into more serviceable guides.
They are like charts which allow predictions to be made about the likely consequences of taking different courses of action.
Some parts of the blueprint will have been tried and tested, and found to be reliable.
Others will be the product of guesswork because the terrain they cover is unknown, and being unknown will contain risks.
Yet these backwaters of consciousness will have great influence upon the channels of communication which are regularly used in dealings with others in later life.
To ‘be at one with the world’ requires a fit between the blueprints constructed internally and the behaviour of the world outside.
When the two do not match up there is pressure either to revise the blueprints or to change the environment.
This tension is the stimulus for social learning and personal development.
There is constant pressure to bring ‘insides’ and ‘outsides’into conjunction with each other.
Whether the resolution is through modifying blueprints or coercing others to conform with our internal codes, providing there is sufficient basic trust and security to allow the two worlds to meet, a process of mutual influence will operate.
The intimate relationships we form in later life, among which marriage is arguably the most important, create opportunities for personal and social development to continue with renewed impetus.
The physical and emotional intimacy of adult sexuality in marriage recreates aspects of our early, and often unremembered, pasts.
The pleasures, anxieties and inhibitions associated with those earlier years frequently come back to haunt us, but in new guises and with different partners.
John and Jean Ladbroke may find through their marriage that their feelings towards each other are connected with behaviour which resurrects childhood ‘rejections’ and ‘damage’.
Both stand to gain from working at some of the separate psychological burdens brought with them into marriage.
Alternatively, they may prefer the limited protection provided by keeping each other(and their own needs) at arm's length by replaying the old scenarios.
That at least confirms their predictions of how the world is.
Either way, they have to face the possibility of discovering discrepancies between what they expect and what they experience, and in that lies the potential for development.
THIRD PERSONS
So far we have considered the development of marriage blueprints in a way which does not take account of sexual differences and which assumes that learning takes place in the context of a two-person relationship, principally between a child and one or other of his parents.
Clearly, the process of development is more complex than that.
As children become older they mix with more and more people, extending the range of their experience and modifying their blueprints in the process.
Brothers, sisters, cousins, aunts, uncles, grandparents, friends and teachers, all contribute to widening the child's social world, and sometimes the significance of these people will be equal to if not greater than that of parents.
Despite there being many different forms of family life in Britain today, the great majority of children spend their early years with their two natural parents.
This fact creates a triangular constellation of relationships with its own particular contribution to make to the process of development.
What is the psychological significance for adult life of having two parents?
Although children can be attached to more than one person from a very early age, there is usually one parent who is special — even if only in the sense that their presence can be taken for granted.
That relationship is regarded in proprietorial terms by young children who will feel threatened by and jealous of any claims made by others on the affections of their first and own love.
Usually the special parent is mother.
The problem comes when a child begins to recognize that another has claim upon her affections — father.
What is the child to do?
A colleague of ours described the reactions of her four-year-old son to the news that his mother was to have another baby.
Climbing into his parents' bed one morning, and establishing himself firmly between them, he declared that when he grew up he was going to marry his mummy.
‘And what about Daddy?’ inquired his amused mother.
‘Oh he'll be dead,’ replied the boy, in a matter-of-fact way.
The tragedy of Oedipus Rex was given archetypal significance by Freud when he claimed it encapsulated the universal unconscious wish of young boys to dispense with their fathers in order to establish an exclusive claim upon their mothers.
The wish is based upon the child's knowledge that he has a rival.
The idea that there is rivalry between fathers and sons for possession — even sexual possession — of father's mate is one which is neither readily digested nor easily given up.
The ‘Oedipus complex’ has become part of our common language, and yet it is seldom taken seriously (except  by parents of four-year-old boys — and even then it is unexpected).
Despite this reserve, the figure of Oedipus has made much more impact upon the theory of male development than has that of Electra upon female development.
Not surprisingly, there has been reaction against the patriarchal notion that a woman is psychologically inferior and physically incomplete in not having a penis, although social realities have, and still do, provide grounds for envy of the male state, if not the male member.
Because babies grow inside their mother, because she is usually the person to feed and physically care for them, and because she provides the emotional anchorage which makes exploration possible, she has enormous importance.
She is the all-powerful source of satisfaction and frustration, happiness and sadness, love and hate.
The fact that mothers are usually the first object of love for their offspring creates real differences between boys and girls when it comes to relinquishing that tie.
It is here that fathers play an important part.
At first, the father's contribution (and we are here making the assumption that he is not the principal parent) does not have a differential impact on boys and on girls.
He acts to supplement the resources of mother.
By being physically and emotionally available to her, and by relieving her of economic worries, he supports her labour of love.
Of course, it does not always work out like that.
The financial needs of the family, the demands of a career and the needs of a father in his own right directly affect his availability to his children and have an indirect effect through the support he can offer his partner.
But mothers cannot parent in a social vacuum.
The more isolated they are, the less they are able to act effectively as parents.
Because the man continues his role outside the home he provides a window on the adult world which may be sorely needed by his partner when she fears she is slowly sinking beneath piles of dirty nappies and baby talk.
He can also take over the parenting role and provide her with respite from the rigours of what is a twenty-four-hour-a-day job.
By so doing he provides her with some immunity against the chronic depression which afflicts so many mothers of pre-school age children, and which in turn undermines their abilities as parents.
As children become older, fathers have a role to play in encouraging exploration and play.
They provide opportunities for making relationships outside the confines of the early exclusive twosome.
They are there to be hugged, fought and played with.
Although it is true that some fathers are involved with their children for seconds in a day rather than hours or even minutes, their presence can encourage confidence to make those expeditions and explorations which are vital to the process of child development.
But there is another and more fundamental way in which fathers contribute towards the development of their children.
Because they, too, have a special relationship with a child's mother — with its own areas of physical and emotional exclusivity — children have to give up the illusion that they own their mother, and so they must learn to share.
They have to come to terms with the fact that there is a rival in the camp, a rival they would both love to remove but hate to lose because of his separate contributions to home life.
In coming to terms with conflicting feelings about the relationship between their parents, and being helped to do so, children assimilate the capacity to manage other relationships in which they are not the centre of attention and from which they may be excluded.
They are then impelled neither to intrude upon nor retreat from those who have other close relationships.
In short, they learn to relate in a way which is inclusive rather than exclusive.
They learn the difference between drawing a line in relationships which defines who can be involved in what, and the kind of rejection which requires a relationship to end.
The process of drawing a line, setting limits, establishing a boundary, is a vital part of social development.
It is the basis for the blueprints which guide human behaviour.
Parents draw the line between what takes place between them as partners (from which the children are excluded) and what takes place between them as parents with their children.
These vital distinctions protect children from experiences which might compromise or abuse their childhood.
When parents relate to their children as if they were partners and look to them for the support and even sexual comfort that should come from other adults, the boundary surrounding and protecting childhood is broken.
The freedoms of childhood include flirting with father and attempting to seduce mother in the safe knowledge that this is play and it will not get out of hand.
By this means children come to learn that their feelings can be expressed without fear of abuse, and their sexuality is both acceptable and manageable.
Children also witness their parents operating as a couple.
From their direct observations they absorb a model of marriage.
How intimate are couples in public?
Is it safe for them to disagree or to argue?
How separately do they operate?
How together are they?
These and many other unformulated questions are being answered each day by the way parents conduct their routines and lives together.
Unknowingly, the most potent of all sex-education programmes is taking place; the ground is being laid for the partnerships of the next generation.
What is also taking place is the formation of sexual identity, the growing  allegiance to male or female gender through identification with one or other parent.
The young boy relinquishes his primary attachment to his mother in order to accompany father to the allotment, to the DIY store or on a fishing expedition.
The bond which grows up between them is some compensation for giving up mother.
Becoming a man in his father's mould offers the boy an identity for the future, and one that will receive encouragement from family friends and relatives.
With time and proper encouragement he will become a man in his own right, determining his own direction, and relatively unaffected by trying to secure the approval and attention of his parents.
But this will not always happen successfully.
There is a cartoon which depicts a statue to an elder statesman bearing the inscription, ‘An inspiration to his country, a leader of men, but still a disappointment to his mother’.
Some present-day achievements are motivated by the hurt of being ignored in the past; they can represent an attempt to go backwards in time to recover early special relationships in the family.
Success is then the cover concealing and even obliterating the real person inside under the mantle of a false self.
If there is no father, or father-substitute, in a family, it is likely to be boys who have the greatest difficulty in finding a secure identity.
They have the greater journey to make when separating from their mothers.
Girls can continue to cultivate their links with their mothers throughout life.
They share a common gender identity and many of the experiences and activities associated with it, even as these change and evolve over time.
Boys will seldom be able or wish to preserve the degree of closeness to their mothers that it is open for girls to do.
They must cross the gender divide to join their fathers, both to help them cope with the pain of parting from their first love and also to match social expectations of the male sex.
The third person, in the shape of father, provides a worthy opponent, a vital stepping-stone and, with luck, a more than sufficient compensation.
THE SOCIAL FILTER
The basic and rather crude blueprints fashioned in the earliest years are tried and tested against social realities, first at home and later in the world outside.
Brothers and sisters provide competition as well as a further reason for having to share and cooperate with others.
Older children may look after  new additions to the family and learn about being a parent by doing so.
Or they may hope that their contribution to the household economy will restore them to a special place in their parents' affections.
The impulse to partner parents can be as strong for children as the temptation for parents to confide in their children as if they were partners.
As the social world of children broadens to include school, friends, television and public heroes, so too does the range of influences which bear upon personal blueprints for living.
With age, the sensitivity to external influence decreases, but there are critical points in the process of growing up when children are more than usually pliable.
These are the in-between years when a crossing is being made between one phase of life and another.
At school, teachers supply their pupils with examples of adult behaviour, which in many respects will supplement and sometimes take over from the models supplied by parents.
Sports heroes and pop stars provide images for teenagers, who may imitate them and style themselves upon them.
These models from the ‘me’ generation are frequently set up in opposition to the ‘they’models of the parents' generation.
They provide an alternative of extremes which help the half-child, half-adult teenager to find a place in the adult world without being a carbon copy of his parents.
Rather as the soft toy or ragged piece of blanket provide transitional objects in early childhood, these figures provide transitional attachments, and reflections of an ideal self, which help the individual towards autonomy.
Recognizing the influence of these figures, advertisers who wish to promote products in a youth market or to discourage drug abuse will summon up images of the alternative culture.
Part of the fantasy about adolescent heroes is that they are in perfect command of their situation and can control the events and people around them.
Their attraction is based on an image which is at the other extreme from the uncertainty and powerlessness which are also part of adolescence.
the young adult oscillates wildly between the extremes of omnipotence and impotence in a search for competence.
During this period there will be pressures to woo and be wooed and to gain sexual experience.
Personal uncertainty will combine with social pressure to encourage experiment.
The nature of the experiment will, however, be directed more towards self-discovery and self-reassurance than towards relating to a real other person.
Sexual experience is part of coming of age, breaking the seal of sexual mythology and entering into the adult world.
Adults will watch the sexual emergence of their offspring, or their friends' offspring, with a mixture of satisfaction, anxiety and envy.
Depending upon  the social circles in which the young adult moves there will be more or less pressure towards getting married.
The better-off are likely to be advised to delay serious relationships until they have more life experience.
The less well-to-do may encourage early marriage and give priority to settling down to stable family life.
The pressure is more likely to be felt by women than men, and increases as individuals grow older.
Although marriage is likely to be prescribed at some stage of life as a remedy for all kinds of life problems, the images people have of marriage will be different.
In various ways these images will be ‘packaged’ and ‘sold’to the upcoming generation.
Those who have experienced marriage may attempt to encourage curiosity and thoughtfulness through education of one kind or another.
Those who regard marriage as a religious sacrament may be concerned to convey the seriousness of the undertaking through symbolism and ritual.
There will also be the influence of soap operas, from Dallas to EastEnders , which will portray marriage with a blend of romanticism and earthiness.
But none of these factors is likely to be as potent an influence upon future relationships as the early family experiences absorbed by the young child.
In the primary attachment to the mother, infants experience some of the most intense physical and emotional experiences of life — the satisfaction of a full belly, the warmth of bodily closeness, the security based on being able to trust other people, the survival of hatred and release from fear.
These and other experiences are repeated and reworked, first with other members of the family, and later with an extending circle of contacts outside the home.
Along with hereditary endowments these experiences will go far to determine the kinds of adult they will grow into, the kinds of images they will form of themselves and those around them, and the kinds of relationships they will have with others.
These are the experiences which, in a fundamental sense, ace the most potent programme of education for marriage and family life and which form the blueprints for the next generation.
Choices
In Britain today the majority of people have more options open to them than their forebears had.
Although we must not forget the sizeable minority who are caught in a poverty trap, during recent years wages and salaries have risen overall more than the cost of living, and educational opportunities have widened.
Most people have considerable leeway as to how they spend their money over and above basic subsistence requirements.
What were once considered luxuries may well, as standards of living have risen, now seem like necessities.
We can choose to have more of this, less of that, travel here, there and further afield.
With growing educational opportunities, choice of job or profession has widened, although industrial recession and demographic factors have limited the opportunities in some businesses and trades.
We also have more freedom as to how we behave within our ascribed or achieved class.
Although there are regional differences, social and marital roles have become less clearly defined and structured than they were half a century ago.
Cohabitation as a prelude to marriage is now an acceptable option.
Greater availability of effective contraception has enabled partners to decide when to start a family and what size it will be.
The limitation that can now be placed on the child-bearing and child-rearing years gives women a greater choice as to whether to return to work sooner, later or not at all.
Easier divorce makes ending an unsatisfactory marriage a real possibility.
Changes in attitudes to authority, including parental and conjugal authority, have extended the choices open to women and young people.
Husbands and fathers no longer have total legal authority over their wives and children.
In what has been called ‘The Age of Psychology’, the development of the individual and his self-fulfilment has been promoted and stressed over and above obligations and duties to marriage partners, children and other relatives.
The ‘Age of psychology’ has also become the ‘Age of the Charter of Individual Human Rights’.
THE BURDEN OF CHOICE
Such wealth of opportunity does not necessarily make life any easier.
In some ways it can make it harder.
It can be more comfortable to say, ‘I had to do it’, than ‘I did not know what to do and then I decided…’
Some of the decisions now open to us require a careful sifting of information and balancing of the pros and cons.
The scales can be fairly evenly balanced.
Sometimes the required information may be difficult to obtain and the implications of different courses of action hard to predict.
Some people find the options bewildering and feel that, with many old values discarded, they have no solid core of new ones to take their places and guide them in their choice.
It often happens that the greater the area of choice, the less clear cut are the guidelines.
We now live in what has been called a ‘turbulent environment’, which is characterized by increased levels of complexity, interdependence and uncertainty.
What happens in another country can within seconds affect life in our own country.
Turbulence arises in a society because of an accelerating but uneven rate of change, and because of unpredictable connections between the increasingly interdependent parts.
With modern methods of communication throughout the world, our perceptions are constantly being enlarged and our attitudes and values are shifting.
However, it is often difficult to distinguish between fact and fiction.
What one hears said by others does not always match up with our own experience, and we can no longer look round expecting to find clear-cut models of behaviour.
As we mentioned in the first chapter of this book, egalitarian marriage is now widely promoted as an ideal, but recent research indicates that there is a wide gulf between what is said to be happening in terms of sharing in marriage and what actually happens.
In a turbulent environment, diversity, contradiction and disjunction are the norm.
We have to live with uncertainty and we have to a far more adaptable than previous generations.
Modern life often tests the limits of human adaptation.
One of the contradictions is that although at some levels we have an immense range of choices, at other levels we are very much constrained by economic and social facts and pressures.
Our society is still governed mainly by the demands of industry and commerce on men and the needs and demands of children on women.
Husbands are usually higher earners than their wives and their jobs or carers take precedence over those of women.
Many women still marry for economic reasons, able to live better on their husband's earnings than on their own.
Rented accommodation has become scarce; heavy mortgages often require two salaries for some years and can delay the date of marriage or cohabitation, or the start of parenting.
Whereas more women than before can choose whether to work or not after the child-bearing years, raised expectations of living standards may make this feel less like a choice and more of a basic requirement.
(Families living in poverty or relative poverty are today frequently characterized by having only one earner.)
And once a choice has been made, this, in itself, imposes constraints.
Although there is much social and occupational mobility, and our choice of marriage partner is wider than it used to be, we are obviously most likely to meet and continue acquaintance with people used to similar standards of living, values and expectations.
On the whole, at a social level, like marries like.
When young people form a strong attachment to someone of another race or religion, parents and elders may well express surprise.
they may not feel open to accepting that person into the family, very aware of having to make a conscious effort to put aside prejudices and stereotypes in order to get to know, like and accept him or her.
They take the stranger to their heart less easily than the familiar friend.
Reflecting the degree of adaptation required, parents may well express concern as to whether the match is viable.
While it is important to recognize the social constraints within which we exercise our choices, the more options there are available, the more psychological factors come into play.
Our choices are partly governed by conscious processes of the mind — a rational weighing up of possibilities, advantages, disadvantages, wishes and motives — but also by unconscious factors of which, by definition, we are unaware.
As we described in the last chapter, blueprints (some of which are not available to conscious recall) weigh heavily among the factors which determine our motives, choices and behaviour.
Where loving and intimate relationships are concerned, we seem to be more strongly influenced by familial blueprints and unconscious preoccupations than by other factors.
The more these blueprints exercise their influence, the less choice there seems to be and the more a particular course of action feels inevitable — a common experience for many people in their choice of partner.
In short, choice is narrowed by internal as well as external constraints.
When we speak of strong attachment or attraction between two people we are in the realms of love, the basis on which many people in our culture choose or are drawn towards their marriage partner.
We are also in the realms of unconscious choice.
CHOICE OF LOVED ONE
It has been argued that romantic love is a relatively modern phenomenon, reserved in earlier times for the delight of troubadours and the illicit pleasures of the rich.
Yet it has cast its spell since time immemorial — once the business of wizards and sorcerers, still the business of astrologers; once subject to aphrodisiacs, philtres and charms, now subject to immense commercialism.
Classical literature tells us that through the centuries love was deemed to be compatible with a good marriage and in the Middle Ages canon law, by basing the validity of marriage on free consent, upheld love as a precursor of the union.
The verb to love is difficult to define as it covers such a range of emotion.
‘The Oxford dictionary is cautious in its definition: ‘to hold dear’; ‘to be fond of’; ‘to delight in’.
It gets stronger when it includes ‘to be addicted to’.
When we talk of the in-love state, we are usually including strong sexual passion and an intensity of emotion not experienced in other affectionate and loving relationships.
Loss of the loved one can raise the same intensity of emotion: a sense of betrayal, hatred of the betrayer, extreme jealousy of a rival-feelings over which a person may believe they have little or no control.
Love and anger, it seems, are two sides of the same coin.
The stronger the love, the stronger The rage when that love is not reciprocated.
The opposite of loving is indifference, with its lack of feeling one way or the other.
It is the strength of feeling associated with the in-love state that makes choice feel irrelevant.
Clearly we do not have full control over feelings.
We either have them or we do not, although we can at times make a conscious effort to put certain feelings out of our minds.
Some feelings are more easily dismissed than others, and some are more easily summoned up.
Some can be so strong that regardless of the consequences they compel action.
With other feelings we may be burdened by their strength, yet still be free enough to choose whether we express them to others by word or action, indulge them or keep a tight rein on them.
There is immense variation between people in their ability to handle their feelings, and in the capacity of one person to handle different types of feeling.
Strange as it may seem, some people have more difficulty in handling or expressing warm, loving feelings than negative, angry ones; or it may feel as if they have to keep a tighter reign on the loving feelings, which they perceive as making them more vulnerable to rejection and disappointment.
All of this suggests that while love is centred on feelings for another  person, feelings for the self are never absent.
Milton Erickson, a marital therapist, when asked how he would describe a good marriage, answered:
…there are essentially four kinds of love.
The infantile type of love, ‘I love me.’
The next state, ‘I love the me in you.
I love you because you are my brother, my mother, my father, my sister, my dog.
The me in you.’
Then the adolescent love, ‘I love you because your dancing pleases me, and because your brains please me.’
And the adult stage of love wherein, ‘I want to love you and cherish you because I can find my happiness in your happiness.
The happier you are the happier I will be.
I'll find my happiness in yours…’
So, the mature love is the capacity to find enjoyment in the enjoyment of the other person's enjoyment.
It works both ways.
(Our italics)
Love can grow up, but is rarely totally altruistic.
The best of lovings are mutual, with a fairly even amount of give and take, as much received as given.
Erickson goes on to say that in good marriages all four types of love exist: I love me; I love me in you; I love your good qualities; and I enjoy the fact that you are happy.
However, there needs to be a sizeable amount of the latter for the marriage to work.
We shall be coming back in this chapter and the next to the problems that occur when choice is based on too much of ‘I love me’ and ‘I love the me in you’, but first we need to look at the basic capacity to realize some love for another, with its mix of self-regard and altruism.
Although everyone has the innate capacity to love and to enjoy another's happiness as well as their own, and to get themselves loved and their happiness enjoyed by others, not everyone can risk the experience in adult life.
The realization of the capacity depends on the earliest blueprints and the infant's experiences of mutuality, giving and receiving or, sadly, its absence.
The ability to love ourselves and another is formed in early childhood.
As has been said, ‘We love in as much as love was present in the first great affair of our lives!’
In Chapter 2 we described the part played by our earliest love affairs in forming personal blueprints for living.
We now return to the processes by which they are formed and consider their impact on freedom of choice.
THE FOUNDATIONS
According to Klein, a child psychoanalyst, babies are consumed with a primitive and innate rage when their needs are not met and they are in bodily  discomfort.
The average, ‘good enough’ mother (to use the terminology of another analyst, Donald Winnicott) cleans, feeds, holds firmly and comforts the raging baby.
Time and time again babies learn that their rage and hatred do not destroy the source of nourishment and love which is prepared to succour and relieve distress.
Repeated experiences of regained enjoyment slowly mitigate the primitive fury.
At first infants cannot distinguish between themselves and others.
Life is totally bad —.
a terrible ‘Ow’— or totally good — a beautiful ‘Mm’— and when distress is relieved it may well be as if they themselves have conjured up the goodness.
In their omnipotence, they can delight in ‘I love me.’
Gradually they learn to discriminate, although for some time they cannot determine what is influencing the mother's movements towards or away from them.
Later they acquire some idea of her motives and of their own.
Once that is so, says Bowlby, ‘the groundwork is laid to develop a much more complex relationship with each other, one that I term a partnership’.
In the formation of the partnership and in the baby's increasing awareness of difference, the mother imparts more than nourishment and cleanliness; she lays the foundation of a future ability to trust and hope, to enjoy with another and to be grateful to another for that enjoyment.
Love for another is one of the main derivatives of this awareness of difference (two bodies in different skins) and the accompanying gratitude when good things are provided: ‘I love you because you are my mother and give me the good things I need.’
From gratitude comes the desire to please: ‘I want you to be happy too.’
People who have this early experience of their anger being mitigated by another and have learnt that their initial angry protest does, in fact, bring relief and comfort, learn two more important lessons.
First, that anger is not necessarily destructive.
It does not have to destroy love, but can be contained within it.
Love is bigger.
With this knowledge inside them, people do not have to be afraid of their own anger, nor their own assertiveness.
They can allow themselves to feel them without undue anxiety.
Through trial and error they learn how and where it is appropriate to express such feelings and when they will be effective.
So they acquire some freedom of choice as to the how, when and where of using the anger of which they have command.
Second, related to the first and to the awareness of being in their own skin, they learn that it is proper and effective to signal for what they need.
At first, their signals are just cries of protest.
If these cries are heard and met, and therefore effective, the cry can, when the ability is acquired, be transferred into words: ‘I want’; ‘I am hungry’; ‘I am hurt.’
When words bring the  required response there is less need to scream and it becomes all right to ask.
And it becomes all right to ask even though the answer is sometimes ‘No’.
One ‘No’ does not mean eternal ‘Noes’.
The child who does not learn to ask is seriously impaired in later life.
This can result from either of two extremes of handling.
On the one hand, there is the infant whose every need continues to be met before it is expressed (one whose mother cannot bear the weakest cry — perhaps she herself was left to cry for too long).
This child fails to learn to be in touch with feelings and to form requests.
On the other hand, people whose words are not answered may have to spend a lifetime screaming for what they want or need, convinced that only if they demand loudly, cajole, beg, bully or threaten, will they obtain what they want.
Or, with a continuing conviction that others will never meet their needs, they may have to get what they want by stealth or theft; they learn that only self can look after self.
Again, if the early screams of protest have been severely punished, regard for their own need may feel too dangerous.
The infantile, unmet scream may be repressed, either successfully or partially, at times breaking out from a normally controlled and reasonable adult.
Those who have learnt that a scream never pays may lose all hope; even protest is useless.
If the ability to ask, to trust another to respond and to feel gratitude are three of the main derivatives of an early partnership and the basis of love, envy is one of the strongest antidotes to loving.
It, too, has its roots in the innate, primitive anger and anxiety of infancy, when food and comfort were withheld.
When the baby's need becomes ravenous, it feels insatiable.
As infants slowly become aware of the mother as a separate person, they see her as the owner of a much needed resource.
If she withholds beyond their as yet limited capacity for tolerance, their continuing rage seeks only to destroy what is in her.
What she can provide is no longer experienced as goodness and, therefore, evokes no gratitude.
Unmitigated infantile anger, and subsequent envy of what the other possesses, has a murderous quality.
In later childhood, these emotions may well be repressed, as parents and then teachers attempt, by a variety of means, to socialize young people.
Such people may remain frightened, consciously or unconsciously, of the strength of their anger and possible loss of control.
It has often been said that the non-neurotic person is one whose repressive mechanisms work well.
When they do not work effectively, the unmitigated anger may well seep out in constant irritation over relatively trivial things or, as it seems to other people, may suddenly and unexpectedly break out with a degree of force inappropriate to the circumstances.
Foundations are laid in early months and years and subsequently built on.
Or they can be shaken, the new and perhaps frail ability to trust, hope and feel gratitude needing to be re-established.
Most toddlers experience a severe shaking of the foundations when the next child is born and they cease to be the baby.
Are they totally replaced?
Does another always come first?
Or are they still loved, even though more grown up?
They have to start to learn to share the love.
Sometimes foundations are shaken to the core by the premature death or prolonged absence of the main attachment figure.
Such a shaking is experienced as supreme betrayal — total abandonment of the source of life and comfort.
Because the theme of betrayal figures so often in fable, myth and legend throughout all cultures, it seems that it is something we must all know about at one level or another and need to have formalized in story form.
It is important to remember that the word trust is meaningless if there is no possibility of betrayal, just as there can be no betrayal if there is no element of trust.
We are not betrayed by enemy or foe, but by our nearest and dearest, or, at least, by our normally reliable friend.
We can guess that, despite a natural growth process, we all experienced a series of early betrayals as our mother expected and encouraged us to grow up and slowly emphasized her separateness and difference.
Such betrayals, when not over-taxing the as yet limited mental resources of the infant, are compensated for by the acquisition of new much praised skills and satisfactions.
(And failure to encourage infants to grow up and experience their own separateness and uniqueness is as much a betrayal of the concept of self as is the abandonment of support and pleasure in their developing maturity.)
Yet betrayal of the initial oneness — the harmonious whole, a glorious, bodily, yet undefined goodness in which there is no distinction between the me and the you — is part of human experience, as is its loss.
The search for love and the in-love state can be seen as an attempt to recreate the harmonious whole.
This statement has been echoed through the ages — by Plato: ‘Love is the desire and pursuit of the whole’; by Coleridge: ‘Love is a desire of the whole being to be united to some thing, some being, felt necessary for its completeness’; and by the man in the street; ‘My other half’, or even ‘My better half’; or in Erickson's terms: ‘the ‘me in you’’.
THE ‘ME IN YOU’
In biological terms, heterosexual love makes whole.
Man cannot experience the fullness of his masculinity and powers of reproduction without a woman, and vice versa.
In addition, both men and women have masculine  and feminine genes within them, but their gender is normally recognized by one set of genes having predominance over the other.
There is much argument as to how far different sexual traits are innate or socially conditioned.
It is likely that social formulations have, over the ages, reflected innate differences.
Some men and women who are sure of and comfortable with their predominant gender are able to express their ‘other half’, some people much less so.
Close association with a member of the other sex, as in marriage, allows a wider range of response and action than either partner could have on their own.
The husband keeps himself in touch with his  femininity as expressed by his wife; she keeps herself in touch with her masculinity as expressed by her husband.
But the question remains, why do we fall in love with one person rather than another when many potential partners are available?
Why is it that a specific person has the indefinable ‘It’ and another has not?
What is the nature of this magnetic attraction?
We have two levels of answer to these questions.
First, one of the main characteristics of attachment behaviour, which we outlined in the previous chapter and which derives from the study of animals and humans, is the specificity of the required caring figure.
When safety is threatened, another figure will not do; ewe and lamb seek out their own.
When overt attachment behaviour is at its peak in young children, it is the main attachment figure (usually the mother) who is needed.
Second, the specificity of who it is safe to love is related to the ‘me in you’: ‘I love someone who reflects part of myself, sometimes a hidden or unacknowledged part of myself; I feel good with a you who either shares my feelings, expresses them for me or helps me to defend myself against them.’
Most strong attachments are, we believe, based on a mixture of these three processes — identification of feeling, complementarity of feeling and mutual defensive avoidance of other feelings.
All these three processes can be conscious or unconscious.
The mix, the range and the flexibility of them relate back to early familial blueprints of how feelings were expressed, handled or avoided.
We suggest that the more a person is in love and the less they are able to define what it is in the other that they love, the less free is the conscious choice and the more it relates to the ‘me in you’ and the search for psychological wholeness through another.
Let us look at the three processes in more detail — the hopes and the fears invested in the processes and the inherent problems if one process is too predominant over the others.
IDENTIFICATION Some people who have been rudely awakened to  awareness of difference, who have never learnt to value the otherness of the other or feel safe with it, may need to search for love only with their mirror image.
Likeness is safer than difference, and difference is to be feared.
A marriage based mainly on likeness can be in trouble when too easy an assumption is made that the other must feel the same and when inevitable differences emerge and cannot be tolerated.
Emergence of difference is often experienced as a shock to the whole system, a sudden puncturing of the illusion of sameness.
In the extremest form of love of the mirror image, a person does not form a close heterosexual attachment at all, remaining more comfortable and much safer in the love of a member of the same sex.
(Many different early blueprints may play into this and compound the fear of the opposite sex, but we are not elaborating on this, as homosexuality is not the subject of this book.)
Less extreme, but also narcissistic in their need for reflection of the self, some people manage to find a member of the opposite sex who, despite difference of gender, is in physical terms remarkably, even strangely, like them.
This can be most apparent when beauty marries beauty.
Beauty is often the object of envy by a plain person, yet people whose prettiness as children captivated the adults around them may grow up with a severe disadvantage.
They often over-rely on their appearance as a means of relating, although they feel cheated when they perceive others as responding only to their physical attributes.
Beautiful people are often surprisingly insecure, more so than those who fear they are not pretty or handsome enough to attract the opposite sex.
Identical twins growing up with their own image constantly near them, sometimes very in tune with what the other is thinking and feeling, may have a problem in their search for a marriage partner on several counts.
First, it may be difficult for them to relinquish the closeness and identification with their twin in favour of a marriage partner.
Second, they may seek this type of identification with a partner and be disappointed when they cannot find it.
And third, their likeness to their twin can confuse possible suitors: which one does he want?
COMPLEMENTARITY Love of the other as a complement to the self is often quite conscious, with opposing social skills and personality traits openly admired.
The calmness, even dullness, of one partner may be containing and useful to an excitable other, just as the more emotive response of the latter may engage and bring spontaneity into an otherwise stable and ordered life.
However, in the search for wholeness one partner may choose and use the other to express a feared or unrecognized part of the self, and this, by definition, is unconscious: ‘I love the unrecognized me in you’.
For example, Clive and Rose Greenacre's early blueprints had left them both distrusting dependency and the reliability of others, but they handled this problem in complementary ways.
Rose was excessively clinging in her behaviour and anxious when Clive was either late, as he often was, or away on an extended business trip.
She was slightly agoraphobic and did not go far from home on her own.
Clive expressed his distrust and fear of being let down by a very detached attitude in all his relationships.
He preferred to keep acquaintances as such, rarely divulged his feelings and placed little reliance on others.
He could be quite casual in his attitude to his wife's anxiety and more often than not failed to let her know when he was delayed.
However, on his belated homecomings, he indirectly reassured her that the needed person did return m- the end.
And he, so apparently casual — punitively casual — often irritated by her anxiety, could also rely on her being there for him, but without having to know about his own need for her to be safely where he had left her.
Ronald and Daphne parker had a mutual problem in handling and using anger.
Ronald's internal volcano was heavily repressed, Daphne's regularly exploding.
He always had to be the one who calmed her down.
However, her expression of anger kept him in touch with that unrecognized part of himself, just as his control gave her a much needed boundary.
His success in calming her down reassured them both that anger could be tamed.
Greed for love, attention and praise was a problematic area for Bob and Joan Halton.
Joan grew up feeling that she was loved less than her prettier younger sister.
She found she could get the attention and praise she wanted only by achieving, being good and caring for that pretty little monster she so resented.
To ask for more for herself and put herself in a position of coming first felt too greedy and dangerous.
Bob, an only child, had no problem in expressing his greed.
His mother had encouraged it, over-indulged him and assured him that he always came first.
But he was fearful of greedy women.
His mother had given him contrary messages.
Despite her indulgence of him, she had kept him very much tied to her apron strings and had had great difficulty in relinquishing him to a wife.
Several previous courtships had foundered on her disapproval.
We want to stress not only how marriage partners choose the complementarity of the other in handling difficult areas of feeling, but also how sensible this can be.
We go so far as to say that in choice of partner it is a wise unconscious that falls in love with and marries its own unrecognized  problem and then in marriage recreates the problematic situation.
At least it keeps a person in touch with the problem.
At best, it provides a chance of doing something about it — repairing a bit of the past, perhaps finding a new way of handling difficult feelings and making them less dangerous.
When less dangerous, they can be owned and a person becomes a little more whole.
DEFENCES Clive Greenacre, in his distrust, used his wife's agoraphobia as a defence against his own need to be sure of her being safely where he left her.
Ronald parker defended against his own expression of anger, but relied on his wife to be the exploder.
Joan Halton used her husband to express the emotional greed of which she was so frightened in herself.
In fact we can say that we never need to have our own feelings if we can be sure that our nearest and dearest will express them for us.
And we never need our own defence if we can be sure that another will provide one for us.
There are various definitions of the phrase ‘psychological defence’.
We use the words in the sense of a psychic process by which the mind protects itself from undue or unbearable pain, anxiety or conflict.
Psychologists often refer to a list of generally used defences: repression, denial, displacement, splitting, projection and reaction formation are the most commonly used.
However, as we have already indicated, we believe that means of protection from psychic pain is not limited to this list; any feeling can be used to defend the self from any other feeling which is feared.
For example, Ronald and Daphne could be using Daphne's expression of anger not only to protect Ronald from knowing about his own anger, but also to protect them both from underlying depressed feelings of which they are even more afraid.
Anger can be used as a defence against depression, just as depression, sometimes defined as anger which has been turned inwards, can protect from overt anger or fear of violence.
As we intimated previously in the section on identification, an over-emphasis on likeness can defend against the reality and fear of difference.
It is important not to despise the use of defences.
We all use them much of the time and could not do without them.
Our minds could not stand the constant battering of immediate reaction to the myriad perceptions to which we are subject all the time.
For example, for much of the day we need to be able to repress or split off some feelings to enable us to concentrate or to use our intellects.
The difference between mental health and mental ill-health is not in whether or not defences are used but in the flexibility or rigidity with which they are employed and in the mix between them, as opposed to the over-use of one defence rather than others.
One defence much used in the ‘I love me in you’ aspect of marriage is that of projection.
Projection is the unconscious attribution to others of feelings that belong to the self.
It is most often used when there is an internal conflict of feeling.
If this conflict is too problematic, one feeling remains conscious and the opposing one is repressed but projected into another person who expresses it.
When it is expressed by the marriage partner the internal conflict is externalized, sometimes on a daily basis.
If this happens in moderation and can be relinquished, little harm is done.
For example, Joan Halton may use Bob to express the greed of which she is afraid, then protest -about the greed he displays.
If her protest is effective, she becomes less frightened of her own greed and more able to own and express it for herself.
They may then have more flexibility as to who is allowed to be the greedy one.
The underlying quarrel in marriage is frequently about how often each can be allowed to be the baby.
However, continued and inflexible projection can intensify fear of the problematic feeling.
Joan's unconscious encouragement of Bob's selfishness may lead him to more extreme behaviour (in psychoanalytic terms, her projection leaves him carrying a ‘double dose’).
This may confirm Joan's fear of greed and make it more frightening for her to know about her own.
The more one partner complains about the behaviour of the other but remains firmly attached to that person, the more we can suspect that a massive projective system is in operation.
When we would expect a feeling to be expressed to some extent by both partners but instead one person is quite overcome with emotion while the other is apparently untouched, we may assume that one carries and expresses the feeling for both.
We mentioned earlier in this chapter that an unreal identification with the partner can be used as a defence against fear of difference.
So can an over-emphasis on difference be used defensively against fear of excessive closeness.
People who have felt too impinged upon in childhood, too taken over, not allowed to experience their own feelings, may bolster their fragile sense of identity by marrying someone ostensibly very different, but with a similar underlying fear of being swamped.
Although ‘mixed’ marriages between people of different races or cultures are made for a variety of reasons, conscious and unconscious, some are necessitated by the need to have constant reassurance of difference: for example, a skin of another colour.
Marrying out of one's own culture is a rejection of that culture and some thing or things feared within it.
Some people, for example, feel less constrained in a language other than their mother tongue when they have felt too burdened by words and idioms used by their mother.
In freeing  themselves from this burden they may need to make their escape into another language or culture, even by establishing geographical distance over thousands of miles of ocean.
Others, terrified of intimacy and closeness, use quarrels as a means of maintaining distance.
In marital therapy it is often noticeable that although a couple are asking for help to sort out their problem, so that they may have the closeness and intimacy for which they yearn, fear overcomes hope, and whenever things start to improve one of them can be relied upon to start up the next quarrel.
There are people whose early experience of bodily closeness, intimacy and care has been so uncomfortable or so traumatic that they dare not risk a repetition of such pain.
If, despite this, social and economic pressures lead them to marry, they may find a partner who also needs to avoid close involvement, emotional or physical.
They may even marry quite young to escape the pressures of the courting scene, but in these cases choice of partner is based more on the need for a mutual defence against a mutual problem than in hope of a mutual problem being resolved.
In these terms, the marriage, rather than some aspects of it, is defensive.
Some people very frightened of their homosexual leanings may consciously or unconsciously enter a defensive marriage to protect themselves from these feelings.
What better proof of heterosexuality than to be married?
We could say we can divide the world into two, although with many shadings in between: those who marry to avoid their problems and those who marry to tangle with them.
The former, not having fallen in love, or with few of their emotions engaged, often continue to feel cheated.
The latter, whose emotions are firmly engaged are, we believe, the majority.
For this majority, the unconscious choice of partner is governed by a mix of hopes and fears, the prospect of repairing and making whole and the fear of doing so.
Most married couples will tangle with some mutual residual problems and leave others firmly alone, retaining some well-defended arras in their personalities and in their partnership.
In the first few years of marriage, before the decision to have a baby is made, reparative work is about intimate pairing and what was felt to have been betrayed in the first partnership of life with the main attachment figure.
When the intimate twosome is established, some early experiences repaired, some old ghosts laid to rest, a couple are ready to make what then can be a choice — to create a baby or not.
THE OPTION OF PARENTING
With reproduction essential for the maintenance of the species, we can but assume that there is a basic biological drive to create.
This can be expressed by people saying that they feel they want a child for their fulfilment as human beings.
Others may talk about a deep urge.
Some never query that sooner or later they will have a child or several children.
Others know about the pleasure they get from children.
Having enjoyed their own childhood and experienced their parents' delight in them, they want to repeat the good experience from the position of parent, and have few fears about this.
It is as if from their own experience of good parenting they know inside themselves what parenting is about.
Some women in early adulthood may feel very unmaternal and not at all sure whether they wish to burden themselves with what they see as the cares and stresses of parenthood.
They may delay the decision, in confusion or conflict over the choice now open to them; but their bodies may give them messages.
They become more aware of other people's babies, wanting to hold and touch them.
‘I've started to feel broody,’ they may be heard to say.
Sometimes the internal conflict of wanting/not wanting a baby, wanting/ fearing having one, is expressed in menstrual pain or premenstrual tension.
Have I conceived or not?
Am I relieved or disappointed by the menstrual flow?
Social encouragement for starting a family is strong.
When peers are becoming absorbed by the new life-style that a baby brings, a couple may feel left behind if they do not embark on this too.
Would-be grandparents can express their disappointment at not acquiring the longed-for grandchild.
Such is the general expectation that married couples will have children that those who do not want them, or want to put parenthood on a few more years, or sadly learn that they cannot conceive, find themselves having to respond to veiled or not so veiled queries.
They can feel criticized, even stigmatized, and in need of group support.
It is ironic, as research into the feelings and behaviour of childless couples has shown, that the voluntarily childless often shield themselves from criticism by implying a fertility problem, whereas the involuntarily childless find it difficult to admit their infertility and leave others believing they have chosen to forgo the experience of parenthood.
Babies are conceived for a variety of reasons apart from basic urges — some  over a wayward partner who shows signs of straying from the fold; in competition with a sister who has recently conceived or in determination to produce the first grandchild.
As we have stated before in this chapter, the greater the choice that is open to people, the more psychological factors, often unconscious, come into play.
When a child is born and a twosome becomes a threesome, more blueprint patterns begin to operate, as they do again when second and subsequent children are born.
The art of managing a threesome is for one of the three to allow the other two to pair, sure in the knowledge that other pairings can easily be restored and the individuals flexibly interchange with each other.
For some people this is very difficult, especially when they have no internal model from their early experience of family life to assist them.
But as in the choice of a partner, so in the choice of parenthood, people may attempt to repair and correct early experiences of threesomes and foursomes.
In giving to their children what they felt they needed and did not have themselves, they obtain gratification and solace.
It is noticeable that parents often react against their own experience so that, for example , if they were brought up in a too restrictive atmosphere with little spoiling, they may spoil and leave their children without enough boundaries and routine.
In spoiling the children they are vicariously spoiling themselves.
People who have felt severely betrayed by the birth of a younger sibling may find they have more difficulty in handling a second child than the first, but this does not deter them from bearing that second child.
the problematic area needs to be repeated.
It is obviously difficult for a parent to help a child through a developmental hurdle which he has not properly encompassed himself, but parents and children can grow up together, or, as we might say, children can bring up their parents.
When considering the options now open to us in respect of parenting, it is important to understand the enormity of some of the choices that can be made today.
As well as the selection of family size, there are choices to allow or to refuse life to a healthy or damaged foetus, to agree to artificial insemination by husband or other donor, and to opt for in vitro fertilization.
Not only do these decisions carry immense implications for the future of parents and children, but they are open to criticism from relatives, friends, public opinion and pressure groups upholding opposite views.
In addition, these options widen the arena for disagreement between partners.
How is a basic disagreement of this nature resolved?
Who gives in and with what misgivings?
When things go wrong, who feels blamed or guilty about having persuaded?
Never has the burden of choice been so heavy.
So much  knowledge and maturity is required to make this type of choice from a properly informed base.
OYSTERS
In this chapter we have concentrated on two major life choices, the choice of marriage partner and, more briefly, whether to parent or not.
By illustrating how unconscious factors influence these choices we have raised the question of how much choice we actually exercise.
Is the world our oyster, or is it not?
We are not arguing that everything is predetermined.
Yes, early blueprints are influential.
We cannot escape our past, nor deny our feelings, which are so often less rational than our intellects.
But we can follow or reject the blueprints; we can consciously master some, but not all; and, as we have emphasized, unless all hope is killed off by dire early environments, a psychological growth process continues throughout life.
In seeking to promote the realization and wholeness of human nature, we attempt to correct our early unsatisfactory experiences.
In doing so we often heal old psychological wounds.
In order to resolve our underlying conflicts and problems, we find partners who enable us to replay old scenes.
When we fall in love the wisdom of the unconscious takes the lead.
As a marriage continues, and the family moves through its different stages, many other major choices will have to be made, including the most difficult one of whether or not to end, a marriage.
We shall come back to these in later chapters.
Here it is important to note that, despite the burden of many of the choices we can now make, people leave themselves with just as weighty a problem by refusing to recognize the options open to them, either putting themselves too easily in other people's hands or not allowing themselves enough space to make an informed choice.
For example, in the infertility clinics, the patient's yearning for a child meets the drive, satisfaction and status inherent in or accorded to technical brilliance.
Yearning and brilliance clasp hands and sweep along together.
People desperate to conceive can sometimes enter fertility programmes without enough space to query how far they are prepared to go, to resolve any differences between the partners, or to mourn their personal loss in not being able to produce a child naturally.
Some people are unable to make choices because they feel they must have everything and cannot accept the loss that is inherent in exercising choice.
For example, some women in a financial position to stop work and start a family are loath to give up their careers for a period, knowing they may lose out in the long term.
Having realized their ambition to combine their career with child-rearing, they remain tom between and exhausted by the demands of job and baby, with ever-decreasing satisfactions in both spheres.
To whom or what are they primarily committed?
In the next chapter we consider the subject and problems of commitment.
Commitment
CONTRACTS AND COVENANTS
The marriage ceremony involves a couple in a public contract — a legal commitment to each other and only to each other, bigamy being a punishable crime.
The contract is witnessed by others and duly recorded.
This legal bond can be severed only through a court of law, and even then the court may insist on one partner continuing to make provision for the other.
Society lays down the basic rules of the marriage contract.
In addition, the couple make a public covenant to love and to cherish, to help and to comfort in both prosperity and adversity.
Despite the number of marriages broken by divorce, it seems that most young people make their vows in good faith, intend to keep them and see themselves as committed to the other for life.
That is not to say that they may not have doubts, be nervous of, or awed by, the large step they are taking.
The feelings that are carried up the aisle or into the registry office are presumably countless.
The public covenant is underwritten by an emotional covenant, partly unconscious, and binding in its claims.
The emotional covenant is often the first to be formed.
It can hold couples together in a way that may seem to the outsider against all reason.
And it can continue to press its claims beyond divorce and even the death of one partner.
the process of making a commitment to marriage usually involves a number of stages.
Whether or not it is good fortune to fall in love with the person you marry, our culture dictates that this is the basis of proper marriage.
The exclusive and private stage of falling in love is followed by one in which commitment is made public.
A couple may begin living together or formally announce their engagement.
Then follows the  wedding ceremony, marking the beginning of marriage proper and the myriad negotiations of the early years of married life.
The experience of falling in love is frequently the first intimation for two people that they may end up married to each other.
An emotional covenant begins to be formed.
For many, the loved person has to be won.
There are no guarantees that love will be reciprocated.
Manoeuvres have to be carefully planned, subtly executed and brought to a successful conclusion.
The old phrase, ‘all is fair in love and war’, suggests how low we may stoop in order to conquer.
The chase and the conquest take so much time and energy that there is often little room for anything else in life.
For some it is difficult to acknowledge love until they are sure they are loved in return.
For some the love of the chase becomes an end in itself.
There are those who spend their lives courting the unobtainable, pursuing impossible dreams; and there are the Don Juans and femmes fatales who prefer to travel rather than to arrive, leaving behind them a path strewn with broken hearts.
For some, life becomes one long struggle to conquer; the commitment is to conquest.
When a conquest is made, the oneness of the individual is often superseded by a state of oneness in the partnership.
In order to hold on to what is most important to them it is as if the courting couple enter into an unconscious agreement with each other not to expose differences, even if this results in negating themselves.
Outward signs of selfless generosity override the expression of personal needs and insecurities, except when the relationship is threatened by the advances of a third party.
Differences are played down and the self surrendered in what can become a metaphysical experience of the kind described by John Donne:
In this state it can seem as if there is a drive not to know too much about the other person.
In Middlemarch , George Eliot records Dorothea's state of mind as she prepares to marry Mr Casaubon, a man she hardly knows:
She filled up all the blanks with unmanifested perfections, interpreting him as she interpreted the works of Providence and accounting for  seeming discords by her own deafness to the higher harmonies.
And there are many blanks left in the weeks of courtship which a loving faith fills with happy assurance.
The idealized state of being in love is an insecure condition.
There is so much to be won and so much at stake.
Living on cloud nine is intoxicating and precarious.
There is a fear of being found wanting, even found out, and thus the constant threat of a plummeting descent from heaven.
There is a dread of falling from grace.
The process of engaging, seducing and conquering is a time of extreme emotions, of high hopes and despair, of jealousy and triumph, of intense agitation and prolonged inactivity.
The intensity of life at this time led Congreve to compare courtship favourably with marriage as ‘a very witty prologue to a rather dull play’.
The process of idealizing one's partner, turning a blind eye to faults or discrepancies between what is and what is desired, can perform a useful function.
It spurs people into making a commitment to each other.
With commitment and sufficient trust comes more freedom to get to know the other person as he or she really is.
A diminishing fear of loss allows some separateness to develop in the partnership; a two-person relationship which is more substantially based on how things really are between the partners begins to emerge.
As the move towards a shared life begins to take hold, the process of finding a mutually comfortable balance between being together and being apart begins in earnest.
A more critical appraisal becomes possible as partners step back to regard each other.
The realities of what living with this other person might be like begin to be registered and weighed up.
Although a measure of ambivalence is quite usual, it is at this point that a decision is made about going public.
With the greater prevalence of cohabitation as a prelude to marriage, many couples feel they make their public commitment to each other when they set up house together and sign the joint mortgage form.
They may think that they are realistically aware of what they are letting themselves in for and what they need to know about each other 's strengths and weaknesses.
The period of cohabitation is often thought of as a trial marriage.
It certainly is a trial — a trial in living together and forming a partnership.
It is also a public statement about being together.
But in terms of its being easier and cheaper to disband and its not carrying the same legal authority, it is not the same as marriage.
It is a half-way house, an intermediate commitment with no binding promises for the future and a built-in escape route.
The  public ceremony, the ritual, the signing of the contract, which can speak so powerfully to the inner world of the subjects, is absent.
The time many cohabiting couples choose to legalize their union is when they are pleased enough with each other as partners to start a family.
For them, making the legal contract of marriage may feel like a re-statement of a previous covenant and, therefore, not so emotionally decisive and fraught.
both ceremony and party.
They, and those who have not cohabited, may cross the threshold into marriage without much of a backward glance, feeling sure they have ‘arrived’, thankful for having arrived, found their mate, achieved their haven, caught up with their friends, pleased or escaped from their parents.
For women without previous commitment to their own career, dependent as they still often are on the normally higher earnings of men, there may be the excitement of starting their life project, married to their husband's job and caring for him and their much hoped-for children.
Others may be more aware of what they are leaving behind in making their commitment.
They have to come to terms with a loss of freedom, a loss of the chase.
Some may have a thought, even a regret, for the ones that got away — those they might have married but now will not.
Some, when reaching their wedding day, may find it difficult to smile, feeling unhappily trapped, persuaded either by lover or parents into a marriage for which they do not feel ready.
Others, perhaps the most doubting, may not dare to let themselves know their qualms.
Their anxiety may be displaced on to the actual ceremony, making the responses correctly, being the centre of attention, or on to details of the reception or party to be held afterwards.
The wedding ceremony publicly marks the beginning of commitment to another through marriage.
Family and friends are drawn together to witness the covenant and contract the couple make, to launch them into their new life together, and to provide practical help in setting up home.
This public celebration is still usually followed by the private honeymoon, despite the fact that for many it will not be the first holiday they have had together.
The honeymoon is likely to be the more enjoyable for that, no longer burdened by the weight of expectation, and sometimes fear, that spoilt the experience for some in days gone by.
But the question remains — why marry?
Such is the strength of social pressure that many such couples want their children to have married parents.
Fathers who want to exercise shared responsibility for their children may still need the security of the married state; named putative fathers, although legally required to support their  offspring, still have limited rights in respect of them.
Although two thirds of the children born out of wedlock are registered by both parents, and illegitimacy is on the increase, we in Britain have not reached the position arrived at in Sweden where, since I January 1988, partners who live together outside marriage are afforded the same legal rights as those who are married.
THE NEED FOR CONTAINMENT
As well as these social reasons, the commitment of marriage provides a secure framework within which the personal negotiations about space, needs, differences and roles can continue.
The legal bond can be a useful container while partners struggle to come to terms with the ‘me in you’, the phenomenon we described in the last chapter.
When the inner world needs the security of a legally endorsed status, marriage can provide it.
But when the inner world is frightened of commitment for one reason or another, the external legal authority seems to accentuate that fear, raising feelings of being trapped.
Some couples whose cohabitation has worked well for them may be surprised, hurt or bewildered when, legally married, they find their relationship deteriorating.
Such deterioration may not necessarily result from the proclamation of commitment.
If the marriage has been timed to coincide with starting a family, the pregnancy, or the move from a pair to a threesome, may have.
more bearing upon the problems that arise.
But it is likely that within the safety of the legal bond partners shake off some aspects of their public persona and expose more of themselves, particularly those problematic areas of their personalities with which unconsciously they wish to engage.
Just as a young child needs to be contained, given a safe and secure haven from which to explore and develop mastery of skills and to which to retreat when his efforts fail, so too might an adult need security in order to develop fully.
Within the legal container of marriage, the idealization and illusion so characteristic or the in-love state can take a nasty knock.
I he person behind the conquering persona is allowed to emerge as he or she really is.
Not only is this inevitable in day-to-day living together, but also, we believe, it is a proper use of containment.
In the drive to make whole or, at least, a bit more whole, partners may need to regress in order to go forward again.
Containment allows for regression.
Old unresolved conflicts may need to be exposed rather than hidden or disguised.
In the last chapter we described how Bob and Joan Halton had been drawn together — had ‘chosen’ each other— by an unconscious preoccupation with handling their emotional greed.
In their courtship, Joan stressed her good sense and ability to care.
Bob did not overplay his obvious selfishness.
In John Donne's terms, they had acknowledged each other as ‘one another 's best’, but ‘saw not what did move’.
In Joan Halton's attempt to be more whole, she needed to know more about her desire to come first, at least for part of the time, rather than always maintaining the veneer of premature maturity she had felt forced into adopting as a child.
But can she allow herself to get in touch with that needy infant inside her adult self, or does she always have to be the carer, the non-greedy adult, leaving Bob Halton to express all the emotional greed for them both?
(What was need in a child can be seen and experienced as greed in an adult.)
As Jung said, an attempt to leave behind the child which still lives in us all, denies a part of ourselves and results in behaviour of a very childish, as opposed to childlike, kind.
What happens when the unconscious child in Joan Halton finds yet again that she is always losing out, this time to her husband, to his old car on which he dotes or to his mother who is still demanding so much of his time and attention, and that he appears to be forgetting that he is now married and has new first loyalties?
And does Bob Halton have to use his old car or the demands of his mother to protect him from yet another demanding woman, whom he senses beneath the caring, loving girl he married?
Now safely married, does he need to overstate his determination to come first, constantly afraid that if he gives an inch, he will inevitably lose a mile?
Both of them want to be close and both need to repair their inner confusion about what they can allow themselves.
But, as is common, they are also afraid of what they most want.
Joan Halton is disturbed by an old guilt related to the underlying resentment and fury she felt in respect of her younger sister who always seemed to be allowed to come first.
Bob Halton, not guilty enough, but confused by his mother's spoiling and manipulative efforts to keep him for herself, is petrified of being taken over completely.
If they can overcome their fears, they have a chance of doing something about their mutual problem, now explicit between them.
So, the big question is, can they have the necessary row?
Can Joan Halton, within the safety of marriage, dare to protest in a way that gets the protest heard in a way she was not able to do with her mother?
Can Bob  Halton hear the protest and risk giving up some of his ‘I love me’?
Can she get a bit more of ‘I love me’, and feel loved and pleased?
Can a row about the endless Saturday afternoons he now spends bent over the bonnet of his old car be used as a vehicle for their underlying struggle?
Can he, after the row is made up and she has something for herself, be relinquished back to his car, knowing that she is not as greedy as he feared?
Can the car be allowed to be just a car, no longer a symbol of defence against possible demands, feelings about a prettier younger sister or a manipulating mother?
For many couples, this type of row out of bed, often made up in bed, does some useful repairing.
There are many issues people have to address in the aftermath of courtship which are in contrast to the wishes and hopes experienced during it.
But young couples are often surprised, even shocked, by the ferocity of the rows that can suddenly blow up in the first year or two of marriage.
This is not how they perceived each other in the courtship.
The rows may be triggered by a seemingly trivial incident, but it is not felt as trivial when it symbolizes past conflicts and needs.
Usually one constant theme related to the shared preoccupation of the couple underlies the seemingly different causes of rows and arguments.
We shall develop and illustrate this point in the next chapter.
Here we are talking of the emotional covenant, the often unconscious commitment to make the selves of the two partners more whole through the interchange between them — a commitment to stay with the struggle of maturation within the relationship.
As we stated in the first chapter of this book, the developmental task of marriage is to convert the unconscious choice of partner into a conscious commitment.
To do this requires some ability to acknowledge and manage one's own infantile feelings rather than inflexibly to project them into the other.
Many couples stick with this covenant and the hope invested in it, and they make something of the struggle it entails.
Bob and Joan Halton did so.
Joan learned to ask more for herself without feeling too guilty about it.
Bob learned to demand a bit less without confirming his worst fears.
They have solved something important for themselves in the turn and turn about of a twosome.
They still have a problem in managing the demands of Bob's mother, but this is now a shared problem which they discuss and handle together rather than a seat of battle for the two women with Bob torn between them.
They will, no doubt, have further struggles when they start a family and more figures are competing in the hierarchy of need.
However, their ability to tangle with the issue in the first place, and their success in doing so, will give them confidence to face those struggles when they arise again.
Many other couples stay with the commitment to a shared problem but fail to resolve it.
The hope and fear is kept in fairly equal balance.
Hope keeps the partners together; fear militates against any resolution.
Clive and Rose Greenacre, also described in the last chapter, continued to live out their shared problem of fearing abandonment.
It was as if their covenant was both to keep the problem alive and yet to ensure they did nothing about it.
Between them they expressed the opposing feelings so often displayed by young children in the peak age of attachment: on the one hand, the protest and fury about being left — cries of rage — and then a sullen refusal to acknowledge and come to the mother; on the other hand, the desperate yearning for the loved one and a need to cling and not let go.
The mind of a young child is not yet strong enough to hold the two conflicting emotions.
As a result one set of feelings is expressed while the other is repressed.
This is the defence of splitting.
At the age when it first occurs in respect of strong contrary feelings, the young child needs his parents to understand that the greater the yearning, the greater the protest.
Within their firm containment, he can slowly learn about holding mixed feelings — loving and hating the same person.
If left too long in a situation of abandonment, the split is not healed and comes to be used as a predominant defence, as it did with Clive and Rose Greenacre.
Rose expressed only the infantile yearning and clinging.
Any anger about Clive's absences and frequent lateness remained firmly repressed.
In contrast, Clive repressed all his earlier yearnings for closeness, but continued to express the old protest in his detached manner to all and sundry, and in his constant irritation with his wife's agoraphobia and anxiety as to his whereabouts.
Usually his anger seeped out in irritation; just occasionally his partial defence broke down and he emptied in an explosion of fury.
Despite the difficulties in their relationship they were unable to part.
The fear of abandonment and being on their own was stronger than the discomfort of the existing situation.
for them, separation symbolized the loss of hope.
By staying together they were at least keeping their problem alive, even if failing to resolve it.
This common type of defensive splitting between married couples is often seen most clearly in retrospect when for some reason the joint defence is breached.
In therapy, Rose Greenacre managed to get in touch with the anger she had previously been unable to feel consciously.
Clive Greenacre, then expressing only his own anger and not hers as well, became less irritable.
Rose, in her newly felt anger, started to complain about Clive's detached behaviour.
As her anger was released, she became less agoraphobic.
She even thought that she might leave him.
Clive then became less sure of her whereabouts and so of himself.
She was no longer safely where he had left her and waiting for his return.
She no longer provided him with a defence against his own yearning for safety which had been so well hidden behind his off-hand behaviour.
Only then, when she was no longer expressing the yearning for him, did he learn of his own need.
Faced with the t quite suicidal.
He, previously so detached, was now begging her not to leave him.
These changes meant that they needed to form a new covenant based on some understanding of their mutual fears, their tendency to split their feelings between them, and their need to respect each other 's yearnings and protests, now more readily experienced by each of them.
They needed to understand that, at times, one or other symbolized the abandoning parent, reactivating in the other the child's need to protest or cling.
expressed by one partner asking to be contained, the other being prepared to contain.
Clive and Rose Greenacre's initial commitment could be seen in these terms, Rose in effect saying, ‘Keep me safe, let me cling’, Clive continuing to allow her to do so despite his irritation.
Jung wrote vividly about this type of covenant.
He suggested that the one who asks for containment usually has a simpler personality than the container who has a tendency to dissociate.
He said, ‘The one who is contained feels himself living entirely within the confines of his marriage; outside the marriage there exist no essential obligations and no binding interests.’
The container, on the other hand, with his tendency to dissociate, ‘has an especial need to unify himself in an undivided love’, but finds the simpler personality of his partner does not complement and satisfy the diverse facets of his own.
According to Jung, a simpler nature works on a more complicated one ‘like a room that is too small’, not allowing the partner enough space.
The more complex partner gives the simpler nature too much space, so that he does not know where he belongs.
The more complicated feel they cannot be contained ‘in such a small room’ and then start ‘spying through the window’.
The more the contained attempts to cling, the more the container feels ‘shut out of the relationship’.
The greater the attempt to cling, the less the container can respond, thereby providing confirmation of the insecurity which feels so painful.
We have found that these roles are not always as clearly divided as may appear at first sight.
The obvious and conscious container is sometimes  unconsciously contained and vice-versa.
For example, Rose Greenacre's agoraphobia was a useful container for Bob Greenacre.
The reader may remember Irene and Soames in The Forsyte Saga .
Irene, with an apparently much more complicated nature, felt restricted and confined by the simpler-natured Soames:
was seldom indeed far from Irene's side at public functions, and, even when separated by the exigencies of social intercourse, could be seen following her about with his eyes, in which were strange expressions of watchfulness and longing…
It was hard, when a man worked as hard as he did, making money for her — yes, and with an ache in his heart — that she should sit there, looking — as if she saw the walls of the room closing in.
Irene felt increasingly outside the marriage and started ‘spying through the window’ at the more complex-seeming Bosinney.
The more Soames pushed, the more she felt alienated and the more he felt rejected, the vicious circle culminating in the so-called rape.
Yet it was clear after Irene left him that she, too, was badly in need of a container, and finally found one in Young Jolyon.
Marriage partners are, perhaps, in the greatest difficulty when both are desperately seeking only to be contained, when neither can perceive the equivalent need in the other and provide accordingly.
Then they become enmeshed in a desperate struggle about who is to be the baby.
But we could say that in any marriage it is important for both partners to be able to contain and at times to say ‘enough is enough’.
TRAPS
We mentioned earlier in this chapter that some people feel uncomfortable or trapped by the public contract of marriage, yet still allow themselves to be married.
In some cases this may be a result of parental pressure and an earlier lack of encouragement to grow up and exercise adult autonomy.
Marriage may feel yet one more place into which they have been pushed, one more area in which they have not been allowed to exercise their own choice.
For others, the feeling of being trapped may arise from an early blueprint drawn  up when they were literally helpless and unable to do anything about an intolerable situation or to get out of it on their own.
The feeling of helplessness then continues to overshadow and influence later relationships.
These people may need to get married — trapped — to prove that they can get out, that divorce is not impossible, to discover that they can influence and do something about the situation.
Many otherwise inexplicable early divorces are about proving that one person can get out of a trap and another can let him or her go.
Hopefully once will be enough, but not always.
Some of the ‘trapped’ learn that a trap is not so bad after all; some traps can prove quite comfortable or can be modified to suit the individual.
There will be those who have gloried in the excitement of the chase and the passion of sex during courtship.
Once married and committed to their partner, they may find excitement has flown out of the window.
Some loss of excitement is inevitable.
One of the many issues young people have to address in the aftermath of courtship is that they and their partners have feet of clay.
Married life is partly about living with ordinariness.
Most people want to be special and know they are special to their loved and chosen partner.
But acceptance of ordinariness is also important.
In Patrick White's The Free Man , Stan and Amy Parker are comforted only by habit ‘…like warm drinks and slippers’, and in their emotionally empty house ‘…dusty light spilled from the windows.
That was all.’
Yet there is a place for drinks and slippers, and many younger and older couples can know about their mutual ordinariness so that they do not have to strive, posture or compete; and yet they still keep a specialness and excitement in each other alive.
In contrast, other people who are afraid of being ordinary and who miss the diversion of continual excitement may need to create a series of crises and emotionally charged situations to reassure themselves that they are alive.
Such people often have a fragile sense of identity or are desperately frightened of a feeling of emptiness within themselves.
As the protagonist in Kafka's Conversation with a Suppliant confessed: ‘There has never been a time in which I have been convinced from within myself that I am alive.’
Sometimes the crises are kept within the marriage.
Sometimes, when much excitement was previously invested in the chase and conquest of courtship, the partners may need to continue to reassure themselves of being able to win love and move from one sexual conquest to another outside the marriage.
Some partners, unsure of their  lovability , may use affairs to get themselves reclaimed by their partner.
The underlying covenant may be concerned with constant reclamation — reclaiming and being reclaimed.
Other couples, not afraid of ordinariness, may also find they are unable to  create any of their own excitement within the commitment of marriage.
They use ordinariness as a defence against excitement.
In these cases their blueprint continues to give stem warnings that excitement in the home is dangerous.
Too many early messages of ‘Don't get excited, it'll only end in tears’ have become etched in the mind.
Often a fear of violence underlies the command of safety and prohibition against excitement.
For some people excitement is only possible outside marriage.
The commitment is to what is safe.
But why, we can ask, is excitement permissible outside marriage, and not within?
What is the taboo on life and liveliness inside the family?
The answer is often connected with incestuous fears.
Once married, the partner can take on the shadow of a forbidding parent: ‘Sex is dirty; sex is bad.’
If the parent of the opposite sex was unconsciously seductive with this adult when a young child, and if the excitement of the love of and for this parent was felt to be too dangerous, or was disapproved of by the parent of the same sex, passion and excitement within marriage may continue to be forbidden by an inner imperative.
An American writer, Searles, wrote vividly about the importance of acknowledging strong, romantic feelings between parents and children of the opposite sex.
Speaking of his daughter, he said,
I used at times to feel somewhat worried when she would play the supremely confident coquette with me and I would be enthralled by her charms, but then I came to the conviction, some time ago, that such moments of relatedness could only be nourishing for her developing personality as well as delightful to me.
If a little girl cannot feel herself able to win the heart of her father, her own father who has known her so well and so long, and is tied to her by mutual blood-ties, I reasoned, then how can the young woman who comes later have any deep confidence in the power of her womanliness.
And I have every impression, similarly, that the Oedipal desires of my son…have found a similarly lively and whole-hearted feeling response in my wife.
In continuing to speak of healthy relationships between children and parents, Searles emphasised the resolution of the Oedipal strivings, not just by the child's identification with the parents of the same sex, not just by the final taboo and containment of the feelings, but also by the parent's renunciation of the reciprocated romantic feelings with a real sense of loss, and also by the love between the parents to which the child owed his existence.
Firm acknowledgement and containment of what are natural, but could be dangerous, feelings in childhood offer a useful blueprint to be carried into marriage.
So, too, does the ability of parents to relinquish the young developing adult first to boyfriend or girlfriend, and finally to marriage partner.
CONFLICTING COMMITMENTS
People make many different commitments in the course of a lifetime.
Some of these are compatible with the commitment made to a spouse, others compete for priority.
Their nature changes over time and requires couples to renegotiate their covenant with each other time and time again.
From the outset, there may be conflict between the commitment of marriage and a commitment to parents.
The continuing popularity of ‘mother-in-law’ jokes reinforces a universally recognized truth that marriage does not necessarily release people from the grip of their parents.
That pull may have been stronger in the past than today.
Nowadays there are opportunities for men and women to live away from home without getting married.
Yet all couples have to make the break from home, emotionally if not physically, if they are to be free to make a marriage work.
Even today, the expense and shortage of houses means that many couples will start married life living with one or other of their sets of parents.
There is, therefore, a triangular situation to be resolved by all couples when establishing their marriage.
Who is to come first?
This question can become a major source of friction.
One young wife described the problem in terms which will be recognizable to many young newly-weds:
‘…we were both pulling in opposite directions, and I felt Brian was siding with his mother rather than standing up for me or remaining in the middle.
He was not supporting me in the way I felt he should support me.
We actually split up for a few days because his mother sent a Christmas card to him and not to me.
I said, ‘Why can't you tell your mother now we're married she must send her Christmas card to both of us'’, but he couldn't tell her.'
Early in marriage a re-ordering of priorities is necessary, and some couples can run into trouble if their commitment to, or dependence upon, healthy robust parents cannot be allowed to take second place to their commitment to their new partner.
But it is unwise to assume that parents will inevitably pose a problem when they are placed first.
Some marriages are based on a tacit, if not explicit, agreement that parents have prior claims.
Some people marry into families rather than commit themselves to a partner.
Later in marriage a particularly keen sense of commitment may be felt towards aged or ailing parents.
Obviously there is less conflict if the commitment is shared by both partners, but it can become a source of tension and disagreement.
Parents are not the only people to be relegated when couples are establishing a joint identity.
We have already referred to those who find it difficult to give up ‘playing the field’ and continue to behave as if they are still single.
Ordinary friendships and activities outside the marriage can also cause tension if they take no account of marital commitments, as another young woman found out:
‘Christopher got this money and spent it on a holiday skiing.
I was put out, but not drastically put out.
But then, afterwards, I learned that the other members of the party had accepted him as a bachelor and he had gone along with that.’
Becoming a couple takes time; commitment has to be made to a joint identity.
Some people, brought up in the expectation of forging a career and getting near the top if not right to the top in their profession, may be deeply committed to their work.
(These days people are often less committed to the actual firm they work for than in the past.
The greater size of many firms, and the social and spatial distance between owners and workers or top managers and lower managers, do not promote the loyalties and identifications that were once part of many people's working life.)
But again there need be no problem in the marriage if the partner is equally committed to and supports the career climb.
In this type of marriage there is little blurring of roles.
Usually it is the husband who is committed to his career and to increasing his earning capacity, and who is dependent upon his wife for most if not all of the child care and domestic responsibilities, organization, routine, style and comfort.
The wife, dependent on her husband's increasing earnings, is committed to the work of home-making for him and their children.
However, as women increasingly go out to work the possibility of conflicting loyalties becomes stronger.
We shall return to this issue in Chapter 6.
In many marriages the commitment to children can at times be in conflict  with the earlier commitment to the partner.
Difficult choices have to be made between opposing needs.
There may be less conflict for those people whose underlying commitment in marriage is to parenting rather than partnering.
Partnering for them is a means to the end of parenting.
Such couples are often recognized by the loss of their first names: they become Mummy and Daddy to one another as well as to the children.
them may be, partners can feel deserted by each other when most in need of help and support.
Husbands may resent the exclusive nature of the nursing couple — mother and baby apparently absorbed only in each other— and long to be included.
Wives, becoming less absorbed as babies become more clearly their own persons, but often remaining tied, tired or bored by the demands of toddlers, perhaps feeling lonely and lacking enough external stimulus, may similarly find themselves resenting and envying what they see as their husbands' ‘freedom’ of action.
Few of us are immune from envy.
Envy between the sexes is so common that we could say it is inevitable — even natural.
People who can allow themselves to know about their envy at least give themselves a chance of attempting to handle it relatively wisely.
Those less in touch with the feeling, or unconsciously consumed by repressed but unmitigated envy from their own infancy, are often in trouble when a real baby is part of the married scene.
For a person who has been severely deprived in early childhood, envy of the baby who is receiving all the care that was and still is so much wanted can feel intolerable.
Whether conscious or not of their own envy, the people in the most difficulty are those who feel they have been born the wrong sex — suspicious, or even quite clear, that their parents desperately wanted them to be the boy or girl they were not.
They can never realize the parental aspiration other than in a superficial way, and they are left not only with the envy of the sex they were meant to be, but also unable to enjoy the sex which they are and the advantages which pertain to it.
Largely preoccupied by a sense of not being able to win, they have little sense of commitment to themselves, let alone to a person of the opposite sex.
With no experience of being accepted for who and what they were and are, it is hard for them in their turn to accept the other for what he or she is, or is becoming.
Most probably, having married their own problem in their unconscious choice of partner — one who also disappoints — it will be particularly difficult for them to convert this inevitably disappointing choice into conscious commitment.
Sometimes commitments are made to those outside marriage in order to buttress a wavering commitment to the self.
A parent, hobby, friend, lover, child or job may be introduced to provide a buffer against claims from the partner which threaten to overwhelm the self.
Such triangular set-ups provide a means of regulating distance in a marriage, and may represent a bid to retain freedom and independence.
The interactive nature of marriage means that such actions can have escalating effects.
The more one partner backs off, the more the other may be impelled to pursue.
Pursuit encourages further retreat, and so a vicious spiral is established which can destabilize a relationship.
Finding an acceptable balance between closeness and distance is, as we have said, an age-old relationship conundrum.
Kahlil Gibran's Prophet captured the paradox with his use of imagery:
Sing and dance together and be joyous, but let each one of you be alone,
Even as the strings of the lute are alone though
they quiver with the same music.
And stand together yet not too near together:
For the Pillars of the temple stand apart,
And the oak tree and the cypress grow not in
each others' shadow.
The same oppositional balance is expressed in more prosaic language by two men who each described one of the two polarities:
‘I've always disliked the idea of couples when they're like Siamese twins, like it's always ‘Charlie and Kate'’, and it's never one alone.
If people see Charlie on his own they say ‘Where's Kate? '’, and vice versa.
I've never liked that approach.’
‘We look at other couples where you see the man with his hobbies and his pint, and the wife has her friends and bingo.
Although they live together and have children they don't seem to be a couple, they just seem to be two people who do their own thing.
We don't want to fall into that situation.
That would be terrible.’
Life is complex when partners are bidding for marriage and family life as well as for themselves.
We could say that the conflict in any modern marriage is between the needs of self, the needs of the partnership (each partner wanting to support the other, but refusing to be swamped by or subjugated to the other), the needs of children, the needs of the family as a group and the needs of those outside the family.
There is plenty of scope for  conflicting commitments.
With the options now open to couples, commitments and covenants will need to be renegotiated and re-formulated many times in the course of a lifetime as family groups move through different stages.
An ability to communicate is essential in this process.
There must be a dialogue in marriage.
We go on now to look at the importance of the dialogue, and the problems which can occur when communication breaks down.
Intercourse
THICK SKINS AND THIN SKINS
Intercourse, whether mental or physical, requires penetration.
One person's idea can influence and spark off a better idea in another, and through the interchange something can be created which is more useful than either could achieve alone.
Words, smiles, laughs and hugs can warm the heart of another.
Bodies can invite or offer penetration and so create an embryo.
Creation through entry and reception sounds so easy, but…
Words and bodies can repel as well as attract.
They can chill and starve as well as warm and nourish.
They can do both at the same time.
Voice, eyes, mouth and posture can contradict the actual verbal message.
Stony, glassy eyes can contradict smiling mouths.
Smiles can also be chilly, just as words can bite and sneer.
Apparently warming hugs can be most ungiving and greedily grasping for the self.
And bodies can fail to respond to the dictates of the conscious mind.
Emotions, and particularly conflicting emotions, are powerful in their ascendance over intellect and they may display themselves more accurately through the body than through words.
Feelings that have been firmly repressed, near the surface yet still not sufficiently available to be formed into words, can express themselves through bodily symptoms; if these feelings relate to permeability, they may well be expressed on the skin -rashes, blotches, spots and boils — and become boundary symptoms.
Must people identity coldness with hostility and deprivation; warmth with friendliness, nourishment, closeness and intimacy.
Yet no one can tolerate too much intimacy.
The closer we allow ourselves to get to another, the more we are affected and influences both consciously and unconsciously through the projective system or defence we described in the last two chapters.
We need to move away as well as towards.
Some people can never  dare to move closer because of the inevitable withdrawal that must follow; the prospect feels too chilly by contrast.
Finding a comfortable emotional distance, encouraging and allowing some penetration without being taken over completely, is the task of all relationships.
A major factor in maintaining relationships is the measure of success people have in finding a mutually comfortable distance.
In writing of the ‘sediment’ of aversion and hostility which exists in every intimate relationship, even the most loving, Freud quoted Schopenhauer's famous simile of the freezing porcupines:
A company of porcupines crowded themselves together one cold winter's day so as to profit from one another 's warmth and so save themselves from being frozen to death.
But soon they felt one another 's quills, which induced them to separate again.
And now, when the need for warmth brought them nearer together again, the second evil arose once more.
So they were driven backwards and forwards from one trouble to the other, until they had discovered a mean distance at which they could tolerably exist.
Some people's quills are longer than those of others.
Some people have thick skins, others have thin ones and are more easily hurt.
There is no correct distance, although as Rilke said, ‘A good marriage is that which appoints the other as guardian of his solitude.’
But just as some marriages can at times feel suffocating, so they may at others feel uncomfortably distant.
As Byng-Hall has written, ‘Spouses need to know and heed these signs.’
He described an adequate marriage as having periods of intimacy interspersed with periods of autonomy for both partners, who, at the same time, do not allow the relationship to become too tenuous and know that the other will be there when needed.
Let us look in more detail at the difficulties inherent for everyone in appropriate penetration and then at the problems that can arise in marriage when these are or an extreme nature.
We consider these difficulties in relation firstly to verbal and bodily intercourse ‘out of bed’ and, secondly, verbal, bodily and sexual intercourse ‘in bed’.
OUT OF BED
Even when our conscious feelings are not in a state of conflict, it is difficult to portray them relatively accurately in words, but it is much more so when they are.
Probably, when our feelings are consistent, the words, perhaps stumbling and inadequate, matter less.
We can be trite or clumsy in our choice of words, but the strength of feeling is adequately conveyed.
Some people are better than others in the use of words, but for some feelings, words always seem grossly inadequate.
Sometimes, with the best of intentions, the words do not come out quite right.
And it is difficult to know how they will be heard.
How thick or thin is the other's skin?
A simple word which to one person is relatively neutral can be emotive dynamite to another.
Similarly, some words which are meant to stir can leave others unmoved.
In Chapter 3 we spoke of the importance of being able to signal, and of the influence of early experiences in acquiring confidence that signals will be seen or heard and then responded to.
Is it safe to ask directly?
If we cannot ask directly, if we cannot risk a ‘No’, do we have to scream for what we want?
Or do we use stealth to obtain it?
Perhaps ‘Thank you’ and ‘Sorry’, so easy to say to a stranger, are two of the most difficult words to say to our nearest and dearest.
If some words are emotionally difficult to form — stay like stones in the throat — a verbal diarrhoea by which every thought and feeling has to be expelled forthwith can be equally uncommunicative.
It induces others to ‘shut off’ and refuse further penetration.
It also allows the diarrhoetic person no time for listening or taking in from the other.
How difficult it is to listen to others!
Perhaps it is one of the most difficult things in life.
Most of us value a good listener.
But in the business of everyday life, in our self-absorption which at times takes over, the request for attention may feel intrusive just when we do not want to be intruded upon.
And what if the request for attention conflicts with our own similar need, as in the incident we described in Chapter I under ‘Babies and Bathwater’, where both partners were tired and needed recognition before they could meet the similar need in the other.
Who can be allowed to come first?
Will I have a good enough share of time if I allow myself to listen first and tell second?
Are the signals clear? is my attention really needed at this moment, or can it wait?
Do I have to permit penetration now?
And when our partners are not good with words, can we notice the  communications made by the body?
Some people express more of their feelings through their eyes, their hands or their whole posture than through their words.
Different people make more use or one sense than another: they may see more than they hear; or they may feel more than they see, even though they have sight.
June and Robert Braithwaite complained of their inability to communicate.
June described the depth of her frustration when she could not get Robert to respond to her words.
She felt guilty about nagging but driven to do so.
When nagging failed, her frustration reached a pitch in which she screamed and threw objects round the house.
Would nothing less than a scream or a thrown object penetrate him?
Words were important to her.
She liked them, read a lot, and in unemotional situations could use them well.
She described herself as introspective, and when not totally frustrated she could analyse much of her behaviour and choose what she would or would not say.
She now wondered if she and Robert had ever communicated properly.
She thought they had started from different points, although she had wanted to marry him after only a few meetings because he ‘felt good to be with’.
Robert had been attracted to her ‘lively mind’, feeling himself inadequate with words.
Then he had valued her ability to express things for them both.
Now he said he found it difficult to show his feelings, but he clearly experienced the world through his senses, particularly touch.
He wanted to touch June more than she wanted to be touched and he was bitterly upset that June was rejecting him sexually.
She thought he was just ‘using’ her in bed.
Without being aware of it, he punished her for this deeply felt bodily rejection in bed by withdrawing his body out of bed.
When not working, he was playing sport, busy with his hands or training his dog.
He spoke lovingly of the dog and his words were most explicit when he explained how he understood its ‘learning by association’.
He did a lot for the children, warmed and warming in his need to hold and touch them.
He could never understand why June became so irritated by his ‘never reading the directions’.
She could not understand that he preferred to work things out for himself ‘by the feel’.
What he experienced through his hands made more sense to him than written words of instruction.
Although Robert used his body more than words to communicate, he failed to recognize June's bodily communications when her words failed to penetrate him.
Even the violent messages, when she threw things round the room, went unheeded.
She was the ‘mad’ one, rather than a person trying to get him to hear.
When she cried in the first therapeutic session, he could not  move over to comfort her and was surprised when the therapist drew attention to this strong communication which he had ignored.
In this first session she demonstrated how she nagged him and went on and on trying to get the response she wanted.
At one point he corrected her too easily made assumption and then pointed out to the therapist that he had shown his feelings: his voice had risen because her remarks had made him angry.
‘You've seen I'm cross, haven't you?’ he asked.
His anger had been just barely visible to a carefully watching eye.
At the end of the session, June Braithwaite said she had found it useful; she had not needed to become hysterical, and he had not been able to leave and disappear into the kitchen.
Like many previous philosophers and psychologists, Jung devised a typology to distinguish personality types, the characteristic ways in which different people use their minds and react to their environment.
First he distinguished the extroverted person from the introverted one — attitude types, as he called them.
The extrovert relates strongly to the world about him, to things outside himself and to other people.
He seeks less of his own company and moves more towards others than away from them.
He can be uncomfortable, even distressed if the world is too bare or temporarily unpeopled.
He may well ask for space for himself, but always space in relation to another.
He is often a practical person.
In contrast, the introverted person is concerned with the space between people and objects.
He seeks out and moves into gaps.
A lot of the time he needs space just for himself, to move on his own.
More often his thoughts, feelings and responses centre on his inner world, his imagery and on understanding phenomena both inside and outside himself.
No one is totally of one type or the other.
Many primarily introverted people can deal with the outside world when required, just as many extroverts can deal with ideas when this is needed.
Jung's distinction drew attention to whether a person relates predominantly to others and less to the self or vice versa.
Secondly, he distinguished between four different ‘function types’, based on the way people perceive and judge the world.
Related to perception were two strongly contrasting ways of taking in and becoming aware of what was happening.
The first was through the five senses.
The second was by intuition, a much less conscious process than sensation.
In this second case a person was less aware of the actual stimulus but quickly in tune with his own associations and what he could ‘read between the lines’.
The two other main functions concerned contrasting ways of judging and ordering these perceptions.
First, there was thinking: a logical, conscious and often impersonal  process.
Second, there was feeling, the word used not in the conventional sense, but to describe a much less consciously formulated process of appreciation and subjective valuation.
These four functions can be combined in one of four ways:
sensing and thinking
sensing and feeling
intuition and thinking
intuition and feeling
They can also be combined with extroverted or introverted attitude types thus making eight combinations in all.
So with one of the four functions normally predominant over the other three we can speak of a sensate, intuitive, thinking or feeling type of person, who can be either extroverted or introverted.
These combinations produce very different types of personality, and conflict can easily occur when people are using opposite ways of perceiving and making judgements.
Just as people show a preference for one way of perceiving and one way of making judgements, they also, said Jung, show a preference between the processes of perceiving and judging.
Some people keep their mind more open to further perceptions and are slow to judge.
Others arrive at verdicts much more quickly.
So we can often distinguish between people who live their life as it happens and those who run their lives.
The predominant use of one function rather than another is not, said Jung, to be despised.
Just as a ship needs a captain, so too does the individual need a governing principle.
If, for example, two perceptive functions are of equal weight, they tend to interfere with and jam each other .
One perceptive and one judging process can develop side by side, provided one remains subordinate and auxiliary to the other.
Thus a primary perceptive function can be supported by an auxiliary judging process and vice versa, but thinking and feeling can never support each other , nor can sensation and intuition.
Clearly it is easier to assess the predominant function used by an extrovert than that used by an introvert, just because the extrovert likes immediate communication.
But it is important not to rush into too neat or speedy a conclusion about another person's main and natural form of mental functioning.
In an over-determined upbringing and education, a child or young person can be forced into a way of using their mind antithetical to their own natural bias.
People functioning on an imposed bias may be severely handicapped when what they think is expected of them is at some level distonic to their whole being.
Obviously this typology has immense implications for educational methods, for communication generally, and for choice of marriage partner.
As we described in Chapter 3, some people base their marriage on identification, others on complementarity.
They may marry an extroverted intuitive-thinking type like themselves, or an introverted sensation-feeling type quite unlike themselves.
The complementary combination may well be more creative eventually, but more difficult to handle in the process of communication and working out how much space a couple ask of and can offer to each other.
Robert Braithwaite soon emerged strongly is a sensation type with feeling as his auxiliary function.
At the time we first met him his limited confidence in himself had been further undermined by June Braithwaite's derision of his way of ‘going on’.
Just because she used many more words, he thought of her as a thinking type.
But in Jung's terms she was an intuitive-feeling type.
As she said when talking about their courtship, ‘I wanted to marry him because I felt good with him.
I can't explain it any further.’
Her perception was not clearly defined by sensations and she made a value judgement not based on a logical process.
Robert also made value-judgements, but based these judgements on actual sensations.
Despite her normal command over words, June Braithwaite found it difficult to ask in ways that were likely to obtain for her what she wanted.
Instead of asking Robert to spend more time with her at the weekends, she blamed him for being absent when something quite minor happened to one of the children.
Blaming the other is a common phenomenon and we all resort to it at times, whether justified or not.
Those who blame most and ask least —‘You never do anything for me’, ‘You never take me out’— are usually very vulnerable, deprived people with little basic trust that others will or can be helpful.
Continued blame is often a communication of despair.
This despair frequently relates back to early experiences when adults were literally more powerful than children and were therefore blamed by those children for some of the awful things, real or imaginary, that happened to them.
Those who perpetually blame others often find attachment very difficult but are frightened of separating and being alone.
They want other people to come close, but are petrified when closeness is offered.
In their ambivalence, their way of asking often ensures that they do not get the closeness they say they want.
In the last chapter we described the defence of splitting between the anger and the yearning aroused by the absence of the needed, safe figure.
An  adult's constant blaming of another can also be heard as the angry protest of the deprived internal infant within that adult body, and when it turns to whining, may also serve to express the yearning and become an attempt to control the whereabouts of the other.
Invariably it is an ineffective communication as it antagonizes and also leaves the subject not knowing whether help would otherwise have been offered spontaneously.
not like outside themselves.
They often remain in a state of despair that the world at large and their nearest friends and relatives treat them so badly.
The split in the mind, formed so early in their lives, becomes a predominant defence against feeling and knowing more about themselves.
When both partners in a marriage consistently blame the other and suffer from the accompanying underlying despair, the marriage is likely to be in difficulties from the beginning.
In the rows and fights which ensue, the pot calls the kettle black.
The continued process is often accentuated by disappointment in the other because of an earlier idealization.
At the age when such a split is formed, such is the yearning for the food, comfort, holding and love which are withheld that the good becomes idealized.
With the smallest fall from grace, it is quickly turned into badness.
In adult years, help from the partner never feels quite sufficient and, therefore, cannot be appreciated.
All that is required must be offered and, if it is not all , it is felt to be useless.
Sometimes when two such people marry, they maintain a loving, close relationship by projecting all the blame into the outside world.
As a couple, they appear as ‘babes in the wood’, helpless and hopeless together as they would be on their own, beset by the awfulness of everyone else.
Other people, with a mountain of blame in their inner world which they are afraid to express, may use their partner to do this for them.
One partner then blames, blames, and blames again both inside and outside the marriage.
The other, frightened of a similar propensity, consciously abhors what becomes so tedious, but unconsciously fuels the fury and whine because of the need to keep in touch with the repudiated blaming, whining self.
Those who have been immensely blamed, or felt they were blamed, may well marry a blaming partner.
If they can become less blamed, they will then have resolved something important for themselves.
Things had gone seriously wrong for Derek Young when his younger brother ran out into the road, was hit by a car, and suffered severe brain damage from which he never recovered, spending the rest of his life as a vegetable in a long-stay hospital.
Derek's father never recovered from this  loss and refused to acknowledge the younger child's previous or continued existence.
Derek remained confused.
He had vague memories of a brother who apparently did not exist any more.
He was led to believe there never had been a brother.
He could not make it out, nor could he trust his own memory.
At the time his brother was injured and disappeared, the five-year-old Derek was still of an age when thinking is often magical in quality and wrong connections can be made.
Somewhere in his mind was a misconnection that his anger with his brother had actually killed him.
Just before the accident, he had snatched his favourite toy from his brother and had been stopped by his mother from hitting him over the head.
The immediate thought that his anger had killed his brother was so terrible that he repressed it; his loss of memory abetted his father's dismissal of the injured child.
Derek grew up to be a careful young man, never prizing any possession too much and desperately afraid of making a mistake.
Mis-spoken words were too dangerous.
He trained and practised as a solicitor, was excessively conscientious, and always warned his clients, as he warned himself, that any ill-thought out actions could spell disaster of some unspecified kind.
Stoically he put up with the complaints of his wife, Elsie.
Despite his meeting so many of her demands on his time and attention, she often complained about and blamed him for his inattentiveness.
There was much truth in this accusation, as he remained obsessed by his inner confusion and disturbing half-memories.
He was a bad listener.
In therapy he was helped to recall what had been so bothering to him and illogically connected.
With the safety and containment of the therapy behind him, he dared (but still unconsciously) to make a mistake in his work.
He succeeded in no uncertain terms.
It was a bad mistake.
He expected to be sacked.
But no, it turned out to be a most therapeutic mistake.
The partners of his firm acknowledged that the back-up had not been sufficient.
The whole firm, working as a team, set about rectifying his mistake.
Even bad mistakes, he learned, could be retrieved.
Even more amazing, Elsie, who had been getting in touch with her previously repudiated strengths, stopped complaining for the day.
Instead of telephoning him at work to blame or to demand attention for herself, she responded to the emergency and visited the office with soup and sandwiches to keep them all going through the evening.
Many books of advice assure people that once they start communicating properly, all their troubles will be over.
This is easier said than done.
People can go on communicating for hours on end, but if they are not talking about  the really important issue, the time is not well spent.
Often what needs to be communicated is not fully conscious.
One constant theme often underlies a series of quarrels or rows on seemingly different issues.
At one level, Bob and Joan Halton rowed about his old car and his mother.
At a deeper level, they rowed about greed — guilt about greed and protection from supposedly greedy women.
At one level, June Braithwaite attacked Robert about the time he spent away from home and what he did and did not do for the children.
The frustration he caused her was the keynote of every one-sided altercation.
Yet much of her frustration was of her own making and within herself.
Her father had expected excessively high standards of her as a child — better deportment, better table manners and better school reports — all of which she felt she could never attain.
She projected a fused image of her father and mother on to Robert.
He became the rejecting father who never helped her, while at the same time she asked him to be mother and take over.
When he did take over, his touching, hugging care of the children, which they adored, made her feel even more inadequate.
Robert was one of a large family.
As a child he had felt very unnoticed, lost in the middle between older and younger children.
He soon learned to find solace on his own out of doors.
He had wanted to be more noticed as a child.
June, too, had wanted to be noticed for herself and not just for fading to attain impossibly high standards.
We could say that most of their quarrels were about notice — who noticed whom and in connection with what.
In their defensive exchanges, they ceased to value what had first so attracted them to each other.
June's having noticed him when they first met and her ability to put things into words now became unbearable to Robert.
She took too much notice of his comings and goings and her sharp words pierced his skin (not as thick as she supposed) through to the heart.
His once quiet, undemanding ease now felt to her a lack of response, a rejecting casual indifference.
Some couples, highly intelligent and normally with a good command over words, manage to keep themselves endlessly but unknowingly confused.
They may have many detailed conversations without realizing that each has attributed a different meaning to the ‘it’ or the ‘that’they are talking about.
They continue to converse at cross purposes and wonder why their numerous conversations never seem to get anywhere or resolve any disagreement.
It seems that there is an underlying need to keep things private  and undisturbed by the other — a refusal to allow penetration.
People who fall into this habit often have a weak sense of identity and have felt very taken over as children, not allowed their own thoughts and feelings, nor to be themselves.
Unconsciously they create a smokescreen of confusion as a defence against the fear of being taken over.
Other ineffective communicators fail to mention what ‘it’ actually is because they still carry an infantile illusion of being able to fuse with another — an unconscious belief, wish or rueful hope that one person can get inside the mind of another.
They expect a loved one to understand without first being told; perfect, intuitive empathy is anticipated.
Brenda Acton, a seemingly competent and well-organized person, had a habit of talking about various events in her life as if other people had prior knowledge of the circumstances leading up to these events.
It always sounded as if one should have known, had been told before and was rather foolish to have forgotten.
She complained bitterly about her husband being so confused and his always forgetting what she had told him without having any insight into her own ability to confuse him and other people.
But as a child she had many times been wrested (as it felt to her) from her known environment into some strange place, leaving her totally confused.
Once she suddenly landed up in hospital for what was not an emergency; several times she had found herself in a new home; and on one occasion she had arrived in another country with a new ‘father’— all without warning or previous explanation.
All big changes in her young life had been suddenly thrust upon her.
She had experienced her mother as a distant figure who at times just grabbed her and moved her about, but she had not had the physical and emotional closeness that she craved and needed.
In her attempt to get closer to her mother she had unknowingly identified with the mother's way of not explaining anything.
Then, in her attempt to experience more closeness to her husband and to drive him to understand what she felt like but could not make conscious or put into words, she did to him what had been done to her.
She left him confused, just as she had been left confused.
This is a common phenomenon.
When words and memories fail, enactments take over as attempts at communication.
Frustration with the ineffectiveness of words lies behind a lot of physical violence.
It may seem odd to think of battering as an attempt to get close.
But battering, like blaming, can serve the expression of opposing feelings.
Fury at the behaviour of the other, or at what the other symbolizes, can be a desperate attempt to get physically and emotionally closer by sharing the  experience of what it is like to be battered.
Even if we find it difficult to imagine the strength of feeling behind this ambivalence, most of us can recall or visualize the ambivalence in a parent's action when given a ‘friendly cuff’, or when threatened with a poised hand and a laughing voice.
Some severely neglected children do at times actually value a cuff, a blow or a kick.
Their sad reasoning goes that at least they are noticed when hit, and this is better than what otherwise feels like oblivion.
In a family in which ‘asking’ is always done by a threatening fist, and physical violence is the usual means of expressing ill-temper or frustration, the difference between welfare and ill-fare is the strength of the blow rather than the fact that it happened.
As we have seen, conscious or unconscious envy of what the other is, or has, underlies much of the fury and frustration which is expressed in physical violence.
Envy is one of the strongest antidotes to love and has its roots in the innate and primitive anger and anxiety of infancy.
When the fury in the bedevilled infant is not constantly mediated by proper care, comfort and attention, it festers and finds expression in later life.
Anything which symbolizes the early lack of care can strengthen or pierce the defences.
With adult weight behind uncontrolled infantile panic, the flailing arm strikes and damages.
Christopher Watts could not understand why he had attacked his wife.
The unpredictability and inexplicability of his action added to his terror as well as to hers.
The world ‘went blank’, he said.
‘Is my violence akin to madness?’ he asked his therapist.
He talked of his harsh, unsympathetic upbringing in which his often drunken father physically abused his wife and children.
After leaving school he had been unable to settle, had wandered from place to place and had eventually landed up in Borstal, where his crimes had given him a reputation for toughness and ruthlessness which he had felt compelled to live up to(although at the same time hating it and himself).
In therapy some of the sources of his rage were exposed, particularly the lack of love within the alternating violence and apathy of the parenting he had received.
The link between his emerging depression and his violent behaviour, the latter defending him from the former, made sense to him.
He became very depressed for some time before he could reassess himself, start to use his considerable abilities and begin courting his wife again.
It was never clear exactly what in his wife's behaviour had felt so rejecting and triggered off his attack on her, but the attack had occurred shortly after the birth of their first child.
It may well have related to his envy of the nursing pair and the demand he experienced to be a good father.
He had little  conviction that he could fulfil this role properly, his own experience of being fathered having been so grossly inadequate.
He felt only shame about what had happened.
There had been no conscious pleasure for him in the attack.
Some violence is, of course, sheer unadulterated sadism with an accompanying orgiastic delight in hurting and remember that we all have a sadistic capacity and there are not many people so out of touch with the darker, deeper aspects of their human nature that they have never indulged a sadistic fantasy.
Masochism is the other side of the coin, the victim's pleasure in the pain and humiliation heaped upon him often remaining unconscious.
Masochism is a defence against unacknowledged sadism and masochists will, in the terms of the unconscious ‘fit’ between partners, tend to marry not necessarily a conscious sadist, but often one who helps them to maintain a masochistic role.
It is usually noticeable that when a masochist has for years felt hard done by, often over-controlled by their partner, and then for some reason the tables are turned, he or she metes out punishment as if this has to go on for the same length of time that the masochist's suffering was endured.
Emily Tranter remained silently resentful of her husband's control of money and all major decisions for over fifteen years.
When at last she gained some independence by taking a job which gave her some income of her own, she suddenly put her foot down.
No, she was not going along with his decision as to how they should spend their holiday.
She heaped her scorn on what became his tentatively offered ideas.
Within two years a fine-looking, commanding man had become a shadow of his former self.
In no way had he been consciously sadistic over the earlier years, but he had a deep fear of women who took over, as his mother had done.
Quite unconsciously he had punished his wife instead of his mother and protected himself from bossy women by holding the marital reigns so tightly.
When the coin flipped over, it seemed as if the punishment would be never-ending.
A constant need to control other people normally arises from deep insecurity and a lack of confidence in the self — a fear of being left and disbelief in the self being lovable.
Phillip Tranter controlled through words and strongly expressed beliefs which were difficult to counter.
Physical violence is also a means of trying to keep control, sometimes a conscious coercion to get others to obey through fear.
There are other coercive techniques.
Blackmail is one.
A suicidal gesture is another, often unconsciously made when help is likely to be at hand.
Although gestures can misfire and some serious suicide attempts fail (it is not always easy to  distinguish between the gesture and the serious attempt), both acts are expressions of immense aggression and can leave behind a trail of guilt and remorse.
Sometimes they succeed in pressuring others to come to heel.
Constant illness and helplessness also control.
Derek Young was exceptionally controlled in his demeanour and general behaviour, unconsciously fearing another disaster like the loss of his brother if he did not exercise sufficient control.
He chose a dependent wife in Elsie, who further controlled him by her ailments and excessive demands.
June Braithwaite attempted to control Robert Braithwaite, but failed.
In both these marriages the sexual intercourse was unsatisfactory for one or both partners.
The control got into bed with them.
Intercourse in bed normally reflects intercourse out of bed.
IN BED
Much of what we have written about verbal intercourse is relevant to the understanding of problems in sexual intercourse.
People afraid of verbal penetration are often afraid of sexual penetration.
Those who have difficulty in sustaining and carrying things through out of bed may also be premature ejaculators in bed.
Inveterate controllers are rarely adequate as physical lovers, unable to let go or risk too much excitement.
People who can never dare to move close because of the inevitable withdrawal afterwards may experience little sexual desire.
Sexual intercourse epitomizes intimacy and closeness and, therefore, accentuates the actuality of separation in the aftermath.
At an unconscious level, distaste, lack of desire or avoidance of bodily intimacy may be used as a defence against the experience of ultimate aloneness which can follow the fusion of intercourse.
When sexual intercourse does take place, the partner is often chided for turning over or away, sometimes even in sleep.
Or the complaint is made of ‘just being used’.
Similarly, those who cannot bear to know about differences between people out of bed, and whose marriage is based more on identification than complementarity, can be disturbed by actual bodily differences which cannot be ignored in bed.
In the reflection of what is going on out of bed, people with relatively well-integrated personalities find that their sexual intercourse over the years represents a variety of feelings and moods.
They can enjoy to varying  extents exciting sex, passionate sex, lazy sex, warm and comforting sex, at times even angry or disgruntled sex, and then, perhaps, forgiving sex.
Forgiveness and atonement may be expressed through the act when feelings are starting to move that way, but the words still too difficult to articulate.
People whose sexual behaviour is at total variance with their previous mood — the most exciting and passionate sex following the most horrendous and enraged row — are demonstrating a split or lack of integration in their personality.
If they go into therapy, they may be disappointed to find that while their marriage is improving or more comfortable generally, sex has ‘gone off’ as it starts to become more variable and follow their actual mood.
The mood by this time may be more depressed, as they start to look at their own problems as opposed to those of their partner.
However, the analytic therapist is pleased by this sign of increasing integration and hopeful that sex will come back to life as the couple move through the depression and the marriage improves.
Expression through and enjoyment of bodily closeness and sexual intercourse is much influenced by early blueprints and, therefore, often reflects emotional development.
We can say that sexual delight, or the lack of it, is the direct heir of infancy.
People who as babies were handled with love and delight, whose perfect little bodies were so much admired, and who did not acquire ‘hang-ups’ from later unfortunate experiences, do not seem to have problems with sexual intercourse.
They have less need of instruction manuals and can follow their instincts and the dictates of their heart.
Those who have learnt of the otherness of the other can communicate bodily, or with words, what pleases and what does not.
People whose parents or early carers have not enjoyed contact with infant bodies nor valued their bodily functions may find it difficult to enjoy either their own body and its sensations or the body of another.
If sharing between mother and baby was minimal, the baby held too tightly and not allowed to play with breast or bottle, pleasing the self by masturbation may give more satisfaction than intercourse and pleasure given by another, as it may if the baby was left too much on its own, the bottle propped up against the pillow.
People who have been held awkwardly may in their turn be stiff, ashamed of nudity or partial nudity, or carry a fantasy that if only the scene were properly set, rosy lights dimly aglow, all would come right.
The agent has to be external and never within themselves.
They cannot imagine any delight in a tumble of ungainly bodies nor can they accept the fact that the sexual act is not graceful.
Usually they have few if any memories of being comforted on a lap, tossed in the air by their father (why do men toss babies  and women so rarely?), delicious bathing times with games and squeals of delight, and well-earned praise and parental pleasure when they excreted in nappy or pot.
More often the memory is of the displeasure that their body and its excretions caused.
Because the genital organ is also the urinary one, or adjacent to it, attitudes inculcated in respect of urination can get displaced on to sex.
Persistent bedwetters or soilers, for whatever reason, physical or psychological, may well have problems in their later adult sexual performance.
Some people feel they have been put off sex by a parent's clear disgust.
The message may be communicated by direct remark or innuendo: ‘Sex is dirty’, ‘I have to put up with your father’, or ‘It never did anything for me.’
But these attitudes to sex are often a reflection of attitudes to bodies generally, indicating the lack of joy in body experienced many years before.
Some mothers can enjoy and care well for a baby in arms, but are disturbed by and neglectful of a toddler who starts to express independence and move away as well as towards.
The rejection of the newly mobile toddler may be accentuated if another baby is born at this time.
For such a toddler the sudden loss of the early comfort can leave a continued yearning for it and lack of satisfaction in activities related to later developmental stages.
In later life the actual genital act may mean very little — a mere sideshow.
Intercourse may be performed occasionally or specifically for reproduction, but continued cuddling and bodily warmth from another is what gives the real satisfaction.
Breasts may be more sensuous than bottoms for people who either experienced great satisfaction at their mother's breast or never had enough of it.
Bottoms may be more or less sensuous to those whose old preoccupations centred on anal functions.
There may have been problems of mastery, of control, of appropriate letting go; or an early refusal to let go as resistance to an over-persistent potty-training parent.
Repression is one of the most influential enemies of sexual desire.
Strong repression of one emotion often succeeds inadvertently in suppressing the desire as well.
When, for example, a previously repressed anger comes back into consciousness and it becomes safer for a person to acknowledge his hostility, desire is also freed.
Clive Greenacre was not only put out when his agoraphobic wife started to express her anger about his callous behaviour, but also amazed by the sexual demands she then started to make on him.
Previously he had blamed her for the lack of sexual satisfaction she gave him, experiencing her as semi-frigid and totally unexciting.
But just as he had used her agoraphobia as a defence against having to know about his need to  find her safely where he had left her, so too did her lack of sexual response defend him from knowing about his need to keep her under his control.
As she became more sexually active — to him, frighteningly so — he became seriously disturbed about whether he could keep up with her.
An erection two nights running was now required.
And then he became even more worried about what she might get up to with a lover.
Previously he had had no worry about her possible infidelity or that she might leave him for a more effective performer.
Needless to say, her new-found potency gave rise to deep misgivings about his own sexual adequacy.
Problems of sexual intercourse are as interactive at an unconscious level as some of a couple's intercourse out of bed.
The problem, whether it be vaginismus (painful contraction of the vaginal muscles) in the woman or failure to obtain an erection by the man, can be complained about and used as a defence against recognizing the problem in the self.
Treatment for a sexual problem in one partner is rarely successful, or if it first appears so when some mental block is eased, results in the exposure of the problem in the other.
Some people faithfully hang on to their problem, sabotaging help when unconsciously they experience their partner as more vulnerable than themselves and in need of protection.
Similarly, some couples assiduously hang on to a sexual problem as a defence against facing up to a much wider problem in their marriage.
Many sexual problems are treated these days primarily by educational or instructive methods, which can be very effective.
After a full history is taken, physical examination performed and a round-table discussion held in which cause and effect may be established, old myths abolished, points of ignorance removed, and communication between the partners opened up, the couple are introduced to the idea of learning more about each other 's sensual responses generally.
They are instructed in ‘pleasuring’ or ‘sensate focus’, whereby in the privacy of their own bedroom they have to experiment with handling, fondling, and massaging their partner with the purpose of learning what gives most pleasure to the other and to the self.
They are told to avoid the genital area.
For some people this is literally the first time they have thought about and felt sensual responses in their own body.
After further round-table discussions of their progress, pleasuring is then extended to the genital area before they are encouraged to attempt intercourse, with different recommendations for particular problems.
Although attention is given in the discussions to underlying emotional problems such as we have described in this chapter, some people's emotional ‘blocks’ do not shift in this setting.
In the jargon it is said that they cannot  even get on the Masters and Johnson ‘ski-slope’, let alone start down it.
(Masters and Johnson were the innovators of the above type of treatment, following eleven years of detailed research into human sexual functioning).
At the discussions, time is given to cause and effect, but this is mainly at a conscious level.
For example, some premature ejaculation is patterned by early courting habits — too many rushed exchanges in the back of a car — or by early experiences with prostitutes when the faster the customer performs, the more the prostitute is pleased.
People usually start to feel better about a problem when they have some explanation for it, but hang-ups relating to very early patterns of relating between mother and baby which we have been describing may not come to light within the time normally allowed for this type of treatment.
Sometimes a deeper, analytic therapy may be required before people can use instruction.
When parents have implicitly forbidden their otherwise relatively mature children to be fully sexual creatures, there can be enormous value in being given permission by an authoritative therapist to have and enjoy sex.
But when permissive or instructional therapy is needed, the interesting question is why people remain so ignorant about their bodies and potential sexuality when there are so many relevant books on the market, when sex education is provided in schools and when many glossy magazines promote the virtue and necessity of orgasm.
Friedman, writing about the work done by a group of doctors in Family Planning Clinics with women who had been unable to consummate their marriage, typified certain syndromes by reference to myths.
(Psychoanalysis shows that many legends and fairy stories owe their continued appeal to their ‘artful representation’ of common unconscious fantasies related to early stages of psychological development.)
One group of wives were called ‘Sleeping Beauties’.
they were in one sense still asleep and unable to know about their sexual organs, using the defence of not knowing against an anxiety aroused by the prospect of copulation.
Sometimes they complained about their vagina being too small.
They often suffered from vaginismus, but they invariably praised their husbands for being ‘exceptionally kind’, passive, totally understanding and ‘so good as not to bother me’.
Another group, ‘Gentling Brünnhildes’, aggressive, masculine women, had strong competitive feelings towards men, but at another level desperately wanted to be overpowered and mastered by Brünnhilde, it will be remembered, was eventually mastered by Siegfried.
these women were often sweetly reasonable, but used their vaginal muscles to fight their husbands and were afraid of men who might make demands on them.
Brünnhildes often held a persistent attachment to their fathers or mothers and their aggressiveness towards men was a means of protecting this tie.
A third group were the ‘Queen Bees’, virgin wives and often virgin mothers who had in the past persuaded a doctor to administer artificial insemination because of their husband's impotence.
Less consciously, their desire was for a baby to be given to them by a symbolic mother (the female doctor).
Often their request for help was for further insemination and not to treat the actual sexual problem.
Non-consummation is one obvious cause of infertility, but some fertility clinics do not always question the assumed fact and frequency of intercourse.
Severe symptoms such as these cover much hostility, often unconscious, and in their extreme passivity are immensely vengeful and aggressive.
Treatment has a low success rate.
Friedman's doctors found that they often needed to confront the patients with their underlying hostility.
One doctor, driven to desperation by a patient, found herself saying, ‘You seem to be a very strong woman and you have managed to reduce your husband to impotence.
If you are so strong, perhaps you can restore him.’
It was apparently reassuring to this woman to have her aggression recognized so straightforwardly, because the couple was then able to have intercourse.
Less severe symptoms also contain the seeds of revenge, a need to control, a fixation on one or other parent or lack of confidence in gender identity.
There may be no severe problem in bed if the underlying preoccupation, doubt, aggression or impulse is contained and given room for expression in other areas of life outside the bedroom.
For example, some jobs or hobbies allow verbally or physically for sublimation of impulses.
Hard physical jobs conducted in a same-sex group can support and strengthen a weak sense of gender identity.
When retirement or redundancy occurs, a sexual problem may manifest itself.
The impulse previously contained or harnessed in the work setting becomes dangerous and inhibiting in bed when there is no alternative outlet.
Jack Kettlewell became impotent within fourteen days of having left the prison service.
It was never fully explained why he had to leave, but we can imagine that the ardour with which he had previously performed his duties (always the first to take on extra work) had gone too far.
Two years later, when he obtained work as a bailiff executing writs, he regained his potency.
Stuart Carter had been a caring and loving father while exercising considerable skill in a steelworks.
When he was made redundant and no longer had this outlet for the expression of his masculinity, he became less confident in the caring aspects of his personality, almost as if afraid he would become all  woman.
He and his wife decided not to put off having the second child they had planned, despite the financial uncertainty.
Conception was external proof of masculinity.
Unlike Jack Kettlewell, his sexual desire increased when he was out of work and his wife had difficulty in keeping up with his need.
Some people have grounds for fearing the consequences of their heterosexuality.
It is not uncommon for a couple who have had the sadness of producing a heavily disabled or diseased baby to find that they later lose their desire for intercourse.
At a rational level, and fully conversant with contraceptive methods, they know their fear is unwarranted.
But if actual proof of unfortunate outcome confirms an underlying fear, which previously they may have repressed well, unconscious panic wins over rational argument.
William Hyatt had been told too often as a child that ‘the sins of the fathers’ shall be visited on the ‘third and fourth generation of them that hate Him’.
As a young man he stoutly said ‘nonsense’ to himself.
Only when his third child was born severely handicapped did his potency fail.
It is generally true that people are in the greatest difficulties when the external world confirms their worst fears about themselves, and are at their happiest when it confirms their best fantasies.
The combination of early fantasy and external fact is what leaves many people in severe difficulty after being sexually abused as children.
Seductive behaviour on the part of a child is natural.
The child needs to know that he can win the heart of his parents, but also that such feelings can be handled safely.
When the parent is consciously or unconsciously seductive, and the child's early fantasies are not mediated and finally renounced, the young person can remain fixated in love like the Brünnhildes and Queen Bees mentioned earlier in this chapter.
However distasteful and frightening an act of incest may have been, the earlier fantasies of wanting the parent for the self may leave a trail of connected guilt.
Today there is much public concern about the amount of incest that occurs and is now coming to light.
It is unfortunate that when a problem of this sort gets so much publicity it can become the bandwagon on which those who desperately want attention jump.
Phone-in services can be bedevilled by hoax calls.
As therapists, we have over the years become suspicious of the adult patient who too openly and easily confesses incestuous experience, putting this as the first and foremost cause of all their problems.
When incest is the genuine major cause of sexual and relationship problems, it usually emerges only slowly, and there is considerable confusion over guilt, fantasies and what actually happened.
When, as it were, it is  flaunted as The Problem , it is more often being used as a defence against a deeper, underlying one.
We repeat again that many sexual problems are the direct heritage of infancy and, in that respect, are not easily overcome.
For many people, some sexual failure, temporary or otherwise, is made worse by the immense current cultural emphasis on passionate sex being the ‘be all and end all’, with the implication of failure if they are not easily roused to orgasm regardless of what else is going on in their lives.
June and Robert Braithwaite achieved much better intercourse both in and out of bed when she learned to understand and value his greater need of physical sensation and he became less worried by her being different and placing a lower value on physical experience.
She felt much less used and abused when she could distinguish whether his hugs were genuine offers of warmth and love towards her or whether they were his means of asking for something just for himself.
Derek and Elsie Young did not overcome their sexual problem; excitement and lack of control remained too frightening for them both.
But they did learn to be less worried about it, and to accept themselves for what they were, with their mutual hang-ups, weaknesses and strengths.
Shocks to the system: Predictable Events
RHYTHMS OF LIFE
Behind the diversity of living arrangements which go to make up individual marriages are common themes and dilemmas.
There is the push for change and the pull of security, the longing for intimacy and the fear of being engulfed, the wish to be the same as others and the drive to be different.
As we have said, couples are engaged in a kind of dance, moving towards each other and then drawing apart, constantly searching for a comfortable balance in their relationship.
Frequently the balance is no sooner found than upset again.
The most satisfying marriages are those where partners can rely upon each other both to support and to counterbalance their movements.
A capacity to adapt and be flexible is a definite asset.
Every marriage is affected by events which occur outside the partnership.
In the next chapter we consider events which are unexpected and which shock the couple into making a response; for example, the discovery of an affair can destabilize a relationship to the point of breakdown, although more frequently it triggers a re-evaluation of the partnership and some heart-searching as to why it was necessary to draw attention to problems in the marriage in this way.
Other events, like the birth of a first child, are predictable and consciously desired.
Yet in the excitement of becoming a parent it is easy to forget that for some the impact can be not so dissimilar from that caused by the discovery of a rival lover.
In this chapter we shall be considering some of these ‘natural’ shocks to the system of marriage and asking why they upset some people and are the making of others.
By focusing on some of the difficulties people may encounter we do not wish to suggest that life is nothing but problems, nor to imply that these problems cannot be overcome.
Our intention is to identify some of the  pressure points in married life and indicate why they have a different impact.
While it is unwise to lay claim to there being a natural history of marriage when there are so many individual variations, there is a discernible ebb and flow in the tide of a couple's life together which forms a pattern.
There is a process of two individuals joining together to form a new life, often personified by children.
Some relationships have to be let go in order that new ones can flourish.
As time passes this new life will change and itself be superseded, requiring a re-ordering of the couple's partnership and reformings in the family group.
This process is repeated over and over again in relation to major and minor events throughout the family life-cycle.
For a marriage to be successful, partners need to be able to handle change constructively.
They need to be alive to the balance between their own needs for intimacy and independence as well as those of their partner.
Moreover, account has to be taken of the needs of other generations — of children and grandparents — which impinge upon their own.
All these change over time.
Change, however welcome, is usually associated with some degree of stress.
Leaving home, getting married, going on holiday, promotion at work, starting a family, all require certain familiar routines and rhythms to be given up in order to make the most of a new situation.
Relationships change.
People seen in a different context are treated in a different way.
As a result they begin to see themselves differently.
New challenges summon up fresh resources, or expose areas in which resources are lacking.
Assumptions may be challenged and identities affected.
But the same events can affect people very differently.
Some have argued that change has a cumulative effect.
Several minor changes occurring in a short space of time can have a totting-up effect, challenging and even overloading the resources people have at their disposal.
Social scientists have devised a check-list of stressful events, weighted according to how serious they are.
At one end of the scale the death of a spouse rates 100 points.
At the other, a minor violation of the law rates 11 points.
Getting married scores 50 points, a marital separation 65.
The originators of this stress-rating scale estimate that people who score 150 points have a 50 per cent likelihood, and those who score 300 have a 90 per cent likelihood, of developing a stress-related illness.
But this is not the full story.
Factors other than events come into play to determine the impact of change.
It is one thing to face a situation alone, quite another to be able to share a burden or the excitement.
Family, friends and colleagues at work can provide a buffer against some of the stressful effects  of change.
More formally, the social procedures which initiate people into new roles and responsibilities can help to equip them to respond positively to the challenge of the new.
Christenings, weddings and funerals are the rites most commonly marking the big events in life.
They provide rituals which publicly mark a change of state and assemble a network of people who can offer practical and emotional support to those undergoing the change.
The accessibility and helpfulness of formal services (such as health care, financial assistance and housing advice) also make a difference.
Every bit as important as the events we experience in life and the support available to us is the personal meaning of change.
Within marriage the same events are continually being interpreted in different ways.
A small event like mother-in-law coming to stay can have a differential impact on newly marrieds.
The mother's offer to cook the lunch may be a reassuring sign of the familiar to her son who may not long have departed from the parental home.
To his wife, mother-in-law's offer can mean a devastating indictment of her cooking abilities, or, worse, a demonstration of a prior claim on her husband.
If she comes from a family where she felt undermined by her own mother the effect upon her is compounded.
With luck, an ensuing argument will highlight how the situation has been read differently by each partner and result in the couple being more married than before, feeling more together in themselves and with each other.
All of us look out on life through personal windows which have been shaped by past experiences.
To varying degrees we all suffer from restricted vision.
We are inclined to look for certain features in the landscape and ignore others.
Moreover, we are conservative beings.
We want our outlook to be confirmed as the right one.
If events contradict the way we see things, we may either turn a blind eye or resist hotly.
To see things differently means changing ourselves in some way, and most of us are reluctant to do this.
We tend not to change unless we have to.
The imperative to change comes from one of two sources, each of which has positive and negative aspects.
Our personal aspirations or dissatisfactions may lead us to seek out new opportunities.
Alternatively they may close us in on ourselves.
When we defend ourselves too rigidly against threatening aspects of change we can precipitate the very situations we seek to avert.
If the fear of being alone causes us to cling ever more insistently to others we are, at some point, likely to be left more on our own than we would otherwise be.
Here an inner momentum brings us face to face with ourselves and we can choose between perpetuating the old pattern or learning from our experience.
Alternatively, an external event like the death  of a loved one can precipitate change.
Then we simply cannot carry on our lives as if nothing has happened.
The event can, of course, be a happy one and create openings which allow us to ‘break the mould’ of earlier restrictions.
Through events of different kinds we are likely to be put in touch with aspects of ourselves which previously have been overlooked — we are given a jolt, and have to make a bridge between how things used to be and how they threatened.
Some way has to be found of bringing past and present into line.
Every transition needs to involve a mourning process.
Although it is most obvious and acute when there is an actual death (and we go on to describe reactions to the death of a partner in the next chapter), some mourning is appropriate to the many minor deaths which occur in the course of married life.
Any change involves a mixture of gain and loss, loss and gain.
As well as celebrating the new, people must let go of that part of their past which is now redundant.
The prospective gains cannot be fully harnessed and enjoyed if the losses are not first acknowledged and then mourned.
The process of mourning, so clearly mapped out in bereavement studies, applies also to getting married, starting a family, letting children go, retiring, and to a myriad other changes which affect marriage.
The intensity of reaction is normally very much less in these cases than after a severe loss such as bereavement but, even so, people can be surprised by their lethargy, sadness, even depression and bursts of irritation, which disturb what was expected to be so happy.
After any major change it is important to give oneself some moratorium — suspend some activities — to allow feelings concerned with the loss of the old to be lived through.
The conservative self needs time to catch up.
And, if it is at all possible, the number of changes which could occur at any one time is better curtailed and staggered.
Inevitable changes in married life provide jolts which can stimulate growth and development.
Through them we can come to know ourselves and others a little better.
FROM TWO TO THREE
IN Chapter 4 we described the transition into marriage, that process of disengagement from family, friends and the single state of mind that is  necessary to enable a lifelong commitment to be made to another person.
We examined the public and private covenants which underwrite this commitment, and the purpose they serve in enabling people to develop both within themselves and in their relationships with others.
In this chapter we outline some of the transitions which normally take place in the course of married life and the challenges they pose.
One of the most significant changes in marriage occurs with the transition to parenthood.
In the short term, becoming a parent is a stressful business.
That is not to deny the pleasures that children bring.
Nor is it to imply that difficulties cannot be resolved.
Normally they can and will.
Because the experience of parenthood is to some extent idealized in our culture we have chosen to draw attention to stressful aspects of the transitions involved.
The pleasures of being a parent speak for themselves.
Leaving aside the reactions of friends and relatives to changes in their roles and relationships (and the generational shift involved in becoming a grandparent has its ups and downs) the transition from wife to mother, and from husband to father, is also a transition from two to three.
In this change, it is often the woman who is the more vulnerable half of the marital partnership.
DEPRESSED MOTHERS
The phenomenon of ‘post-natal depression’ is perhaps the best chronicled negative condition associated with becoming a mother.
This blanket term covers the ‘blues’ at one end of the spectrum (affecting between 70 and 80 per cent of all women in the first week or so after birth) to the post-puerperal psychosis which temporarily hospitalizes three in every thousand mothers.
Between these extremes comes the chronic depression found to have affected one in three mothers with pre-school age children in a London study of working-class families.
Explanations for these conditions vary according to the type of depression under examination and who is doing the categorizing.
For example, medical explanations of the ‘blues’ tend to favour as the principal causative element biochemical changes taking place in a woman's body during pregnancy and immediately after birth.
Sociological explanations of the same condition draw attention to the hospital environment in which mothers have their babies, and to the debilitating effects of medical procedures and technology during labour and delivery.
Some emphasize the idealization of motherhood as a social phenomenon, arguing that the all-sacrificing, good-mother image is the cultural stereotype of  femininity .
Women then feel a choice has to be made — one  that has been socially determined — between attempting to conform or relinquishing their claim to a ‘proper’ sexual identity.
From this perspective, the remedy lies not so much in providing personal help as in attempting to reconcile the activities of women and the values of society more effectively.
Most people would agree that parenthood is not of itself a sufficient explanation for the severe stress symptoms and degree of depression among young mothers.
The experience of becoming a mother has to be understood in a personal and social context which takes account of predisposing factors such as poor housing, an unsupportive marriage, lack of employment and financial difficulties.
The diversity of circumstances and meanings, both social and personal, will then interact with each other, explaining why some will cheerfully survive the worst material hardships while others, who may be well-provided for in terms of physical resources, fall at the first fence.
In the longer term, a woman's feeling about herself as a mother will affect her moods and how she behaves in that role.
Her relationship with her own mother will be a very important determining factor.
A firm identification allows daughters to take inside themselves the resources of their mothers so that when their time comes they, too, are equipped as parents.
If the relationship between mother and daughter is poor, a good relationship may be ‘invented’ to compensate for the shortcomings of that relationship.
In later life the daughter may find herself self-condemned as, without adequate inner resources, she fails to live up to the ideal standards she has set for herself.
In this situation the psychological process known as ‘splitting’, which we have described earlier, is apt to occur.
To recap, idealized ‘good’ relationships (often the product of fantasy) are unconsciously separated from the ‘bad’relationships in which failure, anger, depression and other negatively connoted feelings are experienced.
All that is ‘good’ may then be retained for the conscious self while the ‘bad’is unconsciously attributed to others.
Conversely, the sense of failure may be retained while others are perceived to hold the key to all success.
A third variant is that the ‘good’ and ‘bad’qualities are apportioned to different people outside, in much the same way as children believe in and distinguish between fairies and witches, cowboys and Indians, empires of good and evil.
Liddie Heath became very depressed after the birth of her first child, a baby boy.
She had attended all the preparation classes available during pregnancy and had looked forward to giving birth naturally and effortlessly.
In the event there had been complications during labour and the baby was born by caesarean section while she was under general anaesthetic.
When Liddie returned home she had difficulties breastfeeding her baby and quickly  gave up in favour of using a bottle.
She felt tired and exhausted and lost confidence in herself.
Despite receiving a lot of help she gave up looking after the child, asking her mother-in-law to do so with increasing frequency.
But the more help she received in looking after her son, the more depressed and critical of others she became.
Many women complain of feeling chronically tired, tied to the home, unattractive, disinterested in sex and generally overwhelmed during early parenthood.
Most respond well to offers of practical and emotional help.
But Liddie had difficulty using help.
Despite describing a happy childhood, she told her therapist about how she had been brought up in a family where she felt unappreciated and undervalued.
Both her parents had careers, and Liddie felt under a constant pressure from inside herself to prove herself to them.
She had not got on well with her mother who, she felt, had either left her alone or taken her over completely.
Liddie had trained and practised as an accountant before she started a family, but she had not really enjoyed her work.
Having a baby was going to change all that.
She would be the perfect mother whom others would notice and admire.
The realities of parenthood for her were, as for most people, different from what she expected.
She felt angry with others for robbing her of her ideal fantasy of motherhood.
The doctors had let her down, her baby was difficult, her mother-in-law was not good enough.
Her own sense of failure was projected into others in order to ward off a depression about herself which finally overwhelmed her and was not to lift for some years.
She invited help and then behaved towards those who helped as if they were incompetent or, like her mother, were taking over.
She even began to resent the attention her baby boy received from others, as if he had displaced her.
An actual baby had awakened the baby inside herself; she wanted less to be a mother than to have a baby, so that by feeding him she could in some way nourish herself.
This identification between mother and baby is a normal part of parenthood.
In Liddie's case, however, it had brought her face to face with a disenchanted childhood which she had not wanted to recognize.
DISPOSSESSED FATHERS
Men are subject to two contradictory pressures when they become fathers.
On the one hand there is a strong (and sometimes unconscious) pull to identify with the mother and to share — even take over — her role.
During pregnancy and the months immediately following birth, men frequently identify at an unconscious level with their partners.
It is quite  common to find them taking an unusual interest in pets, putting on weight, complaining of backache and toothache, or being faddy about food — behaviour more usually associated with pregnant women.
This process is aided and abetted by the trend over the past twenty years to encourage the active participation of fathers in the process of childbirth itself.
The Duke of Edinburgh saw none of his children being born, but no one was surprised at Prince Charles' presence at the birth of Prince William.
Once the baby is born, bouts of anger, sulking and withdrawing in the early stages of parenthood suggest that the identification continues; men can sometimes be as post-natally depressed as their partners.
On the other hand there are pressures to divide.
Economic and social realities, together with the legacy of traditional parental practice, limit the opportunities for men to become actively involved as parents.
The ideological commitment to equality between the sexes reinforces expectations about male participation in the very early stages of parenthood which may subsequently be disappointed by social, biological and practical realities.
The elation of witnessing birth may be followed by a sense of disorientation at being a displaced person.
Men cannot breastfeed babies, nor can they experience what it is like to have carried a child, however much their partners may have encouraged them to feel the moving infant inside the belly.
The closeness of pregnancy is frequently followed by a sense of separateness once the baby is born.
Outside the family, the claims of work and career (which may be at their strongest at this time) may either frustrate paternal longings or provide compensation for the displacement.
Yet times are changing.
Brian Jacksons wrote eloquently about the still frequently thwarted aspirations of young fathers today to be different from the invisible or authoritarian men they remember their own fathers as having been.
For some fathers, the motivation to be involved with their children has powerful psychological roots.
Liddie Heath's husband, Richard, was the model of a helpful partner when their son was born.
He had been with Liddie through the various pre-natal classes, lying on the floor with her and learning the breathing exercises.
Back at home with their baby he was quick to be the one to change the nappies and administer the bottle feed once Liddie had given up breastfeeding.
Behind his conscious wish to help was an unconscious fear of losing his wife to the baby.
His own mother had been, and to some extent remained, an intrusive presence in his life, and he had started to shut her out by keeping busy and doing everything for himself.
He dealt with his fear of being controlled by, in some sense, becoming like his mother, and he tried to earn the unconditional attention of others.
When he became a father, he unwittingly undermined and displaced his wife in order not to be undermined and displaced himself.
These factors continued to make it more difficult for him to provide the separateness and space that Liddie needed if she were to develop her limited confidence in herself as a mother.
In consequence he became, in Liddie's eyes, the kind of mother her own mother had been — one who disabled her by taking over.
THE CHANGING COUPLE
As well as celebrating, some measure of depression is an appropriate response for both men and women when they become parents.
There are losses involved.
Motherhood today often involves giving up paid employment (although nowadays for shorter periods than in the past), and with it the sense of identity and community that work affords.
Thirty years ago this change would have been more likely to coincide with marriage; today it coincides with becoming a parent, and its significance may be underrated as maternity leave holds open the option of a very early return to work.
The birth of a baby results in some loss of intimacy in marriage, a loss of space at home, a loss of time to oneself, and a loss of physical and financial resources to manage additional demands and responsibilities.
There may also be losses in terms of the hopes, expectations and images of parenthood which have not been borne out by experience.
There is also a loss for those who have valued shared activities and similarity.
Children separate parents and define their roles along traditional gender lines.
There is a process of segregation which can rebound on the marriage.
With the arrival of a child a woman tends to see herself as parent first and partner second.
This can be expressed very physically in the way breasts are now regarded as being for feeding babies rather than for making love, and most couples experience tensions over their sexual relationship in the early months and even years of parenthood.
They have to become used to the parent in themselves and in their partner, as well as to the baby.
Men tend to put greater store by their work once there are children (perhaps because of the burden of being the sole earner, and perhaps because their place at work is not unchallenged in the way it may be at home) and housework, which before may have been shared equally, often now falls to the woman.
This can be a major source of conflict.
Six months after the first birth, a wife's evaluation of marriage is likely to be lower than that of her husband, and by eighteen months conflict may reach a peak.
The significance of these changes is that the partners, having come together to make children, are now having  to move apart again and manage differences which parenthood has made unavoidable.
When roles become more segregated, as they do after the birth of a baby, even when both parents continue to go out to work, people are less able to avoid their envy of the opposite sex and of the baby who receives so much care and attention.
They may or may not be conscious of their envy, but it will affect their marriage.
In terms of the unconscious choice of partner, and the unconscious covenant between partners which we described in Chapters 3 and 4, it is likely that extreme envy marries the envy in the other, and the defence of splitting may well be used by the couple.
For example, the wife and mother has the opportunity to soothe her own unconscious envy of the baby vicariously by the devoted care she gives to him.
The husband, feeling deprived of the care he previously had from his wife, and sometimes carrying her projected envy, is left even more envious than he otherwise would be.
One of the fantasies of the envious is that the other has everything.
This leaves the person feeling empty — sometimes totally empty.
Husbands may put even more effort and hours into employment outside the home to fill the void.
Wives, increasingly tired from the non-stop demands of a baby whose cries they cannot resist (sometimes because of their own vicarious need, not necessarily the baby's), then feel even more abandoned.
The constant repression of their own envy can add to the burden of tiredness.
(Over-deployed defences are exhausting.)
Fantasies of the joys and excitement of working life abound in the mind.
For men, it can seem as if the reverse is true.
Both partners find it difficult to hear the other and appreciate the needs of the other.
She cannot hear that much of his business life is tedious, worrying, tiring and not all that exciting; he cannot hear and see her boredom and exhaustion in his fantasy that she is the one who has everything — not having to earn, not having to stir out each morning and so comfortable with only a baby to look after.
When both work, similar feelings may be attached to other wives.
Envy of the other sex and envy of babies go hand in hand.
One may get displaced on to the other, or one, a problem in its own right, may be used as a defence against the other.
In its most extreme form envy underlies much marital violence and baby battering, the actual batterer often carrying not only his own unconscious envy but that of his partner as well.
But, as we have suggested earlier, few of us are totally free of envy, or conscious of all the different facets of our envy.
Nor do we easily associate ourselves with violent behaviour.
We suggest, however, that the tiredness experienced by  young couples in the first months of a baby's life is not just the result of broken nights, change of role, anxiety as to the well-being of so small and vulnerable a being, and doubts about being a good enough parent, but is also related to the strain of exercising a defence against envy of the baby to whom so much care and comfort is offered.
It is hardly decent to envy the baby to whom so much is owed.
The more couples are able to tolerate differences in their partnership — between men and women, and between babies and parents — the less will the satisfactions of being a parent and being a married partner be eroded by children.
Past experiences affect how comfortable people are with differences and disparities in their marriage.
Having to be more separate can, for some people, resurrect memories of earlier separations which were particularly painful for them.
Illness, displacement by a younger brother or sister, or the divorce of parents are experiences from the past which can be interwoven with a current separation, overdetermining the strength of feelings and reactions in the present day.
Quite unconsciously, children may be regarded as rivals for a partner's attention, or, when they cry inconsolably, critics of a mother's competence.
Real children stir to life the child that lives on in every parent.
Yet children also bring immense rewards and satisfaction.
A chance is given to recover past joys and heal old wounds as well as to provide the experiences which children will, in their turn, look back upon with love and affection.
Although, for some, the tragedies of one generation will be repeated in the next, people can and do learn from experience.
THE MIDDLE YEARS
For most people, the middle years of marriage are the child-rearing years; life revolves around running the ‘family business’.
These are the years when the satisfactions from marriage are likely to dip.
There is remarkable consensus among family researchers showing a ‘U’ shaped association between levels of marital satisfaction and the child-rearing years.
Satisfaction drops to its lowest point when children are still at home waiting to start school.
There may be some recovery when they go to school, but the dip will reassert itself during the teenage years.
As children leave home marital satisfaction tends to pick up again.
General pictures of what happens during the middle years are inevitably flawed, but they suggest that a change often takes place in marriage at that time and that for many people satisfactions come from sources outside the couple's relationship.
The variety of routes taken by couples make it impossible to track the course most frequently taken.
But if one issue is to be singled out as representing a point of potential conflict between partners at this time it will most likely concern the relationship between home and employment.
Role conflicts within individual marriages are taking place in a context of rapid social change and all the uncertainties that attend it.
The days have passed in which Tennyson could confidently assert:
Man for the field and woman for the hearth:
Man for the sword and for the needle she:
Man with the head and woman with the heart:
Man to command and woman to obey;
All else confusion.
(The Princess , V, 427–31)
The last thirty years in Britain have seen a significant cultural change in respect of women working.
Between 1973 and 1985 the proportion of women working outside the home rose from 56 to 63 per cent.
Many have taken part-time jobs in service industries in order to earn money while caring for their children.
But in 1985 27 per cent of all wives were working in full-time employment, and the trend towards women working is supported by public opinion, except when there are very young children at home.
The need to work is often financial, two incomes being required to maintain heavy mortgages and what Ivan Illich, a critic of the Establishment has called, ‘the modern addiction to paralysing affluence’.
(Although it was as long ago as 1884 that Marx wrote of the shift from worker as producer to worker as consumer, the degree of expendability of goods and their constant replacement by better and newer models has markedly increased during the latter half of this century.)
But the need of many women to work is personal and social as well as financial.
As we mentioned in Chapter 3, the new Age of Psychology promotes and emphasizes the development and self-fulfilment of the individual.
During the early child-rearing years, women often need to exercise their mothering and loving capacities to the exclusion of other parts of themselves.
After a few years they may find that not enough of their nature is being fulfilled.
They ask for more stimulus than their children provide and  for the opportunity to give expression to their other creative and intellectual drives.
Sometimes this can be managed by buying in domestic services.
Sometimes it can occasion immense conflict within the wife between needs of self and needs of partner and children.
Sometimes it triggers a fight between partners.
To be in paid employment is to be valued.
Although the Victorian values embedded in Tennyson's lines continue to hold sway in many quarters, most people recognize the inequalities and injustices that result from home and work activities being allotted according to gender.
Money is power, and for this reason employment continues to call the tune.
If the husband has to move to another area to find work, wife and children are likely to follow (unless the price of property makes the cost of the family living together prohibitive).
If she also works they must decide whose job has priority.
Whereas it used to be assumed that she would follow him around the country and around the world, it is now not uncommon for wives to decide to stay put in order to further their own careers, or so that they do not disrupt their  children's education.
Sometimes, both partners make a commitment to employment way above their commitment to family life.
Home becomes little more than a dormitory, an evening and weekend extension to the office.
Although the partners may remain dependent on their marriage and committed to the arrangement either for provision of a little-used but resplendent home, or for earnings to support the acquired life style, little may be shared between them socially and emotionally.
In these marriages, work becomes what has been called an ‘acceptable mistress’.
But just as women now demand for themselves greater freedom to express different facets of the self, so too do some men, although not nearly so many of them.
Some now want to be less dominated by the world of employment and demands of career.
Like their wives, they want to express more of themselves and get in touch with the caring and home-making aspects of their personalities.
Some have become prepared to forgo promotion if it means too much disruption of home and family and if they personally do not want the commuting life.
Some, of course, have leisure time imposed on them.
The number of men not working and not seeking a job has risen by almost half between 1971 and 1985, from 9 per cent to 13 per cent.
The employment situation has led to early retirement becoming common practice, while some younger men have come to believe they are unemployable.
These changes have profound implications for marriage.
Work is a means of regulating the distance in a partnership.
Too much work and people lose  touch with each other; too little and they get under one another 's feet.
Oil-tig workers, export salesmen and servicemen have to manage part-time marriages, and so do their wives.
A family which has organized itself to run smoothly in the absence of one member must repeatedly adapt to incorporate the absent member when he or she returns home.
Businessmen working away from home frequently describe the tension on their return when their partners, who have been shut in with the children all week, suggest going out for dinner.
When they have been eating out all the time they have been away, and are longing for an evening at home, the suggestion does not go down well.
Unemployment, or increased leisure time, poses different challenges.
A structure and meaning to the day has to be found from inside rather than imposed from outside.
In relation to these changes, which can evoke highly charged feelings, men and women need to continue to negotiate an acceptable balance in their relationship between being together and being apart.
They need to struggle with the thorny issue of whose interests come first, and they must be ready to let go of some aspirations and commitments if they are to enjoy what they decide to do.
THREE INTO TWO
LOSING CHILDREN
The departure of children returns the parental couple to a twosome.
In this new phase, many couples reap the rewards of all their efforts of the preceding years.
For others, there is a grain of truth in Oscar Wilde's sardonic comment that ‘in married life three is company and two none’.
For children, like work, regulate distance in a marriage and provide parents with a role and sense of personal worth.
After the hectic middle years, couples may renew or begin activities together for which there had not previously been time.
Or partners may look at each other across the breakfast table once the children have left home and ask themselves what they still have in common.
For a longer period than in years gone by they can expect to be on their own together.
Although outwardly this period resembles the beginnings of married life, it is very different.
Because children now arrive later in marriage, parents may be in their fifties before the last child leaves home.
They are likely to be beset with other major changes associated with the second half of life.
The menopause, career disappointments, the death of their own parents, and retirement looming on the horizon herald other separations and endings.
The compensation of greater freedom may hold fewer attractions when energy is diminished.
A man may be looking forward to regaining the undivided attention of his wife.
But she may remain preoccupied with her lost children, or anxious to take advantage of her new-found independence, free of demands, including those of her husband.
Although both parents will be affected by the departure of children, the impact is likely to be most keenly felt by the woman.
She is the one who will have devoted the greater part of her married life to the job of child-raising and who will have invested a large part of herself in the children.
Even a career woman will have organized her life and work to take account of the children in a way men, at present, rarely have to do.
So it is the woman who will experience the first withdrawal symptoms.
Some will revel in having more time for themselves; others will feel lost.
There is evidence to suggest that withdrawal symptoms include heightened irritability, a tendency to drink too much and increased susceptibility to illness and depression.
Educated women seem to be at a particular disadvantage because they are expected, and expect themselves, to accept the loss gracefully and suppress irrational feelings associated with a process which is not unlike mourning.
In short, the loss of children is often the major adjustment of middle age for women, equivalent in its impact to the loss of employment for men.
The crux of the experience is where the couple's source of self-esteem lies: this is crucial to how the powerful parent-child attachments are managed.
The degree of ease with which sexuality was handled by the couple's parents will be reflected in the way they handle the sexuality of their own children.
They may put pressure on their children to leave and live the life they missed out on.
Or, if they had difficulty leaving home when they were young, they may unconsciously place obstacles in the way of their own children doing so when the time comes.
How was marriage affected by parenthood at the very beginning?
How did they manage separation when the children were very young?
What was it like at home when the youngest child started school.
What are their feelings about dating?
Is there enough going for the partners — both as a couple and as individuals — to allow them to relinquish their role as parents?
Will they feel empty on the last child's departure and give substance to what is often called the ‘empty nest’ syndrome of marriage?
A satisfying  marriage to which parents are happy to devote time eases the loss.
Letting go is more difficult when children have become comforting substitutes for disappointment in a marriage.
Inevitably, the process is affected by fantasies which surround leaving home.
Pauline Crook had difficulty separating from an intense attachment to her own mother, whose death, shortly after Pauline's marriage, aroused her guilt.
She conceived and gave birth to her only child and transferred this intensity of attachment to her daughter, Chloe.
During the child-rearing years her husband, Dan, was relegated to the sidelines.
Having himself come from a close family he did not at first regard his wife's involvement with Chloe as unusual.
When the time came for Chloe to leave home, Pauline became unduly worried about her health and constantly clucked over her like a mother hen to make sure she was alright.
Only at this point did Dan protest about being neglected.
The relationship between Pauline and Chloe then became a major source of conflict in the marriage.
In relation to Chloe, Pauline and Dan lived out the conflicts of their own adolescence.
Their situation was similar to the well-known triangular struggle between the Barretts of Wimpole Street, Elizabeth colluding with her father in an illness which kept her tied to home until Robert Browning won her away from invalidism to health through marriage.
The challenge for couples when children leave home is to adapt their intimate relationship, relinquishing some aspects of parenthood to become partners once more, and to develop new sources of satisfaction and meaning in life.
for some parents, perhaps the over-committed ones, the hope of early grandparenthood may allow the parental knot to be slackened, if not untied.
For others, the turn of the generations will have a more ominous feel.
But for most the change will ring in new pleasures.
The conscious wish of every parent is to launch their children as competent, independent adults, and much satisfaction and pride is to be gained from this process.
But in this very satisfaction lies the difficulty that for twenty years or more a good deal of self-esteem and affirmation has depended upon the parenting role.
As it is relinquished, and this source of daily confirmation dries up, there may well spring up doubts about self-worth and purpose.
The temptation to hang on to the past can then be strong.
It may be supported by the behaviour of a child sensitive to the parent's feelings.
But the stunting of development in this way is likely to result in parental guilt and some spoiling of the achievements parents and children have accomplished together earlier on.
There are many different ways of making the break.
When parents and  children have been passionately attached to each other it may be that the only way to leave is to have a blow-up.
The stag-fight between fathers and sons, for example, which allows children to leave home abruptly and in high dudgeon may, having achieved what was dreaded, prepare the ground for loving relationships to be restored on a new basis.
It sounds as if this was Mark Twain's experience:
When I was a boy of fourteen, my father was so ignorant I could hardly stand the old man around.
But when I got to be twenty-one, I was astonished at how much he had learned in seven years.
The position of the child in the family may affect the separating process.
Older children may have greater ease in leaving because of the hostage children left behind; indeed, the last child may have been conceived, as many late children are, to postpone the final loss.
On the other hand, if the parents and older children can manage the transition successfully, the way out for the youngest may be eased.
The departure of a ‘special’ child may be particularly problematic because he or she may have invoked part of the parents' own history, or because the child performed a vital role in the family such as‘go-between’or communicator.
Children who have to leave a lone parent, whether single from death or divorce, are obviously going to be more troubled and guilty about the possible loneliness and vulnerability of the one they leave behind than children who know there are others to carry that burden.
If a child has stepped into an absent parent's shoes another dimension of loss and anxiety is added to the transition.
Similarly, an only child may have a tough time leaving home without the support of brothers and sisters.
And the process is not just one way.
Children miss their parents.
An elderly lady admitted crying every night for the first three weeks of her marriage because she missed her sister and widowed mother so much.
Alongside anxiety about loss must be placed a parallel feeling best expressed by the indignant snort of a parent of four ‘children’ in their twenties: ‘Empty nest?
What empty nest?
I'd like to know when it will be empty!’
And this feeling is echoed by many parents whose children have successfully left home but return to visit: ‘It's lovely to see them come, but it's lovely to see them go.’
What about those who cannot go?
When children are unable to find work they may have no option but to stay at home.
What do parents do then?
It is not unknown for the senior generation to move away, even go abroad, in order to tip the younger generation out of the nest.
Frequently the transition is managed with a back and forth movement, a  re-meeting and re-parting by which the slow process of building separate lives is accomplished.
When an added stress threatens a newly won independence there may need to be, a temporary reuniting.
Even if parents succeed in coming to terms with letting their children go, their best efforts are likely to be undermined by the ‘dirty washing’ gambit, or proprietorial claims to ‘my room’which the child will not relinquish.
For the rule is that while children may always blame parents for their problems, this privilege is not allowed to work in reverse.