

Home Corner
Introduction
The importance of Home Corner play for young children has long been accepted.
Many schools have, where possible, extended the provision to include more than one all-purpose Home Corner room, and sometimes children have a ‘kitchen’, ‘lounge’ and ‘bedroom’in which to play.
Other areas such as the shop, supermarket or hairdressers are often set up and, if not permanently established like the Home Corner, are used and replaced, to return again months later and be enjoyed with renewed enthusiasm.
Opportunity for mathematical experience and the development of mathematical thinking might seem unlikely to occur readily in the Home Corner.
Unlikely, that is, until we consider the range of equipment and materials that children handle as they play.
A child's use of the equipment may well reflect previous learning; it may be imitative or imaginative, but will certainly provide first hand experience of using and organising everyday objects, together with opportunities for experiment with the way they behave.
Example
In the Home Corner, Andrew (4.5) is trying to put the largest pan into the oven.
Andrew: It's going to be rice and I can't put it in.
Teacher: Will it fit on the top shelf?
Andrew: I'll take the lid off, then it will go in.
Simply by providing a variety of equipment and allowing the children to experiment, we are effectively increasing the possibility for incidental mathematical experience and learning.
Example
Phillip (4.7): Just look at those pans.
Someone's put all the wrong lids on.
He then replaced the three lids correctly according to size.
The concern for order that Phillip shows is perhaps unusual in young children, who share little of the attention to detail or sequence needed for complicated adult existence.
Example
Ann (4.4) was asked to tidy the prams at the end of the day, i.e. give each pram one pillow, one sheet, one blanket, one doll.
The sheets, etc. were put on the table with the dolls, and an explanation given.
Ann nodded, yes, she could, and was left by herself to do it.
She put all the dolls in one pram and covered them with four sheets and four blankets.
Concern for ideas like one-to-one correspondence is often of minimal importance in the child's imaginative play, when the need may be primarily emotional or social.
At other times, however, when play seems to be faltering, a visit by a genuinely interested adult might be acceptable and suggestions appropriate.
I'm hungry!
Let's lay the table for tea.
Is there one cup each?
Your baby's crying, she's so cold.
Why don't you dress her?
My goodness, this house is untidy.
Let's have a spring clean.
It may not work out that way, but the teacher here has, of course, had matching, ordering and sorting in mind.
The child's play often reflects experience in school and at home.
Many children will not be used to ‘sit down meals’ or ‘laying the table’, for instance, and skills like these may be learned in purposeful activities in school and practised spontaneously in play.
‘Four for tea ‘
Example
Helen (4.4): We need another knife — I've only got two and I need three.
She found a knife in the cutlery drawer and set three places with cups, saucers, plates, knives, forks and spoons.
Tidying away can, of course, involve ideas of space and shape, one-to-one correspondence, sorting and ordering.
The provision of suitable storage space within each area, so that most things have a place in which they fit or belong, enables children to try to tidy up for themselves, though they will doubtless need their teacher's help to begin with.
The play taking place in the Home Corner might at times be imaginative, and at other times imitative.
In his imaginative play, the child in part creates a world of his own and the creatures or objects in it.
In imitative play he might assume a role in imitation of one with which he is familiar and might handle equipment as he has seen it used by others.
There are inevitably occasions when an interested and sensitive adult may very well be welcomed into the child's imaginative play, and a ‘visitor’ in the role of house guest, window cleaner or plumber, may even serve to extend the play by providing extra stimuli and ideas.
On the other hand, the arrival of an adult ‘observer’ or ‘intruder’may shatter the illusion and bring the play to a halt.
Certainly, the arrival of an uninvited and unwelcome mathematically obsessed visitor would hardly be inclined to keep anyone at home!
Possible developments
Home Corner — equipment
Much of the mathematical experience in the Home Corner will be an integral and incidental part of the child's free play with the equipment provided.
There is a need for good quality equipment, and by varying the colour, shape and size of things provided, the opportunity may be extended for one-to-one correspondence, sorting and ordering.
These are experiences which lead towards number and are explained more fully in chapters 7 and 8,Towards Number and Apparatus ,Toys and Games .
Differences are likely to stimulate choice; the smallest chair might be most suitable for the ‘baby’, place settings might each be of a different colour, saucepans might be chosen by size to fit the ring available.
Example
Alexandra (4.3) quite spontaneously sorted a set of pots, matched each with the right-sized lid and graded them on a shelf by size.
Below is a list of equipment which is available for use in Home Corner areas, though quite obviously any one Home Corner will contain only a selection of the items mentioned.
The provision of the equipment does not ensure the mathematical experience, but can create opportunity for it.
Possible mathematical experiences are given for activities involving each item.
Screen : Arranging furniture inside, altering shape of usable floor space.
Is there enough ‘room’?
Moving furniture, selves or prams through door.
Cooker : Might notice shapes of ‘electric rings’, doors, knobs, etc.
Sink unit :(Bowl and soapy water.)
Fitting ‘washing up’ into bowl, perhaps displacing water.
Dresser : Fitting cups, saucers, plates, tins, etc. into cupboards or onto shelves.
Curtains : Children perhaps deciding shape and size.
Covering surface when pulled across window; apparently changing shape when pushed back.
Patterns in curtain material.
Carpet : Covering surface.
Fitting into available space.
Using edge of carpet as boundary, arranging furniture within or outside boundary.
Pattern in carpet design.
Carpet tiles : Rearranging and combining in different patterns and shapes.
Table cloth : Covering surface.
Sometimes the design in the centre of cloth might be used to place it centrally.
Folding.
Cruet set : Fitting pieces onto tray.
Set of three.
Tray : Fitting objects onto tray.
Carrying empty/full tray.
Ironing board and iron : Folding to put away, unfolding to use.
Ironing surfaces.
Clothes basket : Filling and emptying basket; fitting ‘washing’ into basket.
Chest of drawers : Filling/emptying drawers.
Folding, altering shapes to fit.
Fitting drawers into appropriate spaces.
Dish cloth/mop : Cleaning surfaces of plates.
Wiping surfaces of tables, draining board.
Reaching inside bottles etc. to clean them.
Plate rack : Fitting crockery, etc. into rack.
Mirror : Reflections.
(Sometimes promotes talk if placed near telephone — children ‘talk to’ mirror.)
Knives ,forks ,spoons : Sorting.
Cutlery tray : Sorting.
‘Food ’:(All kinds) Variety of imitation foods and sweets might be sorted and shared.
Fruit (imitation )and bowl : Sets of different varieties, colours, etc.
Flowers and vases : Arranging flowers in vases.
Cot /covers /doll : Fitting dolls into right beds, covering them with blankets.
Table and chairs : Matching chairs to people or dolls.
Fitting chairs around table.
Cups ,saucers ,plates : Matching cup to saucer.
Matching sets of cups, saucers, plates or place settings.
Saucepans :(graded sizes) Matching lids to saucepans, saucepan to ‘hot plate’.
Finding lids that fit.
Place mats : Giving one each.
Perhaps paint place setting onto mats so that knives and forks can be matched to picture.
Clothes rail or rack : Hanging clothes on hangers.
Hanging clothes next to each other along rail.
Putting shoes on racks.
Dolls and clothes :(Different sizes, colours, etc. perhaps in sets.)
Dressing dolls with clothes that fit.
Clothes line and pegs : Ordering.
Telephone :(Disused real one if possible!)
Perhaps might encourage recognition of number symbols.
Clock : Possible number recognition.
Play with alarm to ‘time’ things.
Move hands of toy clock to appropriate time, e.g. ‘12’ when ‘lunch-time’.
Teapot : Filling and emptying.
Pouring ‘tea’ into cups.
Some other ways in which Home Corner play might be developed
New opportunities are created when play spontaneously extends beyond the Home Corner area.
Some of the different ways in which play might develop are outlined below.
Separate rooms
Mention has already been made of the many Home Corners with more than one ‘room’.
Where this is not a  permanent possibility, then it is sometimes possible to introduce a temporary partition.
This can lead to talk comparing the amount of space and the position of furniture.
The furniture can be sorted into the two sections.
Some Home Corners have even extended onto split levels or two floors, where raised areas have been used for this purpose.
Vocabulary : more than — less than — smaller than —larger than — inside — outside — around — between — next to— through — on top of — underneath — up — down.
Water
Obviously not all Home Corners are suitable for the use of water for ‘washing up’, ‘tea’ or ‘washing clothes’.
Plastic bowls of water are occasionally used in the sink, but more often water activities are set up elsewhere as extensions of the Home Corner play.
Children may use the classroom sink or water tray to wash the cups or the dolls' clothes.
In the summer, washday may happen out of doors, and can stimulate lots of talk and valuable practical experience as children add soap to the water, wash the clothes (taking care that water doesn't flood over the sides of the bowl), wring the clothes and peg them out on a line.
Vocabulary : full — half full — empty — more — less — too much — not enough — upside down— top — bottom — side — next to .
Food
Children are often encouraged to make the ‘food’ for their Home Corner play themselves, usually with flour and water dough that is moulded, hardened and painted.
Making the food in this way gives incidental experience of imitating shape and making comparisons, and painting involves covering all the surface area.
Foodstuff varies from fried egg and chips to sausage rolls and sponge cakes.
Containers are provided so that, if not during play, then at the close of Home Corner play, there is a simple sorting exercise to be done.
Matching often occurs when food is served, but the sharing may be haphazard.
An occasional word from an adult visitor may, if appropriate, direct attention to the problem and its solution.
Activity elsewhere, at milk time or after a baking session, might also be of help.
Vocabulary : looks like — more than — fewer than — as many as — one (two) each — all — on top — underneath — inside — together — next to— larger than — smaller than — round — straight — curved.
Moving house
Moving house in real life can be a great worry to young children.
Providing opportunity for this to be ‘played out’ in the security of the school can be of help.
It can also give plenty of incidental mathematical experiences, posing practical problems of choosing and clearing sufficient  space, and of moving and arranging the furniture.
Ideas and vocabulary of space, shape and comparisons are likely to be involved.
Many schools have furniture which can be used for play outside and children will often supplement this with improvised ‘furniture’ from cardboard boxes, for instance.
Moving house.
Vocabulary : too wide — too long — through inside — outside — next to— on top of — underneath.
Rhymes and stories
Sometimes stories and rhymes influence children's spontaneous play.
(See chapter 12 Rhymes and Stories .
) Traditional stories, or more recent ones like Mrs Mopple's Washing Line or the Topsy and Tim series, contain many ideas that children might choose for their Home Corner play.
Other opportunities
Tea parties — birthday parties in particular.
Dinner time.
Spring cleaning.
Washday.
Picnic — for teddy bears?
Packing for holidays.
The Shop
Not all children will be familiar with shops and shopping.
A visit to the local supermarket may well be within their experience, but they may not really have been involved with the shopping itself.
A visit in small groups to a local shop might well be a worthwhile preliminary to the introduction of a class shop and may affect the use that the children make of it.
(See chapter 10 The Environment .)
Very young children often enjoy play with improvised materials.
Dried peas, beans or shells stored in durable containers can be much more satisfying than empty packets which, unless regularly replaced, tend to fall apart so easily.
Simple balances and a variety of pots and containers can then add variety to the experience of filling, emptying and sharing.
Boxes and pots in good condition can, of course, be sorted and arranged on shelves.
Tins if originally opened upside down, can be stood the right way up on shelves to look unused, provided that rough and dangerous edges are made quite safe first.
At this stage the act of shopping itself may depend on a very primitive and haphazard rate of exchange, possibly one-to-one.
Children are encouraged to play freely and imaginatively, but at a later stage may be helped to give goods a price-marking of counters, e.g. a packet marked with  would only be exchanged for four counters.
It might be useful to make a simple ‘stocktaking’ book with pictures to match the things in the shop.
The older children might then check the ‘stock’ once in a while by one-to-one correspondence.
‘Two of those, please.’
Again the shop need not be an all-purpose grocers, but might be a supermarket, sweet shop or toy shop, or even a post office with sticky-paper stamps, a letter-box and a postman.
The mathematical ideas which are likely to occur in play in the shop, particularly when children have worked with their teacher to plan and organise it, are those of sorting, matching, ordering, comparisons, shape and space.
Each type of shop will offer experience with different kinds of materials.
Vocabulary : all — some one(two...)— empty — full — bigger (taller, wider, longer) than — smaller (shorter, thinner) than — fewer than — less than — inside — outside — next to — on top of .
The café
This area is probably more suited to the older children, and offers opportunity for experience of sorting, matching, comparisons and shape.
With help, the children can prepare ‘food’, lay the tables and serve their customers.
Some ‘cafes’ have opted to use a simple pictorial menu, a few use a very simple ‘price list’.
A kitchen set up at a nearby ‘dough’ table can provide the ‘food’— cakes, biscuits, sausage rolls or sandwiches.
A group baking session might provide the real thing, and with careful supervision a real tea might be prepared and served as a special treat.
Vocabulary : more — full — half full — empty — one (two...) each — too many — too few — larger than — smaller than — too much — enough.
The hairdressers
Although problems of hygiene do exist, many schools choose to develop the ‘hairdressers’ as an extra play area.
Once again, the kind of play and the extent of mathematical experience which it includes will inevitably vary.
The use of rollers of varying size, colour and shape might be spontaneously sorted into trays provided.
Safe grips can be used and the appropriate sized roller used for each length of hair; dolls or wigs may be used for this.
Hair nets can be used to cover the dolls' or dummies' heads.
Real water for washing dolls' hair provides experience of filling and emptying.
Mirrors can stimulate an interest in reflection and prompt children to talk about themselves.
Talk and general discussion might include ideas of number, shape and comparisons.
Vocabulary : full — empty — half full — larger than — smaller than — round — spiral — longer than — shorter than — on top of— over.
The hospital corner
The function of the hospital corner is to allow children to play out imaginatively fears and worries resulting from real experience at the hospital or doctor's surgery.
Young children may not be aware of the dangers of drugs and medicines, and, of course, it would be dangerous to provide ‘sweet’ imitations.
Beds enable the children themselves to be patients.
Bandages of various shapes and sizes can be used and fitted according to the nature of each ‘injury’.
Sticking plasters, perhaps made from paper or sticky tape, again in different shapes and sizes, offer choice and comparison.
There is, after all, always some status attached to wearing the largest plaster from the real First Aid Kit, even for the smallest scratch!
Beds must be made, equipment sorted and ordered, and patients dealt with one at a time.
Mathematical experience can be an integral part of this play, in particular in the child's improvisation of materials which is often quite fascinating.
‘Eat it all up.
It will make you better.’
Vocabulary : fits — too long — not long enough — too short — wider than — long enough.
The bus
The creation of a bus needs only a collection of chairs and sufficient space for them to be arranged appropriately.
This arrangement can be mathematical once the play is under way; a conductor or driver may soon assume responsibility for matching passengers to seats and the children will encounter problems of too many, not enough, empty, etc.
Some children can be encouraged to use improvised tickets, and occasionally ‘money’ can be used in exchange.
In some classes the bus is used in conjunction with other areas, so that a group might ‘take a bus ride’ to the ‘shop’or to ‘visit friends’in the Home Corner.
Used outdoors in the summer the bus might go ‘to the country’ or ‘the seaside’or off to ‘a picnic’.
Vocabulary : inside — outside — front — back — first, second, etc. — one each — too many — full — empty — next — one (two…) more.
The teacher's role
There are many other areas and themes of play which the children might choose to develop that have not been mentioned here.
It is important to remember that imaginative/imitative play is a valuable part of the child's early experience.
The teacher may initiate ideas through the provision of new and varied equipment and the use of stories or rhymes, but the development of the play arises from the spontaneous interest of the children themselves.
The teacher can learn much about the children's thinking by observing the way that children handle and use the equipment.
There are times when she will be included in their play and might decide to develop an opportunity for exploring mathematical ideas which have occurred.
The following examples show how teachers have watched children make use of different materials in spontaneous activity.
In the first example, a chance happening develops into a mathematical experience.
Under the watchful eye of the teacher the children improvise their shoe shop, and probably it is she who suggests the use of shelves for the ‘display’ of pairs.
Later, she decides to pursue their interest by initiating the tracing and matching activity.
Example 1 The shoe shop
A box of different types of shoes was left near the Home Corner by accident.
The children immediately seized on this, and with permission emptied the contents on the floor.
Within minutes they had quite voluntarily created a shoe shop.
From this came experience of matching, sorting and comparisons.
Talk of size and shape: ‘Mine's larger and fatter than yours.’
‘Give me that short one to go with this.’
‘This shoe's too small for me, but it might fit you.’
The children enjoyed sorting the shoes into pairs.
They arranged them on the shelves: ‘There's too many for this shelf.
Put a few over there.’
Later, shoe-shapes were traced on black card.
The cutouts were used for matching to the shoes.
The next example is an account of a teacher's observation of children at play whereby she learns of the children's own discoveries as they experiment for themselves.
Example 2 The Supermarket
The children stacked tins as for display in a supermarket.
Similar sizes were put together and the piles were symmetrical.
Loading shopping baskets to the full, they had experience of capacity.
‘I want a bigger basket than this.
You have mine.
You only want a little one for those few tins.’
By filling empty tins and jam jars with peas, lentils etc., and also with larger objects like apples and nuts, they discovered for themselves that many small, but few larger, things fill the same container.
The teacher in Example 3 provided a box of dolls' clothes of different sizes and designs.
The children are left to find out which ones will fit each doll.
Example 3 Dressing dolls
The box of dolls' clothes is on the table.
Susan (4.8) combs the dolls' hair while Cheryl (4.7) sorts out the clothes, measuring the dresses against each doll to see if it's ‘big enough’.
Susan insists that none of them are big enough and Cheryl is equally insistent that the right sized one is.
There is great hilarity when they find clothes that are obviously ‘too small’.
Cheryl decides, ‘I'm going to tidy up first’.
She sorts out the vests trying several against the doll and saying, ‘It's only halfway up her’.
She then sorts all the vests and folds them up and puts them in the box, then the pants, then dresses and lastly cardigans.
Meanwhile Susan dresses her doll; vest, then pants and dress.
Cheryl smiles when she notices a different shade of wool on one sleeve of a cardigan.
‘It's got two different reds.’
She measures a too-small all-in-one suit against her doll and laughs, ‘Look, Sue, look!’
In the last example, the teacher has joined the children as they wash their dolls.
It is probably her presence that encourages the children to compare the size of the dolls and to talk about things they notice as they play.
The teacher does not allow the ‘unnatural’ pursuit of any mathematical ideas to spoil the children's enjoyment of the activity.
Example 4 Doll washing
Three children are washing dolls.
They decide to use warm water.
They all rub the soap on the dolls and rub and rub them, then splash up the water till the soap ‘comes off’.
They decide the soap makes the water ‘white’.
Julie (4.6): My doll's legs are longer than Susan's.
Susan's got a little doll.
Steven (4.7): She has got baby's legs.
They decide if you rub the soap on the dolls hard enough with water you ‘get little bubbles’.
Julie dropped the soap in the water and Susan (4.8) said, ‘It will melt’.
They stand the dolls together and Julie says, ‘Mine is bigger than hers’.
They then see how far the water comes up the dolls' legs.
They find it takes a lot of water ‘to rinse off the soap’.
Julie has the large bath towel to dry her doll because ‘my doll is the biggest’.
Julie holds the doll up high ‘to get all the water from inside her’ and is fascinated to watch it stream out from a little hole in the doll's big toe.
She dried her off well and said, ‘She can't have two washes’.
The Family
Introduction
When a three- or four-year-old child first comes to school, his real concern could almost be said to be his own identity.
He is busy learning about himself, and at the same time finding out something about the world beyond his home and family, about other children, other adults and other things.
In general young children need to feel important; they are proud of their own achievements and proud and possessive of their own property.
The school provides freedom of choice and the encouragement to experiment in play.
Children love to discover that they can ‘do’ something new, and through the provision that is made and suggestions that are offered, each child is able to succeed at his own level.
Most of the child's talk about himself, his toys, the things that he has seen or those he can do, arises spontaneously from his play.
Talk and activity centred on the child himself are likely to encompass mathematical ideas naturally, and some of these are explored in the section ‘Myself’, below.
The child's willingness to talk about his family and his home, however, will be much more likely to reflect his own individual circumstance.
Some children have considerable difficulties at home.
It is certainly not intended that intrusion of any kind should be encouraged into an area of the child's experience which must be sensitively respected, and this must be kept in mind when reading the section ‘My family’.
In some communities the extended family is the child's experience, and although some examples involve primarily the ‘nuclear’ family, these will extend to include cousins, uncles, grandparents as appropriate.
The section, ‘The family’, is perhaps more likely to be explored in terms of an imaginary one — the family in a story or rhyme, or the family of dolls that lives in the doll's house.
Here there are established relationships, sizes and perceptible properties which might be talked about, without offending any child.
In the next section some of the circumstances in which mathematical ideas have occurred, from talk and activity about families, are discussed.
They are given as an indication of what can happen and a suggestion of some of the ways in which similar ideas might be explored by different children in different circumstances.
1
Myself: e.g. I'm growing; my birthday; look in the mirror; hands and feet; dressing up; it's mine; I can and I can't; making things to fit.
2
My family: e.g. who's tallest?; how many; our pets; it looks like; my house; things we use at home; comparisons; ordering; baking; creative work and painting.
3
The family: e.g. dolls; other toys; stories and rhymes; ‘happy families’.
Possible developments
Myself
‘I’, ‘me’ or ‘mine’are words that are frequently heard in the classroom, as a child proudly announces that he has ‘built a big tower’or ‘got one like that’, or as he asserts himself by virtue of possession, ‘That's mine’.
Such remarks can be an invitation to the teacher to come and listen or look, and as she shares the children's enjoyment and pride or helps them to sort out their problems, there are times when this will involve ideas which are mathematical.
I'm growing
Example
This was a conversation overheard at the lunch table:
Roger (5.1): I got more hair than you, Rodney.
Rodney (4.4): That's 'cos my head is growing.
Roger: My hair grows.
Rodney: Everything grows.
Josephine (4.4): Houses don't grow.
Roger: Babies grow.
Stephen (4.0): Simon and me were babies.
Josephine: Lizzie and I were too.
Do you know why Lizzie is bigger than me? 'Cos she was born first.
It is difficult for children to understand the process of growing.
The common confusion of age with height is just one example (see chapter 11 The Passage of Time ).
‘When I'm big’ is a favourite thought.
Example
Anna (4.3): When I'm six I will be much bigger.
I will be a lady no, I will have to be bigger still more.
James (4.2): When I'm grown up big I shall be like a giant, and I shall be up here and I shall look down at you and you will say, ‘What are you doing up there?’
With help, ‘big’ is gradually replaced by ‘older’or ‘taller’as these different ideas acquire meaning.
Often there are two tiers of coat pegs for the children to use and many who ‘can't quite reach’ when they first come to school, can use them easily two or three terms later.
Sometimes a teacher considers it suitable to help some of the children make marks on the wall to establish their present height, and these marks are then compared with others made later in the term (perhaps in a different colour) so that children can see how much they have grown.
Lengths of wool or strips of paper are sometimes used to emphasise that the mark represents a height from the floor.
‘I'm as tall as the tower.’
Children for whom this activity may have little meaning can compare their own height with towers of blocks, tops of cupboards and so on.
For them the comparison must be immediate.
Comparing the heights of two children in the group or ordering several can be a spontaneous and useful activity, again using ideas of taller and shorter, the tallest and the shortest.
On the other hand, as a group activity it can be less than enjoyable for the shortest child in the group if he is continually identified as ‘the shortest’, when he needs to believe that ‘he's a big boy, really’.
Children often notice differences in size when they play, when, for instance, they fit themselves under a table or try to crawl through a hoop.
Of course a child's comments need not always be explored but are of themselves tremendously important in giving an indication of his stage of thinking.
Examples
Ann-Marie (3.6): I am bigger than her, she not smaller than me.
Ceri (4.2): My mum is buying me a new bathing suit.
The one I had last year is too small — 'cos I've grown bigger.
Vocabulary : older than — younger than — taller than — shorter than — oldest — youngest — tallest — shortest.
My birthday
The celebration of each child's birthday in school can involve other ideas than ‘how old am I?’ which is explored in chapter 11 The Passage of Time .
Each class will have its own birthday rituals which offer the children different experiences.
When children help to put out chairs for the group or distribute mugs of orange juice or bottles of milk, then they need to establish one-to-one correspondence.
They may find that there are more children than chairs, for instance, and have to find how many more chairs are needed to provide one each.
It may be that the baking group will make ‘birthday biscuits’ and the baking and distribution will involve mathematical ideas.
Sometimes a cake may be sent to school for the children to share; sharing a cake for a large group of children would not be done by the children themselves, though it might turn into a spontaneous counting activity.
‘How many of us are there?
Let's count.
How many pieces will we need?’
These will then be given out one to each child.
Sometimes the class has a permanent –birthday cake’.
The child can then put the same number of candles on it as his years, perhaps putting ‘how many for last year?’, ‘four’ and then one more for his ‘fifth’birthday.
If the candles are to be blown out there may be talk about the number extinguished at one blow, for example, ‘Three have gone out — two more to go!’
If a child brings in his birthday cards, then the teacher might explore his interest by talking with him about the number of cards, the pictures (colours, sizes, what's happening, etc.), the shape and size of the cards, and the number symbol.
Talk might identify similarities and differences and lead to simple comparisons or ordering.
Through this personal talk, the teacher avoids any competitive feeling that might occur if this became a group activity.
Vocabulary : one each — more — fewer — older — younger — one — two — three — four — five — third — fourth — fifth.
Look in the mirror
The mirror, especially a full length one, can provide plenty of fun when children pull funny faces or make different shapes.
Without inhibiting this enjoyment, there may be occasions when attention can focus on comparisons such as longer, wider, taller, as children experiment.
The mirror can be useful in checking whether one child is taller than another in such a way that both can clearly see the difference.
Looking at his reflection a child sees that he has two eyes and one nose, that his mouth is lower than his nose, his ears are at each side of his head.
Angled mirrors can be fun (’ Look where his arms come out now’) and provide experience of symmetry.
A child can also see more easily the one-to-one correspondence of the buttons and button holes on his coat.
If he is asked to count the buttons on his shirt or see how many colours are in the pattern of his sweater, then a look in the mirror might help with this too.
Vocabulary : taller than — shorter than — wider than — narrower than — curved — straight — next to— underneath — behind — above — looks like.
Hands and feet
Example
Fiona (4.7) said to Jason (4.10), ‘Your boots are on the wrong feet.’
Teacher: How do you know?
Fiona: They are facing in the wrong direction.
Children are often asked to use their own bodies for counting and corresponding.
How many eyes, hands, feet, legs, toes, fingers?
How many shoes do we need for our feet or gloves for our hands?
And, of course, they notice when shoes don't fit or there's one missing.
‘I've lost my shoe.’
Comparisons of the size of hands or feet often occur spontaneously, or are prompted by a visit to a shoe shop or making handprints in wet sand, wet footprints by the paddling pool and so on.
Prints may be made of hands spread or with fingers close together.
Footprints might be made in different directions; ‘sideways’, ‘forwards’, ‘backwards’.
Comparison of size might be made more clearly between prints made by an adult and those made by the children.
Hands and feet are used to print with paint or into clay or damp sand.
They might be printed in pairs or in patterns which repeat.
When more than one child's prints are made, then the sizes may be compared or ordered.
Sometimes children try to print with just one thumb or finger, or two fingers or three fingers.
Dressing up
The clothes that the children wear or dress up in often prompt comment.
Children like to show off new clothes and new toys for that matter, and may enjoy the opportunity of talking with an adult about colour, patterns, when or where bought or made, and so on.
The ladybird has spots — just like my dress!
They're circles.’
Some will enjoy looking round the class for things that are the same colour, or might like to try to copy the pattern of a simple fabric, if provided with similar shapes and colour paints to enable them to experiment.
They might go on to sort similar materials from the scrap material box, perhaps sorting all the floral designs or all the striped pieces.
The full length mirror can be a great help by enabling the child to look at things he is wearing which he may be trying to describe.
Children often claim similarity, and experience of comparison will enable them, like Tom, to explore whether things are exactly the same or not.
Example
Andrew (4.11) and Tom (4.6) were sitting drinking milk.
Andrew: Hey, we have both got the same socks.
They are long ones.
Tom: Yes, they are the same but yours are a bit different.
They are slightly darker grey and you've got a different pattern on yours.
Andrew: Yes, but they are the same.
Children are not always concerned with the size of clothes in which they dress up and the teacher would not intrude in any imaginative role play through an inappropriate concern for mathematics.
Children do occasionally comment on the length of dresses though, and have to solve the problem of the dress that is too long for them to walk in, or the jacket which is too small.
It ' s mine 
Example
Shafgar (4.1) was showing his paintings to the teacher.
He said, ‘I done another one.
Two paintings.
I'll take these two paintings home.
It is sometimes difficult for children to remember which things are theirs or were made by them.
Beginning to take responsibility for their own property, they may be proud to count how many paintings they have done or sort their work from the pile, to take home.
The use of personal symbols in many schools, provides each child with a sense of what is his.
This is his peg and his coat must be put on it.
This is his symbol to place on a bottle of milk to show that it is his.
This idea establishes a one-to-one relationship of ‘belonging’.
Young children may lay claim to possession just because they happen to be playing with, say, a car or doll.
Sharing can cause problems, but in some cases the children can be encouraged to explore possible solutions for themselves.
An example is given in Example l later.
Their pride of possession can confuse ideas of size.
Some children tend to insist that their models, cars, towers, etc. are the biggest, fastest or tallest and it is not always kind to suggest otherwise.
Others are much happier to have their judgements explored and can check their claims.
I can and I can't
Experiment and activity enable children to find out about things that they can and cannot do.
Often their comments or explanations involve mathematical ideas like height weight, shape or space.
Example
Nigel (4.8):(Balancing along a plank)‘Look, I balance all the way along here.
Teacher: Can you tell me what balance means?
Nigel: Mind you don't fall off.
Nigel had invited his teacher's attention and in turn she had offered him a chance to try to tell her what he meant by ‘balance’.
Example
Donna (3.10):(On the swing) I can't push myself.
Teacher: No, your feet don't touch the ground.
Donna: But the swings in the park are smaller.
I can push myself on those.
It would be difficult to explore the idea of ‘smaller’ as Donna has used it.
They may be smaller; they may just be nearer the ground.
At any rate she has noticed the difference and tried to describe it.
Making things to fit
Making things to fit the children themselves can be tricky, and children will probably need the help of a friend or an adult.
Example
The teacher joined a group of three who were spontaneously cutting and pasting paper crowns for themselves.
Robert (4.1) made his and the teacher said, ‘It doesn't quite fit, does it?’
Donna (5.0) interrupted saying ‘You should have done it bigger [for longer]like me.
I'll do you one.’
Experience will teach Robert that it is more efficient to make an estimate first ‘This length fits round my head.
I'll use this one.’
My family
Each child's home circumstance is different, and not all children will want to talk about it in school.
The child's willingness to share his news and to talk about his family should not be inhibited for the sake of any mathematical ideas that might be incidental to it.
There are times  when these ideas will occur naturally and when it will be appropriate, and this is for the child's teacher to decide.
Who is the tallest?
Children talk about size as ‘big’ rather than using finer definitions like ‘tall’or ‘wide’or ‘long’.
It must be difficult for them to understand when the way that we use ‘big’ is so confusing.
Example
Teacher: How big is your new baby?
Amy (4.11): He isn't big, he's small.
Andrew (4.8): Mummy's biggest.
I'm smallest, but I'm a big boy.
Very young children may find little meaning in the question of who is the tallest in your family.
Example
Ayeshea (3.6): I'm biggest.
Bigger than Lucy (elder); bigger than mummy and daddy.
Usually, we assume that dad will be the tallest, mum the next tallest and so on, but of course this may not be so and unless we know the family there may be little point in exploring the idea.
Comparisons are best made at this early stage between things which the children can see.
When talking about brothers and sisters, children can often say who is the tallest or shortest, but find it difficult to distinguish between oldest and youngest.
Again they prefer to say ‘I've got a big brother’ or ‘a little sister’.
In some families there may be little distinction made between siblings and cousins, and these may be included in any discussion.
Ideas of height and age are best explored using things in the class or the children themselves.
Then gradually their experience will enable them to make sound judgements about their family.
Example
Emily (4.0): Mummy is the oldest.
Daddy is taller, but that doesn't mean he's older.
How many?
Sometimes children like to list the names of the members of their family and in this way we can help them to count how many there are, and help them to remember to include themselves in the count!
Our Pets
Family pets may be included in the child's idea of his family.
Pets which are kept in school can reinforce this interest and there are many incidental mathematical experiences involved in their care — water containers may be filled and emptied, more water may be needed, or a certain number of leaves may be fed to the pet and so on.
Caring for the class pet might prompt the child to comment on his own pet.
Talk might involve ideas of comparison of shape, size, colour or weight.
Pictures might be found in books which ‘look like’ the family pet, and these could be discussed.
It looks like
Children enjoy finding things in school which look like those at home.
The interest which this kind of discovery sparks off can often lead to some finer comparison: ‘Is it exactly the same?
How is it different?’
Examples
Andrew (4.4): I want that box because it looks like my daddy's car.
Andrew has been prompted to make a model car like his dad's.
Lee (4.8): My daddy has two vans, a blue one and a yellow one.
Daddy goes to work in them.
One is a big one and one is a little one.
Lee's spontaneous remark could have been followed by a suggestion that he tried to sort the vans from the other vehicles in the garage, or he could have been encouraged to watch vans travelling outside the school.
A natural follow-up would be for him to make a model van, perhaps like one of his dad's.
Ideas of speed might be introduced; his dad's van goes faster than the toy van in the garage.
Watch the traffic outside for things that move fast or more slowly; the cars might be counted and compared for size, shape or colour.
My house
Children might recognise similarities between the house or flat in which they live and one illustrated in a book or noticed on a visit.
The discussion which follows may involve comparison and the use of various mathematical ideas.
Models or paintings might be made and perhaps become a similar basis for talk.
For obvious reasons it would be unwise to encourage children to make comparisons between their respective homes.
Things we use at home
Collections can be made of things that we use ‘in the garden’ or ‘in the kitchen’, for instance.
They could include Home Corner equipment, pictures from magazines or objects from a furnished doll's house.
Reorganising the Home Corner can involve sorting of this kind, putting things for the kitchen in one area and things for the bedroom in another.
Discussion might arise, for instance, about the saucepans in the Home Corner.
Are the ones at home like that?
How are they different?
The children might have made a collection of shiny things or things made of metal, and be invited to think of things that they use at home which are shiny or made of metal.
Comparison
Children make use of family terms to make comparisons of size.
Example
David (3.7) was playing on the slide.
He said, ‘It's just right for me, but mummies and daddies can't go on it, can they?’
The language of comparison (taller, shorter, longer, wider, higher, stronger…) acquires meaning through its use in many contexts.
It may be that David's teacher would consider it appropriate to wonder why he thought mummies and daddies couldn't go on the slide.
Is it ‘too narrow’?
Would they be ‘too heavy’?
Ordering
Sometimes when children put more than two people or objects in order, they also make use of ‘family’ terms, giving the teacher the chance to introduce correct vocabulary.
Example
Catherine (4.7) was playing with four balls of clay.
Catherine: The biggest, the girlest, the boyest, the smallest.
(She then changed to…)
Daddy, could be mummy, then the boy and next the baby.
Again one might choose to introduce the mathematical terms — larger, smaller, look the same.
It may be that Catherine is giving her clay balls identities rather than deliberately ordering them.
Baking
Example
Fiona (4.7) made four biscuits and took them home.
The next day she said, ‘I couldn't give one to daddy because there weren't enough.
I had one, Justin had one, Joanna had one and mummy had one, so I gave daddy a bit of mine.’
Making biscuits in school to take home to her family had given Fiona an opportunity to share her biscuits, and a chance to share school and home experience.
Informal fractions (see chapter 7 Towards Number often occur in conversations of this kind.
Vocabulary : one each — the same — more — fewer — smaller — half — quarter.
Creative work and painting
Children like to make models or collage pictures of their home, and the enjoyment of the activity should not be lost to our concern for form and detail.
It is enough to know that the children are able to experiment freely with space and shape, and without necessarily feeling a need to talk about it.
There is a lot to be learnt from standing back and observing the way a child plays with shape and form, but it may be that the child will want to talk about it afterwards, or ask for help to find particular shape materials as he works.
Children also like to paint their family or part of it, they do not necessarily show the correct number in the family or reflect gradations in size.
The boy who has no dad, for instance, may paint dads all over the place; the one with a new baby sister may leave her out altogether.
Sometimes children make things to take home for particular members of their family.
This is a link between home and school and might stimulate talk about numbers, size and relationships.
The family
Dolls
Families of dolls or puppets provide children with the opportunity for much free imaginative play.
The doll family can also be the basis for exploring ideas of relationships, comparison, ordering and number.
Mr and Mrs X and their children live in the house in the corner by the books.
Here they are:
Mr X Mrs X Girl Boy Baby
They are all different.
When the children meet the family some of the differences might be pointed out; others the children may notice as they play.
Of those standing, Mr X is the tallest.
Girl is the shortest.
(Though baby is smaller still.)
Their clothes are of different textures and patterns.
Mr X has long trousers whilst Boy has shorter ones.
Which of the family are wearing something green?
The family may have a well-furnished house, with furniture of different sizes for each member, so the children may use each size appropriately.
Relationships in general are important in mathematics (see chapters l and 2 Space and Shape and Comparisons ).
Exploring relationships within the family is yet another opportunity for this experience — for example, Mr X is the father of Boy, Boy is the son of Mr X. The doll family can, of course , be extended to include ‘grandparents’, ‘aunts’ or ‘cousins’, as thought suitable.
Perhaps some children would be able to make new ‘clothes’ for the family: things that fit.
(Clothes of different size and type can be sorted.)
They might like to make a family of their own with fewer members, and a simple house in which they can live.
This will include ideas of space and shape.
Vocabulary : taller than — shorter than — tallest — shortest oldest — youngest — younger than — older than — looks like — longer — same as — straight lines — circles all some — fits too long — too short — too small — wide — long — tall — across — above — next to— together.
Other toys
Of course the family need not be ‘human’.
One might improvise a family of fishes or cars or imaginary creatures.
The imaginary ones might have a different number of legs or eyes, some with tails, others without.
They will be different sizes (length, width, height) and may be of different colours or patterns.
This will provide opportunity to notice similarities and differences.
Again the family may be introduced through an improvised story, perhaps one which involves attention to comparison in some way.
Homes of suitable shape and size might be made for each individual creature.
Stories and rhymes
Traditional stories are a great source of enjoyment, and those like ‘The Three Bears’ include mathematical ideas which might be explored in talk and creative work.
(See also chapter 12 Rhymes and Stories .)
A small table might be set out for the three bears' breakfast with three sizes of chair, bowl and so on, together with three sizes of bear for the children to play with.
Although children become familiar with the terms used in the story and call out when they are listening to it, the ideas involved may not necessarily have been understood.
Again it is important for children to experience these ideas practically in a variety of ways to enable them eventually to achieve full understanding.
The teacher's role
As always, it is the role of the teacher to be aware of the possibilities for helping children to explore mathematical ideas.
‘The Family’ relies very heavily on the teacher's skill in realising the importance of listening to children talking and also knowing when simply to listen and when to listen and suggest or question.
The teacher does have a role in initiating interest and activity through the use of dolls, pictures, rhymes or stories, and in pursuing any teaching point when she feels it is right to do so.
The teacher who finds, for instance, that a child has difficulty in including himself in a ‘family count up’, may make sure that he has opportunity for counting the members of many different groups of which he is a part, on other occasions.
Here are some examples of ways in which individual teachers have explored particular comments or happenings.
In the first example given below the teacher is quick to follow Bruce's initiative, and to ask him to suggest a way of sharing.
At no point does she tell Bruce that his idea was wrong.
Instead, she guides him to check his suggestion and when he realises that he is not successful, she skilfully involves him in the final solution to the problem.
Example 1
This story involves Mona (3.3) and Kim (3.6), and also Bruce (5.1), who is visiting from another class.
Bruce and Kim have large lumps of clay.
Mona walks up and grabs Kim's lump.
Bruce: She's taken Kim's.
Kim: Gimme.
Mona: Mona's, Mona's.
(She speaks little English.)
Teacher: Give it back to Mona and we'll find some for you.
Kim: Gimme.
Bruce: Let's share it.
Teacher: How shall we do that?
Bruce Mona can have half of mine and half Kim's.
(He cuts approximately half from each and gives them to Mona.)
Kim: Her got lots.
Bruce: No, she's got half.
Teacher: Are you sure, Bruce?
What did you give her?
Bruce: I gave her half of this and half of this.
Teacher: Put your bit beside hers.
Bruce: It's bigger.
I know, we'll put it in one big lump and you can share it.
Teacher: How many people want a lump?
Bruce: One, two, three.
Teacher: So I'll cut it into thirds.
You can have one third each, not one half, like this.
Now, does that seem fair?
Bruce: Look, they are the same!
In the next example, does Nichola imply that she believes her feet to have stopped growing now?
Her teacher would  know whether the idea of ‘growing’ is one that confuses Nichola, and would know whether or not to pursue the idea on another occasion.
The teacher might, however, go on to invite comparison between, for instance, the new sandals and the old shoes, or the size of Nichola's feet and her own.
Example 2
Nichola (3.7): Look at my new sandals, teacher — they're the next size up!
My feet had grown and the man said my shoes were too small so now I'm going to wear my sandals all the time.
I'm glad my feet grew!
‘I'm glad my feet grew!’
In the following example the teacher has quite deliberately sought to initiate interest in the comparison of ages and heights, by arranging for older brothers and sisters to visit the group.
Knowing her children, the teacher had decided that this activity was suitable for them.
In each case the teacher tried to encourage the use also of ‘opposites’; Steven is taller than Linda — Linda is shorter than Steven.
Example 3
The children invited older brothers and sisters from another school to visit the group.
They looked at each family separately.
These are some of the ideas which were mentioned on that occasion and which will be met in many other different contexts, leading towards a real understanding of them.
Steven is taller than Linda.
When Linda stands on a chair Linda is higher than Steven.
Steven is older than Linda.
Heather and Anita are the same size although Heather is older than Anita.
Bernie is a little taller than Elizabeth.
Adrian is much taller than Davie.
Sharon is older than Tracey.
When Sharon stands on a chair, Tracey is lower than Sharon.
Karen is taller than Mark and Mark is taller than Martin.
Mark is older than Karen and Karen is older than Martin.
Karen is the tallest.
Martin is the shortest.
Mark is in the middle.
Water
Introduction
Water is fascinating and exciting to all children.
For many of them, the classroom will be the first place where they are able to play with water and even spill it on the floor without incurring an adult's displeasure.
Mops and cloths should be provided so that children can mop up their own spills, and so help to prevent accidents.
Running water from taps, plug holes and drains are all things to be explored, as are ditches, puddles, fish tanks and the pets' water containers.
‘Where does that water go?’
It is not easy to follow a child's thoughts as he pours, fills and empties.
He could be working something out, but he may just be enjoying emotional relaxation and a purely sensory level of play.
The water trough can then be a peaceful place where children make social contact with other children and adults and talk of many things.
At other times it is suddenly exciting, as a new discovery is made or a sensitive teacher initiates a new game just as the last activity begins to pall.
Given a free choice, children usually choose the apparatus they are ready for and although a three-year-old may imitate the feats of an older child with a funnel, tube and bottle, he may not gain the same satisfaction as he does from achieving something much more simple on his own.
The child who has been moving boats and other objects that float on the surface of the water, suddenly discovers that he can make them sink by holding them down or pouring water on top of them.
Next he may discover that containers full of water will stand on the bottom of a trough of shallow water.
He continues pouring from one container to another, and after lots of experience and conversation with the adults around him can begin to estimate how much he is going to need to fill the guinea pig's water bowl or top up the vase of flowers.
Younger children often try to use a funnel as a scoop, but as they progress, it is used to fill bottles, control the flow of water through the water wheel and as part of a complex water system of pipes, jugs and bottles on different levels.
Children make progress at various speeds at different ages and by watching their activities and offering the next stage when they are ready for it teachers can give them the breadth of experience that will make the formal work of later years more meaningful.
Valuable mathematical experiences need not be confined to the well-ordered water trough, and the sensitive adult can find many ways of introducing new vocabulary and mathematical ideas during the children's play.
Possible developments
Washing
a)
There must be enough time and space for each child to wash properly.
As there are often only half a dozen wash-basins, turns must be arranged and children soon realise that there are too many or not enough children for the basins available.
Fitting in plugs and turning taps on and off may all be new experiences, as well as estimating how much water is needed.
Will the water overflow if two hands are plunged into the bowl?
What happens to the overflowing water and also to the waste water?
If a mother can bring a baby to be bathed, there will be valuable conversation about temperature, displacement and the sequence of washing, rinsing, drying and dressing.
b)
Tablecloths, mats, napkins, dolls' clothes, dressing up clothes, cot and pram covers all need to be washed at various intervals and provide experiences of sorting, displacement, comparison, absorption and evaporation.
Young children can be helped to plunge, rub and squeeze, and if a wringer or spin dryer is used (by an adult, of course), the children will be amazed to see how much more water can be extracted than by just squeezing.
c)
The cups, saucers, pots and pans in the Home Corner all need washing at intervals.
In fact, if there is an un-carpeted area, real water can be used in the play sink or a bowl, and ‘meals’ can be followed by real washing up, sorting and restacking in cupboards or on shelves.
d)
Regular washing of plastic bricks and toys helps to preserve their freshness and while standard Lego pieces can be soaked in a small bowl, larger bricks will need a larger container.
The bricks and other plastic toys then need to be sorted and fitted back into their appropriate containers.
Dolls can be bathed and the correct sequence (as for the real baby) encouraged.
e)
Pastry boards, rollers, cutters and cooking tins all need washing.
Offer the children different materials for drying up.
The children can sort which absorb most water.
‘Shall we try to push them all under the water.?’
Vocabulary : too many — not enough — how much?— inside — outside — underneath — on top of— sort — under — over.
Indoor and outdoor gardens
a)
Probably one of the easiest ways to show that water is necessary, is to germinate cress seeds on wet blotting paper, cotton wool, flannel, etc.
Children can watch them absorb the water, grow fatter and begin to shoot.
Daily additions of water will maintain the growth.
Peas and beans can be grown in jars, supported by damp paper; carrot and parsnip tops grow in saucers of water; onions, potatoes and hyacinths resting on the top of jars of water will send roots down and make top growth; cuttings such as Busy Lizzie and Tradescantia will produce roots when standing in water.
Controls can be set up for most of these experiments, e.g. plant cress seed on dry  blotting paper as well as wet, so that children begin to realise that it really is the water that is responsible for the change.
b)
There is a need for daily or weekly watering of pot plants and the effect of too much or too little water is soon evident.
As bulbs grow in pots, the amount of water needed varies according to the growth of the flowers.
Flowers and vegetables grown outdoors need regular watering in hot weather.
Routine and quantity can be established.
c)
Cut flowers in vases need the water changed or topped up.
Size and quantity of flowers for vases can be estimated and experimented with.
Vocabulary : up — down — through — under — over — too much — too little — weekly — daily.
Cooking
a)
Where a refrigerator is available (or in freezing conditions outside), flavoured ice cubes or lollies can be made.
Discuss the shape of containers and whether they should be full or nearly full.
Melting, and the size of container needed to hold the liquid afterwards, can also be explored.
b)
Use water to mix real pastry, icing sugar or play dough.
c)
Cold drinks can be made by diluting concentrated squash or mixing water with powder.
Share the mixture between cups.
Estimate how many cups can be filled or try to pour equal quantities into a given number of cups.
d)
Feel the different textures of sugar, salt, flour, etc.
Try mixing each with a little water.
Which dissolve?
Which form a paste?
Which are unaffected?
e)
Soak dried fruit, peas, beans, etc. before cooking them.
Discuss how much water is necessary — too much or too little.
Leave an equal amount of fruit unsoaked, so that children can compare the difference in size and weight.
Vocabulary : full — empty — half full — add — mix — share — how much?— too much — little — enough.
Pets
Children can often help to refill drinking containers for their pets, and bird baths.
Further uses of water in the care of pets can be found in Small Mammals (Wray, J. D. Small Mammals , Schools Council Project Educational Use of Small Animals, English Universities Press Ltd., 1974).
Vocabulary : deep — shallow — round — flat — inside — outside — full — empty — too much — enough.
Rainy days
a)
Watch the raindrops on the windows.
Do they run down, joining together or are the blobs separate?
Paint a blob-and-trickle picture using watery paint on smooth or textured paper on an easel.
b)
Watch raindrops falling into puddles and look for circles of various sizes.
Raindrops feel and look heavy when they hit us or the ground.
Where have they come from?
Listen to the rain.
Compare slow dripping, fast gushing, trickling, etc.
c)
Look for drips from gutterings or a leaky roof.
Catch them in a bucket.
How soon will it be full or too heavy to carry?
d)
Set up a simple ‘weather station’ by collecting rain in a container.
Is there more today than yesterday?
e)
After it has been raining, go out in rubber boots to look for puddles, and walk through them.
Notice how the footprints fall, their pattern, size, etc.
f)
Ride through puddles on bicycles, tricycles, trucks, etc Notice different tyre marks and number of tracks.
Find out how to make straight or curved tracks.
g)
Look at the size of the puddles, chalk round them, cut string to stretch round them or use small bricks to surround them.
Look again later — has evaporation made them smaller or has more rain made them bigger?
Jump or step over puddles, estimating size.
Paddling pools
a)
Boats of varying sizes and weights can be floated in a pool while children paddle, but some objects will sink.
Does the depth of water affect this?
b)
In a swimming pool, rubber rings, balloons, etc. float How can you tell if the water is deep?
In which part can a child/adult stand on the bottom?
c)
A sprinkler or hose will show fragmentation and many colours in the sun.
d)
If buckets are used to fill the pool, they can be counted and discussions about empty and full will develop as water is transferred from one to the other.
Vocabulary : float — sink — empty — full — in — out — under — on top of— deep — shallow.
Rivers, streams, ponds and seashore
These are all potentially dangerous areas, and although many interesting discoveries can be made, children must be carefully supervised and not allowed to explore alone.
a)
Ways of crossing rivers and streams can be discussed; bridges, stepping stones, rafts and boats.
But this is only practical if expeditions with teachers and parents can be planned to give children first-hand experience.
What can be found in the stream?
Notice the different speeds of movement of snails, fish, tadpoles, etc.
Why do our paper boats always float that way?
Is the water flowing up-hill or down-hill?
Do leaves, twigs or stones float?
What happens when the water freezes?
b)
On the seashore, gullies can be dug for the incoming tide to fill.
Water can be seen to seep away from holes or fill up holes as it finds it own level.
c)
Ponds can be watched for reflections on still water, sunlight sparkling and ripples caused by the wind.
A straight stick held in the water will appear to bend, showing refraction.
d)
Discuss the open sea, fast flowing water in waterfalls, mountain streams and potholes, water in reservoirs behind a dam and the fresh water in our taps.
These topics may all be within some children's experience.
Vocabulary : over — through — under — behind — up — down — fast — slow — full — empty.
Water troughs, trays and bowls
Although children will already have had everyday experiences with water this may be the first time that water has been offered to them as a material to play and experiment with.
The tray should be in a part of the room that can be mopped up easily, but not isolated from the rest of the children and adults in the group.
The equipment, which should be stored nearby, can be sorted on to shelves or into bins and buckets.
These could be labelled with pictures as well as words so that some children can match and sort for themselves.
Different selections of equipment will encourage children to experiment in different ways, and a plank resting over the tray will make a level surface on which to stand containers to be filled.
The selection can be varied with some of the following activities in mind.
a)
Drop corks, stones, shells, pieces of coal, wood and sponge into various depths of water.
Play with hollow boats, solid and hollow figures, balls and containers that will float when empty but sink when full.
Sort out objects according to whether they float or sink.
Do all small objects float and large ones sink?
b)
Use pipes, bottles, buckets and the water-wheel to find out about the force of water and the direction of flow.
Fill and squeeze plastic bottles to show propulsion.
c)
Pour water into and through sieves, colanders and yoghurt pots with holes pierced in the sides or bottoms.
Try to fill paper, cloth bags or cardboard boxes.
How are they different from plastic pots?
d)
Provide varying sizes of jugs, buckets and bottles.
Many children feel the need to pour from one container to another continuously as they slowly acquire manual skill.
e)
Provide containers of various shapes which hold approximately the same amount.
Assorted plastic bottles can be cut to the appropriate size.
Children will begin to see that the same amount of water will fill containers that appear to be of different capacity.
The original amount (with care!) remains constant.
f)
Provide a set of cups or beakers of similar size and shape to give experience of sharing, estimating and matching.
g)
Provide pots that can be half-filled with water and then have stones dropped into them so that children can see the water level rising and find out about displacement.
h)
Use scraps of soap, liquid soap or soap flakes shaken up in the water to make bubbles.
Provide a separate bowl of diluted steriliser in which to rinse pipes and tubes.
Use tubes of varying diameters and lengths, and special bubble pipes.
Drinking straws are best avoided, as children are more used to sucking than blowing through them.
i)
Provide translucent pots with lids, that can be half-filled with coloured water, to find out about the movement of water and its level, despite the tilting of the pot.
Vocabulary : full — empty — share — solid — hollow — sink — float — flow — through — up — down — over — under — fill — level.
The teacher's role
It is not enough just to provide the equipment and the opportunities; the relaxed and warm feeling must be created between adult and child that will help them both to enjoy making discoveries together.
Many words which express mathematical ideas are used over and over again and it is important that they are used correctly, especially comparatives such as wider, longer, deeper, heavier, lighter, thicker and thinner.
Young children imitate and ‘play’ the activities that they see adults enjoying.
For example, a teacher who says that she thinks some of the dolls need bathing will soon have some willing helpers.
Some of the following sentences are bound to occur during the doll-washing activity:
Who will find the bowl for the water?
Do you think that one is the right size?
Let's see if the doll can sit in it.
Do her legs bend, like ours?
Will you get a jug and put some water in it?
It's not too heavy for you to carry, is it?
Perhaps a smaller jug would be lighter to carry?
What happens to the water when we put the doll into the bowl?
Was the bowl too full?
It is not suggested that the teacher should keep up a non-stop commentary or continually repeat the children's answers and comments for the benefit of the rest of the group.
If children can be drawn into normal conversation with adults as they work together, the ideas and experience which they assimilate will begin to have more meaning for them.
‘Is that enough water?’
Pot plants and flowers that need regular watering will be watched carefully by the children if they are helped to do the watering, and they will be quick to tell us that the guinea pig's water pot is empty if they can refill it themselves.
Again, it is almost second nature to use such expressions as ‘Don't give them too much’.
What does ‘too much’ mean?
Perhaps a certain amount for each plant could be decided upon and gradually the amount needed can be estimated by the children.
When cooking with the children we want to finish with something eatable, so we are likely to add the liquid carefully ourselves, but we could let children experiment with the play-dough and if they make the first lot too soggy, more flour and salt can be added without much trouble until they make a ‘workable’ dough, and there can be plenty of conversation about too much, too little, a little more, a lot more and enough.
Situations which involve deeper water out of doors need very careful supervision, but a small group of children with an adult could visit a bridge to watch boats move underneath as cars and buses go over the top.
They might make their own bridge over a very small stream or ditch and find out what will float underneath.
Children are sometimes asked to experiment with a collection of items made of various materials by placing them in water.
They are then encouraged to notice and talk about what happens, e.g. a plastic boat floats, but if filled with water, it sinks; or paper is lighter than a stone, but when it is wet through, it sinks.
Playing with the classroom water trough, some children feel the need to fill, pour and empty continuously.
If simple containers are put away to introduce sieves, for example, the children who have previously enjoyed filling and emptying will drift away.
It would seem better to add one or two different pieces of apparatus and an extra trough so that new pieces can be explored in the company of old favourites.
Then, by watching and joining in with the children's play, the balance of new and old can be altered as their interests change, without having everything in the water at once.
This sort of awareness of the children's requirements is a key role for the teacher in most activities as she tries to anticipate and provide for the next stage in each child's development.
In the following example the teacher is drawing Raymond into an activity, in the hope that it will lead to further thought.
Example 1
Teacher asked Raymond (4.5) if he would like to help her water the plants.
Raymond: Why?
Teacher: Why would you think so?
Raymond: Because they would die if they didn't have water.
I would die if I didn't have water.
This one [plant]is very dry.
Teacher: How much will this little plant need?
Raymond: Just a little water because it is a small plant.
In the next example, the teacher could have developed this child's thinking by suggesting that they should find out if the boat would still float when carrying a smaller stone or if a larger boat could carry the stone they had.
Example 2
Gary (4.3): The boat floats, but it won't if the stone's in it.
Teacher: Why will it not float if the stone is in, Gary?
Gary: Because the stone is hard.
Teacher: What does the hard stone do to the boat?
Gary: It makes it heavy, and it sinks.
The next example shows that Aabida needs a great deal more experience before she will understand how liquids behave in various shaped containers.
Piaget (Piaget, Jean,The Child ' s Conception of Number , Chapter I, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1952) has described many experiments of this type with children of four years upwards and concluded that it was not until about the age of seven that children were able to see that a quantity of liquid remains constant although it appears to change when poured into different shaped containers.
Example 3
Aabida (4.5), playing with water, carefully filled a tall transparent plastic bottle.
Teacher: Can you pour all the water in your bottle into this jug?
Aabida:(Looking at the jug, then back at the bottle.)
Yes.
She lifted the bottle shakily and with care poured the water into the jug.
It began to flow over the top.
She carried on pouring.
She then stopped pouring, but made no comment.
Teacher: Have you any water left in your bottle?
Aabida: Yes.
Teacher: Is the jug full?
Aabida: Yes.
Teacher: Can you fit any more water into the jug?
Aabida: No.
Aabida continued pouring water into various containers at teacher's suggestion, but remained convinced that a taller container held more water than a shorter, fatter one.
Although there is no adult conversation in the next example, it is obvious that Jill was a sympathetic listener, letting Dean enjoy his experiences and learn from them.
Example 4
Dean (4.6) was talking to a student in the washroom.
Dean: Can I help wash the tablecloths?
(Returning from playroom with five in his arms.)
I've got them.
(Puts them in sink and runs water.
Pulls up chair to sit by low sink and turns up sleeves.)
Watch this, Jill.
When I go down on the table-cloths, the water runs over my hand.
(After moving to laundry room and using spin dryer.)
They have dried good, haven't they, Jill?
(Picks up bowl containing tablecloths to carry them back.)
It's not so heavy when they have dried.
In the following example, Siobham is gaining valuable experience in pouring and estimating under the teacher's guidance, in a practical situation.
Example 5
Siobham (4.6), during lunch, asked the teacher, ‘Can I pour the water, please?’
Teacher: Yes, Siobham.
Siobham half fills each glass in turn except one which she fills to the brim.
Teacher: Siobham, I think that glass has too much water in it.
Pour some back into the jug.
This she did, gauging how much was left in the glass by the amount in the other glasses.
The teacher in the next example has supplied just enough information to start Jonathon on the road to discovery.
Example 6
Jonathon (4.7): What is that, teacher?
Teacher: It's a water wheel.
See what happens when you pour water on the top.
Jonathon: It goes round.
(pointing to the wheel.)
Teacher: What happens when you pour the water slowly?
Jonathon: It goes slow.
The final story began when Jane painted a picture.
Had she seen a plastic brick floating, or did she have to think of a name for her wavy line and enclosed shape?
Example 7
‘It's a brick floating on the water.’
Teacher: Tell me about your painting, Jane.
Jane (4.5): It's a brick floating on the water.
Teacher: Oh!
Do you think a brick would float on water?
Jane: Yes.
At this point, Mark (4.8), who was making a clay elephant nearby and had overheard this conversation, interrupted with a very disdainful, ‘No!
Bricks don't float on water
Jane: They do.
Teacher: Shall we try and find a brick to see if it will float?
After a short search they found a half brick made of concrete and went over to the water through.
Teacher: Jane, would you like to put it in the water to see if it will float?
Jane put it in and of course it sank.
She was disappointed but Mark triumphantly said, ‘I told you so!’
Teacher: All right, Mark, would you like to try this brick and see if this sinks?(handing him a large, hollow wooden brick.)
Mark: It's floating.
That's 'cause it's only light!
Teacher: Mark, go and get the heaviest wooden block that you can find.
When Mark returned with a large wooden and discovered that it floated, he looked up and a slow smile crept over his face as he said, ‘It's a trick!’
Teacher: No it isn't, Mark, really.
All wooden things float.
Let's look in this bucket and see which of these things will float and which of them will sink.
They took down the bucket labelled ‘Buoyancy’ and experimented with stones, shells, pieces of wood, metal bottle tops, forks, sponges, plastic boats and animals, plastic bobbins and two plastic cups, one of which sinks when filled with water and the other which floats just under the surface.
When all these objects had been tested and discussed, they took them out and put them on the shelf in two groups: those that floated, and those that sank.
Teacher: I wonder why some things float and others sink?
Mark: I know why.
It's 'cause they're stronger.
Teacher: What do you mean, Mark?
Mark: Well, bricks are stronger — like that big heavy stone.
(pointing to one of the Stones that we had tested.)
At this point, he started to take off his plastic apron, indicating that he had finished with water for the day, leaving a bemused teacher reflecting on the relationship of density to ‘strength’.
Raw Materials
Introduction
In the classroom, very young children are encouraged to explore and become familiar with the variety of objects and materials which are provided.
Most classrooms have a wealth of materials such as sand, clay and wood, and make collections of natural things like shells, leaves and pebbles, all of which can form the basis of much free play and experiment.
Other materials, like paint, dough, paper of all sorts, cardboard, waste cartons, cloth of various textures, tin foil and plastic cannot be called ‘raw’, but are basic materials which have been brought within the scope of this booklet.
The provision of a range of materials and the opportunity to handle them freely, enables a child to become familiar with their various properties.
The perceptive adult can help him to identify some of these properties and introduce the appropriate mathematical vocabulary.
However, it is necessary to emphasise that exploration of materials such as sand, clay, soil and wood for sheer delight, without the intervention of an adult, is extremely important and for some children lasts a long time.
Mathematics is the study of relationships, and as children explore, they begin to appreciate the relationship between one surface and another, one colour and another and between various tools and surfaces.
The introduction of new materials, or the suggestion of new ways to use familiar ones stimulates interest and prompts comparison and experiment.
The choice and preparation of materials gives a teacher the opportunity to lead children towards certain experiences.
She can also make sure that the more mature children have access to special tools and materials so that their creativity may progress.
For example, whilst a younger child will stick paper, cloth, seeds and leaves apparently haphazardly onto a piece of paper, the more mature child may divide his paper by folding or making crayon lines and use scissors to cut materials to the size and shape he wants.
Sorting
When a child looks for a particular size box or a piece of material of a certain colour or texture, he is taking early steps towards sorting.
The number of choices, say in box sizes or colours of material, can sometimes be limited by the teacher so that the youngest children are not discouraged from their natural urge to sort.
Possible developments
Sand
Ideally, children should be offered regular experience of both wet and dry, coarse and silver sand.
Many schools are fortunate to have an outside sand pit as well.
Dry and wet sand
Without equipment the children are able to enjoy the sensation of handling the sand, whether wet or dry.
They can hold, pour or push it about.
Wet sand can be moulded, whilst dry sand is much more elusive.
They may watch the sand shifting as they tunnel their hands into it.
Children may discover that the covering of sand in the tray can be pushed to one side into a mound, yet will still push back to cover the tray.
This is leading towards the idea of ‘invariance of mass’— there is still the same amount even though it has changed form.
Water can be added to the dry sand, so that children can experiment with ‘rivers’, ‘moats’ or ‘seas’.
They may mix the water in to use the sand wet.
The presence of both wet and dry sand in the same tray might prompt comparison of what each type feels like or the way each behaves.
Wet sand can be moulded, either by hand or using buckets, spades or moulds.
Comparisons of space, shape or size may be made as well as weight and number.
Impressions and patterns may be made in the wet sand, either by hand or with the tools available.
The activities may be spontaneous or at the suggestion of the teacher.
Let's make another line that's straight like that one.
Let's make a pattern with the things that make triangles.
Sand equipment
Sand equipment can be varied in much the same way as the teacher would vary the equipment at the water tray.
Some equipment will be more suited to dry or wet sand, though it is sometimes interesting for the children to try using the funnel, for instance, with the wet sand, and comparison can be made of the way the different types of sand feel and behave.
Example
Maxine (4.10): Wet sand won't go through the funnel because it soaks up the water and sticks together.
Below are summarised some of the opportunities for mathematical experience which arise through the use of various equipment with dry and wet sand:
Dry sand
Spades, scoops and spoons of different size, shape or colour give opportunities for comparisons.
Buckets and other containers can lead to comparisons of size, shape, capacity and full/empty.
Funnels, sieves, colanders, salt and pepper shakers can be used to compare the way sand behaves when wet and dry.
Sand combs lead to experiences of space and shape.
Plastic tubing of different sizes provide opportunities for comparisons.
Transparent containers show level.
The sand wheel can be used with wet or dry sand.
It will spin at different speeds with less or more sand.
Simple scales give experience of balance, mass and comparison.
They can be used with wet or dry sand.
Wet sand
Spades, scoops, spoons of different size, shape or colour give opportunities for comparisons.
Buckets and other containers lead to comparisons of size, shape, colour and capacity.
Moulds give experience of filling space, and also of shape and size.
Sand combs and pattern makers (e.g. potato masher, rolling pin, rake) lead to experiments with space and shape, and can be used for describing patterns and lines.
The sand table
Outdoor sand pit
The outdoor sand pit may include many of the activities already described and is dealt with more fully in chapter 9 Outdoor Activities .
Vocabulary : full — part full — empty — inside — outside — holds more than/less than — through — up — down — curved — straight — round — faster/slower than — more — less — looks like/different — around — under — on top of— behind — higher than — further than.
Collections
Collections of raw materials of all kinds can be the source of much interest and talk.
Comparisons may be made of many different properties; shape, size, colour, texture, where the things were found, their use, scent, etc.
Each collection will offer different properties and in any sorting activity the criteria chosen will mainly depend on the children themselves, though other qualities might be mentioned by their teacher.
Collections may be made quite spontaneously; a sudden gust of wind might produce an assortment of fallen leaves or petals to be gathered, as this teacher found:
Example
After our half term holiday most of the leaves had fallen from the trees here and in the park.
There was much conversation about the leaves.
We watched the gardeners sweeping them into piles and the children swept up the leaves too.
We compared the sizes of the gardeners' brooms with our own.
We counted the piles of leaves.
We talked about the sizes and shapes of the leaves.
Some children made leaf prints — sizes and shapes were discussed.
Collections may be made following a child's interest in say ‘shiny’ things or from the teacher's suggestion, ‘Let's  collect things that are made of wood’or ‘things with lines on’.
A table or display space set aside may encourage the children to sort out their collection.
Children often bring a new toy or special gift they have received to show their teacher and friends, and this may become the basis for a collection, as may something as simple as a pretty sweet wrapper or even an old shoe.
Sometimes collections are made by the teacher herself to introduce new and possibly unfamiliar things for the children to explore.
Such an ‘investigation’ table might include a selection from cogs, clocks, a plug, a kaleidoscope, spoons, magnets, a glass stopper, an old radio and weights.
The ‘button box’ is, of course, an old favourite and one which retains its fascination and offers endless possibilities for sorting.
The children in the following example were using a collection of beads, and their teacher decided to initiate an activity.
Example
Teacher: Can you make a necklace the same as mine?(3 red, 3 green, 3 yellow, 3 blue)
Kelly (4.4) looked at it and silently counted the three red beads, took three out of the box and threaded them; the same with the green beads.
When she came to the yellow and blue ones, she did not need to count the beads on the teacher's necklace, but simply picked up three together with one hand and threaded them.
The finished necklace looked the same as the teacher's in spite of constant interruptions and distractions.
Vocabulary : looks the same/different — more — fewer — straight — curved — round — heavier/lighter than — together — inside — outside — larger than — longer than — wider than — narrower than — smaller than — under — on top of— next to .
Junk materials
Sorting
Many schools store their junk materials in such a way that children can sort the materials for themselves.
The sophistication of the system varies according to the amount of space available.
It might be as simple as two picture-labelled boxes, one for cuboids, the other cylinders.
Some schools have a wealth of scraps stored in drawers labelled with examples of the material contained; silver foil on the ‘shiny things’ drawer, sticky paper for the paper scraps.
Children may sort with or without adult help when they bring things or when they pack them away.
Old sweet jars make good containers for material scraps.
Different colours, perhaps already cut into small pieces by an adult, can be sorted by teachers and children ready for collage work.
Children may enjoy spreading out a large selection of junk materials on the floor, and exploring and experimenting with them with the teacher's active participation and help.
This might turn into a game.
‘Let's find things that are longer than this’ or ‘Let's find things that will roll’.
Sorting and tidying up is, of course, a valuable mathematical experience as well as a very necessary part of the activity.
Model making
When children are actually involved in making things they often do not need an adult, unless they encounter a real difficulty and need help to cut or find a particular shape or material not already available.
Nevertheless, without interfering, an adult who is obviously interested in what they are doing can encourage them to talk about the choices they are making regarding size, shape and texture.
It may be that they will enjoy an opportunity to talk about their models afterwards, perhaps how they were made, or comparisons of materials used, but this will  obviously depend upon the child.
Mathematical ideas of space and shape and comparisons will have been involved in the making and the teacher may learn much from observation.
Example
Mark (4.5) had a tall thin box stuck to a cheese carton.
He tried to balance it with the thin box as the base.
This was not very steady and the model fell over.
Mark: I'll turn it over and see if it works.
It then stood easily and he chose a larger box and stuck his model on the top.
Again he tried to make it stand with the thin box as the base and once again it fell over.
This time he simply said ‘It doesn't work’ and walked off to another activity.
Knowing the child, the teacher would decide whether or not to pursue the teaching point and encourage Mark to try again.
There does seem to be a development from apparently aimless handling towards quite deliberate modelling, and the teacher will observe this in the development of the children's free play.
Children should be able to use junk materials freely.
The kind of things that they make may reflect ideas that they encounter in stories, rhymes or visits.
In this way the teacher stimulates experiment without directing it.
By ensuring that a good variety of the right kind of materials are available, such as cotton reels or cheese boxes for wheels, she can enable any child to pursue a particular interest.
Older children may be much more ready to improvise for themselves.
The mathematical experiences involved may be explored in talk with the teacher afterwards.
Junk materials are sometimes used to make puppets.
Some puppets are simple enough for the children to improvise for themselves once the teacher has introduced the idea.
Often a group of children will work alongside their teacher and may produce similar puppets, but at another time they may use the technique more creatively.
Ideas of space and shape, as children fit or match or choose shapes and so on, will be involved.
Some classes have even pursued the interest and made instant ‘puppet theatres’ using large junk boxes and other scraps for decor.
Collage
Collage work with paper shapes can involve ordering and sorting, especially if different textures, colours or sizes are provided.
Squares, circles, triangles and rectangles soon become familiar terms when shapes are regularly used and talked about.
Imitative collage, perhaps following a story like ‘The Three Billy Goats Gruff’, might use simple gradation of size.
Scrap materials can be used for three-dimensional collage as well as model making.
Polyfilla, alabastine or plasticine spread onto cardboard or wood provides a base for buttons, buckles, conkers, etc. to be pressed in.
Sticks or twigs can be used for poles, and ‘chains’ or necklaces suspended from ‘pole’to ‘pole’.
This may be a group effort in which children are able to join as they wish and do as much or as little as they choose.
‘…and I made his toe.’
Often a theme arises from a story or rhyme or following an outing to a farm or zoo.
There will be considerable opportunity in this kind of shared activity to talk with the children as they play and for the teacher to discuss the mathematical ideas involved.
Texture and shape
For young children the most exciting part of the play with junk is probably feeling and choosing.
Encouraged by the teacher's interest, they may notice differences in shape, texture and other properties, and will discover that ‘rounded things’ roll and so on.
Children like to handle scraps of material of different texture and thickness.
Pieces of lace or net, for instance, are fascinating materials to handle and look through.
They might even be stiffened with starch and painted over to leave a pattern.
Other opportunities
Further practical experiences with space and shape may be gained through play with junk boxes and other materials large enough for the children to sit in and use in imaginative play as trains or cars.
Some packaging cartons can be stored flat, then opened up to produce large three-dimensional shapes.
Sides can be painted in different colours and lead to conversations about ‘inside’, ‘outside’, ‘underneath’, ‘on top of’.
There are, of course, many other ways of using junk materials which may involve ideas of number, shape or comparisons.
One group spent a long time comparing the different notes or tones produced when tubes of different width and length were blown or spoken down.
Vocabulary : round — straight — curved — flat — looks like/ different — together — all — longer/shorter than — wider/ narrower than — lighter/heavier than — next to— on top of — under — higher/lower than — taller/shorter than — at the top/bottom — other way round.
Painting and printing
Painting
Paint is another material which children need to use freely and creatively.
They enjoy painting for its own sake, and although adult interest provides encouragement, it is essentially a private activity.
Much incidental mathematical experience may be involved in the organisation and preparation, as well as the clearing away.
Example
Simon (4.2) was bringing a bucket of water to wash down the paint easels.
He said, ‘Look, Sara, this isn't too heavy for me to carry now.’
Teacher: Why isn't it too heavy, Simon?
(When last seen he was struggling.)
Simon: Because me and Sara (3.11) took some water out.‘
The provision of a variety of tools, paints or papers is one way in which teachers introduce the possibility of change and experiment while still leaving the children free to choose.
Many schools, for instance, offer paper ready cut into a number of different shapes, and the children use whichever they want or need.
Similarly, the colour of the paper provided may be varied and include dark colours as well as light ones.
Paper of different texture or thickness may be used.
The brushes, too, may be of different thicknesses or lengths.
The teacher is able to vary the ways in which the children make use of paint.
Each variation can create opportunity for comparison to be made.
The use of different implements, or the provision of different surfaces on which the paint is applied can lead to comparison of shape, size, texture, colour etc.
The use of paint thickeners of various  kinds (see page 94 Appendix A) and the mixing of the paint itself can involve comparison of colour and thickness as well as the idea of the time taken.
Of course these ideas will not be explored on each occasion and it is for the teacher to decide when it is right to pursue the child's interest.
Printing
Printing is another activity in which the teacher can create opportunity for attention to particular ideas.
She might, for instance, put out a selection of objects for the children to print with, which will produce only different sized circles.
As well as printing circles, the children might discover that it is possible to print a pattern of concentric circles, or print in sets of each size, or even make ordered sequences.
The use of three-dimensional shapes for printing gives opportunity for the shapes themselves to be compared and discussed.
This brick, for example, can give a variety of prints, according to which surface is used.
e.g.  and a cheese box lid can produce 
Example
Shelly (3.6): I'm going to use the bridge-shaped block.
(Puts paint on the two square base areas.)
Look, it doesn't look like a bridge any more.
It looks like two squares.
Some children might be asked to predict the two-dimensional shape that will be produced from the three-dimensional shape.
Vegetables and fruits are often cut and used for printing.
Potatoes, carrots and onions can be used, and other vegetables like cabbages and brussel sprouts also produce interesting sections and prints.
Hand and foot prints can be made and sizes compared.
Vocabulary : thicker/thinner than — looks or feels the same/ different — longer/shorter than — wider/narrower than — heavier/lighter than — square — rectangle — triangle circle — round — straight — curved — larger/smaller than — more/ less than — more/fewer than — inside — outside — next to— under — above — all — some.
Modelling materials
Although materials like clay, dough, aloplast and plasticine have quite different qualities, they do all provide opportunity for mathematical experiences such as moulding the same amount into many different forms, sharing, or comparing size, shape, pattern and texture.
Once again it must be emphasised that creative play with these materials is tremendously important, and though mathematical experience may be an integral part of that activity,the child ' s creative urge should never be sacrificed .
Clay 
Children will probably discover that patterns can be imprinted in the clay even without the provision of pattern-making tools.
Their fingers will make an impression — as will the sleeve of their sweater!
Children need plenty of time to manipulate and mould with their hands before tools are introduced.
Sometimes they can be given a lump of clay that is too heavy for them to lift and they will gain new experiences as they try to mould or divide it into pieces of a manageable size.
When rollers are set out, children may flatten the clay and use whichever shapes are provided, to press into the clay.
This more deliberate pattern-making may be in imitation of the teacher's attempt or even at her suggestion.
‘Pattern-makers’, like potato mashers or meat hammers, may be provided for the children to use with the clay to produce different effects.
A loose consistency of clay can be used in an old forcing bag to pipe out lines and patterns.
Lines may be curved, zig-zag or straight, for example, and blobs may be of different sizes.
Dough
Dough is a much used material in the nursery.
Two simple recipes are included for the teacher in Appendix B on page 94.
Teachers often invite the children to help with making the dough.
The colour may be varied perhaps according to the type of tools put out with it; ‘natural’ for pastry cutters and patty tins, for instance.
Experience of different amounts, sharing and mixing will be enjoyed when children are able to share in the preparation.
Example
Several children were playing with the pastry and another child wanted to join in too.
Teacher: I wonder if Tracy could come and play, too.
There doesn't seem to be any pastry left for her though; what do you think we could do?
May (4.0): Nothing.
She'll have to wait until someone's finished.
Carrie (4.5): No she won't.
If we all give her a little of our pastry, she'll get a lot, and we'll have some left as well.
Children often use dough in imitation of pastry; rolling, cutting and making cakes, pies or pasties.
For this purpose, rolling pins, cutters of different shapes and sizes, and cake tins should be available.
This play sometimes takes place in the Home Corner or cafe area and can provide experience of space and shape, comparisons and one-to-one correspondence.
Example
The teacher was sitting at the pastry table with several children.
She rolled out the pastry and, using a small cutter, cut out seven small tarts and started to place them in a six-sectioned tart tin.
Geoffrey (4.9): You've made too many, teacher.
Teacher: How do you know that, Geoffrey?
Without saying a word, Geoffrey proceeded to place a tart in every section of the tart tin and then said, ‘See, there's one left.’
The use of the material with no tools available is as important as ever; the dough can be stretched, broken and moulded into different shapes by hand.
Once again, this gives experience of moulding the same amount into different forms.
Yoghurt cartons or cheese boxes may be put out as bases for the dough to be moulded onto as arms, legs, etc.
Talk afterwards might explore similarity and difference and simple counting.
Smaller objects such as shells, buttons or bobbins may be provided to be used on any models produced, or as ‘print’ makers to make impressions in the dough, providing experience of space and shape.
Plasticine
Plasticine is an old favourite and together with dough provides a useful alternative to clay.
Vocabulary : wider/narrower than — longer/shorter than — larger/smaller than — looks same/different — more/less than — more/fewer than — found — straight — curved — on top of— next to — underneath.
Wood
Although wood is not easy to obtain and certainly not cheap, many schools do find ways of obtaining quantities of off-cuts of softwood suitable for the children to use.
Interesting pieces of natural wood and driftwood can be collected and lead to conversations about ‘length’, ‘thickness’ and ‘shape’.
Woodwork is an activity which requires careful supervision.
Off-cuts of ‘interesting’ woods or ornate wooden strips for picture frames can be collected and put out to be handled, looked at and talked about.
Example
A box of wood of various shapes and sizes was brought by a father.
Paul (3.11) selected two pieces of wood, one longer than the other.
He then added a small piece to the shorter piece of wood.
‘Now they're the same.’
The children should be allowed to make things or play with the wood as they wish, but other materials may extend the possibility for experiment.
Bags of string, bottle tops, cylinders, etc. can be added to the basic shape — either tacked on with nails or glued on later.
Dowels and broom handles are useful.
The length of nails, in relation to the thickness of the wood they are to go through, can be discussed and reasons for the protrusion of nails arrived at.
Example
Robert (4.2): This short nail won't go through this thick piece of wood.
Teacher: What do you need then?
Robert: I need a long nail to go right through.
Teacher: Can you see one?
Robert: This will go through.
(Picking up a long nail.)
It is important that the children should be able to play freely in this way, and again although it might be appropriate to talk with them about the materials beforehand or afterwards, if a model has been completed, a great deal can be learnt simply by observation.
Hammers of various sizes, saws, planes and sandpaper blocks can be stored on a clipboard and if outlines of the various tools are drawn on the cupboard, this provides a good matching activity at clearing-up time.
Vocabulary : longer/shorter than — long enough — same length — wide/narrower than — through — inside — next to— on top of .
The teacher's role
Raw materials are the source of much spontaneous interest, experiment and creative play.
Mathematical experience may be involved incidentally in many of these activities, but the teacher must decide when it is appropriate to bring it to the surface.
Children need the opportunity to play freely and creatively with raw materials, and concern for mathematical ideas will probably have little place in this kind of activity.
The teacher, however, creates the opportunity for experiment and choice in the provision that she makes.
Variety offers opportunity for comparisons and the discovery of new and different properties, which may be generalised later; experience of many rounded things will suggest that ‘rounded things roll’.
When the teacher involves the children in the preparation and clearing away of each activity, then further opportunity for sorting and sharing, and experiences of shape and space will occur.
The examples which follow are just some of those opportunities which have occurred in particular circumstances.
They do not show how to impose mathematics, but occasions when mathematical experiences and ideas have naturally been involved and sometimes explored, as each teacher has thought appropriate.
Example 1
In this example the teacher has provided a collection of shells for the children to explore.
Shirley (4.6) and Trevor (4.8) are looking at the shells and their teacher, noticing their interest in the different kinds, joins with them to initiate a ‘spontaneous’ sorting activity.
Shirley: I've got a tiny one.
Trevor: This is a big one.
It's like a stick.
Shirley: Feel this.
This is a smooth one.
Trevor: I've got a smooth one.
Shirley: Here's another stick one.
Teacher: Put the stick ones together.
Shirley: And the smooth ones.
The children put the shells in appropriate groups, ‘stick ones’‘tiny ones’, ‘curly ones’, ‘smooth ones’.
Other children join them.
Shirley: I've got a little tiny one.
(Puts it with large shells of the same type, then replaces it with the tiny ones.)
Teacher: Why have you put it there?
Shirley: Because it's tiny.
Look at all these.
(She presents a collection of mussel shells of all sizes.)
Let's put these here.
Trevor: Here's another flat one.
Let's put them with the other flat ones.
Teacher: What sort are these?
(Holds up a limpet shell.)
Shirley: Shells.
Teacher: But they are all shells.
(The children smile.)
Example 2
These children were ‘painting’ the outside wall with water.
Their teacher had provided different sized brushes.
This is her observation of their activity.
They chose their brushes and were measuring them side by side.
Ceri (4.7): Mine's bigger — let's measure.
Victoria (4.3): Mine's too tiny, it won't do anything.
Shelly (4.4): It's because the point is too small.
Victoria: The bristles are too small.
It will take a long time to cover my wall.
Shelly: Not mine, because my brush has more water.
Paul (4.8): You can't reach this high, Ceri.
Ceri: I can.
(Standing on her toes.)
Paul: Not really, only on your toes.
It's too high for you.
Victoria:(Measuring her height against Ceri.)
I'll be able to reach.
I'm nearer it.
Examples 3 and 4 show how a teacher has involved several children in the making of two different puppets.
In example 4, she involved them in her use of a book for instruction, and asks for their suggestions to solve her ‘problems’.
Example 5 shows how she invites the children to suggest the colour to be used and then follows up this interest with a quite spontaneous sorting and comparison.
Example 3
A group was looking at a book showing the various kinds of puppets to be made.
One was made using a toilet roll.
The teacher held up a rectangular piece of paper.
Teacher: How can we make this piece into a tube?
Elliott (4.3): You can roll it around and fasten it.
Now you need a face and arms.
Draw his face with your pen.
Teacher: How can we make arms?
Elliott: You need a long piece to go right round him.
Example 4
Another group of children were helping to make a puppet.
Teacher: What colour eyes shall we give him?
Joanne (3.1): Blue.
I've got blue.
Russell (4.1): Brown, because I've got brown.
Teacher: Shall we see how many children have brown eyes and how many have blue?
The children counted and nine had brown eyes and four had blue eyes.
Teacher: Are there more children with brown eyes or more with blue eyes?
Marie (4.4): There are more with brown eyes.
Teacher: Shall we give our puppet brown eyes, then?
In the next example, Christopher shows some difficulty in solving a practical problem.
Example 5
The teacher stands back and observes Christopher (4.7) as he tries to cut right through a block of wood with a tenon saw only half its width.
Knowing Christopher, she has judged it right to leave him to make his own attempts, though had he not succeeded she would probably have joined him and discussed the solution with him.
Christopher was sawing through a piece of wood held in the vice.
The saw stuck when it reached its own depth, but he kept on trying.
Eventually he removed the wood from the vice, turned it round and sawed until both cuts met.
Example 6 Box Work
The teacher left the children to use the materials provided and observed their activity and invited comment afterwards.
There was little or no talking within the group as most were engrossed with making the boxes stick.
These children showed most response when they had finished modelling and were only interested in talking about their own model very little interest in those made by others in the group.
Sarah (4.10): The people are going up into the boat.
They're tall.
(Pointing with her finger.)
Lisa (4.10): My boat has big guns and little guns.
Robert (4.11): These are binoculars and this is a telescope.
They are round.
Craig (5.0):(Immature.)
Mine's a boat.
It carries people to the beach.
Teacher: What is this part?
Craig: That's the gun in case someone shoots the people.
There are lots of people inside the boat.
(Pointing.)
Helen (4.11): It's a house-boat.
There are lots of boxes.
Example 7 Train play
Teacher: I've brought a lot of new boxes from the shop.
Would you like to make another train?
Ian (3.11), without answering went to inspect the boxes.
He chose a small box and said ‘This is my coal box.’
He then selected a similar box saying, ‘That's the engine.’
He stood the boxes side by side and then realised that they were the same size.
He returned one to the pile and got a larger one.
Teacher: We shall need a cylinder.
Ian: Yes, that's for the chimney.
He chose a very long one and realising it was too long chose a smaller one.
The children then started arranging the boxes to make the train.
With some assistance they fastened the boxes together.
Jill (4.6) wanted the chimney to be in the corner but Ian insisted on the middle and won.
The engine box had a centre ‘handle’ and Ian took a long time sighting his chimney by this.
Ian taped the bottom of the cylinder only.
Jill realised it would need taping near the top as well.
‘We'll have to tie it there or it will just fall down.’
The teacher said, ‘We'll need to find something circular to draw round so we can cut some nice round shapes for our wheels.’
The children had decided to have cardboard wheels, but they found four wooden circles which they decided would do for wheels.
Ian said, ‘We want two on the engine and two on the coal box.’
He then found some black crêpe paper and put some in his coal box saying, ‘There, that is the coal.’
Teacher: Can I come for a ride in your train?
Ian: No, you're too big.
Teacher: If you found a bigger box could we add it to the train for me to sit in?
Ian went off and came back with a box the same size as the ones that had been used for the train.
Teacher: Will I be able to get into that box?
Ian: Yes.
Put your legs in first and then you just fit in.
Teacher got into the box and with a struggle sat down.
Teacher: I think I'm going to need a much larger box.
Ian: I'll go and get one.
(Coming back.)
I can't find a large box so you can't come.
Appendix A Ways with paint
Varying paint
Soap flakes, Polycell, wallpaper paste and sawdust can be used as paint thickeners.
Grated crayon added to paint produces interesting effects and can give different shades of colour.
The passage of time taken for the paint to thicken might also be discussed.
Just two colours of paint can be used to produce different colours.
One colour with white will give different shades of the one colour.
Applying paint
Paint can be applied with: combs, flat lolly sticks, toothbrushes, foam/wool rollers, feathers, twigs, other natural materials, rolling pins wrapped with string or wool or with cotton reel tracks.
It can also be blown with straws or dripped from straws.
Different surfaces to be painted
Perspex
Aluminium tinfoil
Formica
Blackboard
Newspaper
Wallpaper
Corrugated card
Blotting paper
Attention to shape
Sticky tape applied to plain paper, when peeled off after paint has been applied and dried, leaves a clear outline to shapes.
Wax resist Shapes can be drawn with wax candles and then painted over — the paint will not be absorbed by the waxed areas.
Paint ‘splattered’ on to cut-out shapes arranged on paper, will produce a silhouette of these shapes when they are removed.
Leaves produce a pleasing effect.
Coloured paint or ink dripped from straws onto wet blotting paper will produce radiating patterns.
Symmetry
Paintings may be folded to produce a symmetrical print.
It might be interesting to fold the paper in different ways.
A wall mirror in the painting area can stimulate the children's attention to natural symmetry.
Finger painting
Finger painting is, of course, a great favourite.
Paint may be thickened with paste and larger surfaces like formica table tops used.
When the children have had enough of their play, then prints are sometimes made of the finished effect, by gently pressing paper on the paint pattern.
The painted area may be compared with its print.
Appendix B Recipes for play dough
Mix plain flour and water with a little salt.
Add food colouring.
1 cup salt
2 tablespoons cooking oil
3 cups flour
Food colouring
1/2 cup water
Make up a thickish paste from polycell or other wallpaper paste.
Add sawdust until you can knead it.
Avoid paste which contains fungicide, and sawdust from wood treated with preservative.
Some colour powder paints are best avoided; yellow tends to smell, red can stain.
The dough should be covered with a cloth after each session to prevent a crust forming, or stored in an airtight container.
When left in the air dough will dry out and models harden.
Towards Number
Introduction
Number is an abstract idea and many experiences are needed before ‘three’, or ‘ten’, or any other number is understood.
No-one, for example, has ever seen a ‘three’; the symbol 3 is just a shorthand devised by man.
The idea of three comes as an abstraction from many sets of three objects: although no-one has ever seen three, children can see three cars, three people, three umbrellas, three miscellaneous objects, and so on, and eventually they will understand the ‘threeness of three’.
One of the first ideas towards understanding number is accordingly that of a set of objects (cars or people, etc.).
Sets are often formed by sorting .
Things are put together which are in some way alike or belong together.
This might be on the basis of a particular attribute such as colour or shape, or a more abstract quality such as use or even ‘because I like them’.
Apart from sorting, many other concepts are needed for the understanding of number, for example that of one —to —one correspondence .
Young children will pass through a stage when they will believe that row A in the illustration below has the same number as row B because they ‘look the same’; they apparently take up the same space.
Matching objects one —to —one is a technique for checking whether one set has more or fewer objects than another, or the same amount.
Only when children can do this confidently can counting have any meaning, as counting is simply matching objects (or people, or whatever is being counted) with numbers.
Another necessary concept is that of comparison .
Eventually the children will understand, for example, that four is greater than three by comparing a set of four things with a set of three things.
Comparison is also a preliminary to ordering .
As soon as there are more than two things to be compared, they will be ordered according to a particular relationship.
Numbers are ordered according to the  relation is greater than’, but many other ordering experiences should be provided beforehand.
Yet another concept is that of invariance of number of elements in a set.
A child may be able to count the five ducks but have to recount if they are moved round to form a different pattern.
This chapter deals with all these concepts ‘towards number’.
In the past, because children have been able to chant numbers in order (1, 2, 3…), it has sometimes been assumed that they understood them and so were ready for sums.
Time spent in acquiring the preliminary concepts will amply repay itself later in terms of understanding, enjoyment and proficiency in mathematics.
Young children need to experience the ideas through their play.
It is practical activity that is important; the handling of a whole range of materials.
The help of a skilled adult, who can stand back and observe and who is ready also to join with a child as he plays, to.
attention and talk with him, is also important.
It would be difficult, and undesirable, to isolate experiences which lead towards an understanding of number when so many arise naturally out of everyday activities.
It is these everyday experiences which help the child towards understanding.
The suggestion of some possibilities will undoubtedly recall others to mind.
Some early number books and friezes can be a useful talking point, used by an adult with one or two of the older children.
There is a danger, however, that number friezes badly used may lead children to relate for instance, five only with five ducks or a domino pattern.
As always, variety of experience and talk with the teacher are important.
Some books that have proved useful are:
Possible developments
Sorting
Sorting, putting together those things that are alike or belong together, is a natural reaction for many children when playing with a collection of objects.
Before this sorting can take place, however, each object must be classified.
The identity and classification a child chooses may not be ones which are obvious to an adult observer, and may not even be ones which the child himself is able to verbalise.
It is important that young children should have the opportunity to handle and play freely with a whole range of materials.
These experiences will help them to become familiar with all kinds of things, from shells and pebbles to bricks and plastic shapes.
Classifying arises from an ability to observe similarities and differences.
A skilled adult can encourage children to make comparisons and talk with them to help them to identify differences that they can see but cannot label with a word.
This sort of discussion might be prompted by a child's chance remark, ‘Look, I've got one like that’— a judgement which might be explored —‘Yes, it does look like that one, but is it exactly the same?’
Alternatively, the teacher may take the initiative: ‘Can you find one that looks the same as this one?
Is it the same or is there something different about it?’
It might be easier to use a few objects with clearly differentiated attributes as a starting point, but conversations of this kind can occur spontaneously in many activities.
Colour and shape have always been used as a basis for sorting, but objects may have many properties, and can be sorted, for example, according to size, weight or texture.
At adult level, for instance, a collection of objects identified as lorry, car, car and bicycle, might be sorted in many different ways.
They might be sorted by their identity into lorry, cars and bicycle, according to a particular attribute (colour, shape, weight, size, texture, etc.), by some group identity (in this case modes of transport), or some more abstract quality.
things that are green
things that are not green
things that are driven by an engine
things that are not driven by an engine
They might be sorted according to any combination of these, such as things which are ‘green and made of metal’, but such sophisticated sorting is seldom within the range of the very young child.
Young children will be exploring the identity and simple attributes of objects that they can see and feel.
Sorting is not, of course, restricted to the use of ‘sorting toys’.
Children often find endless pleasure in sorting and re-sorting boxes of buttons, odd pieces of materials, pebbles, a ‘lost pieces’ tray and other inexpensive collections.
Many everyday activities involve incidental sorting.
Though it takes time and a great deal of adult help at first, young children can take an active role in caring for equipment and tidying it away.
Puzzles and games must be sorted into the right boxes, boxes placed in cupboards, books on shelves and blocks packed away.
There are times when the teacher might impose restrictions by asking, for example, for ‘all the blue balls to be put into the basket’, or, ‘all those wearing red to fetch their coats’, or she might ask the children to sort a collection into just two piles.
It is also useful to give the occasional ‘negative’ instruction: ‘All those not wearing red fetch their coats’.
Provision and guidance are at the discretion of the sensitive adult.
Some activities which might involve experience of sorting are discussed below:
Making collections of all kinds
For example: junk materials; flowers; shells; natural objects; leaves; marbles; scraps of material; buttons; bottletops.
Making collections for display
The items can be gathered by children themselves, for example, shiny things; things of a particular colour; things of a particular texture (rough, smooth, prickly); particular shapes (rounded, with holes, pointed, with straight sides, spirals, etc.); things we use in the kitchen or bathroom; things that we use to draw with or cook with.
Tidying up
The teacher could provide containers (boxes, drawers, jars, etc.), perhaps labelled with colour pictures, so that equipment can be sorted and put in the right place.
Ask the children to replace things that belong in each area (Home Corner, shop, water tray, etc.).
Containers, drawers and shelves could be provided in the Home Corner, shop, etc., so that articles can be sorted and put away.
Sorting of apparatus ,bought or improvised 
Farm and animals Field markings, hedges and buildings can provide boundaries to contain different kinds of animals.
Animals ,birds ,people ,vehicles These can all extend the range of sorting.
House ,furniture ,people Doll's house furniture may be sorted to be placed in particular rooms.
Junk material Children might like to make rooms and furniture for themselves out of junk material.
Garage ,cars ,lorries ,etc .
Vehicles might be grouped according to colour, use, whether ‘broken down’, number of wheels, etc.
Picture cards These might be classified and sorted according to those that look alike, those that are of a particular colour or design, etc.
Logiblocks (attribute blocks).
Plastic shapes Many kinds are available.
Provision of coloured hoops or trays may prompt sorting especially by colour.
Making sets of themselves
Sometimes children will themselves become part of a set — children wearing red, sandals, hair ribbon, etc.; children sitting on the mat, floor, grass, etc.
Vocabulary : looks like — looks different — same — all — belongs together — put together — inside —(and words which identify, describe and compare objects).
One-to-one correspondence
Young children are very much influenced by ‘the way things look’ rather than the way they are.
Example
The children were looking at a picture showing two rows of cats.
Teacher: Are there more fat cats than thin cats?
David (3.7): No.
Nicholas (3.10): No, they take the same room.
Teacher: Are there more thin ones?
Alistair (3.7): No.
There are the same number.
Placing things in one-to-one correspondence enables children to make a visual check of whether there are, in fact, ‘more’, ‘fewer’ or ‘the same’.
There are many incidental opportunities for children to need to put objects in one-to-one correspondence.
Some examples of one-to-one correspondence which arise in particular activities are given below.
Tidying up
Hanging hats on hooks, wigs on stands, and coats on pegs — perhaps with picture symbols.
Replacing pencils and scissors in spaces in a rack.
Hanging equipment on hooks and pegs, where there is one hook or peg for each piece of equipment to be stored in this way — perhaps labelled with a picture symbol.
Replacing lids on boxes and jars.
Returning trays or drawers into appropriate spaces.
In Home Corner areas, replacing lids, using cups with saucers or hanging them on hooks provided.
Growing things
Planting one bulb in each pot.
Separating seeds, plants; perhaps each one replanted in its own section of an egg box.
Themselves
Finding a ‘partner’ or ‘friend’— perhaps to use the seesaw.
Buttoning a coat (often easier to button a friend's!).
Meal times
There might be one cloth for each table; one place mat for each setting; one napkin, mug, knife, fork and spoon for each setting; one plate and one chair for each child.
Baking
Providing an apron for each child.
Putting a helping of mixture into each tray or cake case.
Making one cake for each child in the group, or the class.
Topping the cakes; perhaps with one cherry each.
Milk
There should be one straw to be put into each bottle; either each child does his own or one child takes a turn for the group.
The children should take one bottle each, or the milk should be distributed one-to-one by a ‘monitor’.
Sometimes children place a symbol or name tag on a bottle at the beginning of the day to label their own.
Some exchange a symbol or name card for a bottle at milk time.
The bottles must be placed in the crate.
Are there enough spaces?
Sometimes children must wait for an empty chair at the milk table before they can sit down.
Block play
Building two towers with similar sized bricks, matching one-to-one to build towers of similar height.
Perhaps copying a tower already made.
Building towers of different sized bricks but using bricks in one-to-one correspondence, probably with the teacher's guidance.
Other apparatus
Placing objects in one-to-one correspondence according to texture in ‘feely puzzle’.
Fitting lids to different-sized jars.
Matching pairs of cards; there are many different sets of cards produced for this purpose.
Vocabulary : one each — enough — as many as — pair.
Comparisons of number
Once a child is able to match one-to-one with confidence, he can use the idea to make a visual comparison of the number of objects contained in two sets.
In this way the child can make the comparisons ‘more than’ or ‘fewer than’or ‘same as’.
A young child faced with a row of cups and a pile of saucers might have no other way of finding whether he has enough saucers to put with the cups than to match them as far as possible, one-to-one.
In this way he can check whether there are ‘more’, ‘fewer’ or ‘the same’cups as saucers, without using number.
Making comparisons between two sets also enables the child to establish a relationship between them, and is one step towards the later understanding of the relationship ‘is greater than’ or ‘is less than’between two numbers.
Children often attract our attention when they think that someone has ‘more’ than they do.
A spontaneous remark can often be followed up by a simple check.
A child who thinks his friend has more blocks can be helped to compare his set of blocks with that of his friend by placing each of his blocks in correspondence with one of those of his friend.
Those blocks which have no ‘partner’ will indicate who has ‘more’and, of course, who has ‘fewer’.
There may be a case for sometimes deliberately providing ‘too many’ or ‘too few’of, for example, straws for bottles, to enable children to verbalise what they, in some cases, intuitively see.
Some examples of situations in which comparison of number may be necessary are given below.
Taking turns
In many activities each child will need to have a piece of equipment to use for himself — a bike, a chair, a place setting at meal-time, a piece of paper, and so on.
Children will soon discover if there are ‘fewer’ bikes, chairs, etc. than children wanting to use them.
Meal-times
Children involved in preparing for meal-times will need to put out one mug for each child and may rely on one-to-one correspondence without counting.
A child putting a straw into each of the bottles in the crate will not know whether he has enough straws for bottles until he has distributed them one-to-one.
Similarly a plate of biscuits may not contain enough for ‘one each’ and children would not know until each had taken one or they had run out.
Baking
Children making sandwich biscuits might be allocated ‘tops’ or ‘bottoms’.
They will need to check whether they have made the same amount of each and if they are not able to count, then they can correspond one-to-one ‘tops’ with ‘bottoms’.
Vocabulary : enough — not enough — more than — fewer than — too many — same as.
Ordering
Any comparison of more than two objects will involve ‘ordering’ them according to the chosen criterion.
If we compare the height of A, B, and C, shown below, we can see that B is at the same time linked with A, which it follows and C that it precedes, and the three are ordered in sequence: A, B, C. B is, at the same time, taller than A and shorter than C. 
Numbers are ordered according to the relationship ‘is greater than’, but before children begin to use numbers and understand the basis of their order, they will encounter the notion of ordering in many other ways, based on the kind of comparisons that were mentioned in the section on sorting, such as length, weight, height and width.
Ordering of this kind will probably occur in the arrangement of goods in the ‘shop’, or books and boxes on the class shelves, or play with different sized dolls and clothes.
Stories like ‘The Three Bears’ or ‘The Three Billy Goats Gruff’, which involve ordering, can be good starting points, developed in creative work, and used as a basis for talk with the children.
It may be that some young children will achieve a stage where they are ready to compare more than two sets to see which has ‘most’ or ‘least’, but incidental experience of this kind is less frequent.
Using number names and counting
Many of the rhymes and stories which we use with young children include the use of number names.
(See chapter 12  Rhymes and Stories .)
Children often become familiar with the number names long before they achieve any understanding of their meaning.
It is not unusual for children to recite happily from one to ten in a number rhyme or as they play, but the teacher does not assume that they can therefore use number or count.
Counting attaches a different verbal number symbol to a set of units as one unit is added.
In effect we are saying: as each object is moved to join the previous one.
Young children need a lot of experience of touching and counting, with an adult to listen and help if necessary.
From a distance it is easy to believe that a child is counting when in fact he is only reciting a number sequence and touching or moving objects at random.
Children have to learn that it is easier to start at one end of a line of objects and finish at the other.
Counting objects placed anyhow or counting, for example, beads on a ring, or cakes in a patty-tin, the child must learn to establish a starting and ending point of his own.
Scatter counting is a fairly sophisticated skill for young children, and they will need lots of help and practice.
Invariance
It is not obvious to the very young child that a set of objects has the same number of units however those units are arranged (provided, of , that none are removed or added).At this stage, however, we can offer many opportunities for children to arrange and re-arrange the objects in a set and see whether they need to re-count each time.
Although some children may be capable of finding there are the same number of things in two sets (by matching), they may not be at all sure there are still the same number of the objects if one of the sets is differently arranged.
Informal fractions
Informal fractions, especially ‘half’, are frequently used as approximate measures in incidental discussion.
Cutting into ‘four’ or ‘three’tends to be talked about rather than‘quarters’or ‘thirds’, although fractions are sometimes used.
Problems of sharing arise at meal-times, during baking and when sharing materials.
Numerals
Children come across written numbers, just as they come across written words, long before they are able to read or understand them.
Until a child has achieved that understanding, a numeral is just a shape with no real meaning.
Example
Paula (4.5) was painting.
Paula: I made a letter.
Teacher: That's a number.
That's number four.
Paula: I made a four.
What's a letter?
Make me a letter.
Teacher: I'll make a letter P for Paula.
Like this.
Paula copied the shape and said, ‘I made a four and a P’.
The teacher's role
The teacher is the initiator of many of the activities which lead towards number.
In many cases it is she who develops an opportunity for talk with the children, following their interest in the activities provided, and pursues attention to ideas like one-to-one correspondence, comparison and so on.
Children need the variety of experience and the attention to detail that the teacher is able to encourage.
In this first example we see how a teacher is able to initiate a sorting activity following a child's chance remark.
Her presence and interest doubtless affect the children's attention to similarity and difference.
Example 1
The children were playing with a mass of junk boxes, all shapes and sizes.
Tania (5.2): Look how many I've got.
Mark (4.10): What a mess on the table.
Teacher: Let's sort them out — are there any the same?
The children soon got the idea and sorted things of similar size and shape, e.g. egg boxes and yoghurt pots.
Some noticed that the cereal packets were wider or longer than soap packets.
When they had grouped things into general sets, they began to subdivide them, e.g. different types of egg boxes, different pictures on yoghurt pots, different coloured polystyrene trays, long tubes and short tubes.
They noted two Bisto packets, that had the same picture, were different sizes.
Afterwards they fitted everything into a big box.
In this second example a teacher observes the child's confusion over the invariance of number.
Example 2
Jonathan (3.4) was trying to fit a milk bottle into a crate with no spaces.
He took one bottle out to put his own in, took another one out to put a second one in, and this proceeded up the line and down the next until he realised he was always left with one in hand.
He then took two bottles out with the same result.
He did this a few times before he realised the result would always be the same.
Finally he took a whole lot of bottles out in the hope that in the ensuing muddle they would all finally be fitted in.
Example 3
Is this child really ready to count?
Could she not use one-to-one correspondence to check?
Tara (4.6):(Looked at two towers of bricks — each six bricks high — counted…)
One, two, three, four, seven, five, six.
Teacher: And how many here?
Tara: One, two, three, six, seven, eight.
Teacher: How many?
Tara: Seven.
Teacher: Is there the same number in each tower?
Tara: Yes.
Teacher: Which is bigger?
Tara: Both the same.
Yours is bigger.
Teacher: What if we lay them down?
Tara: Now mine's little and yours is little too.
Apparatus, Toys and Games
Introduction
Children learn by doing .
It is therefore not surprising that the provision of apparatus (both large and small), toys and games, has been accepted as a necessity.
The use of apparatus and toys does not always provide a specific end product, but the experiences of building, matching, sharing, comparing and taking apart can all lead towards mathematical concepts.
Many of the matching, sorting and ordering activities can arise incidentally within the periods of tidying away and clearing up.
It is not always the child who has been building that does the packing away.
Some children really enjoy helping to fill a box or shelves in the correct way.
Example
Toby (4.5) had been playing with blocks, but then wandered away and the blocks were put away by two other boys, who spent a long time carefully fitting the different sizes of blocks into the two boxes.
With only a few left to pick up Jo (4.1) said, ‘We've nearly put them all away.’
Both Toby and Jo had valuable experiences, although the more obvious mathematical one may be said to lie with Jo and his companion in their appreciation of the relative sizes of the blocks and their places in the storage boxes.
Although some material with particular mathematical structure will be mentioned, it is sometimes restrictive in the overall experience it provides for very young children by the very nature of its structure.
Therefore it is often preferable to select materials that do not have such a tight-knit structure; when appropriate, the teacher can extend the enquiries and discoveries with these along the lines of the structured material.
Large apparatus to climb into/out of/through/under/over, and push/pull toys of various sizes may help to give the children ideas of weight, speed, height, width and length, while increasing their spatial awareness.
Other mathematical experiences with large apparatus are discussed more fully in chapters 9 and 10 Outdoor Activities and The Environment .
Constructional kits, jigsaws, inset boards and stacking or nesting toys provide practice in fitting, ordering and estimating shapes and sizes.
Games may be of the type where at the conclusion there is a specific winner, but for very young children the games are generally more in the form of an activity to experience and complete on an individual basis.
The emphasis is on personal achievement.
Ideas leading towards mathematical concepts can be gained from all the toys and apparatus.
The next section will indicate the value of a teacher's comment or direct intervention is at the relevant time within the activity.
But on many occasions children gain mathematical experience without any intervention by an adult.
Possible Developments
Building blocks
Whenever a place is being furnished for the use of young children, a set of blocks is generally considered one of the basic pieces of equipment to be provided.
A glance through the catalogues soon brings the realisation that the choice is much greater than existed even a few years ago.
Expense considerations aside, there is much variety in size, material, weight (whether solid or hollow), colour and texture.
Ideally, provision should be made to cover all these factors but the important thing is to have plenty in each set.
If expense must be curtailed, then it is probably better to have a plentiful supply (at least 100) of two or three sorts rather than a small quantity of many; it can be exasperating to have insufficient blocks of a kind to complete a construction.
As well as wooden blocks, there are now many kinds of plastic and PVC-coated foam blocks on the market.
These have a slightly wider range of shapes and are often much bigger than their wooden counterparts but much lighter.
The surfaces seem to impart slight ‘stiction’ to the blocks when stacked together.
Young children often play with just one block at a time; they may stand on it, sit on it and use it in their imaginative play as a parcel, steering wheel or tool.
Then, as they discover more blocks and those of various shapes and sizes, building begins.
The addition of such accessories as steering wheels, steps and hosepipes can encourage imaginative play where spatial ideas such as inside, outside, on top of and underneath are likely to be explored.
Hollow blocks of various sizes and types involve even more ideas of space, volume and area, for example, they can be used as windows or garages.
When children play with toy animals, cars, lorries, etc. in conjunction with blocks, there may also be opportunities for sorting and making comparisons.
Tower building
Many children start block play by building upwards to make a tower.
The principal aim seems to be to find out how far it can be extended.
The towers collapse when the height becomes too great and the vocabulary arising from this activity is usually of the type, ‘Can I make it fall down?’
Alongside the thrill of anticipation of the tumbling tower is the understanding of cause and effect.
But this is not the only mathematical experience that can be gained from tower construction.
Some children grasp the idea of standing on a box or steps to become higher than a tower or other object that is taller than themselves, so that, intuitively at least , they have some idea of the distinction between taller than and higher than .
Sometimes conversations reveal the lack of understanding of this concept: it  has still to be formed in the minds of some of the children.
Through tower building there is a development of vocabulary from the original big and small to more selective comparatives.
Example
Alistair (3.4): Mine is taller.
Wayne (4.2): Mine is big as well.
Alistair: So is mine.
Wayne: Put yours on top of mine then we'll have a giant one!
Example
Matthew (3.10) and Claire (3.6) are trying to make a tower the size of Claire.
Claire: We need some more bricks, I reckon.
Matthew: We must put some more of those on.
Claire: It is too tall — now take some off.
Matthew: That is just the right size now.
Alistair and Wayne show they have appreciated that the addition of one tower to the other will create a new tower that is taller than either of its component towers, whereas Matthew and Claire have been looking at the inverse operation — one brick less and the tower is lower.
Taking one of a pair of identical towers and re-building in another form, e.g.  helps the child towards the idea of invariance of number — there are the same number of blocks ‘before’ and ‘after’although they look different.
Example
Helen (3.10) had built two towers of blocks, each containing the same number of blocks of equal size.
Helen: Look, that one's the biggest and that's the smallest.
Khusam (4.7) had also built two tall towers of similar height.
Khusam: They are the same.
One is bigger and one is bigger.
Apparently Helen and Khusam are both experiencing difficulty with ‘the same height’ in relation to the biggest and the smallest.
But although the symptoms may appear to be similar, for Helen it is a lack of the concept of equality whereas Khusam is lost for the appropriate vocabulary.
Building on a flat surface
An alternative start to block play is to build along a flat surface either in a line like a roadway or as a tabloid.
In these instances the problems of balance are avoided and the emphasis becomes an awareness of matching the blocks in some way, and the need to encourage the development of relevant vocabulary is all the more pressing.
Example
A group of children were making a road with blocks.
Lorraine (4.5): It's getting too long.
We'll have to make a roundabout.
Many sets of blocks consist only of regular shapes.
The addition of off-cuts of wood, trimmed and made splinter-proof, with irregular shapes, can make the materials much more stimulating.
Obvious discussion points are based on the introduction of the mathematical names for the more common shapes and of some of their properties, but only in the simplest terms, e.g. which shapes will roll, which will slide, etc. and these discussions can be centred at one time upon the three-dimensional solid and on another occasion on the two-dimensional bounding surfaces.
Solids have faces which meet at edges which, in turn, meet at corners.
How many faces?
Draw a different pattern on each one.
How many patterns have you drawn?
Interlocking bricks
With interlocking bricks it is possible to go further away from the plumb than with smooth blocks (wood, cork, etc.), but there is a limit to how far such non-alignment can go.
One teacher commented on the ‘bent’ tower a child had made through careless and partial use of an interlocking system.
Once his attention was drawn to the bending, the child dismantled the tower but before he could rebuild it properly, the teacher challenged him to build another bent tower.
Now his attention was focussed on why the tower had bent and his second effort not only bent as before but was even taller than the previous tower.
Just to satisfy herself that he understood how it was he was able to build out of the vertical, the teacher asked if he could make a bent tower with wooden building blocks.
The structures below made by Aaron (4.5) demonstrate an extension of the experience which interlocking bricks provide.
A man walking (the small bricks are staggered)
A see-saw (small bricks placed centrally)
The first two ‘models’ could be created with wooden blocks of the conventional type, but not the slide.
A slide
Vocabulary : heavy — heavier — light — lighter — long — longer — high — higher — low — lower — short — shorter — up — down — tall — taller — more — less — side — edge — corner — face.
Constructional kits
Blocks and connector rods
Some structures merely seem to satisfy an urge to build but not any desire to simulate an existing object or building.
There is often a sense of balance, or equivalence, within the construction and many are quite complex.
Much of the experience given by these constructional toys is concerned with size, shape and linear dimensions, but the next example is an instance involving balance and weight.
Example
Patrick (4.8) made a ‘tree’ with the blocks and connector rods.
The addition of a new ‘branch’ caused the tree to  fall.
The teacher talked with him about balance and he able to tell her that one stick was heavier because it was longer.
He went on to experiment with how far a branch could be extended in any one direction before the tree tipped over.
A week later, Tracey (4.5) made an umbrella from junk materials (a large egg carton and a toilet roll tube).
She did not have the tube central and the umbrella would not balance.
The teacher referred her back to the work done with connector rods and scales and then asked her what she needed to do.
’ Make the sides the same’, Tracey replied, and on being asked ‘How?’she moved the tube to a more central position relative to the box.
A further four days had elapsed and both Patrick and Tracey were playing with the connector rods.
Patrick was again experimenting with balance, deliberately trying to build a construction that would over-balance (a word given to him by the teacher during their earlier discussions).
Tracey made a tree with an equal number of rods protruding from each side and all of the same size.
In spite of this, the tree would not stand up, yet when asked if she thought her tree was balanced she said, ‘Yes’.
When Patrick was asked if he thought it was balanced, he replied ‘No, because it keeps over-balancing’.
When asked why he thought this was so, without examining the tree he said, ‘It cannot be the same on both sides’.
The teacher responded, ‘It looks the same to me — do you think both sides are the same?’
Tracey said, ‘Yes, they are’.
Patrick now inspected it closely and said, ‘One must be heavier than the other or it wouldn't fall down’.
Later, Patrick discovered that Tracey's tree would not balance as one rod was not pushed in as far as the others.
Tracey had been dominated by the perceptual aspects and had equated balance with apparent symmetry.
Patrick went on to build irregular, non-symmetrical shapes with the connector rods that maintained perfect balance.
This was not a one-off experience but rather the culmination of many experiments, much discussion and thoughtful provision of leading ideas by the teacher.
Figure Craft
Figure Craft and similar types of material usually stimulate the child to make figures where choice of size, shape and colour play their part.
To make them stand up without toppling over needs an understanding of balance, and vocabulary related to over-balancing, top-heavy, etc. can be introduced.
Equipment such as Fit-Bits ,Plastic Meccano ,Junior Engineer and Bilofix , requires the manipulative skills of fitting nuts on to bolts.
In fastening the strips together to construct any model, choice has to be made of the correct size of nut and bolt involving both sorting, matching and then screwing.
Similarly, choice of the appropriate parts to bolt together must be made if a child is copying a model from the drawings usually supplied with a kit (involving size, shape and matching).
If, however, there is no attempt to copy a pattern, there is often more appreciation of shape  in whatever is made — like the four-year-old who made a triangular shape from three strips and correctly named it, whilst another boy (3.9) named the second shape (a square) when he added a fourth strip to the original three.
Sticklebricks give rise to as many types of play and conversation as the interlocking small bricks, but due to their change in physical appearance and the wheel shapes that come in the packs there is a wider provision for imaginative construction.
For example, one boy (4.1) made ‘an air grass cutter with a steering wheel’.
Construct —o —Straws or Orbit material encourage children to build shapes in three dimensions.
On using the straws they often note and comment on the matchings they have made for colour and/or size.
Although quite different in appearance,Playplax offers the same diversity of  experience — creative construction involving a sense of balance and pattern or symmetry together with the opportunity to sort according to colour and shape.
Example
Jill (4.9) was using both rings and squares from the kit, saying, ‘I'm building lots of castles with these’.
Teacher: Can you tell me anything about these castles then?
Jill: Well, I made them all with four things on one of those round things.
Teacher: You mean the squares.
Jill: Yes, and they are all the same colour.
Vocabulary : high — low — short — shorter — higher — lower — into — out of— balance — centre — ring — square — circle — cube — cylinder.
Structured mathematical apparatus
Some apparatus has a definite mathematical structure, e.g. Poleidoblocs ,Stern apparatus and Unifix .
They can be used purely as play material and indeed that is the way to introduce them to children so that each individual child becomes familiar with the parts of the apparatus and the relationships between the parts.
Superficially, Poleidoblocs G may be confused with any other set of coloured and polished wooden blocks of various shapes and sizes, but closer inspection will reveal the interlinking relations between many of the blocks.
Questions can be asked of a child of the type:
Can you find another block to match this red one?
Can you find a cylinder that is taller than this one?
How many blue cubes do you need to build a cube the same size as the red cube?
Appreciation of the ways in which the various shapes are related enables the teacher to ask further leading questions when a suitable opening presents itself in a child's play (e.g. commenting on the way the flat slabs will go together to make a staircase of three steps —‘What would we need to make the next step?’).
Other apparatus which is mathematically structured the set of ‘logic’ or ‘attribute’blocks.
The majority of suppliers use plastic shapes although the original Dienes floor set was a collection of wooden shapes.
In practically every case the collection varies in shape, colour, size and thickness, and there is, consequently, a wide variety of the methods of sorting and matching that can be performed.
It should be remembered, however, that to describe squares, for example, as thick or thin is not mathematically accurate and if possible, young children should not be confused in this way.
The initial experience for any child is just to play with the pieces to familiarise himself with them all and this often takes the form of picture and pattern making — similar to the early use of the other structured apparatus.
Example
Christopher (3.9): That's a circle.
This is two pence.
That's a tent one.
That's a window one.
That's a big cloud up in the sky.
Zoe (4.0) made a symmetrical pattern:
Raquel (4.0): It's a train.
Those are ears and these are eyes — they're between.
Amanda (3.11): A tree.
It looks like a kite.
Vocabulary : taller than — shorter than — long — longer than — longest — next to— after — before — above.
Other apparatus and equipment
Sorting
There are many varieties of wooden and plastic toys meant for counting and sorting.
Children often play with them as representational toys (despite their different scales which make comparisons difficult).
They use them as stamps or cutters with dough and clay, but in conception they were intended for sorting and matching and thereby to link in with games and toys.
Example
Donna (5.1) and Sharon (4.10) were playing with the All sorts and had made sets with them placing the sets in columns.
When they had sorted the collection completely, they stacked each set in piles.
On another occasion Joanne (4.6) used the All sorts to sort out into rows.
Even with a collection of beads there can be a similar sorting experience when they are of varied size, shape, colour and texture.
Example
Matthew (4.7): These beads are cylinders and they've got a hole right through them.
Those are called cubes and they've got a hole as well.
Patterns and sequences
When children are encouraged to thread beads on a lace to match a particular pattern and then repeat it to the end of the lace, there is development of the idea of sequence.
There is as well experience of identification of assorted beads according to shape, size and colour and (maybe) material — wood or plastic.
There is often considerable vocabulary used amongst a group of children engrossed in their threading activities which incorporates ideas of growth in length as well as naming colours and shapes of individual beads.
The ideas can be consolidated when the teacher is shown the full lace with its pattern of beads (with or without errors in repeat).
Example
Viki (4.3), Sarah (4.8) and Simon (4.6) were tidying drawers containing beads, with the teacher.
Simon: This drawer has big beads and little beads.
The little ones don't belong — they go in there.
Sarah: I'm fixing mine into rows — some have holes and some have flat.
It looks like a carpet.
Viki: Mine go in rows.
This is the yellow row.
It looks like a carpet.
It has patterns.
It's like mummy bear and baby bear.
[She had cylindrical beads and meant that each bead had two circles.]
Sarah: But where is daddy bear?
I know, you be daddy (to Viki) 'cos yours are biggest.
You be mummy (to Simon) and I'll be baby because mine are the smallest.
Viki: This box isn't big enough.
There are too many to go in.
(Long pause.)
I'll make them into double deckers.
Simon: What's that?
Viki: It's one on top of that one.
It's two, in a pile — like this.
Patterns and sequences also arise with pegs and a peg-board.
Example
Dawn (4.8) made a symmetrical pattern of squares with pegs, then filled in the rest of the board, working across  and down, always putting in a peg next to one already there but the colours were haphazard.
Ian (4.11) filled in evenly in rows from the top, using all yellow pegs for the first two rows then haphazardly using the remaining colours for the rest of the rows.
A week later Ian filled in a peg board starting at the outside (perimeter) and making smaller and smaller squares.
Discoveries of shape may also be made with a peg-board, such as, that half a square, divided diagonally, is a triangle, but when the square is divided from the mid-point of one side to the mid-point of the opposite side, it yields two rectangles.
Vocabulary : sort — match — next to— after — before — on top of — underneath — half quarter.
Toys
In all the equipment mentioned so far, there seems to have been some kind of mathematical experience inherent.
But what about the other toys that are to be found in the classroom?
Very often it is not the toy by itself that will provide a mathematical experience but rather the way in which it is being used either on its own or in conjunction with other things.
Push and pull toys
Example
Carole (3.11) was  manoeuvring a pram up a steep slope.
She approached the slope pushing a doll's pram full of dolls and blankets.
Finding she couldn't push the pram up the slope, she thought for a few seconds and then tried to pull it up.
As this was also unsuccessful, she thought again and then emptied the pram of its contents.
Then, with a struggle, she pulled the pram up the slope.
On many occasions a small group of children will be playing with cars, either running them down an incline (a plank resting on a block) or pushing them up.
Such activities may spontaneously develop ideas of the degree of push needed to get a car up a slope with cries of, ‘Push harder — that was too gentle!’
The children will soon realise that the steeper the slope the greater the effort required.
If the spontaneity is not there, then a word from the teacher may be all that is required.
Another occasion may yield the realisation that the steeper the slope the faster a vehicle will run down it.
If the speed is too great then the vehicle may fall off the sides of the plank and crash.
Tracks
Railway lines, with stations, signal boxes, tunnels, bridges, and long or short trains lead to more ideas of spatial awareness.
A large enough space on the floor must be found, or the track must wind between the legs of tables and chairs.
Tunnels and bridges must be high enough for the train to go under.
Ramps must be fitted correctly so that the train can run smoothly.
Example
James (3.4) and David (4.2) were constructing a railway track from long pieces of wood supported on blocks.
David overlapped his section and the train had to bump over it.
James — though younger — butted his pieces of wood so that the train ran smoothly over the joins.
There may be a beginning and end to the track, and the train will go backwards and forwards, instead of round a continuous track.
The engine may be reversed or used to push the trucks  instead of pulling them.
There is bound to be conversation about direction.
Cars and lorries of all sizes are often used in the same way, with roadways, intersections, bridges and unloading bays made from blocks or other materials.
Less ambitiously, simple networks can be chalked on to the playground.
Buildings
Dolls' houses, bungalows, house and roof units, farm houses, barns, garages, shops and airports all lead to imaginative play, which in turn leads towards ideas of sorting, matching and estimation of size.
Can you put all the bedroom furniture upstairs in the doll's house?
Put the farmer and his wife in the farmhouse, and what shall we put in the barn?
If that car is too long to go in that garage, try to find a smaller one.
Stacking and nesting
Ideas of comparison and ordering come from playing with the many toys with graded components, e.g. Russian nesting dolls, pyramid rings, stacking cubes and boxes.
Recognition and estimation of size and shape is experienced with posting boxes, hammer toys, ring toys and inset boards.
Jigsaw puzzles
Young children nearly always put puzzles together by trial and error, ‘trying out’ each piece against another until it fits.
Then, from doing the same puzzle a number of times they remember where each piece fits.
Even inset boards, where a child has to match a certain shape, e.g. a lorry to its silhouette, are difficult for the beginner who doesn't always realise that he is trying to put it in upside-down.
This shows that he is not really aware of the shape relationship at all, but just remembers or ‘has a feeling’ that it ought to go there.
Example
Andrew (4.8) demonstrates this memory way of doing puzzles.
Teacher: You can do the puzzle very quickly and it is quite a hard one.
Where do you put this piece?
Andrew: It is the slide and it goes there.
I know where they all go.
Teacher: How do you know?
Andrew: Because I've done it before.
Joanne (4.4) on the other hand, looks at the shape of pieces.
Example
Teacher: Do you look at the piece before you put it in?
Joanne: Yes.
Teacher: How can you see that it goes there?
Joanne: Because it's the shape.
Because it fits there.
Ian (4.9) has reached a different stage of recognising shapes.
Example
Teacher: What do you do now, if it does not fit?
Ian: I turn it round and try it the other way.
Conversation with adults may lead children towards sorting out straight edges or corners, and with the large floor puzzles it is often possible to match pieces by colour or pattern.
Vocabulary : up — down — slow — fast — higher — lower — backwards — forwards — over — under — above — below — edge — corner — straight — curved.
Games — matching and sorting
Dominoes may be used for matching, as in the game of dominoes itself, and the dots would be seen as patterns to match (not necessarily to count).
There are also many types of picture dominoes (animals, fruit, vegetables, colours, shapes, people) all giving practice in matching.
This practice of matching one picture or pattern to another identical one is also given in the game of Lotto and in playing pairing games such as Snap.
Example
The children were playing at the Lotto table.
John (4.6): Timothy has taken all the cards.
Nicholas (5.0): Hasn't he to share them out?
Teacher: It would be better to share, wouldn't it, Timothy?
Timothy (4.6): I have shared.
(Pointing to two cards.)
He eventually shared them all out.
The equality of shares is not immediately apparent to young children and experiences to stress this need to be provided.
Portioning apples and oranges, handing round a plate of biscuits, etc., are practical ways of giving this experience in an everyday situation.
When playing with Dominoes, Lotto cards, Snap cards, etc., the predominant thought has been to use the pictures or patterns on them for matching one-to-one, yet the example quoted shows valuable spin-offs that lead to other equally important mathematical experiences.
Within sets of pictures and patterns to match, it is often possible to develop games where the matching is not merely one-to-one but a complete set of a kind is collected instead, e.g. Happy Families.
Much of the equipment that is presented as pre-reading material is in fact using these ideas of matching, pairing and visual discrimination, which are equally necessary in the foundation experiences for mathematics.
Many of the games suggested can be applied to sorting toys with suitable adaptation.
For example, one animal could be removed from a collection while the children close their eyes.
They could then try to find out which one was missing.
One teacher organised a sorting game by asking each child in the group to choose and bring a toy from around the room; there was a farm lorry, a helicopter, a golliwog, a breakdown lorry, a helmet and a domino brick.
One child was chosen to sort these toys into two sets while the other children tried to guess her reason.
The first time it was ‘some yellow/no yellow’.
Then another child sorted them in a different way.
This involved the whole group in seeing differences and matching similarities.
Vocabulary : share — match — different — some — all — up — down — inside — outside — under — over — backwards — forwards — sideways — next to.
The teacher's role
There are many important points for a teacher to think about when she prepares a room with toys and other apparatus.
She should ask herself questions such as:
How do I decide which to present?
Do I allow every child to choose?
Do I impose my wishes?
Do I allow a change of apparatus or toy at will?
Do I withdraw apparatus when interest in it wanes?
Do I replace it with something else?
Do I sometimes try to link it with similar materials, providing for experience of solving similar problems?
By listening, a teacher will realise that children ‘talk’ a great deal of mathematics while they are playing, and she can find out quite a lot about their stages of development.
In this way she can judge when some children are ready to join a group game, enabling her to present them with some small problem that will help to lead them one step further in their mathematical thinking.
Example 1
This teacher was playing with a group of four-year-old children using Sticklebricks .
Matthew: I like this colour [yellow]and this colour is for Liverpool [red].
Jason: Let's find all the reds.
I'll find the most.
All the Sticklebricks were piled to one side.
Teacher: Should we put the big ones together over here?
The children began to sort large rectangular bricks into one pile.
Matthew attempted to put a triangular shaped brick onto the pile.
Jason: Take that away.
It's not the same as these.
Example 2
This group of three- and four-year-olds were quite happy on their own, but by listening their teacher was able to learn quite a lot about their use of words and understanding of their meaning.
They began to build a roadway using very large hollow blocks.
Jamie: I'll help, because they are heavy, but I'm strong, aren't I?
Simon: And me.
The roadway was soon built with the help of a number of boys.
Jeffrey: Look how long it is.
Paul: We can make it much longer.
There are lots more bricks yet.
Alan: Yes.
Let's make it longer and longer, till it touches the wall.
When the roadway was finished four of the boys sat on a train to ride along the roadway.
Unfortunately as the blocks reached the wall at either side they could not ride on or off at the ends.
Jamie: It's too long.
We will have to make it shorter.
Paul: Yes.
Let's take some blocks away.
With three blocks removed, it was just the right length for riding on at one end and off at the other.
Example 3
Here the teacher is working with a slightly older group of children and developing sorting, using a sorting box containing cubes, off-cuts of wood, beads, wheels, cotton reels, rods, etc.
She asked the children to sort out everything that rolled.
Onto one of the trays the children put beads of various sizes, wheels, cotton reels and rods.
Pointing to the articles left in the sorting box, the teacher asked, ‘Why don't these roll?’
Alison (4.9): Because they are not round.
Teacher: Are all these round?
(Pointing to articles on the tray.)
Children: Yes.
Teacher: Are they all the same?
Children: No.
A further sorting amongst the articles on the tray put them into sets of beads, reels, rods and wheels.
Teacher: Now, how are they different?
Matthew (4.1): These are all round [beads]and these are round in the middle [reels].
Teacher: What about these?
(Pointing to rods and wheels.)
Matthew: Those are round at the end [rods]and those are flat round [wheels].
The final example is perhaps an unexpected mathematical experience as there is no discussion of the tower itself but rather the child has been carried to the top of the high tower in his imagination and asked to look down at the people below.
Ian has had this experience in reality and is all it with some explanation.
Example 4
Ian (4.8): I'm going to build a great big tower to the sky.
Teacher: If you were right at the top of the tower would the people down below you look like?
Ian: Tidgy.
Teacher: Why would they look tidgy?
Ian: Because people do when they are up high.
Perhaps his teacher should have given him a better word than ‘tidgy’, but they both knew what they meant.
It is interesting that he replied to her question in reverse!
It is always worth taking a fresh look at the toys and apparatus which are put out daily, to decide just why they are there.
For example, placing the blocks in the centre of a large room or out on the porch, instead of in their usual corner, can stimulate quite a different type of play.
A whole cupboard may be turned out to find a forgotten toy and then the clearing up, sorting and re-packing becomes an activity in itself.
By deliberately altering the appearance of apparatus which has been put out but not used, a teacher can exploit the sorting and ordering activities that occur when clearing up.
There is sometimes a tendency to set out apparatus at the beginning of a session and then to hurry the clearing up, thus losing valuable experience.
It is well worth while to leave plenty of time to help the children to do all the clearing up themselves.
Outdoor Activities
Introduction
It is very difficult to generalise on outdoor activities, as the amount of space available differs from school to school.
Some have a paved area as small as 10 square metres surrounded by high walls, while others enjoy an orchard, garden, playing field and carefully constructed play spaces.
Sometimes the large apparatus can be left outside, always ready for use.
In other areas it must be stacked away in sheds or classrooms to avoid the attention of vandals.
We usually think of the purely physical and enjoyment value to children of playing in the open air.
Indeed, for many children, this may be their first chance to play freely, experiencing hard surfaces, grass, fences, trees, ponds and sand pits.
Just as materials offered to young children in the classroom can be chosen to provide them with experiences leading to the acquisition of mathematical ideas, so the provision and organisation of outdoor activities can encourage children to explore such things as balance, weight, height, depth, direction, speed, spatial order, shape and size with very little participation from an adult.
In ideal situations, indoor and outdoor activities will overlap, as children move freely from one to the other.
Bricks, sand, water, paint and dressing-up clothes will, for example, provide different experiences when used out-of-doors.
Many children need to spend much of their time with the group in physical activity out-of-doors, and a teacher supervising them can help to develop their experiences and language, so that she feels her time is being used just as profitably out-of-doors as within the confines of the classroom.
The rapid development of physical co-ordination and agility by children of three and four years old is very obvious.
Intellectual development goes hand in hand with this physical progression as children experiment with materials and learn to control them.
Their own experience leads them on, for example, to rejecting a full box or bucket that they think is too heavy for them to carry.
From being surprised that a ball rolls away on a gentle slope, a child will purposely ride his scooter down the same slope for enjoyment, knowing that he then has to push it up again.
The more mature child will be the initiator of imaginative play with boxes, planks and tyres, knowing from past games that certain boxes will fit together and a particular plank will bridge a gap.
This chapter deals with outdoor activities within the school grounds.
See chapter 10 The Environment , for further outdoor activities, including outings further afield.
Possible developments
Flat, hard surfaces
The old-style playground, tarmac covered, bereft of trees, shrubs, grass and gardens, bounded by a high wall or fence, may be the only outside play space for some groups.
Even so, much activity can be encouraged with improvised equipment such as planks, boxes, tyres and barrels.
Toys to ride, and push and pull toys
Scooters, tricycles, bicycles and pedal cars can all be used safely on a flat hard surface and there are many chances for one-to-one correspondence.
‘Only one on this bike because it's only got one seat’,(Simon 4.3).
If a pedal car has two seats, there is room for two and there can also be discussion about front and back.
Whilst riding, children are experiencing various speeds and directions which are influenced by their own body weight and steering ability.
Two-, three- and four-wheel toys pose problems of balance.
Encourage children to talk about their preference for a particular toy.
With push and pull toys the children experience weight in a very practical way when deciding what and how much they put into a pram or trolley to push.
Example
Darren (3.9) was pushing a friend in a large basket on wheels when his teacher asked if she could have a ride.
Darren: Get in…
No, I can't push you, you're too heavy!
Different types of barrows and trucks lead children to use them in various ways.
It is not easy to give a friend a ride in a wheelbarrow, because of the problems of balance, and it is difficult to carry sand and soil on a trolley with low or slatted sides.
Children can find out these differences and we might encourage them to talk about them by posing such questions as:
How shall we move these planks of wood to the other side of the playground?
If it rains, do you think that doll will be able to sit up under the hood of the pram?
Many more estimations will be made — rightly or wrongly — by the children as they try to push and pull their prams and trolleys through narrow spaces.
Do you really think there is room to overtake just there?
Many statements about direction will be made by children while they are pushing and pulling.
We are all going this way round the tree.
You must come behind me.
They also like to up-end push and pull toys for imaginary mending, and wheels can be spun at different speeds.
While playing with the children we can introduce the terms backwards ,forwards ,in front of ,behind ,by the side of and next to .
Gradually children will come to understand them in various contexts and so use them in their own play.
Small apparatus
All children love playing with balls and at this age it is sure to be one each, so that one-to-one correspondence comes naturally.
As children mature they may be prepared to share one ball between two, or play with an adult in a small group taking turns at catching or rolling a ball.
Bean bags, cloth or woollen balls can all be used and at clearing up time the various balls can be sorted.
Hoops can be used for crawling through, jumping in, out of and over, and comparing sizes.
They can also be used for making flat designs on the ground, imaginary steering wheels and stepping stones.
At the same time, the children are learning to control them and are finding out some of the properties of a circle.
Skipping ropes are popular and can be used for many activities as well as skipping, jumping over and crawling under.
Two roughly parallel ropes on the ground to jump over.
They can be moved further and further apart.
A squiggly rope to jump over.
It can wiggle sideways as well as up and down.
Spatial relationships — limited space
Some of the following suggestions may be useful where the space is very limited, while others could be initiated by a teacher with a small group of children who have lost interest in the more usual activities.
Feel all the space around you.
Stand close to some other children, now spread out so that you can't touch anybody.
Move various parts of you — legs up and down, arms forwards, backwards; look through the arch made by your legs.
Stand against the wall or fence.
What can you see?
Turn around, now what can you see?
A blank wall?
Over the top of the wall?
Through the fence?
Can we all fit in along this short wall?
Now take some big jumps forward.
Turn around and jump back to the wall.
Let's jump sideways as well as forwards and backwards.
Circles, straight lines and zig-zags can be chalked or painted on to a hard surface for children to walk, run, jump or skip along.
Vocabulary : front — back — forwards — backwards — fast — slow — curved — straight — next to— in front of — behind — by the side of — through — in — out — over — under.
Grassy areas and gardens
Slopes, dips, pathways and steps
A sandbank at the bottom of a steeper incline provides a safe stopping place for bikes and scooters.
Old tyres of various sizes are great fun to roll down slopes, and children can experiment with the different sizes — comparing the speeds and distances.
Pushing the tyres up again takes more energy and children will soon sort out the lightest or compete with one another to push the heaviest.
Many schools are able to make a ‘jungle’ for children, which they love to explore.
It may be a shrubbery with a well-trodden path that the children have made themselves or a hard-surfaced path winding between small trees.
The children's enjoyment seems to stem from the feeling of  being lost, but knowing that they will come out safely at the end.
The narrowness of the path means that they must always play ‘follow the leader’, and begin to learn something about position and ordinal number.
First, second, third and last will stay in the same order unless there is a junction, when the line may divide and their positions change.
Steps can encourage similar experiences of spatial order as children go up and down and there are also opportunities to make higher and lower comparisons.
When trucks and trolleys need to negotiate the steps, children can experience weight, balance and the effect of sharing the weight between several children working together, under the careful supervision of an adult.
Gardens
A garden is useful in helping the children to understand space comparisons and the seasons.
Children like to see quick results from their efforts, but a garden, however small, can demonstrate the passing of time as they watch for changes.
A small apple tree, a garden pea or even a strawberry plant pass through various stages during spring and summer and children can look for the first appearance of leaves and flowers and fruit.
Do the flowers come before the leaves?
Where will the fruit be?
When can we eat it?
How long until it is ripe?
Are the apples too high for me to reach?
Quick-growing root vegetables such as radishes and carrots which grow out of sight can be compared for size when they are pulled at various times.
Will some of these carrots grow larger if we leave them till next week?
Children can plant sunflower seeds in pots indoors and then transfer them to the garden in early summer.
There they can compare the speed and amount of growth and also compare the height of themselves and adults against the growing plant.
Other quick-growing plants are tomatoes and runner beans, but these plants that mature in the autumn are not really suitable for schools that have a long August holiday, as continuity is lost, even if help is available to care for the plants.
Whilst digging in, and planting and weeding the garden, children are bound to find many small creatures, and there are countless opportunities to discuss these.
Some topics which may arise are: the length of worms, and their lack of legs; the many legs of a centipede; the slowness of snails and slugs; the woodlouse rolling into a ball; the flight differences of butterflies, bees, ladybirds and flies.
Birds will be attracted to gardens as they hunt for worms, insects, seeds and fruits.
Again, differences in sizes, species and habits can be observed.
Starlings usually come in a noisy crowd, sparrows in twos and threes, while the robin is more often alone.
All these simple garden activities depend upon the real involvement and enjoyment of an adult who loves a garden, and can pass on some of his or her knowledge to children as they work and play together.
As they sort weeds from flowers, compare leaves for size and texture and observe symmetries, collect fruits, dig holes for plants and bulbs and arrange stakes and poles, children are absorbing many ideas of spatial order and relationships.
NOTE : When planning a garden, care must be taken to exclude plants which have poisonous leaves or berries .
Vocabulary : stop — start — fast — slow — up — down — higher — lower — first — second — third — last.
Shelters
Sunrooms, verandahs and summer-houses give children a feeling of going out and away from the classroom, even in inclement weather.
Sometimes this means they have more room for wheel toys, but often it gives them a chance to make their own den to hide away in with a favourite toy.
Wigwams, canvas and tarpaulin shelters need to be erected by adults, but as children help they are experiencing one-to-one correspondence with tapes to loops or hooks to holes, etc. and will soon say:
There's not enough.
You need another one.
Just two more to do.
The children then have the fun of squeezing themselves and toys inside the shelter and comparisons arise as to how many children can sit, stand or lie down.
Again they soon sort this out for themselves.
You can't come in.
You're too fat.
You can fit in there.
You can't stand up near the side.
Even more valuable are the shelters that children improvise for themselves.
A box with a blanket draped over the top to act as a door makes a home for how many children?
Several boxes and planks with blanket covers pose problems of height, area and weight.
The old-fashioned clothes horse offered to children with a blanket and some clothes pegs lets them explore triangular three-dimensional shapes.
Vocabulary : enough — too many — more than — higher than — lower than — inside — outside — in — out — over — under.
Large apparatus
Opinions vary widely as to safety of various pieces of large apparatus.
Most of the equipment must be locked away in storerooms and sheds at night and put out again every morning.
When the children help, they sometimes suggest a different way of arranging things and even a small alteration can suddenly make a forgotten toy more popular.
Some of the mathematical ideas which can be experienced with the most general apparatus are suggested here.
Climbing frames
These are often fixed, but a movable ladder can be hooked on different sides to encourage children to look in different directions.
The square, window-type frame gives practice with moving in and out as well as up, down and over the top of, and there is experience of being enclosed within a three-dimensional shape.
When I climbed up here yesterday, I could see the church.
Today I can see the shops.
What shall I see if I climb round here?
Scrambling nets need more awareness and control of body weight than fixed frames.
Slides
Slides can also be pointed in various directions and if there are several, with different gradients, more comparisons of body control can be made.
Body position can also be varied; sitting or lying face in or face up is safer than head first.
Swings
There are a great many different swings, but a child must be aware of the skill necessary to make a swing work, that is, transference of his own body weight, as he goes forwards, backwards, up, down and sideways.
Some swings have seats of various heights, others have double handgrips or a rubber tyre.
There are single ropes to curl around and seats on single ropes.
They all provide different experiences that children can be encouraged to talk about.
Seesaws
Seesaws and swingboats both lead to estimation of weight as children look for a comfortable partner.
A too-heavy friend will put Jane up in the air all the time until they learn to balance their weight by sitting in different positions.
Tunnels
Barrels, and tunnels made from large pipes, can either be flat on the ground or raised on frames so that steps or sloping planks are needed to get into them.
Children learn to change their own shapes as they go from one to another and also gain further experience of spatial order, as overtaking is impossible and ‘first in, first out’ becomes the rule.
More timid children who are just watching can be encouraged to remember who went into the tunnel first and watch for them coming out again.
Improvised
Cardboard cartons, discarded beer and milk crates, bread baskets, planks, bricks and other builder's waste, old tyres and steering wheels can all be made safe for children to experiment with as they build and imagine themselves as pilots, racing drivers, farmers and naval captains.
All the time they are experimenting with weight, size and shape in three dimensions.
Boxes
Boxes, hidey-holes and box steps can be fitted together or used separately and children usually help to arrange these themselves, again giving many opportunities to experience ‘inside’, ‘outside’, ‘on top of’, ‘next to ’, ‘in front of ’ and ‘behind’.
Boats and vehicles
Some nurseries have old boats and vehicles which have been made safe for children to play in.
Experience of ‘inside’, ‘outside’, ‘up’, ‘down’, ‘under’ and ‘over’will arise here, as well as the number of children who can get in.
Trees
Tree stumps to jump from, logs to climb over and smaller logs to arrange in patterns and roll about, give experiences of height, weight, and shape.
Vocabulary : in — out — up — down —through — on top of— next to — in front of — behind — heavy — light — first — last —— over — under — inside — outside.
Sand pits
Shape
The shape of a sand pit is usually decided by the space and materials available, but if planning a new one, here are some ideas that may help to make it even more exciting.
Strong, but not ‘too heavy to move’, covers must be provided unless the area is absolutely cat, dog and vandal proof.
Hexagonal, curved or irregularly shaped pits are more interesting than square ones.
It may be possible to prepare the pit with a sloping bottom so that deeper holes can be dug at one end, leading to comparisons being made.
A paved or cement area next to the pit makes a good surface for sand castles and another paved area, at a little distance from the pit, to use as a dumping place for sand-filled trucks, encourages imaginative play.
Equipment
Experiences leading to mathematical ideas can be encouraged by providing a range of equipment in various sizes.
Buckets in different sizes, as well as colours, encourage conversation between the children and between the children and adults.
‘Mine will be the largest sand castle.’
‘Oh dear, it's too heavy for me to lift.’
Spades of various sizes encourage children to see who can fill buckets of the same size first, or dig the deepest holes.
Children often match the colours of their equipment, but sometimes the smallest spade is the same colour as the largest bucket and further conversation can be encouraged as they discover it is not always easier to fill a small bucket with a large spade, than to fill a large bucket with a small spade.
Rakes, pounders, sticks, boxes and sieves will all produce interesting shapes and tracks in the sand, leading to guessing games such as, ‘Guess what I did this with’.
Marks made by feet can be compared.
This must be a giant's foot.
Look at it next to my foot!
Imaginative play
While this should never be interrupted by a mathematically obsessed adult, provision of suitable equipment and the space to use it will lead children to make many useful discoveries.
If we fill the wheelbarrow with sand in the pit, it's too heavy to lift out.
This is the tallest castle I've ever built.
Now I'll stand on the top.
Now I'll make a tunnel underneath it.
That's the doorway.
My leg can go right inside.
Children will learn about weight, volume, length, shape and size, and gain some idea of the invariance of mass as they move sand from one container to another.
Vocabulary : full — empty — heavy — light — deep — shallow — match — on top of— underneath.
Ponds and paddling pools
Some schools have permanent pools outside, but as with the sand pit, they need to be kept clean and free from intruders.
Many of the mathematical ideas connected with them are described in chapter 5 Water .
The weather
The amount of time spent out of doors is so dependent upon the weather that children are bound to be aware of changes and some effects of sun, wind, rain and snow.
Sun
What is a shadow?
Children can look for shadows of trees, walls, houses, swings, climbing frames, etc., comparing the shape of the original with its shadow.
Shadows of themselves, adults and smaller children can be compared.
Games of chasing shadows, jumping on someone else's shadow, making tall and short shadows, can all be initiated by an adult with a small group of interested children.
When does the sun make us feel hot?
Some comparisons of the seasons can be included here and sunny or shady parts of the garden sorted out for various times of the day.
Wind
How strong is the wind today?
Are the leaves being blown from the trees?
Is the washing moving on the clothes line?
Which way is the wind blowing?
Is it blowing us backwards or forwards?
Let's make some paper windmills.
Which way do they go round more quickly?
Let's fly a kite or blow some bubbles up into the sky.
Rain
Rainwater can be collected in different-sized containers, raindrops observed going down window panes, etc.
For further suggestions, see chapter 5 Water .
Snow
Nearly all children want to go out in the snow and, if they are suitably dressed, they can have many mathematically rewarding experiences as well as lots of fun.
They can compare the weight of some loose snow on one hand with a compressed snowball on the other.
They can use snow to make a big ball or snowman.
They can make tracks and footmarks in the snow, and on finding footmarks can guess which way the person who made them was going.
Buckets can be filled with snow — loosely or hard packed — and the amount of water found when the snow has melted can be discussed and compared.
If there is enough snow to make a really big snowman, he may be as tall as Mr A. on the first day, but as he melts, he will shrink to be as tall as Miss B. and then as small as the smallest child, until he finally disappears.
Vocabulary : inside — outside — behind — forwards — backwards — full — empty.
The teacher's role
With outdoor activities, even more than indoors, the good teacher becomes the provider of materials and the involved observer.
Many children are quite happy to run, push, pull, ride and climb, but when an adult is standing by, ready to help, she is sure to be drawn in by the children as in the following example.
Example 1
In the outside sand pit, the teacher sat down to dig, using a small spade.
Timothy (4.2) handed the teacher a large spade and said, ‘Use this one; it digs deeper.’
Younger children, or those that have had little experience of playing freely, need a little more encouragement and the next example illustrates how a teacher was able to lead a small group without directing them too much.
Example 2
Zahid (3.11) was playing in the sand pit in the playground, one of a group of four children, with a teacher, engaged in digging a trench around a log.
Zahid:(Upon completing the job) All round now.
Teacher: Yes, it goes all the way round the log now.
We can make this piece higher if you want to.
(Indicating island in the middle)
Zahid: Yes, higher.
Finally, the teacher took a bucket and made a sand castle on top.
Zahid took another, and made a second castle.
Zahid: Two now!
In the next example the boys, with the pedal car, had already made their decision on size and did not really need the teacher to question them about it, but they were obviously quite used to talking with her.
Example 3
Christopher (4.7) was riding in the pedal car with Mark (4.7) pushing.
When they got near the large boxes, Christopher stood up inside the car and lifted it round to turn it.
The teacher asked why they lifted it round.
Christopher: We can't get round there.
(Pointing to the boxes)
Teacher: Why not?
Christopher: There isn't enough room.
There's a big box there.
Mark: Can't get round there.
There isn't enough room.
Perhaps she could have continued the conversation by offering to move the boxes or asking them how much more room they needed, and how it could be found.
The next teacher provided some different materials and left the children to experiment.
She writes about some of the things that happened.
Example 4
One day I put some large heavy cardboard tubes in the wheelbarrows and awaited the reaction from the children first coming out to play.
At first the boys went straight for the cars as usual and the girls didn't notice.
One boy (4.8) said ‘What's those things?’
Paul (3.8) pushed the wheelbarrow with the tubes inside and on reaching the small slide stopped and tried rolling them down it.
He then tried putting them on the roll—about tyre.
Then he put them on his arms, grew tired and left them.
Rebecca (3.10) rolled them along the ground.
Sarah (4.9) and Donna (3.11) put them in and out of the wheelbarrow.
Julian (4.5) and David (4.2) stood them up and played a game with them as rockets going up to the sky.
They then tried sitting on them.
They put them on their arms, but Julian noticed his were of different lengths, one covering his hand, the other leaving his hand extended beyond the edge.
He did not like this and changed them for two of the same length.
Later they had them set in a row near the climbing frame.
They were of three different heights so in conversation with Julian I asked if they were all the same height or if some were taller than the others.
Julian, although knowing through putting them on his arms that they were of different lengths, said they were ‘the same’.
Sarah was watching and listening so I asked her if she thought they were all the same.
She said, ‘No, that one is the biggest’, picking out the tallest one.
I asked which were the next tallest and she picked out the only two of the next size.
I asked which were the smallest, and she picked out the three shortest ones quickly.
The next day Julian found the tubes again and started to put his arms in them to play ‘Daleks’.
Donna joined him and he found her the shortest ones, saying, ‘You have the short ones.
You are small.’
Later Julian and David took them and stood them along the ground near the climbing frame.
Julian then found by laying three equal sized tubes end to end, they would exactly fit along a double bar between two uprights and would not roll off because the bars were near and parallel to each other.
He then tried propping the others up on the climbing frame but they kept falling off.
He could not suggest why this should happen.
When one rolled along the ground he picked it up and stood it on its end to stop it rolling.
The teacher had chosen her time to join them with the purpose of extending their mathematical thinking and the second day's activity shows that David had absorbed some of the ideas about size.
Example 5
Teacher: Shall we make a monster's shadow, children.
Caroline (4.5): How can we, we haven't got a monster?
Teacher: Make a line.
Now stand exactly behind the person in front of you.
Look, you've made a long shadow.
Now hold your arms out.
Look at the shadow.
What can you see?
Carolyn (4.6): Look, it's a big crocodile.
Maxine (4.6): It looks like a real monster.
Teacher: Wave your arms about and see what happens.
Katherine (4.2): Look — it's moving.
It's a crawly thing.
Again, the following mathematical thoughts would not have been explored and put into words without the right question from Gillian's teacher.
Example 6
Gillian (4.6) was one of three children playing in the large paddling pool in the garden, when she commented (whilst gently stirring the water with her feet), ‘Oh, the water's heavier than my feet.’
Teacher: How can you tell?
Gillian: Well, it's lifting my feet up.
On the other hand, Peter initiates the next conversation by asking the question.
His teacher's explanation would help to consolidate his previous experiences.
Example 7
Peter (4.9) was on the tyre with wheels.
Peter: Why did you go backwards when I was coming to you?
Teacher: You were coming towards me and I thought you were going to run me over, Peter.
If I'd moved forwards, we would have bumped.
Peter: I'll go backwards now.
Example 8
Teacher: What is that shape on the playground?
Leanne (4.5): My shadow.
Teacher: How can you tell that it is your shadow?
Leanne: It's joined on to me, it starts at my feet.
Teacher: Is your shadow the same shape as you?
Leanne: Yes.
Look it's got two legs and it's got two plaits the same as me.
Teacher: What will happen to your shadow if you move?
Leanne:(Swinging body from side to side) It moves with me, look.
Teacher: Let's see what happens if you jump.
Leanne: Look it's jumping with me.
Teacher: Do you think your shadow is the same size as you, Leanne?
Leanne: It looks the same, I think it is.
Teacher: Shall we see if it is?
The teacher then took a length of string, cut it to the height of the child and laid it on the ground on top of the shadow of Leanne.
Leanne: Oh, my shadow's bigger than me.
This incident has led to work being carried on, comparing shadow sizes.
Lunchtime, milktime and hometime sizes are being measured and chalk outlines made.
Example 9
The teacher demonstrated shadow animals using hands, and this led to further experiment with shadows.
Teacher: Let's play some tricks with our shadows.
Maxine, look at your shadow.
Now, has this bucket got a shadow?
Maxine (4.6): Yes, I can see it by mine.
Teacher: Put your hand down here.
(Teacher guided hand in front of bucket handle) Now look at the shadows.
What does it look as if you are going to do?
Maxine: It looks like I'm going to pick it up, but I'm not.
My hand's not really at the back.
It's at the front.
Observing the children's play out of doors, teachers will be able to draw in and encourage some children by offering them small problems to solve, such as the best way to move some bricks from one side of the garden to another.
As they become more independent, she can, by the provision of suitable equipment and conversation, lead them on to explore many mathematical ideas while their physical skills are developing.