

BBC considers sponsorship plan
By Sarah Macdonald
One of the 15 BBC management task forces investigating the Corporation's future has recommended the scrapping of all sponsorship — including the £1.2m Lloyds Young Musician — damning it as covert advertising.
The report, ‘BBC — The Entrepreneur’, compiled by Radio 4 controller Michael Green, Radio Times editor Nicholas Brett and Money Programme editor David Nissan, also recommends the end of Embassy Cigarettes' sponsorship of the World Professional Snooker championships, worth £1.5m a year.
‘We are keen to distance the BBC from tobacco sponsorship as soon as practicable in line with UK and European trends,’ says the report leaked this week.
However, in a separate report compiled by consultant analyst Brian Sturgess, ‘The Funding Bible’, the BBC is urged to take advertising, predicting that a mere two minutes a day on both BBC1 and BBC2 would net the Corporation £433m by the year 2000 at 1991 prices.
Sturgess claims that if the BBC were to allow advertisers access to the screens the total market would rise from £2.12bn in 1996 to £2.29bn in 1997.
ITV, Channels 4 and 5 and satellite companies would not lose revenue but gain, he claims.
BBC Enterprises does not escape criticism from ‘The Entrepreneur’.
It says: ‘BBCE is at a crossroads.
Its prescription to maximise turnover and profits at all costs — for growth — should not be renewed.
We believe this policy has taken us into ventures which stray from the Corporation's core activities [and]endanger its image.’
BBC YOUNG MUSICIAN OF THE YEAR Sponsorship May go
Tory win fails to impress advertisers
The UK's top advertisers remain pessimistic about economic upturn despite the Tory victory at the polls last week.
Yershon Media commissioned a survey of the country's top 300 advertisers immediately after the election on Friday.
Some 44 per cent of the 65 advertisers interviewed saw the economy picking up in the last quarter of this year at the earliest, and a further 35 per cent did not envisage an improvement until 1993.
According to Yershon, this caution is reflected in pessimism over advertising budgets.
Two-thirds of respondents anticipate no change in planned adspend for 1992, and none of the more optimistic forecast more than a slight increase.
Next year, advertisers predict a marginally brighter future, with 45 per cent seeing a ‘modest’ increase in budget levels as a result of the election.
While a mere three per cent said budgets would increase a lot, the rest anticipate no change or are still unsure.
Ironically, Conservative Central Office claims to welcome the survey as evidence of continued restraint within the business community.
‘It is too soon after the election to judge.
However, it is encouraging they aren't rushing into expanded budgets,’ says a spokeswoman.
Tories: Not inspiring hope
BA escalates war in the air with Branson
British Airways is suing Virgin Atlantic Airways and its chairman Richard Branson for libel only weeks after Branson took his own action against BA over an alleged dirty tricks campaign.
British Airways legal director Merwyn Walker says: ‘For several months we have endured a campaign of very serious allegations made against us by Virgin and Branson.
We have made it clear throughout that those accusations are untrue.’
British Airways says that alongside pursuing its own action, the company and chairman Lord King are planning to vigorously defend the defamation case brought by Virgin and Branson.
However, a statement from Virgin which denies defamations says the company was this week finally awarded a date for a trial by Justice Drake in June or July ‘against the strong opposition of British Airways’.
Industry speculation suggest BA's counter claim may be a delaying tactic, but British Airways vigorously denies this.
Branson: Counter claim
Dior poaches Simpson for expansion
By Helen Jones
Parfums Christian Dior UK has poached Stuart Simpson from cosmetics company Bourjois with a brief to expand the company's already growing market share.
Simpson, currently managing director at Bourjois, part of Chanel, confirms he will fill the position at Christian Dior.
The appointment is the culmination of a long search which started with the departure of Simpson's predecessor Richard Macey in December.
Macey became managing director in 1990 and was responsible for Parfums Christian Dior and sister company Parfums Christian Lacroix UK.
Despite the recession, Dior's turnover increased by two per cent in the first quarter of 1991, divided equally between fragrance and beauty products.
The company's Poison fragrance, launched in the late Eighties, is now the UK's best-selling women's perfume.
Dior scored a recent success with the launch of Dune, which industry sources say was among the most popular lines at Christmas.
However, there is evidence that Dune may be cannibalising Poison, which may require one or the other to be repositioned.
Stoessl to head polls post mortem 
by Chris Boulding
Market Research Society director general Sue Stoessl has fiercely rebutted suggestions that election opinion polls will turn advertising agencies and marketers against market research.
In its own post mortem of the polls' performance, an MRS panel of senior market researchers will examine the professional competence of the five main polling companies.
But, says Stoessl: ‘Opinion polling is totally different from marketing research.
Nobody in marketing is looking at a plus or minus two per cent— they're looking at trends in the longer term.’
The inquiry will examine every aspect of the polls such as questionnaires, response rates and the effect of the ‘don't knows’ to ensure the ‘high standards and reputation’of the industry are maintained.
The industry is expected to excuse itself by highlighting the last-minute change in voters' allegiances, reflected in the last polls.
Stoessl says: ‘The inquiry doesn't have to justify the polls, but to look into the way they're done and try to explain the discrepancies.
One frequent error is to assume the polls are predictive when in fact they're snapshots of a situation at one particular moment.’
Media analysis, page 17 
NEWS
Gates plans £1m battery launch
By Lindsay McMurdo
US battery manufacturer Gates Energy Products is set to introduce its ‘environmentally-friendly’ rechargeable battery system to the UK, backed by a £1m advertising spend.
Marketing chief Peter Sadler was unavailable to comment on the launch plans, but it is thought four agencies have been lined up to pitch for the business.
Industry sources say the company is likely to adopt the same marketing strategy as in the US, where its range of domestic batteries are targeted predominantly at women.
Research in the US has shown women are more conscious of the environmental implication of the products they buy than men, and women buy 60 per cent of all disposable batteries sold there.
Gates' range is branded as the Millenium Power System and was introduced in the US in 1990.
The batteries are available in the most popular sizes, in one or three-hour charging systems, and come with lifetime guarantees.
Rechargeable batteries are expected to be the fastest-growing sector in the market during the Nineties.
Brands already available in the UK include Varta, Panasonic and Memorex.
The market is estimated to be worth £500m.
.
Market leader Ever Ready has been sold by Hanson to Ralston Purina, which markets the brand in the US.
It is thought unlikely that marketing or agency arrangements will be affected.
FROM THE PEOPLE WHO GAVE YOU LONG LIFE.
REINCARNATION.
Ever Ready: Market leader
B&W gears up for ‘radical’ savings offer
New Bristol & West director of marketing Ken Scott will spearhead the launch of a ‘radical’ new ‘bespoke’product later this year.
Scott, who joined the building society in January from the Midland Bank, intends to launch a savings product which he says ‘will give customers the opportunity to mix their own savings product.
In the same way that you go into a DIY store to mix paint, we are looking to fit our product to customers’ lifestyle and financial needs.’
Scott hints his appointment may also herald B&W's return to TV advertising — a medium it has not exploited recently.
Advertising strategy will be directed away from product-led treatments to focus on consumer demands.
The new product — details of which remain under wraps — will target current customers, as part of Scott's strategy to build better relationships with B&W's existing base, and enhance client retention.
‘The number-one customer need is trust and the perception of empathy,’ Scott says.
‘This is one area to which financial services are not attentive.
Over the past 18 months we have launched a number of products offering opportunities for existing customers.
Our efforts are leaning towards product offerings and building relationships as a basis on which to retain customers.’
Scott replaced former marketing director Ian Kennedy, who has become general manager for indirect business channels within the company.
Bristol & West is the UK's tenth-largest building society, with assets of more than £7bn and 350 retail outlets.
Scott: Trust and empathy
Salmon to run marketing for Audioline
Consumer electronics company Audioline, which owns the Audioline answering machine and Moss Security brands, has appointed Jon Salmon to the newly-created head of marketing post.
Salmon was previously marketing controller for Ladbroke Racing.
Salmon has also worked in marketing for Argos and Ever Ready.
Audioline's chairman Harry Moss says Salmon's ‘retail and product marketing experience will be invaluable in the year ahead, when we shall be intensifying above and below-the-line support’.
Audioline is the fastest-growing brand in the answering machine market.
It is running a TV campaign through Burkitt Weinreich Bryant Clients & Company, using the line ‘telephones and answering machines that do more than laze around’.
The campaign is designed to build brand awareness in a market dominated by British Telecom.
Market penetration of answering machines is about six per cent, although research indicates 20 per cent of the population are considering purchasing one.
Salmon: Experienced
Raleigh sails away from old image
Youth development group Raleigh International is being relaunched with a new marketing department and strategic direction, in a bid to overcome its ‘army camp’ image.
The organisation, formerly known as Operation Raleigh, has a new logo and is considering an above-the-line campaign to boost its image revamp next month.
The logo, designed by ad agency Bastable, scraps the tall ship and compass look for an image that better reflects the more general bridge-building and clinic-operating activities of the group.
‘We dropped the name (and image) because it gave the wrong impression by sounding like an extension of an army camp,’ says a Raleigh International spokeswoman.
‘We are a credible youth development charity, but we are saddled with an outdated, confused image.
People know us, but they don't know how big we are,’ she adds.
The restructured department involves the promotion of former commercial director Jamie Robertson-Macleod to director general.
He was preciously responsible for bringing in big-name sponsors like British Rail and Barclays Bank.
Other team members include former expedition leader David Taylor-Smith, who becomes commercial director, and Fiona Haas has been brought in from Brodanski Sponsorship Management to head the sponsorship department.
Operation Raleigh was launched in 1984 by Prince Charles and John Blashford-Snell as a four-year project to encourage young people of all classes to get involved in community work abroad.
Since then the organisation has grown, with schemes in the UK and abroad including areas such as elephant conservation.
It has sent 8,000 young people abroad.
Robertson-Macleod: Top job
Forte launches upmarket inns
By Janet Izatt
Hotel and catering group Forte has launched a new upmarket brand, the Heritage collection, which marks the latest phase in the corporate identity revamp that began last summer.
Heritage, a collection of 118 traditional British inns, follows the launch of two upmarket collection, Forte Posthouse and Forte Crest, last year.
Hotels in the Heritage collection include the Swan at Levenham and The Bear at Woodstock.
Three bands for the lower end of the market will also be launched, to reflect the diversity of Forte's 8,000 hotels across 32 countries.
While unable to comment about launch details on the eve of reporting its financial results, Forte says the marketing campaign will include national advertising through to direct mail to ‘present selections of hotels from the collection to segmented groups in the leisure and business markets’.
A Forte spokesperson says the launch of the Heritage campaign is timed to coincide with the Easter break.
Wolff Olins handled the corporate identity strategy last year, which dropped Trusthouse from the company's name.
Incumbent Saatchi & Saatchi has been using a 90-second ad with the key line ‘For him, for her, forever…
Forte — host to the world’.
Forte is expected to show a drop of up to 64 per cent in 1991 pre-tax profits to between £70m and £76m (£190m) when it reports its results today (Wednesday).
Heritage: Brand covers 118 traditional inns
BBC Enterprises appeals against listings decision
BBC Enterprises has again thrown open the TV listings debate by lodging an eleventh hour appeal to the High Court.
BBCE, the parent company of Radio Times, appealed against the Copyright Tribunal's decision to award minimum payments for listings information to newspapers and magazines on the last possible date.
A High Court judge will decide in the next few months whether the tribunal has considered all evidence correctly.
Both the BBCE and TV Times proprietor IPC previously held the duopoly on listings for the UK.
The Copyright Tribunal's decision in March to charge only nominal fees for that information caused outrage at the BBC, which would like remuneration to be much higher.
Ironically, IPC will not challenge the tribunal on appeal.
Time Out publisher Tony Elliott, who is chairman of the TV Listings Campaign lobby group, says: ‘We ended with a decision which was very favourable to us — about £1,000 a year for Time Out — and we know it's unrealistic for us to complain, although a large number of publishers believe this information should be completely free.’
Elliott regards the original decision as a vindication of the lobby which he led and predicts copyright charges will disappear once the more diversified ITV company arrangements come into effect in 1993.
A tribunal hearing set for May 22 to decide on costs is now likely to be suspended following the BBCE appeal.
BBCE representatives were unavailable for comment.
Elliott: ‘Decision was very favourable to us’
Church's Shoes moves into fashion
Upmarket shoe company Church's is diversifying into the UK fashion accessories market following the launch of a luxury product range on the Continent a year ago.
The move is part of the company's attempt to strengthen consumer awareness of the Church's brand and to extend retail opportunities for ladies' and men's shoes.
Church's is launching a range of leather goods, including luggage, briefcases, belts and handbags, as well as a selection of ties, scarves and socks made from silk, wool, cashmere and mohair.
Marketing director Tony Gledhill says the company will not be using an ad agency to launch the range but will stay below the line with recently appointed PR agency Smart Communications.
‘We have an international brand name established in Europe and beyond.
Extending our name to accessories is a natural and logical progression.
As we come out of the recession, retailers will be looking for new merchandise to attract people into their stores,’ says Gledhill.
The Church's group has trading operations throughout Europe, the US and Hong Kong.
Wilkinson Sword boosts ad spend
by Lindsay McMurdo
Wilkinson Sword is embarking on a seven-fold increase in advertising spend for the launch of its Protector wet shaving system.
After spending less than £500,000 above the line in 1991, the company plans a £3.5m spend behind the new product in TV and press ads through Ogilvy & Mather.
Promotional support is expected to add another £1.5m to the launch budget.
TV ads break nationally in late June and run for five weeks.
Press support follows in August and September.
Protector features what the company claims is a first in razor technology — a ‘thin guard wire over the edges of the blades which has the same effect as the metal foil of a dry razor’.
It will be positioned to appeal to a wide range of shavers including ‘other systems users, users of twin disposables dry shavers who would prefer to wet-shave and younger shavers’, says marketing manager Steve Griffin.
Wilkinson Sword hopes Protector will enable it to wrest back the technological advantage in the razor market which it is widely thought to have lost to brand leader Gillette in recent years.
Gillette products, particularly its best-selling Sensor range have benefited from constant heavyweight TV support, enabling it to gain an estimated 55 per cent share by value of the £75m market, compared with Wilkinson Sword's 24 per cent.
Wilkinson: £3.5m spend
Unijet unveils Sun Busters late holidays
Unijet is launching its first branded product targeting latebooking holidaymakers, under the Sun Busters banner.
The operator, which claims sixth place in the packaged holiday market, says the move is part of its intention to identify and cater for specific market segments.
Sun Busters is a separate brochure featuring late availability across a raft of Unijet products at reduced prices.
Included in the first issue are last-minute holidays from its Villas and Apartments brochure, inclusive and fly-drive product from its American programme, and seat-only offerings.
Unlike market leader Thomson Holidays — which has a branded Price Breakers late-booking brochure — Unijet will detail customers' accommodation arrangements prior to departure.
Thomson, and other companies, delay naming accommodation until late bookers actually arrive on resort.
Last week Thomson announced it was adding an additional 80,000 discounted holidays to its Price Breakers programme.
Other operators Owners Abroad and Airtours confirm they anticipate a more buoyant market post-election.
Unijet aims to increase greatly capacity across all its programmes in 1992.
Sales from programmes featured in Sun Busters will contribute to forecast levels of 40,000 holidays sold from its Villas and Apartments brochure in 1992, compared with 10,000 sold in 1991.
European seat-only sales are expected to rise to 270,000 compared with 220,000 in 1991; US flights to rise to 75,000 from 54,000 last year, and US holidays to reach 50,000 from 28,000.
Sun Busters: Late bookings
Clarks launches Cica sports shoe range
Clarks International has unveiled a new range of sports shoes called Cica.
The company says the trainer market's core consumers are turned off by the Clarks name.
‘Teenagers find the name a turn-off because it is what your mum buys you.
If you have worn something since you were a baby it is natural that you want to rebel a bit,’ according to the firm's sports products manager Tony Linford.
Clarks launched an own-label brand, Clarks Sport, in the late Seventies which was before its time and was withdrawn according to Linford.
Sports shoes account for an increasing share of the total footwear market — about 23 per cent by value — but represent only ten per cent of Clarks' 17 million unit business.
Cica is designed to broaden its business base by creating a franchise within the 13–30 year old bracket.
Cica will not be competing directly with top-of-the-range brands such as Reebok and Nike as it will not ‘be making specific performance claims’ and will be ‘better value for money’, says Linford.
It will be chasing the UK's biggest volume supplier Hi-Tec, which sells about 5 million pairs.
The launch is being supported by a £1.7m TV campaign through BMP DDB Needham.
.
Benetton is also planning to enter the trainers market although no launch date has been set yet.
Cica: Chasing Hi-Tec
Van den Berghs chief wins top award
Van den Berghs marketing director Bill Young carried off the UK Marketer of the Year award at a packed ceremony in London late last week.
Marketers from all branches of the industry gathered to hear the 1992 Awards for Marketing, sponsored by Marketing Week , the Marketing Society and the ITV companies.
Young's award acknowledges his handling of the I Can't Believe It's Not Butter controversy.
He capitalised on the TV ban with a press blitz through McCann-Erickson which put ICBINB into the top five dairy spreads.
Elsewhere in the awards, Sir Alistair Grant and Sir Michael Angus entered the UK and International Marketing Halls of Fame respectively.
Brand of the year awards went to Guinness and the fmcg sector, BMW in durables and Virgin Atlantic in services.
Häagen-Dazs was named new product of the year, with particular mention for its mould-breaking press ads through Bartle Bogle Hegarty.
The advertising awards saw Red Rock's ads by GGT beat Heinz, The Economist and John Smith's in the campaign of the year for fmcg.
The Electricity Association's Creature Comforts campaign, in durables, and Tesco's continuing Dudley Moore saga, in services, were also winners.
Young: Marketer of the Year
Seagram pulls in top UD marketer
By Ruth Morelli
Seagram has poached one of its arch-rival's top marketers, James Espey, to head its newly-formed global whiskies division.
Espey had been at United Distillers since 1986, most recently as chairman of its North American operation, where he oversaw its acquisition of Glenmore Distilleries (MW July 19, 1991) and the division's subsequent reorganisation.
The Chivas and Glenlivet Division will be responsible for the strategic direction, business development and global marketing of Seagram's Scotch whiskies and the international development of Canadian and American whiskies outside the US.
It has been formed after a year-long management and brand analysis of Seagram's global brands.
Espey, the division's president, is best known in the drinks industry for his 17-year sojourn at International Distillers & Vintners, where he was responsible for the launch of Piat d'Or, now the UK's biggest branded wine, and Malibu, one of the UK's largest speciality spirits.
He was also involved in the development of Bailey's Irish Cream, which created an entirely new category of drinks, cream liqueurs.
Espey: Division president
Report highlights move to European strategies
The increasing determination among marketers to develop pan-European strategies is underlined in a report to be unveiled this week by agency network Euro RSCG.
Responses from 685 European marketers across all sectors showed 81 per cent were already working on a pan-European business plan.
Only 13 per cent thought marketing activity would be left to each individual country.
Euro RSCG has developed a ‘brand strength index’ derived from the numbers of countries in which a product is available, multiplied by its market position.
According to international development director Edward Sharp, the brands which emerged most strongly were those which adopted a pan-European approach to their above-the-line marketing, but a more flexible, country-by-country approach to direct marketing and promotions.
Sharp was unable to name specifically the brands which had most successfully taken this approach, but confirmed the list was dominated by the large US multinationals such as Ford and Coca-Cola.
Marketers in the Anglo-Saxon cultures have moved closer to a pan-European approach than their Latin counterparts, the survey adds.
Thomas Cook is to launch a £1m campaign to encourage late bookers to travel over the Easter break.
InterCity has launched a spring offer for Senior Railcard holders.
Between April 27 and May 19, they can travel for half fare, instead of the usual one-third discount.
Simplesse has appointed Mike Kirby UK manager with responsibility for the sales and marketing of its fat substitute.
Avis has announced a £750,000 launch campaign for its low-cost ‘Avis Holiday Cars’ programme.
Portfolio Foods has bought the Keillers, Barker & Dobson, Bensons and Milady sugar confectionery brands from Alma, which went into liquidation last month.
The company's other brands, Victory V and Hacks, were bought by Cadbury last week.
The UK car rental market declined by seven per cent in 1990 and is now worth £510m, according to Euromonitor.
Canadian Gold , a bottled lager from Canadian National Breweries, is to launch in the UK this month.
Cornhill Insurance is introducing a corporate identity designed by Walker Izard.
The Office of Fair Trading director general Sir Gordon Borrie has warned brewers he will use powers available through the Competition Act and Fair Trading Act if he believes long-term supply agreements are being used to frustrate the loosening of the tie.
NABS aims to raise £250,000 via its new NABS Club to cover its deficit from last year.
Members pay £25 to join and get discounts in return from the Metropolitan Club, Dollond & Aitchison, and various national magazines.
Helene Curtis is to spend £5m advertising Finesse and Salon Selectives hair products.
Ads have been created in-house with media through Manning Gottlieb Media.
Med Choice has introduced Supersavers holidays, designed to capitalise on the anticipated surge in demand for low-cost breaks following the election result.
Coke: One multinational dominating Euro RSCG's list
AGENCIES
Y&R tipped to win Euro Pirelli
By Michele Martin
Young & Rubicam is hotly tipped to have won the £11m pan-European Pirelli account, beating Saatchi & Saatchi and Woollams Moira Gaskin O'Malley to the business.
An official announcement was expected at the end of the week, following a final meeting at Pirelli's Milan headquarters, but it has been delayed by contractual difficulties with some of the company's existing Italian agencies.
Pirelli UK's marketing manager Peter Tyson confirms the company is in the middle of negotiations to place creative and media buying centrally for the first time.
The company has traditionally used a roster of European agencies for advertising.
WMGO holds the account in the UK, while BBDO holds it in Italy.
‘We intend appointing one agency, but that now means manoeuvring around existing contracts,’ says Tyson.
‘We may still have to make penalty payments or let some of the existing agencies run out their contracts and buy airtime.’
Its £11m spend is double last year's European budget, and is part of a redistribution of funds following Pirelli's decision to stop sponsoring Formula One racing.
Pirelli confirms a pan-European TV campaign is planned for the first time, positioning the company's tyre products as chic and high-performance.
The decision to centralise Pirelli's European account into one agency follows the setting up last year of a marketing department to handle European strategy.
Pirelli: Pan-European
Burberrys £1.5m work up for grabs
Luxury clothing retailer Burberrys has invited a number of agencies to pitch for its estimated £1.5m international business.
Advertising manager Peter Matthews confirmed the review, which he says has been under way for some time.
It is understood eight agencies are involved, ‘including some big names who are attracted by the prestige brand name despite the relatively small budget’, according to the source.
The £500,000 UK account has been held by  FCA!for some years.
Senior management at the agency could not be contacted to confirm whether it will repitch.
Advertising for the brand concentrates almost solely on the quality magazine press.
Burberrys' UK stores have been affected by declining numbers of tourists during the recession though parent company Great Universal Stores, which also owns upmarket woollen goods chain Scotch House, returned increased profits overall in 1991.
Burberrys' products, many featuring its distinctive checked design, are especially popular with US and Japanese visitors.
Burberrys: Prestige
Westcountry shortlists agencies for launch
Westcountry Television is shortlisting agencies for a national and regional campaign to launch the new ITV franchisee to the public and business communities before its January screen debut.
According to Westcountry TV commercial director Caroline McDevitt, Lower Bell Communications has already been signed up to work on public relations strategy, although a permanent presentation, promotion and planning director has not yet been appointed.
‘We will use an advertising agency in the region to look at our relationship with viewers and target businesses,’ says McDevitt.
‘We are also putting forward a national launch and will be shortlisting from a creative and consultative point of view to promote Westcountry to advertisers.’
Preliminary talks have already been held with John Ayling & Associates, CIA/Billett, Hoare Wilkins and Young & Rubicam.
However, more agencies and media independents may also be on the list.
‘We are looking for someone on a consultancy basis to advise on above and below-the-line campaigns, but there may be several arms to that,’ McDevitt adds.
‘It is all part of the countdown process until we get on air in January.’
Budgets have not yet been set.
Westcountry snatched the ITV franchise for the southwest from TSW last year.
Although it bid less than TSW, the latter's business plan was deemed unviable by the Independent Television Commission with a £16.1m bid.
RSCG wins Parcelforce International
RSCG Direct has won Parcelforce International's £1.5m advertising account, with a brief to extend its direct marketing activity and generate sales leads.
The decision to move the account out of Menten Dupin Branford White without a pitch has been described as ‘amicable’.
It follows J Walter Thompson's recent corporate image-building TV campaign for Parcelforce in the UK.
The programme prompted Parcelforce International, part of the Post Office, to rethink its own brand-building work.
‘The main Parcelforce ads have had a halo effect on international services and have taken the pressure off corporate image building for us,’ says Parcelforce International's services manager Andy Young.
‘The new approach will be about direct generation of business.’
RSCG Direct will continue the company's telemarketing and direct mail work.
It has also been asked to explore radio and insert work, and expand off-the-page activity.
The increased advertising activity coincides with Parcelforce International restructuring its ground sales force.
Parcelforce: New approach
Group X to take Specialeyes upmarket
Optical chainstore Specialeyes has brought in a new agency to help it shrug off its ‘cheap’ image and to break into the youth and pensioners markets.
The company, launched in 1985 with its free frames promotion, has handed its £500,000 account to Group X, after a four-way pitch with Lewis Broadbent Advertising, the Tenet Group and former incumbent Archminster.
Archminster had held the account for 18 months
Specialeyes marketing director Steve Jacobs says the company has always been perceived as being at the cheap end of the market and it is now trying to raise its image with its professional market and consumers.
The ad campaign, which rolls out next month, will avoid television but will use radio and press advertising, as well as putting heavy emphasis on leaflet drops and point-of-sale promotions.
Group X managing director Chris Davies says he is reluctant to reveal further details about the campaign because of the ‘hypercompetitive nature of the market’.
Specialeyes is the fourth account win for Group X this year.
It has already picked up Meccano, Trans Avia airlines and Swan Vestas.
Specialeyes: Upmarket
£3.5m Carlton TV moves into LH-S
By Sarah Macdonald
Lowe Howard-Spink will launch Carlton Television will launch Carlton Television to the UK public after beating six other agencies to the £3.5m account.
The London weekday broadcaster, which tales over from Thames TV on January 1 next year, asked BSB Dorland, Abbott Mead Vickers.
BBDO, Leo Burnett, Chiat Day and LH-S to present their credentials only for the above and below-the-line campaign.
However, in the past few weeks, Carlton is also believed to have invited Bainsfair Sharkey Trott and Ogilvy & Mather to pitch for the account.
Carlton will use a wide-ranging media mix of radio, posters, press and television (possibly on London Weekend Television) to inform the public, advertising and business communities of its programme and corporate format prior to launch.
LH-S' account team will be directed by chairman Geoff Howard-Spink, with creative work overseen by group chief executive Frank Lowe.
Howard-Spink says the campaign strategy has yet to be decided.
‘We have to ensure both the trade and consumer realise Carlton is the new London weekday station.
Equally, we don't want to suggest there is a huge revolutionary change going on in London television.
‘While there will be change, such as the combined LWT and Carlton news service, we want to create the right awareness at the beginning for a smooth transition from Thames to Carlton,’ he adds.
LH-S' appointment was widely tipped.
Carlton's sales director Martin Bowley employed the agency when he was at Television South West, and his deputy, marketing and commercial controller for Carlton, Simon Cade, is a former LH-S employee.
CARLTON TELEVISION Carlton: Prestigious account
KWS secures Haywards Pickles image update
Hillsdown subsidiary Haywards Pickles has chosen Kelly Weedon Shute to update its brand image following a three-way pitch.
Bainsfair Sharkey Trott and Butterfield Day Devito Hockney also presented to group marketing manager Mike Hind, but KWS's creative solution swung the decision, he says.
A £500,000 burst of TV advertising is planned for the peak pre-Christmas selling season on TV-am nationally, plus the London and Yorkshire regions.
Haywards is considering a second burst the following summer.
While reluctant to divulge exactly the new creative strategy, Hind confirms the forthcoming campaign will drop the old line, ‘Pickles that bite back’ devised by Still Price for the brand when it was owned by Brooke Bond.
Hillsdown bought the company in 1989.
The ads will, however, still adopt a humorous approach, he says, suggesting new meals for which the pickles can provide an accompaniment.
‘Pickles have been out of step with consumers’ changing eating patterns in recent years,’says Hind.
‘We aim to bring them up to date.’
Branded manufacturers have lost share to own-label in a market which is estimated to worth £100m, including sweet pickles, relish and chutney.
D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles is hotly tipped to pick up the creative account for St Ivel's Shape and Gold brands, currently handled by J Walter Thompson.
Marketing director Jim Bradford says JWT is still included in the review, but confirms the other agencies involved have now been dropped.
Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide 's new chairman and chief executive is Charlotte Beers, who previously held the same position at US agency Tatham/RSCG.
O&M's current chairman and ceo Graham Phillips is to stay on as vice chairman.
It is understood Beers was also courted by Saatchi & Saatchi worldwide.
Abbott Mead Vickers.
BBDO has set up its own NPD unit called Brand Features, headed by senior planner Jem Keen, to work with existing clients such as Pillsbury.
Young & Rubicam is still the world's largest advertising agency, according to Advertising Age, with a worldwide gross income of $980.8m in 1991.
Saatchi & Saatchi is in second place, with income of $829.2m, and McCann-Erickson is third with $811.6m.
Rival US magazine Ad Week put McCann-Erickson in top place in its survey, which is based on billings: Ad Age's billings table puts Y&R in top position, with McCann in fourth place.
Strategy Europe , the environmental public affairs group, is looking for an ad agency or marketing consultancy to help it promote an audio cassette entitled ‘Global Warming — the debate’.
Alan Lawson is joining Saatchi & Saatchi's through-the-line agency Equator as chief executive.
He was previously at TBWA subsidiary AM-C International.
Publicis ’ first work for Super Nintendo breaks this week and runs until early June with a media spend of £1.5m.
FDG , the Hampshire agency, has been appointed by Britax Restmor, maker of baby transport and nursery furniture.
Honda is supporting the ads for its new Civic model with a £750,000 direct marketing campaign through Jane Porter Direct.
Oxfam is to stay with incumbent agency Pearson Paul Haworth Nolan following a fourway pitch.
Public enemy Number one.
Haywards: TV burst
MEDIA
ITC threat to C5 over vcr retuning
By Sarah Macdonald
No one will win the Channel 5 licence if the video retuning problem cannot be solved, the Independent Television Commission warned this week.
The ITC finally issued the long-delayed invitation to apply for C5 and set the closing date for July 7.
The franchise should be awarded in early November.
But instead of assuring potential bidders that C5 is a certainty, the Commission has buckled under intense pressure from an industry highly sceptical of the channel's chances of success.
The high costs placed on the licensee to retune millions of domestic VCRs and satellite receivers, plus a 30 per cent original programming starting base, is expected to deter a number of bidders.
And those who do bid for the franchise must solve these problems to have a chance of winning.
At last week's Fleming Memorial Lecture, ITC chairman George Russell warned the industry of mounting caveats to the C5 application.
‘We've made it quite clear that no award will be made unless we're absolutely satisfied that the problem of retuning has been probably addressed.
If applicants don't pass it, there'll be no license award.
We are quite ready to say no to people who haven't solved this problem,’ he said.
The ITC can be assured of at least one application from Five TV, in which Thames TV is believed to be a partner.
The consortium's spokesman Chris Rowley claims his group is the only one to have cracked the retuning problem.
Other potential bidders include TV-am (as revealed in MW last week), Conrad Black and Phil Redmond's Mersey TV.
CLT has still to make up its mind.
The ITC will award the licence to the highest bidder who passes the quality threshold.
Russell: ‘Ready to say no’
Tory poster spend ‘highly exaggerated’
Reports of the Conservative Party's spending on poster advertising in the run-up to the election were greatly exaggerated, according to a campaign survey by outdoor specialist Concord Posterlink.
The survey concludes the Tories spent an estimated £1.5m on posters in the four weeks before the election, rather than the unattributed figures of between £5m and £20m quoted in national newspapers.
Labour's spend was around £750,000 for the same period, while the Liberal Democrats spent about £175,000.
These amounts measure the exposure value of each party's sites, regardless of how they were booked.
The sites, donated by Imperial Tobacco to the Tory campaign, and those booked by Harrison Salinson using other clients' brand names as a front, were all included.
One media independent says: ‘The poster advertising seemed more than it was because awareness was raised by the posters’ exposure in the press and on TV, which probably doubled the effective budget.’
Poster expenditure may also have been overestimated because the parties used up to eight different creative treatments over the period instead of just one, which is the standard for a monthlong campaign.
The combined spend by political parties on posters of £2.7m accounts for 17 per cent of all monies spent on roadside advertising for the four weeks before the election.
Lib Dems: Lowest poster spend at £175,000
Jazz, Kiss and LBC forge airtime deal
Jazz FM, Kiss FM and LBC are taking on the might of London station Capital Radio by selling their airtime in one package.
Jazz FM joined Kiss and LBC at sales house Independent Radio Sales this week after quitting its long-term sales partner, The Radio Sales Company, on Friday.
According to Jazz head of sales and marketing Katy Turner, the appointment gives the three stations the first opportunity to sell against Capital, the UK's largest radio station.
‘Together we can provide a competitive alternative for the first time.
It makes sense to be sold in a package,’ says Turner.
Jazz, which has been dogged by crippling financial troubles, takeover battles and continual  re-formatting , appears to be finally making headway after launching as one of London's first incremental stations into the recession.
A new business development unit has been set up at the station, which will work closely with IRS in foraging for potential leads.
‘We want to drive forward the traditional relationship between the sales houses and the stations.
This business unit will ensure we use the whole of radio strength to target specific accounts also being targeted by IRS,’ adds Turner.
The Radio Sales Company was unavailable to comment.
Jazz: Taking on Capital
S Express enjoys rise in circulation
The Sunday Express has begun to reap the rewards of a series of promotions with its largest circulation increase since it was relaunched under the editorship of Eve Pollard in May last year.
According to latest Audit Bureau of Circulations figures, average October to March sales of the Sunday Express have stepped up to 1,666,993 this year from 1,617,129 in the equivalent period last year, a rise of more than three per cent.
However, its midmarket rival, The Mail on Sunday, has consolidated its own position during the past six months with sales of 2,010,807 against 1,931,025.
The Observer's circulation has declined to 550,310 from 576,555 as rumours of its impending sale continue to multiply.
Would-be bidders are likely to include Pearson, The Guardian and Newspaper Publishing, The Independent's holding company.
In spite of monthly gains, The Independent on Sunday's October to March average sales have surprisingly fallen beneath the previous year, by more than 4,500 to 377,826.
Of the dailies, Today's circulation has registered the worst seasonal drop, falling to 466,631 from 513,673.
Meanwhile, The Guardian has widened the gap between itself and its major rivals, The Independent and The Times, with sales of 417,314.
This is a fall on last year's figure of 436,973, but a smaller drop than The Independent's (down to 371,411 from 410,713) or The Times' (down to 390,401 from 416,882).
BBC, Thames link up for satellite TV
By Sarah Macdonald
BBC Enterprises has pulled out of its programming partnership with The Comedy Channel, placing the future of the BSkyB infant service in doubt.
Sunday's announcement at MIP-TV in Cannes that BBCE is instead launching a joint subscription satellite television channel with Thames TV, means BSkyB will no longer be supplied with BBC archive programmes.
BBC director of UK Television Keith Owen says: ‘We have had a hold on all sales to cable and satellite, pending out decision with Thames.
We are not going to renegotiate with BSkyB and we will not be providing programming on a sales basis to them.’
BSkyB was unavailable to comment on the ramifications of the BBC withdrawal or on the launch of what is effectively a competitive channel to its own.
However, at a press conference in March to announce its operating profit, the satellite broadcaster played down programme negotiations with the BBC, claiming all was in-hand.
Despite losing the popular BBC comedy repeats, BSkyB may actually welcome the new Thames deal.
Both the ITV broadcaster and the BBC are renowned for their programme archives which could attract new viewers to satellite and cable if promoted properly.
Thames will have a 15 per cent stake in the unnamed channel, with BBCE limiting itself to 20 per cent.
Outside investors are apparently clamouring to have a share of the service, which is expected to launch later this year.
For the BBC the deal means additional revenue from subscription and advertising, and represents a dramatic reevaluation of strategy.
BBC programmes will no longer be sold on an ad hoc basis.
Instead, the corporation is hunting for stakes in both cable and satellite services.
For Thames, a joint operation with the BBC is seen as a commercial coup and guarantees its a future, at least in the short-term.
The ITV licensee lost its franchise to Carlton TV last year, and will hand over the reins to the London weekday franchise on December 31.
While it is also bidding for the Channel 5 licence, the Astra service is more controllable and is free from the perceived whims of the Independent Television Commission and the high stakes of the bidding process.
Thames TV chief executive Richard Dunn said on Sunday: ‘The new channel will get a fast and economic start by using one of Thames’ Astra transponders and by the use of some of Thames' broadcasting assets.’
Those assets include Minder, Rumpole of the Bailey and The Bill, although Carlton is still negotiating with Thames for any future productions of The Bill for the ITV network.
But the biggest and most dangerous Thames asset is its own ITV airtime before and after the satellite service launches.
It is believed that Thames will use this airtime to flag the new channel, and C5 if it wins.
The Institute of Practitioners in Advertising has already called on the ITC to monitor spots given to self-promotion on Thames (MW last week), but the rest of the ITV broadcasters are likely to protest loudest if this becomes a reality.
In contrast to ITV broadcasters, agencies are welcoming the prospect of a new advertising vehicle, with the opportunity to buy airtime around BBC programmes.
Manning Gottlieb Media partner Nick Manning welcomes a channel of wall-to-wall archive, while 20–20 Media managing director Paul Woolmington claims it makes sense.
And it is a very British coup.
The BBC will be able to use a cultural argument when confronted with a government debate in the build-up to its charter renewal in 1996.
It can prove that it has secured additional revenue sources, while protecting our screens from unwelcome foreign imports.
The Central Office of Information has reduced the shortlist for the £35m centralised television buying account to The Media Centre, Young & Rubicam and Zenith.
TMD Carat and BMP DDB Needham have been knocked off the list.
A decision is expected in the next fortnight.
Classic FM , the first national commercial radio station, is to install a network of 22 transmitters reaching 86 per cent of the population.
Cable news Network International , the 24-hour news service, last week became available on the Astra satellite as well as Intelsat, thereby expanding the service throughout Europe.
The Independent Television Commission will decide in May whether to force competitive TV station advertising on the ITV companies.
Time magazine has been restyled in three distinct editorial sections — The Week, Reviews and People — starting with the April 20 edition.
BBC insiders are understood to be relieved by the appointment of David Mellor to head the new heritage ministry, which will oversee the Corporation's charter renewal in 1996.
The New York Daily News , formerly controlled by Robert Maxwell, is considering bids from Daily Telegraph owner Conrad Black, property developer Mortimer Zuckerman and Peter Kalikow, who owns the New York Post.
Capital FM 's spring roadshow is to be sponsored by Sega, the European games console manufacturer.
Ulster Television showed a one per cent increase in pretax profits to £1.95m for 1991 from £1.92m in 1990.
Esquire is carrying a compact disc mounted on the front cover of its May issue, featuring jazz music of the Forties and Fifties.
MTV Europe has increased its audience rating to a claimed 35 million following an agreement with Rete Unica in Italy which will bring the station into about 1.5 million more homes.
London Transport has launched a free distribution colour tabloid for the capital, London Direct, aiming to appeal to the broad base of consumers.
Thames: Guaranteed future
NEWS ANALYSIS
Credit cards enjoyed their boom in the Eighties, but are now suffering from the Nineties backlash as consumers become more cautious in their spending and turn to charge cards as a way of avoiding interest rates.
By Helen Jones 
Debt where is thy sting?
This is the question an increasing number of consumers are asking themselves in the financially straitened Nineties.
The greatest sting, it seems, lies with credit cards which were issued almost indiscriminately in the booming Eighties, but now many people find they can no longer afford the interest charges levied.
According to recent reports, there is £8bn outstanding on credit cards in the UK, which works out at an average of between £350 and £400 on each card in issue with an interest rate of about 26 per cent a year.
More and more people are choosing to pay off the full amount on their credit cards at the end of each month — using them like charge cards to avoid interest charges.
About 62 per cent did just that last year compared with 42 per cent the previous year.
Charge card companies such as American Express and Diners Club International insist on full repayment at the end of the month, and do not carry interest charges or pre-set spending levels but charge an annual fee of between £25 and £85.
They are confident they will benefit from increasing consumer caution.
American Express managing director John Crewe says: ‘There is a whole swing away from debt and the creation of debt as people become more cautious, which means the charge card will come into its own.’
Crewe: ‘The charge card will come into its own’
Consumers are turning away from credit cards.
According to market researcher Datamonitor, 3 million people cut up their credit cards in 1991 when standing charges were introduced.
Lloyds Bank, which was the first to impose a levy, lost the most customers when it charged £12 for the privilege of owning its card.
Midland and National Westminster followed suit with a £12 charge on their cards and Barclays demanded £8 from its customers.
Instead customers are turning to debit cards.
Switch and Visa Delta had 23 million debit cards between them in circulation by the end of last year — an increase of 20 per cent on the previous year.
And holders are also using them more frequently — the number of transactions and the amount spent increased by 90 per cent in 1991.
The latest squabble between supermarkets and banks over the latter's unilateral decision to hoist transaction charges may of course make debit cards less attractive to consumers if the charges end up being passed on.
Although market researcher Market Assessment suggests charge card usage could increase by 43 per cent by 1995, charge card companies, particularly American Express, have suffered from poor publicity in recent months as retailers spurn their cards and their associated high margins.
American Express sets its margin at about 3.5 per cent, and the banks have forced their rates to retailers down to 1.8 per cent .
Crewe of American Express says ‘the banks can't afford to do business at that level’, but adds that American Express is talking to retailers and other outlets about its charges, especially those made to small restaurants and hotels.
Diners Club has slightly different problems.
Many industry observers say it is a declining brand.
It is now third in the charge card market behind American Express and Mastercard Gold.
It has about 300,000 cards in circulation in the UK — a million less than American Express.
The number has been static with minor fluctuations, since 1984, says Market Assessment.
0
Diners Club: A declining brand, according to observers
Diners Club claims its customers' average transactions are higher than those of other charge cards, but this is difficult to substantiate as Diners Club does not make figures available.
It is primarily a travel and entertainment card, so its retail outlets base is much narrower than that of its competitors.
In the past it has marketed itself primarily at existing customers by concentrating on improving services.
Last year it introduced a joint venture with British Airways — the BA Corporate Card, which offered business travellers special deals on BA flights.
But it is possible it may change its strategy.
The company is reviewing its advertising account, held by Euro  RSCG's below-the-line subsidiary KLP, and it is thought new work may attempt to recruit new cardholders.
SWITCH: Increasingly popular
Both American Express and Diners Club have lost ground to Mastercard Gold, which increased its share of the market by about 38 per cent in 1990 (although from a small base) and now has 19 per cent of the cards in issue by volume, compared with American Express' 57 per cent and Diners Club's 13 per cent, says Market Assessment.
American Express is fighting back, it says, with strategic emphasis on its sales force, which will tell existing and potential service providers such as retailers, restaurants and hotels, how they can benefit from their association with the Amex card.
However, it will not be producing an aggressive consumer recruitment campaign.
Crewe says: ‘We are not going for numbers — we have to stay contained to offer the level of service that we do and meet the needs of our existing customer base.’
He admits that in the Eighties the card took on some people who were not quite of the calibre of its existing client portfolio.
‘There was too much emphasis on how fast we could grow,’ he says, but adds that the company is still turning down about 70 per cent of those who apply for an Amex card.
Although the charge card industry says it will benefit from the move away from credit cards, it is unlikely to take on the mass of consumers who acquired a credit card in the Eighties.
Charge cards are largely held by higher-income individuals who have to an extent been cushioned form the onset of the recession.
Charge cards companies will not be looking to take on those customers with lower incomes who do not want to pay, or find it difficulty in paying, high credit-card interest rates.
Exposing the target market to a direct hit
The 1991 Census, with its billion items of information, will benefit target marketing.
By Richard Webber 
If fast-food take-aways want to find their best prospects they can do a lot worse than identify areas which have a high proportion of ‘households sharing access to a bath’.
This category from the 1981 census has proved an excellent indicator, because it largely identifies young, single people living in multi-occupied houses who either cannot or do not cook, or who do not have regular access to a kitchen.
North West Gas used the census variable ‘dwellings with no inside wc’ to find areas at serious risk from blocked flues.
Houses with inside toilets, it seems, are usually in areas of pre-1914 terraced housing, in which the problem is most common.
Calor Gas and the electricity companies have found areas with a high percentage of people ‘employed in agriculture’ are almost certain not to be served by mains gas.
By contrast, ‘born in Asia’ is an excellent match for areas where people do not use electricity for cooking.
Political targeting includes the census variable ‘percentage travelling to work on foot’.
This accurately indicates areas high in Liberal Democrat voters.
In these areas, people live near their work, work in small units of employment and, hence, belong to real local communities in which so-called community politics is viable.
The correlation between such unlikely indicators and target markets was not discovered by accident, and marketers who want to get the most out of the results of the 1991 census, which will shortly become available, should be thinking about how they will do it now.
The potential benefits are massive.
From a survey of some 23 million households, a staggering 1 billion items of statistical information will become available to improve marketing and local market planning.
There are three key applications of the census.
Retailers and manufacturers need to know the size and quality of individual local markets.
such informational helps the likes of Sainsbury, Tesco and Procter & Gamble to answer questions such as‘Should I be represented in that local market, given its size and quality?’,
‘Does my turnover fall short of the potential in that market, given its size and quality?’ and ‘Which of my brands/retail concepts best match the preferences of the local community?’
The new census statistics will benefit organisations such as Reader's Digest or Kays, that sell direct to the customer, in that they will be able to improve the selection of both prospects and existing customers for targeted mailshots.
Regional media owners such as Reed and Northcliffe will also benefit.
For them, census statistics on local circulation areas play an increasingly important role in supporting their advertisement selling.
Of all the items available at small-area level, basic population counts will be the most simple, but perhaps still the most useful information.
Many inner-city areas have lost as much as ten per cent of their population since the 1981 census.
No wonder brewers find themselves with unprofitable outlets in such areas, whatever pub concept they apply to them.
By contrast, increased population counts will enable multiple retailers to identify towns which, for the first time, are large enough to sustain a branch.
Relating the number of customers of, say, a bank or building society branch to the size of the population in a media or postal area will give a much more accurate measure of the effectiveness of local promotion if the new census figures are used, rather than the latest population estimates.
Users of the 1991 census should nevertheless carefully consider whether crude population totals are the most suitable base for measuring penetration.
For example, people aged 18-plus may be a more appropriate denominator for a building society, and private households may be better for a double-glazing contractor.
When selecting other census counts to profile a local market, it is important to choose the most useful of the 10,000 or so available counts.
Advice from the specialist agencies should be taken, because every census count will have only a partial alignment with the target audience being sought.
Unless the apparent bias of each indicator is recognised, areas that are far from ideal may be targeted.
For example, car ownership is frequently used as an indicator of affluence.
But in inner-city areas, car ownership is lower than would be expected on the basis of affluence, given both the very small average household size and the better availability of public transport.
To get the most out of the census marketers should pursue at least one of three strategies.
The first is to consult the census agencies, which can give experienced advice.
The second it to ask the suppliers to provide information on the correlation between different census variables and the various geodemographic systems.
The third is for companies to acquire software for profiling, cross-analysing and clustering the census variables against their own customer records.
Such software should reveal even the less obvious correlations that the take-aways and energy suppliers used.
Richard Webber is managing director of CCN Marketing, a census agency and demographic analysis company.
Mailshots: Good prospects
BUSINESS
The trade winds of change
With Michael Heseltine as Trade Secretary, John Major may achieve for industry what Margaret Thatcher never tried to — the long-term view.
By George Pitcher 
The funniest election story to my mind — with the possible exception of Chris Patten losing his seat — is that Annabel Heseltine disfranchised herself by throwing away her Westminster constituency registration forms.
It is not so much the fact that she was consequently unable to vote for her father's party, or, any other party for that matter, that I find so diverting as the reason that The Daily Telegraph gives for her binning her poll application material.
She apparently thought it was ‘election bumf’.
Since registration forms are usually despatched in the autumn, and in any event well before this last election was announced, Ms Heseltine obviously knew something that the rest of us didn't.
The second funniest election story, also courtesy of the Telegraph's excellent City Diary, is that Grand Metropolitan chairman Sir Allen Sheppard has cancelled his headquarters' subscriptions to the Financial Times because it came out for Labour.
The reason I cite these tales is that they do have a bearing on one another, albeit a tenuous.
Michael Heseltine can be expected to exercise rather greater influence over British industry than he does politically over his progeny and the apoplectic Sheppard may care to reflect on the differences between Heseltine and Gordon Brown as Trade Secretaries.
Imagine a Trade Secretary who promises a degree of interventionism, with even a dash of implicit ‘corporatism’, stresses the importance of industry being able to take a longerterm view, with a programme of investment in skills and training, and warns of the dangers of takeover mania.
Now, answer this.
Is it Brown or Heseltine who has written the following on competition policy (clue: its wasn't Brown): ‘There is a need for a new sophistication in Britain's approach to the ownership of her industrial assets if they are not to be acquired in growing numbers by our rivals as pieces of the game of restructuring European industry.’
Yes, the author of that piece of anti-merger polemic is Hezza.
This is the man, remember, who walked out of Thatcher's Cabinet because she and the then Trade Secretary, Leon Brittan, wanted helicopter-maker Westland to be acquired by Sikorsky of the US.
Pardon me, they wanted market forces to prevail.
Hezza, as Defence Secretary, wanted European forces to prevail.
It that is not interventionist, then John Major is a charismatic leader.
If the shampoo-swilling celebrants of the City, or for that matter the likes of true-blue Sheppard, think for a moment that this man is likely to preside over unfettered mergers and acquisitions activity in the recalcitrant manner of his 12 predecessors since 1979, they are hopelessly wide of the mark.
Heseltine has an awesome reputation in Whitehall for generating loyalty and enthusiasm among his civil servants — he is, in fact, accorded the sort of political devotion from his mandarins that he should expect from his daughter.
In a break with tradition, he can be expected to be a Trade Secretary who gets things done.
This is not to say that his will be an entirely popular tenure of the DTI.
Heseltine shafted British Rail — and to a degree erstwhile Transport Secretary Malcolm Rifkind — by forcing through Cabinet the controversial east London route for the fast rail link to the Channel Tunnel.
The Department of Transport, not the DTI, will be the sponsoring body for the privatisation of BR, but any hopes that Heseltine may harbour of an industrial troika with new Transport Secretary John MacGregor and Chancellor Norman Lamont, who helped to defeat his leadership bid, may prove overoptimistic.
Heseltine will also preside over the privatisation of British Coal, now he has absorbed the Department of Energy, as well as the dissolution of the British Gas monopoly.
With the Rothschild report on the coal industry still gaining currency with its prospect of just 12–14 deep pits, Heseltine will not necessarily be toasted throughout industry.
His precise attitude to the likes of break-up artist Lord Hanson is not known.
But history would seem to indicate that he has other industrial priorities than handing British assets to the highest bidder.
Hanson is said to be gearing up for a further full-scale foray into our industrial base.
Heseltine may not prove as co-operative as his DTI forebears and, while he may not earn the adulation of predators such as Hanson, he will increasingly enjoy the appreciation of potential targets, such as ICI, Trafalgar House and Vickers.
The key here is that Major may be about to achieve in government what Thatcher never did — indeed, she never tried to achieve it.
That is, the long-term view.
Thatcher's friends, such as former United Biscuits boss Sir Hector Laing, used to implore her to give British industry the kind of support that was rather more consistent than those who bought and sold its shares in the City.
She and her free-market colleagues were largely deaf to such requests.
The recession might not have been so long nor so deep had she listened.
Now, Major has an opportunity to redress the balance and, at first sight of his celebratory reshuffle, he does not appear to be squandering it.
Say what you like about his awful presence, he could gain a not inconsiderable reputation for what he does in the comfort of his den.
Heseltine's appointment will be one test of Major's resolve to re-introduce some stability and vision to industrial policy.
David Mellor's is another.
His brief at the new Ministry for National Heritage — of Fun and Tourism (Fat), as it is known in Whitehall — embraces the BBC.
It was Mellor who salvaged something from the disastrous 1990 Broadcasting Bill, which presaged the widely-ridiculed independent television franchise round.
If Mellor can learn from that experience sufficiently to bring some soundly-constructed strategy to the review of the BBC's charter in 1996, then Major will have succeeded in the introduction of some long-termism, at least some medium-termism, in two areas that badly need it.
If the BBC review degenerated into Tory revenge for what it considers long-standing bias (a particular hobby-horse of Heseltine), then he will have failed.
The implications for all industrial planning function are immense.
Marketing thrives in an atmosphere where the future direction of the corporate entities it serves are chartable.
Uncertainty is the enemy of marketers as much as it is of City markets.
A difference is that stability, in the shape of interventionism, is also not favoured by the City.
But it is what British business badly needs.
Heseltine's attitude to the likes of break-up artist Lord Hanson is not known.
But history would seem to indicate he has other priorities than handing British assets to the highest bidder
NEWS & VIEWS
The new AB TGI for 1991 has revealed that the Sunday Express has an outstanding level of coverage of AB Adults with sizeable amounts of savings and investments.
For coverage of adults with savings between £25,000 — £150,000 the Sunday Express is one of the top three nationals.
For adults with savings above £150,000 it performs even better, as one of the top two nationals.
In every case, the Sunday Express handsomely beats the Mail on Sunday for coverage of this important market.
Top brokers , James Capel and Credit Lyonnais Laing have gone public with the opinion that United Newspaper's shares are a ‘good buy’.
The argue that the quality of management and of the business generally are at least as good as the other media majors and this is not yet reflected, according to them, in the price of the shares.
Media Training leading to the development of media talent in the advertising industry remains a high priority for Express in 1992.
Apart from the now well established Media Mind competition (won this year by Leo Burnett Ltd), Express are running a monthly series of training days for media executives which are proving popular and successful — and will again be sponsoring the IPA Media Award designed to encourage excellence in media planning and buying.
MEDIA ANALYSIS
Lies, damned lies and polls
One explanation for the inaccuracy of recent opinion polls is that ours is a nation of liars.
If that's true, can we ever believe in market research again?
By Torin Douglas 
Will we ever believe an opinion poll again?
And why should we, after the pollsters' total and collective failure to gauge the outcome of the election?
More seriously, will we ever believe any market research again?
Political polls account for only six per cent of the research industry's business, but they are its most visible — and accountable — manifestation.
No wonder the Market Research Society, under new director general Sue Stoessl, has set up a swift investigation.
Will pollsters falling over themselves to admit their errors, there is a danger that the public's and clients' faith in the mysterious art of tapping the nation's mind has been irreparably damaged.
Never was there such a public beating of breasts.
Bob Worcester of MORI admitted frankly it was ‘the worst result for the opinion polls since they were invented’.
Nick Moon of NOP said: ‘It's a very big embarrassment.’
Peter Kellner of The Independent and Newsnight, one of the few journalists acknowledged as an expert by the pollsters, wrote: ‘I owe readers an apology.
The polls were wrong and so was I. Never before has every single poll strayed so far from reality.’
Kellner pointed out that even in 1970, when almost all polls predicted a victory for Harold Wilson, one which was published in the Evening Standard on polling day continued interviewing later than the others and detected the late swing to Edward Heath.
This time even the much vaunted exit polls, which ask not how people intend to vote but how they did vote, got it wrong.
At least, they did in terms of seats.
In terms of votes, the ITN/Harris exit poll showed the Conservatives on 41 per cent compared with Labour's 36 per cent— much closer to the final result than earlier polls.
Unfortunately, it lost its way converting votes into seats and gave the Conservatives only 305 and Labour 294, a similar result to that of the BBC/NOP exit poll.
Harris research director Robert Waller may not care to be reminded of a quote attributed to him in The Independent on Sunday on March 8 at the start of the campaign: ‘Oh yes, it's exciting.
It's nerve wracking.
It's commercial suicide if we're wrong.’
Fortunately for Waller, Thursday night's events seemed more like a suicide pact involving all the polling firms.
Had only one been wrong, it might indeed have suffered commercially.
The question now is whether they will all be penalised as a result of collective inaccuracy, or if a convincing explanation will be found to persuade clients, both political and commercial, that surveys are worth the paper they are printed on.
It had all seemed so different at the start of the campaign.
At a media briefing in the House of Commons, the five main polling organisations — Gallup, Harris, ICM, NOP and MORI — reminded political editors and other interested journalists how accurate they had been in the past.
They were far more concerned about how politicians and journalists might misuse their data, either through ignorance or to further their own ends.
The accuracy of the figures, give or take the one poll in 20 that might prove to be a ‘rogue’, was now, it seemed, beyond dispute.
Even the traditional margin of error — plus or minus three per cent for each party on a sample of 1000 — was apparently an overstatement.
Most polls were well within that margin.
In the 1987 election, Worcester told us, these five polling firms were all within three per cent of the share of vote for each party, and the average error on share was 1.25 per cent.
In 1983 their record was even better, all within three per cent of the share, with an average error of only 0.86 per cent.
And over the 13 elections since 1945, when polling began with Gallup correctly predicting a Labour victory, the average error per party was 1.4 per cent.
Provided one remembered that a poll was simply a snapshot of voting intention at the time it was taken and that national polls should have a sample of at least 1,000, one would not go far wrong.
Not all market researchers were convinced.
While reporting the use of direct marketing techniques at the start of the election, I came across Tony Book of Compass, the database consultancy within the ICD group.
A full member of the MRS, he told me the polls understated the influence of undecided voters and he now believes he was proved right.
So what went wrong?
Far from one poll in 20 proving a rogue, the whole 1992 election would appear to be a rogue in polling terms.
There is no shortage of theories.
Worcester is convinced there was a late swing to the Tories.
Nick Sparrow of ICM believes Labour's tax plans and the ‘Trojan horse’ fear — that a vote for the Liberal Democrats might let in Labour — helped the Tories in the last 24 hours.
Waller believes it is more complex than just a huge shift of opinion on the day.
He says there must be a reinterpretation of the way polls are analysed and like some others, including Worcester and Moon, believes there may also have been sampling errors.
He noted that when Harris sampled at weekends it found many more Tories than on weekdays.
Kellner says one possible explanation is that the 20 per cent of the electorate who refused to respond to the exit polls were disproportionately Tory, or that some voters lied, or both.
‘And if that is the case for exit polls, it may also have been the case for the campaign polls,’ he writes.
This is a worrying prospect for the market research industry, and one it finds hard to accept.
But Sunday Times political columnist Robert Harris thinks it is the most plausible explanation.
‘I do not blame the pollsters.
Rather, I have reached the reluctant conclusion that ours is a nation of liars.
People lied about their intentions up to the moment of voting and went on lying even as they left the polling stations, saying they had voted for Labour when they had voted Tory,’ he says.
I await with interest the Market Research Society's verdict.
If its investigation gives credence to the theory that people do not tell the truth to market researchers, the industry has a problem.
It would then have to find out whether people were any more truthful when answering commercial questionnaires than political ones.
If people lie about voting, do they tell the truth about muesli and mayonnaise?
Torin Douglas is media correspondent for BBC news and current affairs.
Some observers believe polls overestimated the influence of undecided voters.
Others say the 20 per cent of voters who refused to answer exit polls were disproportionately Tory
ELECTION COMMENT
There's nowt as queer as folk
The British voter is as unpredictable as ever.
By Mark Jones
So what are we left with?
First, an overwhelming urge to find a market researcher and kick him or her hard on a soft target area.
Second, a renewed respect for the independence of spirit and utter perversity of the British voter.
In the last act of King Lear, Regan complains of a spot of tummy trouble.
Her sister, Goneril, who has poisoned her, isn't surprised: ‘If not, I'll ne'er trust medicine.’
In peephological terms, the voters have been fed large doses of medicine for the past month.
And instead of rolling over and playing dead as the script demanded, the amateurs got up with a cheerful smile, went to their polling booth and ad-libbed.
The majority of marketing and media people were doubtless relieved, personally and corporately, when the Tories produced their shock ending.
Equally, I suspect a good few were left with an uneasy feeling in the pit of their stomachs.
After all, the medicine which led the pollsters and the Opposition down also happens to be the medicine on which they rely so heavily themselves.
In my mind's eye, I see grey-faced men and women going to work on Friday morning.
A report lands on their desks.
Toffee eating in Macclesfield, maybe, or a qualitative group on radio advertising in Chichester.
They look at the newspaper front pages then back to the report.
A troubled expression crosses their faces.
‘Yes, but what if they're not telling the truth?’
The Labour Party showed more faith than anyone in the medicine of the pollsters and strategists, believing they has found in it the panacea for their 13-year malaise.
In the end, in the final few days, the Labour campaign atrophied.
Terrified of making the slightest slip — Kinnock and the rest played safe — or what they thought was safe.
In practice, this meant NHS, NHS, NHS, plus a few triumphalist and premature nothings about the bright future ahead.
In private, some of Labour's medicine men and some MPs were furious the leadership hadn't gone tooth and claw for the Conservatives; that in their determination to look and play the part of responsible government, they neglected to hammer the real Government responsible for real problems.
The other problem was Neil Kinnock.
Again, a ruthless party would have ditched the leader once the job he was best suited for, left-smashing, was completed.
But (unlike the Tories) it isn't that kind of outfit.
Kinnock was presented in the best light possible.
However, the old adage that leaders don't lose elections should be seriously questioned.
The bad news for Labour is that the section of the party which isn't blaming Kinnock is blaming John Smith instead — both for an unnecessarily harsh tax programme and an unnecessarily timid attack on the Government's economic record.
Among the Tories there are one or two rampant hindsighters who claim they knew what they were doing all along, and that the tax strategy was bound to pay off.
It took the disarmingly incautious David Mellor to acknowledge that everyone, Central Office included, was scared witless on Thursday morning.
The campaign was fought for long periods with all the strategic sense of an exhausted boxer launching haymakers from the ropes.
The post mortem will be not less perplexing for the Liberal Democrats.
At times, Paddy Ashdown seemed closer to that elusive mood than either of the ‘old parties’.
But as before, their influence over the voters' mood ended well before the polling booth.
In the end, the quacks and medicine men were left with that strange, disembodied feeling you get when you've been talking for several minutes to someone who isn't there.
One minute, you're holding forth from a pulpit and everyone thinks you're one hell of a guy.
The next, you're making speeches to the wind.
Tricky customers, ordinary people.
LEADER
BBC and Thames reach for the sky
The announcement of a link-up with the BBC on to satellite is more than a propaganda coup for Thames Television.
In the twilight of its London weekday franchise, Thames has become — to the confusion of industry observers — not a TV production company, nor a contender for Channel 5, nor a satellite TV broadcaster; but apparently all three.
To what extent these strategic aims are compatible remains to be seen.
But it is certain the collaboration with BBC Enterprises offers a formidable cocktail.
Add to Minder and Van der Valk the likes of Dad's Army and Edge of Darkness and it is clear BSkyB's Sky One will have some rethinking to do.
Nor is the Thames/BBC project likely to be beset by the teething troubles which plagued the pioneer satellite broadcasters.
The new channel will use the tried-and-tested Astra satellite, and is promised an initial penetration (thanks to BSkyB's efforts in the main) of three million cable and satellite homes in the UK.
By the end of the century the channel's household penetration is expected to have reached about 11 million.
Thames can congratulate itself on this scheme, but the BBC must feel still more satisfaction.
If things get nasty on Planet Terra it can at least beam itself up on to the Starship Astra.
Admittedly, there is now much less reason for invoking this doomsday scenario.
The shrill and hysterical pre-election threats to clobber the Corporation have been neutralised by the appointment of David Mellor as cabinet minister responsible for the new superministry of arts, the media heritage and sport.
part of his mandate will be to oversee the renewal of the BBC's charter.
Mellor, it will be recalled, was the unfortunate minister charged with turning the pig's ear of Margaret Thatcher's commercial broadcast policy into a silk purse — a miracle he came close to performing.
At the very least the BBC will be able to experiment with a new form of independent financing — advertising.
It will be able to demonstrate (aided by Thames' formidable selling skills) that it is not simply a complacent white elephant milking the public purse.
And that, come the day of judgment, may well weigh in its favour.
LETTERS
C5 quality: What is the ITC opinion?
While appreciating the ITC is in a no-win situation, Sarah Thane's letter (MW April 3) taking issue with my Channel 5 analysis (MW March 27) proves my point.
Ninety per cent of her letter is concerned with selfjustification for the bureaucracy.
Unfortunately, most bureaucracies tend to concentrate on small details, sacrificing the overall picture.
The opinions of the potential user — the viewer — are paramount, not the potential problem for a few VCR illiterates.
With regard to rumour, if the ITC was more transparent concerning its use of discretionary powers, we would all be able to abandon the science of speculation.
For instance, what is the ITC's definition of a quality service for Channel 5?
Phil Redmond Chairman Mersey Television Liverpool
Rover: Less of Morley
As a former Rover Triumph/Leyland/BL/Austin Rover/Rover man, I was heartened to see Kevin Morley is continuing the best traditions of the company with his new venture.
After three name changes in its first two months, can Kudos/Morley Kudos/Kevin Morley Group keep up this early pace?
Tony Grove, Stockton, Warwickshire
Water is more than enough
Since the manufacturers of ‘Summer's Eve’ have complained to you about my comments on their product, I thought I'd copy to you this letter sent to their PR representative when she sent me literature and samples.
Dear Cressy Leggatt,
I have to say that while I am quite sure that ‘Summer's Eve’ is a perfectly suitable wash for people with sensitive skins and that a no-talcum powder has a lot going for it, I can't possible support the selling of this product as necessary for ‘intimate’care.
No woman needs this sort of product; plain water is more than enough and all you are trying to do — or rather the company you are representing — is create a market where none exists.
Your product implies that women are somehow unpleasant to be near and in need of very special washing to be civilised company for anyone.
Let me repeat what I said to Marketing Week ; that no woman needs a special washing substance for her vulva.
And incidentally may I point out that the proper term for the external female genitalia is vulva.
There's no such thing as an ‘external vagina’.
The fact that your copy-writers are so uninformed on this perhaps links up with the lack of information the manufacturers have on the need for their product.
If you could tell your clients that they're on a very sticky wicket here and that I won't be the only woman journalist who's utterly repulsed, you'll be doing them a service!
Claire Rayner Harrow Middx 
Summer's Eve: Implication
BA ‘honours’ far from honest
Your leader column (MW March 27) contains grossly inaccurate and offensive remarks about British Airways.
First, you infer improper conduct on the part of BA in relation to Laker Airways, British Caledonian and Air Europe.
That inference is totally without foundation.
Second, you infer BA has carried out a ‘dirty tricks’ campaign against Virgin Atlantic Airways.
BA has never engaged in such a campaign and the allegations made against us to the contrary are totally untrue.
We will defend vigorously the libel proceedings commenced us by Virgin and its owner and any other proceedings they choose to commence.
Mervyn Walker British Airways Hounslow
The leader column ‘inferred’ no such conclusions.
What it implied was that BA has not exactly been covering itself with glory in its propaganda war with Virgin — and would do well to change tactics.
The tenor of the above letter seems to endorse rather than diminish that inference — Ed.
Why is Murray not a knight?
It is time — once again— to say that Iain Murray's endpiece in your magazine is the best tonic for jaded admen, marketing gurus, stray nuns, roller-skating PR hooligans and other assorted readers of your organ that could possibly be devised.
Why is this man not yet a knight, or even a peer?
I thing we should be told.
Harry Turner Managing Director TSW Plymouth
Ham & High and mighty
Torin Douglas' excellent media analysis (MW April 3) of newspaper readership in Hampstead omits the Hampstead & Highgate Express.
This is like discussing the royal family without mentioning the Queen.
Douglas' only reference is: ‘There are also local newspapers circulating which will focus more tightly on issues of direct relevance’.
The Ham & High (which has covered elections since 1860) is the most widely read newspaper in the constituency.
Sixty-eight per cent of the population have read or looked at it in the past year.
Far from focusing more tightly on issues, many of the Ham & High's key stories have been taken up by the nationals.
Moreover, the weight of political party advertising testifies to the huge influence the paper has in the area, and beyond.
D M Bonn Hampstead & Highgate Express London 
AGENCIES
THE GROWING PAINS OF AMV
Five years as a plc and the link-up with BBDO are bringing new influences to bear at AMV.
Will the quest for corporate growth squeeze its culture and brand values?
By Franny Moyle
Abbott Mead Vickers.
BBDO is the epitome of the caring Nineties advertising agency.
Its brand values are those of  beneficence towards staff, responsibility towards its public — it will not advertise tobacco or toys — and high quality work for its clients
But the agency is at a crossroads.
More than five years after its flotation on the UK stock market, some see they brand values on which the agency was built becoming diluted by the stresses of being a plc.
Last year's link-up with the international BBDO network also brings new influences to bear on the creation of David Abbott, Peter Mead and Adrian Vickers.
Like all agencies operating in a squeezed market, it faces the challenge of achieving corporate growth.
Management teams under Ken New and Jackie Boulter are strongly strategic
Will this extraordinary advertising culture by just as visible in two or three years' time?
And if not, what will become of it?
The agency has a great ability to retain its clients.
Volvo, for example, has been with AMV since day one.
Sainsbury moved in around day two with a £200,000 press project that has now evolved into a £14.2m (Media Register) account.
The agency will attribute its growth — from billings of £60m in 1985, when the company floated, to £160m in 1991 — to a strong creative culture, which focuses on Abbott.
Even fellow founding partner Mead refers to Abbott as ‘God’.
Abbott-inspired work for Sainsbury, Volvo and The Economist has proved the bedrock of the agency's reputation.
‘We never had a need for a new-business director,’ explains Mead.
‘The phone always rang once every three weeks.’
For an agency with such a visible creative profile it is refreshing that it claims no philosophies or advertising theories as its own.
‘We've never really tried to have a proposition,’ says Abbott.
‘We don't have books about the agency, or philosophies.
We are simply a collection of people who like the mix of sensible advice and effort, and can turn that into advertising.’
Abbott offers the disarming creative theory: ‘It's about trying to find something to persuade someone.’
A rigorous planning culture has been established by Leslie Butterfield and continued by Jackie Boulter.
Added to this, AMV can boast account management teams — including the likes of Adrian Vickers, and media buying under the direction of Ken New — with a strong strategic approach.
‘A few years ago we realised we had lost our way,’ says The Economist UK marketing manager Chantal Hughes.
‘Our positioning was wrong.
AMV identified the fact that not enough business people were reading the magazine.
The came up with the Red campaign and suggested we take it on to posters — something we had not used before.
‘The last BMRC survey indicated a 90,000 business readership compared with 59,000 two years ago.’
Sainsbury marketing director Robin Whitbread says: ‘They have a very good understanding of our business and its dynamics.’
The most recent TV campaign executed by AMV was ‘phenomenally successful’, Whitbread adds.
But he points out that recent high points must be put into context: ‘The current colour magazine campaign began in 1980 and is as strong now as then.’
AMV's own peculiar culture — the simple ‘niceness’ of the place — is as much part of AMV's brand franchise as its creative or strategic thinking.
‘The most potent management weapon is an ‘umbrella of affection’,’ explains Mead.
‘It means you can criticise under this without being personal.
‘Sensitivity is valued as a commodity again.
We believe in dignity and treating people fairly.
The feel-good factor within this agency differentiates us from the financial engineers.’
The long-lasting and smooth relationship between the partners is attributed to earlier experiences.
‘At my former company [French Gold Abbott]we were inexperienced and no one viewed FGA as the last place they were going to work.
‘When we started AMV, we did so from a maturer base.
We also decided early on to try to run a non-political agency, and that started with ourselves…
We remained practitioners and resisted putting partners on another floor,’ Abbott adds.
He remains a working copywriter, with Ron Brown his long-time art director.
His recent briefs including writing an ad comprising 7-Up luminary Fido Dido.
Adrian Vickers, an account director, also feels strongly about the partners' continued ground-level role in the agency.
‘When you are starting off you imagine a stratosphere into which you will one day ascend.
But it is dangerous to allow yourself to be taken away from the clients.
We have been aware of the dangers of over-confidence and losing touch with our clients, who are here because of the ability of the agency.’
(From left) Baulk, Abbott, Vickers and (front) Mead: Taking a more mainstream business mentality
Of course AMV has not been without its critics.
In the past it has been said AMV's TV has never matched its press work; that it has been insular and unadventurous from a strategic corporate point of view; and that it has   relied too heavily on its self-referential ability to sell middle-class brands.
As far as TV work is concerned, one critic claims the only interesting work the agency is producing is Kiss FM — from an inherited BBDO creative duo.
But Abbott maintains: ‘As an agency we have got better at TV.
It was partly true [that we were not as good at TV as we might have been], but that was also partly distorted by how good we were at press.
We have overcome all that by trial and hiring.
We have encouraged a TV culture and we have started winning awards — for Yellow Pages, for example.’
Ads for Kiss FM, Yellow pages and Nivea underline AMV's TV culture
On the accusation of middle-class leanings, Abbott counters: ‘That's narrow casting.
People forget the singing potatoes we did for Smiths Crisps.
We have never been more varied than now, thanks to the BBDO merger [bringing in brands like Pepsi-Cola and Gillette].’
On insularity and lack of adventure it is harder to find a defence for the agency.
AMV returned very respectable pre-tax profits for 1991 of £5.02m, which gives AMV ‘a robust appearance in the current circumstances’, says Kleinwort Benson analyst David Forster.
‘In terms of shares, they have outperformed the stock market at 55 per cent over both three months and one month.
From an operating point of view, their results compared very favourably with the sector.
The multinationals [WPP and Saatchi & Saatchi]are saddled [with debt].
The nearest comparable company, GGT, was more aggressive withe regard to acquisition and diversification, but the result has been a weakened balance sheet.’
So, as Forster points out, AMV has the cash resources to expand at a time when many target companies are temptingly priced.
But the fact AMV is now sitting very prettily is as much down to good luck as good management, some say.
The epitome of Nineties value rather than volume has become just that, after having been not terribly good at being the Eighties thrusting stereotype — though not for want of trying.
Mead argues: ‘Other public companies rushed out and bought volume rather than quality.
But we wanted a group based on quality not quantity.
It would take longer to put together but it would endure.’
However, others point out that at one stage AMV was prepared to offer a lot of money for Scali McCabe Sloves, the international group which had bought a substantial stake in AMV in 1979 and was subsequently taken over by WPP.
But AMV failed to agree a price with WPP's Martin Sorrell.
That lack of success on the acquisitions front — despite the fact it delayed other required moves into international business — has proved the agency's saving grace.
‘The deal they escaped by the skin of their teeth was SMS,’ Forster says.
‘It was luck rather than judgement.
If they had agreed a price the deal would have gone through just as SMS found itself in so much trouble with Volvo [SMS was forced to resign the $40m Volvo account in early 1991, after it was discovered the agency was rigging performance advertisements].
AMV would have been involved with a company losing clients rapidly.
It is the best deal they never did.’
The agency's recognition of its need to take a more aggressive stance in the Eighties was partly due to the appointment of former Ogilvy & Mather managing director Michael Baulk as chief executive in 1988.
It is on Baulk that observers pin responsibility for a dilution of the original AMV brand values.
But it is also on him that many say the group's future success hinges.
Baulk and Abbott now run the agency.
With Mead's responsibilities focused on the City and Vickers' on clients, it is easy to imagine how Baulkism  has become AMV's managerial guiding principle.
Bringing in Baulk has made the agency more businesslike and money-oriented,’ says an insider.
‘They said flotation would make no difference to AMV, and they kid themselves it's still the same, but it is not.
They are squeezing all the time to make the figures.
It is becoming a smaller version of Ogilvy & Mather.
Top desk publishing.
The Economist
At Sainsbury's, the freshest herbs you can buy.
(From pot to pot in seconds.)
A new cost consciousness — salaries are currently frozen and end-of-year bonuses were not awarded last year — is not the sign of a new lack of heart.
Indeed, when AMV was forced to lay off staff for the first time in 1991, because of duplication during the BBDO merger, all got very generous payments.
But sources claim that in place of a family atmosphere, a more mainstream business mentality is setting in.
Baulk has made a number of sensible managerial moves.
For the first time, AMV has a new business director.
For O&M employee Cilla Snowball joined the agency in March.
And former O&M Europe chairman Peter Warren has also joined, to help exploit the link with BBDO.
The BBDO deal, heavily recommended by Baulk, has further important for AMV.
From a business perspective it is a manoeuvre which meets a much-recognised need for the agency to offer clients international service.
The City is happy because a new source of revenue has been located, and as well as broadening the client portfolio it gives the company the business and creative opportunity to be lead agency for Europe on international brands such as Pepsi.
But the deal also potentially marginalises the three founding partners.
There is an understanding that BBDO will fully take over the agency some time after 1993, which threatens a loss of sovereignty.
The partners remain sanguine about speculation that their tenure of the company they founded is coming to an end.
While they maintain there are no plans to change the status quo, they also admit they have invested heavily in the next stage of managerial succession and feel confident the culture they have created is strong enough to survive beyond their actual involvement.
Since his arrival at the agency in 1986, Baulk has been a key figure in putting in place, through acquisition, below-the-line services.
In 1987 AMV invested in McBain Noel-Johnson, a design and advertising agency which Baulk helped found 20 years ago.
In 1988 McBain set up The Electronic Studio, a technology and business systems specialist.
In that year The Promotions Centre, an fmcg sales promotion specialist, was brought into the AMV fold.
And more recently, Momentum — a strategic marketing company — and direct marketing agency Barraclough Hall Woolston Gray has also become part of the group.
‘Advertising is no longer the panacea it was,’ says Baulk.
‘I believe good agencies will offer through-the-line services to their clients in the future.
We want a quality service in all the major areas of persuasive communication.
There is an opportunity for agencies to redefine the business they want to be in, and find ways of building business and opportunity in areas once not perceived as part of advertising.’
Underpinning Baulk's  policy of acquisition is thorough intellectual planning.
Below- the-line activity in the US now takes 60 per cent of marketers' expenditure, and it would be foolish to exclude the same thing happening here.
But apart from securing revenue growth, the moves also help to lock clients more closely into the group.
Account tenure spread across a number of service areas ought to diminish the willingness of clients to review their businesses.
Of all the below-the-line babies he has delivered into the AMV fold, it is The Electronic Studio that Baulk heralds as having the most potential for growth and innovation.
The Electronic Studio represents ‘a real lead for AMV over other agencies’, he says.
A design, advertising and publishing production house based on digital transmission, it houses technology that can produced finished artwork for anything from press ads to corporate brochures in situ.
The studio handles AMV's production, thus cutting costs in straitened times.
But is potential lies in the extra value it can offer AMV clients.
It can also service the advertising agency community with typesetting and artwork production; provide communications consultancy from client companies; and produce proprietary software products.
Already AMV is a somewhat different type of advertising creature from the founding partnership.
But the success the agency has enjoyed, though different in hue, looks unlikely to fade.
Already this year £12.3m of new business has come through AMV's doors from Ciga Hotels, Douwe Egbert, Pillsbury, Weetabix, Knight Williams and Smith & Nephew.
And still only a very few seem to want to leave.
CAGES SAVE LIVES.
VOLVO
The ITV AWARDS For Marketing ‘92
VICTORY PARADE
This year's ITV Awards for Marketing (co-sponsored by Marketing Week and the Marketing Society) were held on the eve of last week's poll-shocker.
And it would be fair to say that the vicissitudes of electoral fortunes were as hot a topic as those of peer group approval.
Perhaps the E-factor helps to explain the excitable nature of the crowd that filled the Dorchester ballroom.
At all events, master of ceremonies Bill Franklyn — still synonymous with the Schh…in Schweppes tonic — occasionally found his crowd-control skills put to the test.
But he bowled through with his customary dry wit, unveiling a choice of award winners slightly less conservative than those chosen by the electorate the following day.
Which is not to say that old-fashioned, blue-chip brands do not continue to pull in the plaudits.
Guinness, for example, showed that there's life in the old brand yet, carrying off the brand of the year award in fmcg for its canned draught stout.
Launched in 1989, the produce was the only take-home beer to increase market share in 1991, from 1.9 to 2.6 per cent, helped by intensive advertising support through Ogilvy & Mather, which continued to develop Rutger Hauer as brand spokesman.
Continuity in marketing can count for a lot, but not if consumer attitudes are going through a sea change, and BMW's light-footedness in launching the 3-series earned it the brand of the year award for durables.
The company's launch campaign through WCRS moved away from its yuppie connotations to emphasise recyclability.
BMW sales dropped ten per cent in a year when the industry crashed by more than 20 per cent.
The award for brand of the year in services raised one of the loudest cheers of the evening as Virgin Atlantic trounced archrival BA, further fuelling their ‘You stab my back and I'll stab yours’ feud.
BA's headline-grabbing World's Biggest Offer was insufficient to turn the judges' heads from Virgin's achievement in increasing its routes, despite the Gulf War and the recession.
One suspects that the David and Goliath nature of their ongoing battle may have swayed the decision further in Virgin's direction.
Recession has obviously hit new product development hard, and two of the nominees for new product of the year in fmcg, including the winner Häagen-Dazs, have been around since before 1991.
But there can be little doubt that Häagen-Dazs has really put premium ice-cream on the marketing map, not least by its bold, passion-exuding press ads through Bartle Bogle Hegarty.
Ice-cream as sex substitute or sex aid?
We'll find out if the brand ever goes on TV.
No award was made in the services  sector, but Nintendo took the durables prize for its Game Boy hand-held video game system.
Advertising proved a more fertile category, with decisions which set heads nodding and shaking in equal measure.
In the fmcg sector, some felt that Heinz's mould-breaking corporate campaign through BSB Dorland was unlucky not to win over John Smith's ladybird lovers and David Abbott's stylish, if austere, work on The Economist — but in the event, all these were beaten by GGT's cheery work for Red Rock cider, which challenges the lager brands on their own turf.
Taunton Cider's satisfaction with the resulting brand awareness was reflected in its recent decision to increase it spend by 50 per cent(MW April 10).
In the durables category, the Electricity Association's Creature Comforts campaign carried off what must surely be its last award.
A little amiability goes a long way, it would seem, and many of those present felt that Reebok was the unluckiest loser of the night in this category.
However, the power of any ad which can make consumers feel warm towards utility companies is not to be denied.
The agency responsible was GGK.
As with Creature Comforts, Lowe Howard-Spink's work for Tesco, which won the campaign of the year in services, was deemed by some to be beyond its first flush of freshness, but its impact on consumer perceptions continues to impress.
What's more, it has held its own against rival Sainsbury's high-profile TV work.
The ‘personalities’ awards rounded off proceedings with three highly popular choices.
Van den Berghs' marketing director Bill Young took the UK marketer of the year trophy in recognition of his deft handling of the I Can't Believe It's Not Butter controversy, which showed that even the monolithic Unilever can be quick on its feet when its brands are under threat.
Sir Michael Angus made it a double whammy for Unilever as the outgoing plc chairman, soon to take up the cudgels on behalf of the CBI, entered the International Marketing Hall of Fame.
Last, but most definitely no least, came this year's entrant to the UK Marketing Hall of Fame in the form of Sir Alistair Grant, chairman and chief executive of the Argyll Group, owner of Safeway.
Sir Alistair's light-hearted speech included a sideways swipe at Häagen-Dazs —‘it's come to something when an ice-cream positions itself as the alternative to KY Jelly’ and another at people who trade on their Scottish names as a guarantee of their trustworthiness — such as Robert Maxwell.
Self-deprecatory laughter all round.
Awards over and bottles emptied, marketing's great and good drifted out into the night.
The next day, of course, they got up and went out to vote.
But that's another story.
Award winners from top left: UK Marketing Hall of Fame entrant Sir Alistair Grant of the Argyll Group, UK marketer of the year Bill Young of Van den Berghs (right), International Marketing Hall of Fame new member Sir Michael Angus of Unilever, new product (durables) Nintendo Game Boy, brand of the year (services) Virgin Atlantic, brand of the year (durables) BMW 3-series, and advertising (fmcg) for GGT's Red Rock cider
Award winner from top: New product of the year (fmcg) Häagen-Dazs, helped by Bartle Bogle Hegarty's press advertisements, brand of the year (fmcg) for canned draught Guinness through Ogilvy & Mather, advertising campaign of the year (durables) for the Electricity Association's Creature Comforts by GGK (below left) and campaign of the year (services) for Lowe Howard-Spink's Tesco advertisements
Ripe Oregon strawberries are especially selected as we feel it best compliments the rich cream flavour of Häagen-Dazs.
Dedicated to Pleasure
HOSPITALITY
RISING TIDE OF TEAM GAMES
Alternative ways of achieving marketing goals are taking the hospitality industry by storm.
Whether your company prefers physical challenges, fantasy days, or just good fun, an unusual event is one way of splashing out cost-effectively.
By Lauren Sterling and Claire Murphy
Have you ever wanted to play the lead in ‘Robin Hood’ or to be the victim of a ‘Screaming Blue Murder’?
If so, the latest developments in the hospitality industry could well appeal to you.
Lazy days of corporate entertainment at Henley or Ascot are long gone, replaced by a new breed of entertainment hitting the industry in the form of teambuilding, motivation and unusual participation events.
Major companies still believe corporate hospitality plays a vital role in achieving marketing goals, but now they are having to justify the expense.
Although marketing managers constantly ask what will be achieved, ‘alternative’ corporate hospitality days prove very popular.
They provide unique and memorable entertainment, forging important ties between companies and clients, enhancing fruitful business relationships through highcalibre contact.
During a day filled with intrigue, excitement and adventure, participants are given the opportunity of re-enacting some of their wildest fantasies in an informal yet highly motivated environment.
Many blue chip companies use team-based competitions with a series of mental and physical challenges.
Whether they are crossing a river in a coracle to retrieve vital clues or assembling coloured cubes blindfolded and guided by duck whistles, each group's success lies in working together as a team.
On the more theatrical side, participants, could spend the day re-enacting a classic movie, armed with lighting rigs, video cameras, clapper boards, a director's chair and a lot of imagination!
The could also partake in a ‘Screaming Blue Murder’ evening where everyone has a role to play.
Theatrical corporate hospitality (above)— re-enacting Bugsy Malone?
A new concept in corporate hospitality is roadshows.
Used previously for promotional purposes, companies with several offices throughout the UK are taking the entertainment to their clients as a more effective means of reaching them.
Carnival Casino Promotions, a supplier of casinos and race nights, is presently running a roadshow  for a large network of estate agents, at venues throughout the UK.
If clients have restrictions on time spent out of the office, roadshows provide an interesting solution.
Specialist agencies are now starting to provide unique entertainment staged in spectacular settings.
The Isle of Man Tourist Board is offering microlight gliding days round the island; Lake Vrnwy Hotel in Mid-Wales is promoting helicopter safaris over magnificent scenery; and clients can abseil down the walls of the Lake District's Armathwaite Hall.
The success of such events resides in the combination of good basic fun with the more serious side of client motivation.
With companies now planning their entertainment strategy for the coming year, some will be looking for a more exciting day out.
The advent of teambuilding and competitive games look set to take the hospitality industry by storm.
Lauren Sterling is director of Sterling Events.
In the team-based competitions each group's success, lies in working together, rendering such events tests as well as games.
PLAIN SAILING ALL THE WAY
Getting some fresh air, trying out a new experience, learning a skill and having fun are just some of the reasons why corporate sailing days are growing in popularity.
By the end of their jaunt on the high seas initially dubious visitors are often reluctant to return home and will consider taking their own clients on a similar event.
Sailing as corporate hospitality took off about a decade ago, with companies looking for a new way of hosting events.
Taking people for a day on a yacht is infinitely more interesting that lunching in a hotel.
How most people prefer to be actively involved in sailing the boat rather than just sitting and admiring the view.
There are great advantages to this style of entertaining; the bonding between participants is inevitable and speedy, given the fact they all have to work together in close proximity; business relationships are enhanced as company employees and valued clients share the hoisting of the sails and other such activities.
Corporate hospitality has become a lot more sophisticated, as the growth of sailing events illustrates.
It is no longer acceptable to pretend to be entertaining clients while overtly pushing your business at them.
They appreciate a chance to indulge themselves without having to talk business.
Of course, they will remember which company treated them to a day's sailing.
The emphasis of the day is on having a good time, but the aim of hospitality is not forgotten in the planning.
Sailing: Most people prefer to be actively involved in sailing the boat than just sitting on it and admiring the view
As Mike Best, corporate sailing manager at Sunsail, says: ‘You'd be surprised how carefully  we plan who gets to go on which boat with who.’
Companies that have used Sunsail for corporate hospitality include TWA, Toshiba and Citibank.
Air Canada even initiated a regatta in its name, with representatives from about 20 companies taking park.
This is the beauty of an event like corporate sailing.
Sunsail is willing to organise virtually anything, from regattas to simple fun days out for a small group; you could charter all 15 of their 36ft yachts, or just sail a dinghy around the Solent.
Companies generally take their guests down to Sunsail's Port Solent base near Portsmouth in the evening, give them dinner and put them up in a hotel.
The next morning participants are taken to the marina, introduced to their skippers, given a safety briefing, and taken through the basics of sailing.
Every standard of sailor can be catered for, from the absolute beginner to the skilled, and, as Best observes, ‘the beginners generally pick it up very fast’.
The yachts anchor together after the morning sail, and the guests have a well-earned lunch.
By the afternoon, most have mastered the basics and become competitive, usually leading to a race home.
Weather is not as big a limitation as you would think.
Best claims to be willing to take groups out all year round, although the summer season is obviously more popular.
As long as it is considered safe, the more ‘testing’ weather conditions can provide an extra element of challenge to a braver set of participants.
Another plus for this style of entertaining is the cost.
At a time when splashing money around is either impossible of undiplomatic this represents a surprisingly cost-effective way of putting on an event without cutting corners.
Sunsail quotes prices ranging from £95 to £120 a head, depending on catering and accommodation; significantly less than events such as Ascot or Wimbledon.
If you are prepared to splash out on costs Sunsail can organise your event in the Caribbean, Mediterranean or Thailand.
This, according to the company's marketing executive Vanessa Lowe, is the latest trend in the sector.
So if you are trying to decide how to provide your favourite clients and clients-to-be with an enjoyable and memorable time this summer, within the limitations of your latest budget cut, perhaps you should be considering corporate sailing.
For those companies prepared to bear the costs, sailing somewhere hot and far away, in the Mediterranean or Thailand, can be arranged.
This, apparently, is the latest trend in the sector.
IAIN MURRAY
Pole-axeing the pollsters
At 2am on Friday, opinion pollsters, who led everyone to take their eyes off the ball, were cut down to size and shown up for what they are: a waster of money
Triumphalism is not an edifying spectacle, So those among you of a sensitive disposition are advised not to read on.
Go back and have another look at the Sits Vac.
This column, however, would be less than human were it not to exult in the humiliation of the pollsters in last week's election.
There were around 70 polls taken during the campaign at a cost of about £10,000 apiece.
More than 50 put Labour in the lead by margins of anything from 1 to 7 per cent.
None gave the Tories a hope of being elected with a working majority.
What a waste of time and money.
All those ladies in Burberry raincoats standing, clipboards poised, on the wind-swept corners of shopping malls; all those hundreds of thousands of electors stopped and questioned; all that ‘analysis’ and number crunching; all those column centimetres filled with prognostication; all that sound and fury; all that nothing.
I have never liked opinion polling or pollsters.
I don't care for the practice of polling because of polling because it is direct descendant of that fraudulent invention sociology.
Sociologists erroneously claim scientific method can be successfully applied to human behaviour.
From that mistaken belief springs the evil of social engineering, which, at its worst, results in bureaucracy seeking to manipulate entire populations.
Like sociologists, opinion pollsters believe that, by the application of scientific methodology, people can be treated as units for experimentation, like amoebae on a slide.
Well, as the pollsters discovered last week, people are wonderfully, maddeningly more complicated than that.
It's difficult to escape the conclusion that a great many of those questioned spoke less than the truth in their answers.
Hooray for them.
Confounding the pollsters is a noble work.
Some may have lied deliberately, perhaps out of boredom, perhaps out of mischief, perhaps because they consider pollsters an impertinent nuisance.
Others may simply have tried to please.
Ladies in Burberry raincoats can be intimidating in the nicest possible way.
Asked by a perfumed interrogator whether I would like a large slice of my earned income to be taken from me and devoted to helping the poor, I would feel loathe to shake my head.
Polling, in short, is a grubby profession of no great consequence.
That it was allowed to appear as more than that was the work of the politicians who, in their yearning for power, clutch at any straw.
It was ever thus.
The politicians of ancient Rome, terrified by the uncertainty of their trade, used soothsayers — toothless, bearded old frauds who claimed to divine the future in chicken's entrails and sundry portents.
In the age of science, the pollsters are the geomancers.
With their talk of quota sampling and other such bosh, they hold the politicians spellbound, and strut in the tawdry glow of reflected power.
When last week's votes were counted, commentators agreed it was an ‘amazing’ result.
Why?
Because they all believed the polls.
Had there been no polls, the result would not have caused such unanimous amazement.
The geomancers led everyone to take their eye from the ball and fix instead on an illusory bubble that burst at about 2am on Friday.
There is a possible explanation for the gobsmacking outcome which directly implicates the polls.
It has been suggested that those who lied to the pollsters, for whatever reason, later recoiled in horror when starkly confronted with the implication of their mendacity — Glenys Kinnock in Number 10 — and voted Tory.
If the polls do influence people in this way, then we are truly stepping through one mirror after another.
Maybe next time we shall consign the polls to their proper place alongside the racing tips, but somehow I doubt it.
In another sense, the election was an undoubted victory for sound marketing practice.
Labour, it is said, fought a magnificent campaign.
Which is exactly what was said in 1987.
And both times Labour lost.
Hard to escape the conclusion that the magnificence of slick, professionally crafted campaigns should be judged entirely independently of their avowed purpose.
We could have two votes: one to judge the artistic and creative merits of the campaigns; the other to decide who should govern the country.
Labour's campaign came about as close to pure packaging as is possible.
Everything was planned and stage-managed to the last detail.
Neil Kinnock's clothes, make-up, speeches, audiences, responses and, of course, policies were all decided for him.
Danger men such as Gerald Kaufman and John Prescott, who might have taken the wrapping off the chocolate box, were kept hidden from sight.
As a cynical attempt to manipulate the electorate and the media, it was unsurpassed.
But it failed.
It is greatly to the credit of the squeaking John Major that he broke free from the stage-managed sets devised by his image makers.
(Incidentally, this was the only time the Irish question was raised in the entire campaign.
Was Major meant to be Val Doonican or Dave Allen?)
Entirely of his own volition, he stumped the country with his soapbox.
My, that made Kinnock laugh.
There was he, in his double-breasted suit, riding around in a chauffeured limousine, looking every inch a Prime Minister in waiting, while the real incumbent was standing on an old box, ducking flying eggs.
The outcome was a victory for marketing, because it proves that what applies in the world of packaged goods holds true in the world of politics.
Labour's policies were ‘production-led’.
Created in Walworth Road, they were based on the assumption that it is possible to bribe one set of electors with money extracted from the pockets of another set.
As we all know, no matter how slick and glossy a campaign, it will never sell the unsellable.
The best policies, like the most successful products, are market-led.
But don't, for heaven's sake, tell the politicians.
They would be bound to seek the help of the pollsters, and we've all seen and heard quite enough of them.
HOW OPINION POLLS WORK: To get our Tory voters out in droves we have to scare 'em shitless No problem — we could show Kinnock with a 10% lead…
Steady on — 3% will do But what about the egg on our faces afterwards?
That's what you get paid for, isn't it?