

Civil War A Royal Armouries Exhibition sponsored by THE TIMES
Hull
Hull justly claims to be the birthplace of the Civil War.
Here in late April 1642, Charles I was refused entry to the city; denying him access to its arsenal for use against rebellious Parliamentarians.
The Civil War travelling exhibition of arms and armour opens at the Town Docks Museum on 11 April where visitors can see the armour worn by the future Charles II at ‘the refusal’.
Members of the English Civil War Society will re-enact this event at Beverley Gate, opposite the museum, on 25 April at 1.30pm.
The Town Docks Museum is a 10 minute walk from both the Hull BR and adjacent bus station.
Parking is available in nearby Osborne and Dock Streets.
To herald the opening of the Civil War exhibition the Royal Armouries Saker gun will be fired in Queens Gardens on 10 April at 2pm.
A highlight of the Hull Festival is a major muster by the English Civil War Society on 19–20 June at 3pm..
A cavalry trooper or harquebusier wearing a ‘lobster pott’ helmet, typical of the cavalry on both sides
Coventry
Coventry's accumulated wealth attracted the King's interest in mid August, 1642.
Whilst Charles and Prince Rupert were invited to enter the city's gates the majority of the armed forces were ordered to remain outside.
An infuriated Charles ordered the battering of Newgate, where artillery breached the wall and hit the nearby Carmelite house (now Whitefriars Museum where Civil War will be displayed) supposedly killing two of the occupants.
Whitefriars Museum is a 10 minute walk from Coventry BR station down High Street to Gosford Street.
West Midlands bus nos. 17 and 21 connect the station to the city centre.
Parking is available at Whitefriars Street and Gosford Street.
At 11.00am on 6 June, a procession will proceed from St Mary's Church Hall to Whitefriars featuring the Lord Mayor and councillors, descendants of Civil War figures and members of the English Civil War Society.
Nottingham
Nottingham played a pivotal role during the tumultuous beginnings of the English Civil War in 1642.
At 6.00pm on 22 August, Charles I raised his standard in the northern bailey of the Castle, formally launching Civil War hostilities.
Nottingham's townfolk eventually sided with Parliamentarian forces, who held the Castle until 1651, when the order was issued for its destruction.
In 1878, the Castle became a museum where from 1 August visitors can see the Civil War exhibition.
Nottingham Castle is a 10 minute walk from the BR station whilst the major coach station in the Victoria shopping centre is 15 minutes from the Castle.
A regular bus service (Mon–Sat) operates from the shopping centre to the Castle entrance.
On-site parking for disabled people is available whilst there is both city centre and nearby pay parking.
To mark the raising of the standard on 22 August, the Royal Armouries Saker gun will be fired on the Castle green whilst the Sealed Knot Society will re-enact the event at 6.00pm.
Further skirmishes will be held the following day at Highfields Park, University Boulevard.
On 17–18 September the Clumber Players at Welbeck College present Ben Jonson's Masque ‘The King at Welbeck’.
Pikemen clash at the Battle of Stokes Bay re-enactment in Gosport, August 1990.
Courtesy of W. Shaw, Gosport
Worcester
Worcester was the site for the first and last of the Civil War battles and today it calls itself ‘the Civil War City’.
In 1642, Worcester witnessed a Royalist victory, under the command of Prince Rupert, the King's nephew, at the Battle of Powick Bridge — the first clash of Civil War arms.
Nine years later, in 1651, Charles II watched the final defeat of the Royalist forces at the Battle of Worcester before going into exile after Cromwell's victory.
Civil War is on show at Worcester's City Museum and Art Gallery from 26 September.
It is a 3 minute walk from Foregate Street BR station and a 5 minute walk from the Crown Gate Shopping Centre bus station.
Parking is available in Taylors Lane as well as the city centre.
Watch out for the bloody re-enactment of the Battle of Powick Bridge — the largest cavalry battle on English soil since the 17th century — on 19–20 September at Powick Bridge, Bennetts Dairies, Lower Wick, Worcester..
A pikeman holding a 17 foot pike.
Up to half the infantry forces on both sides were pikemen
Cirencester
Cirencester could not be ignored by the Royalists.
Its capture would enable the King to seize Gloucester, open communications with his Welsh supporters and complete the defensive ring around the Royalist headquarters at Oxford.
Prince Rupert and his army then launched a successful attack on the town on Thursday, 2 February, 1643, imprisoning 1200 Parliamentarians after a four hour battle.
Cirencester and most of the Cotswolds remained in Royalist hands until 1645.
The constant movement of troops through these areas caused great economic dislocation for the local populace and it is only recently that a number of Civil War ‘hoards’ have been found.
Coaches of silver spoons, coins and other treasures will be displayed to complement the Civil War exhibition.
The Corinium Museum is easily accessible by car with town car parking available.
The nearest BR station is Kemble with a connecting bus service.
Civil War
The English Civil War (1642–1651) is one of the most turbulent and complex chapters of British history.
The finest Civil War pieces in the Royal Armouries collection will be shown for the first time outside the Tower of London in the travelling exhibition,Civil War .
Through the arms and armour of kings, commanders and ordinary soldiers, the exhibition will present the realities and reveal the myths of the conflict of Cavaliers and Roundheads.
Civil War , sponsored by THE TIMES , opens in April, in Hull, where 350 years before, almost to the day, the first armed confrontation took place between the forces of King and Parliament.
A Royal Armouries exhibition sponsored by
THE TIMES
HISTORIC TOWN TRAIL
Northampton's Visitor Centre was opened in August 1991 in buildings restored to their original Georgian/Victorian character.
Occupied in Victorian times by the officers of the County Gaol.
The Visitor Centre includes: Tourist Information; craft area; an audio visual display about Northampton's history; tea room and a bridge link to the Central Museum and Art Gallery.
Go through the new Peacock Arcade into Market Square.
Northampton's new Visitor Centre, the start and finish of our tour.
Visit the Central Museum and Art Gallery.
With perhaps the finest collection of boots and shoes in the Country.
The Art Gallery holds frequent exhibitions and concerts.
Turn into Swan Street through the car park to emerge in Albion Place.
The Guildhall — Victorian Gothic at its best; built by Edward Godwin in the 1860's when he was only 28.
Extended by the Northampton Architect, Matthew Holding, in 1892.
Inside is a wealth of colour and decoration.
The Royal Theatre's modest exterior belies the gorgeously decorated auditorium — like a trip back to the Victorian heyday of Theatre.
Designed by C. J. Phipps in 1884, the Theatre was then known as ‘The Opera House’.
Abington Street — once a congested traffic route is now attractively pedestrianised.
In Fish Street, the visitor is confronted by the architectural whimsy of The Fish Public House opposite the imposing ‘Wrennaissance’ facade of City Buildings, designed by Alexander Anderson in 1900.
Look above the shop fronts to the upper floors above nos. 33–45 St. Giles Street.
The row originally formed part of St. Thomas' Hospital Charity.
Albion Place is a quiet backwater of fine Georgian villas.
At the southern end of the terrace the style erupts into graceful Regency with canopies and verandahs.
St. Giles School is a striking example of mid 19th Century Victorian Gothic architecture.
Now renovated as a Community Centre.
On the corner — St. Giles Terrace — is an imposing row of 19th Century houses, now offices, in ‘Carolean’ style, by Matthew Holding.
The old St. Thomas' Hospital has now been renovated.
St. Giles Street, though unremarkable, has a variety of shops which will be of interest to the visitor.
Some of the shops have kept the picturesque arcaded windows.
Derngate has some very attractive Regency houses which have been retained in original state.
On the northside you can see a typical example of 1930s Art Deco style in Bedford Mansions with its brick detailing, rounded corners and metal windows.
St. Giles School is a striking example of mid 19th Century Victorian Gothic architecture.
Now renovated as a Community Centre.
On the corner — St. Giles Terrace — is an imposing row of 19th Century houses, now offices, in ‘Carolean’ style, by Matthew Holding.
The old St. Thomas' Hospital has now been renovated.
On the west side of Cheyne Walk is an attractive row of 19th Century Victorian Villas in a wealth of styles and materials, but all echoing the grandeur of Victorian opulence.
78 Derngate — once a typical 19th Century terrace house was extensively remodelled by the famous Scottish Art Nouveau exponent Charles Rennie Mackintosh in 1916 for the Northampton Model-Maker W. J. Bassett Lowke.
St. Giles Church — The 12th Century Church of St. Giles was rebuilt in 1616 after the original tower collapsed virtually destroying it.
The fine Romanesque west doorway is a 19th Century reconstruction of Norman work.
Inside look at the magnificent east window — a fine example of Victorian glass painting.
The Churchyard is a pleasant spot to loiter.
Robert Browne — founder of the Congregational Church — is buried here.
The Victorian Villas here are even more splendid than in Cheyne Walk — reminiscent of Cheltenham with their cast-iron decoration.
Styles vary from Jacobean with multi-gabled frontages to ‘Tudorbethan’ with battlements and pinnacles.
Take time to look at the corner of the Hospital wall where stands a memorial to King Edward VII surmounted by a bronze of St. George and the Dragon by the eminent sculptor Sir George Frampton.
The General Hospital at the top of the bill was built by Samuel Saxon in 1793.
Beckets Well.
Thomas a Becket in flight after his trial at Northampton Castle in 1164 is supposed to have gained respite here.
The present structure was built in 1843 and has recently been refurbished with a mosaic inspired by local school children..
Map of old Northampton, reproduced from the John Speed map of 1610
Castle Mound is now all that remains of the once famous Norman castle.
Thomas a Becket was tried here.
After the restoration of Charles II in 1660 the castle was destroyed.
The final obliteration came from development of the railway on the site.
The present ‘look-out’ was built in 1984.
St. Peter's Church dates from 1160 but has earlier Saxon origins.
Perhaps one of the finest examples of Norman Church Architecture in the region — simple in form yet richly ornate.
Look at the blank arcading along the clerestory and tower.
St. Peter's must have had strong affinity with the nearby Castle.
The interior is rich in carving and decoration.
Doddridge Church, originally Castle Hill Meeting built in 1695, was mostly rebuilt.
Congregationalist, Philip Doddridge preached here for 22 years and became a famous local figure.
His famous Academy is in lower Sheep Street.
Cross Horsemarket into St. Mary's Street.
This area was once the horsetrading centre of Northampton.
Hazelrigg House (built in 1662) for the Hazelrigg family, escaped destruction in the Great Fire.
Recently restored..
Hazelrigg House
St. Katherine's Gardens — once the site of St. Katherine's Church of which only a few stones now remain.
The gardens are a welcome green space within the bustling Town.
Gold Street has a wealth of small 19th Century buildings.
The name derives from the number of goldsmiths who traded in the street in earlier times.
One of the most interesting buildings is 31/39 Gold Street (formerly Jeffery's) with its three-storey fully glazed facade.
Joseph Jeffery was Mayor of Northampton in 1899.
Look above the modern shop fronts to the upper floors which display a variety of styles and embellishments..
Retrace your steps to return to the Market Square
Sheep Street once formed the ‘Northgate’ entry into the Town — its name derived from the sheep fairs formerly held here.
Most of the historic buildings stem from the 18th Century when they were town houses for the more prosperous traders.
Some have been skilfully renovated, particularly Oriel House with its lovely Venetian style window.
Leave Market Square and go south down ‘The Drapery’— the name derived from the congregation of Drapers there in the 18th and 19th Centuries.
Look out for the narrow entrance to Swan Yard next to‘Debenhams’.
The classical facade of College Street Baptist Church is the grand vista greeting the traveller on emerging from Swan Yard.
The Church was built in 1863 by William Hall and might be said to represent the ultimate in Victorian Non-Conformist ‘Chapel’ building.
Passing the Grand Hotel turn right into Kingswell Street.
Kingswell Street; rather dingy but notice the Becket and Sargeant School for Girls ‘endowed’ in 1738.
Further down is the factory formerly occupied by Bassett Lowke, the world famous model-making firm.
Designed by Alexander Anderson from Glasgow.
The Museum of Leathercraft — formerly the ‘Corporation Charity School’ and later Bluecoat School.
Built in 1811 and now the Borough Council's Leathercraft Museum.
Well worth a visit.
Look at the statues of the ‘Bluecoat Boys’ on the front of the building.
Church of the Holy Sepulchre is said to be the oldest building in Northampton and the largest and best preserved of the medieval round churches in the Country.
The original Norman Church comprised the ‘Round’ and a small Chancel.
The Church was much extended in the 13th and 14th Centuries and again in Victorian times.
Look for the bullet holes in the tower dating from the days of the ‘Roundheads’.
Above the shops you can see the facade of Dr Doddridge's famous Academy dating from 1740.
Spare a look at 8–9a George Row with its fine proportions and impressive porch.
Designed by Henry Bell in the 17th Century.
Inside is a magnificent stairway.
Northampton's first infirmary was opened here in 1744.
The Angel Hotel, a well proportioned and imposing 19th Century Coaching Inn with origins in the 16th Century.
St. John's Roman Catholic Church founded in 1138 was formerly the Chapel of the medieval Hospital of St. John.
Most of the existing building though is 15th and 16th Century.
Next to the Chapel is the former infirmary — later the almshouse.
Market Square (reputedly the second largest in England) enjoys a wealth of historic buildings.
Perhaps the most distinguished is Welsh House — now Church's China, rebuilt in 1975 in the original 16th Century form.
This was one of the few houses to escape destruction in the Great Fire.
Look for the inscription — Heb Dyw, Heb Dym, Dyw a Digon — you can get a translation within.
Next door is Beethoven House — late 17th Century with a fine oriel window.
The Square reveals many well preserved and renovated buildings.
On the south side Drury Chambers (late 17th Century — now the Halifax Building Society), adjoining is Phelan and Agutter which is impressively decorated.
On the west side Victoria House (about 1840) has fine pilaster work.
Look into the little alleyways — Drum Lane gives a fascinating glimpse of All Saints Church.
Opposite is the War Memorial designed by Lutyens and set in delightful gardens.
Return to the Visitor Centre and the finish of our tour.
Sessions House — once County Hall — was one of the first ‘new’ buildings after the Great Fire.
The Courtrooms have lavish plasterwork ceilings by Edward Goudge.
Next door are the Judges lodgings.
The Church of All Saints — built in 1680 in the ‘Wren’ style replaced the large 11th century building destroyed in the Great Fire of 1675.
Above the portico stands King Charles II — in Roman attire — remembered for his help in restoring the fire ravaged town.
NORTHAMPTON — HISTORIC TOWN TRAIL
Whether you are a visitor to our town, or indeed live nearby, you may be surprised at the many fascinating glimpses of Old Northampton which remain and can be enjoyed.
Northampton's history goes back beyond the Romans — certainly to the Iron Age and settlements of that time can be found in and around the town.
In the town centre, almost all the medieval buildings were destroyed in the Great Fire of 1675.
Charles II helped with the Town's restoration, and since then the process of rebuilding and regeneration has been continuous.
The Market Square is a fascinating mix of ancient and modern combining to provide atmosphere and charm.
Around the town centre the four medieval churches of St. Peter's, St. Giles, St. John's and Holy Sepulchre compliment the classical Church of All Saints which stands at the ‘hub’ of the town.
Northampton, of course, is famous for its ‘boots and shoes’ and many of the fine Victorian buildings which abound are derived from the wealth of the shoe industry at the turn of the century.
The Town Trail attempts to link the long history of Northampton and present you, the visitor, with a taste of the heritage which belongs to this handsome town..
A short walk around Northampton's Historic Town Centre — approximately 3 miles
FURTHER AFIELD
Having visited the Heart of the Town — three places to visit, Abington Park, Delapre Abbey and Hunsbury Hill — should provide many rewards.
Delapre Abbey
The Abbey, a 17th Century mansion, in a beautiful parkland setting, was once a medieval nunnery.
The gardens in summer are a blaze of colour.
Nearby is Eleanor Cross, one of only three surviving crosses marking the route of Queen Eleanor's funeral cortege in 1290.
Abington Park
Abington Abbey features the Museum of Local Life and the Northamptonshire Regiment's Museum.
(The Museum is currently closed for structural repairs).
The nearby Church of St. Peter and St. Paul should be visited and the beautiful Abington Park provides a superb setting.
Hunsbury Hill
Hunsbury Iron Age Hill Fort, an ancient monument, is encompassed by Hunsbury Country Park which also includes a reconstructed Ironstone Railway and Museum.
Further Information
For further information about Northampton, places to visit, what's on, maps, guide books, etc. call in to the:
GUIDED WALKS in and around Northampton
Discover fascinating facts about Northampton on our summer series of guided walks around the town with specially trained Northamptonshire Tourist Guides.
This programme takes an entertaining look at the different ages of Northampton, from Medieval times, through the Industrial Revolution and Victorian era, to the present day.
As well as important historical events that helped to shape the town, the walks show how people lived, worked and enjoyed themselves.
Each walk is on a different theme and lasts for 1½–2 hrs and covers approximately 1½–3 miles.
The walks take place in all but the most extreme weather conditions, so please wear suitable outdoor clothing.
There are a limited number of places on each walk so it is best to obtain your ticket in advance.
Walk tickets are available in advance from the Northampton Tourist Information Centre, Mr Grant's House, 10 Giles Square, Northampton.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON WALKS
All walks start at 2.15pm .
NORTHAMPTON'S STORY
2,000 years of history in 90 minutes, a truly educational experience!
THE VICTORIANS
The architecture and people of this fascinating era.
AN AMBLE AROUND ABINGTON PARK
A leisurely look at the history of one of Northampton's most popular parks.
NORTHAMPTON TALES
Intriguing anecdotes about Northampton people and places.
RELIGIOUS HERITAGE
Tradition and dissent, from Saxon times to the present day.
DELAPRE & THE BATTLE OF NORTHAMPTON
The history of Delapre Park and Abbey.
HISTORY ON YOUR DOORSTEP
Unnoticed features and their meaning in Northampton's history.
BOOTS & SHOES
Growth of a boot and shoe town — from workshops to factories.
HUNSBURY: IRON AGE TO IRONSTONE
Discover the history of Hunsbury Hill.
THE HANDSOMEST & BEST BUILT TOWN
Daniel Defoe's Northampton: buildings and people.
COUNTRYSIDE IN TOWN
A meander through Becket's Park and along the riverside in the town centre.
CURIOSITIES
Unusual architectural features and historical facts.
THREE TOWN CENTRE CHURCHES
The architecture and history of Northampton's most well-known churches: St. Peter's, All Saints and the Holy Sepulchre.
NEW TOWN
A look at town centre development during the 20th century.
EVENTS & ESCAPADES
Events which have shaped Northampton's history.
HIDDEN TREASURES
Northampton's architectural heritage — Medieval times to the present day.
THURSDAY EVENING WALKS
All walks start at 7.30pm.
ENTERTAINMENT THROUGH THE AGES
How Northampton people amused themselves, strolling players to modern day entertainment.
A PERAMBULATION OF PUBS
A walk around the old Pubs and Inns of Northampton.
CRIMES & PUNISHMENT
Murder, witchcraft, religious dissent and places of punishment.
GHOSTS & LEGENDS
A walk around the haunted sites of Northampton.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE TOURIST GUIDES
Northamptonshire's fine historic buildings, pleasant countryside, charming villages and bustling towns are often less well known than they deserve, even by the County's residents.
Whether you live in Northamptonshire or come to the area as a visitor, for business or leisure, the expertise of the County's Tourist Guides will help you get to know this varied County better, and even help you find out more about the areas you thought you knew.
Northamptonshire Tourist Guides are trained and qualified to a nationally recognised standard by the East Midlands Tourist Board with support from the Northamptonshire Enterprise Agency, Northampton Borough Council and other local authorities.
Their intensive course of study included lectures, reading, visits and practical guiding sessions for all aspects of the County, against a background of a national core curriculum.
After successfully completing written and practical examinations, with language exams when appropriate, the Northamptonshire Tourist Guides are now qualified to offer walking tours, coach excursions and visits to attractions such as churches, museums and historic houses, ensuring that visits are enjoyable as well as informative.
To book a guide for your family visit, your group or society, or for an individual tour, ask for further details and a booking form from the Tourist Information Centre at Northampton Visitor Centre, Mr Grant's House, 10 St. Giles Square, Northampton.
NN1 1DA.
Tel:(0604) 22677.
A Guide to Northampton
Welcome to Northampton — a town full of hidden treasures just waiting to be discovered.
Famous throughout the world for its boots and shoes, this thriving market town offers a fascinating mix of old and new.
Fine Norman churches, elegant Victorian architecture, museums, art galleries, modern shopping, sports and entertainment, will spoil you for choice.
Colourful narrowboats on the River Nene, beautiful parks and gardens, and peaceful riverside walks all add to the charm and character of a town that has welcomed visitors for centuries.
Queen Eleanor Cross
Turner's Merry-go-Round
Despite damage caused by the Great Fire of 1675, Northampton still has a rich variety of historic buildings and churches for visitors to enjoy.
A focal point in the town centre is the Victorian-Gothic Guildhall, with its intricate carved statues outside showing scenes from Northampton's history.
Guildhall
Medieval Market Square, one of the largest in England, is surrounded by fine old buildings, including Welsh House, completely restored in 1975 in its original 16th Century form.
Welsh House was one of the few buildings to survive the Great Fire.
Market Square
Fine Norman architecture such as St. Peter's Church on Marefair remind you of days when Northampton was a fortified town with a strong castle.
The castle was a favourite royal residence of English Kings from Henry I to Richard II.
Much of Northampton's medieval heritage was destroyed by fire in 1675, but Charles II gave timber to help rebuild the town and this is commemorated by his statue on All Saints Church.
A short walk along Sheep Street is the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, the best preserved medieval round church in the country.
It was built around 1100 by the first Earl of Northampton to commemorate his safe return from the Crusades.
St. Peter's Church
Church of the Holy Sepulchre
Northampton's past comes to life in the Central Museum and Art Gallery on Guildhall Road.
As well as the world famous Boot and Shoe Collection, the Museum also includes fine collections of ceramics and paintings, and the two history galleries, ‘Hamtun’ and ‘Shoe Town — New Town’, recreate the town's past, from its earliest days to modern times.
The Museum of Leathercraft in Bridge Street houses a nationally important collection of leathergoods dating from Egyptian times up to the present day.
Billing Mill Museum at Billing Aquadrome is a restored 19th Century corn grinding mill with working waterwheel and milling machinery, and Hunsbury Hill Ironstone Railway and Museum tells the story of the ironstone industry in Northamptonshire through models and photographs, and has a working standard gauge railway.
Museum of Leathercraft
Reconstruction of a pawnbroker shop
Central Museum
Shopping couldn't be easier than in Northampton's compact central area.
The Grosvenor Centre with over 60 shops is linked to the Greyfriars bus/coach station and multistorey car park.
Nearby, the Market Square offers over 200 stalls on full market days: Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, and there's a covered fish and meat market on Sheep Street.
Peacock Place, a stunning arcade of fashion and specialist shops, leads to Abington Street, a pedestrianised shopping area with all your favourite chain stores.
And within walking distance, The Drapery, Gold Street, and St Giles Street add to the choice.
Good quality restaurants, cafes, pubs and ample car parks make shopping a pleasure.
Abington Street
Peacock Place
College Street Mews
Derngate, our prestigious entertainment centre on Guildhall Road, brings you famous names from around the world in a packed programme of concerts, musicals, dance, drama and variety.
The elegant Royal Theatre next door is one of the most splendid of its kind in the country.
Designed by the eminent architect C. J. Phipps, the Royal has enjoyed a history of live theatre since 1884.
Nostalgic memories can be relived at Turner's Musical Merry-go-Round, Newport Pagnell Road, where working fairground organs, a Wurlitzer and large carousel all form part of a spectacular indoor show.
The Cannon cinema, Abington Square shows all the latest films on release, while the Forum Cinema at Weston Favell is the regional film theatre.
Several nightclubs, together with pubs, jazz and folk clubs, provide a wide choice of entertainment.
Royal Theatre
Derngate
Heart of the Country
Northampton is superbly located midway between London and Birmingham, close to junctions 15 and 16 of the M1 with easy access from there to the M5, M6 and M25.
By rail it is on the London (Euston) to Glasgow line, with an hourly service to London and Birmingham.
London (Heathrow), Stanstead, East Midlands, Birmingham and Luton airports are all within 65 miles of Northampton.
The area is surrounded by major tourist venues within reasonable distance, including Warwick Castle, Coventry Cathedral, Stratford-on-Avon, Woburn Abbey, and the university cities of Cambridge and Oxford.
Keep fit during your visit whatever your sport!
Danes Camp, Clannel Road features a leisure pool with 45m water flume.
In the town centre the Mounts Baths offers a fully equipped health suite, Turkish Bath and top class swimming pool, while Lings Forum, Weston Favell caters for badminton, basketball, five-aside football, athletics and swimming.
Golfers have a choice of venues including Delapre Golf Complex on Eagle Drive where you can ‘pay-as-you-play’, and a new international course at Collingtree.
At St James Retail Park there's GX Superbowl, a 24-lane ten pin bowling centre.
Billing Aquadrome, four miles to the east of town, is a 270 acre leisure park with funfair, large marina and outdoor swimming pool.
If you prefer to just watch, there's county cricket and league football at the County Ground and ‘The Saints’ Rugby Club plays at Franklin Gardens on Weedon Road.
Within 12 miles of Northampton there's Silverstone Grand Prix Circuit, stock car racing at Northampton Stadium, Brafield, and horse racing at Towcester.
Danes Camp Leisure Centre
Delapre Golf Complex
Billing Aquadrome
Northampton has over 1500 acres of parks and gardens.
The largest, Abington Park, has boating, tennis, bowls, pitch and putt, band concerts, as well as ornamental gardens.
Delapre Park offers a charming combination of an Elizabethan walled garden, parkland and woodland walks.
Nearby on London Road is one of only three surviving Eleanor Crosses, which mark the route of Queen Eleanor's funeral cortege in 1290.
Just five minutes walk from the town centre, Beckets Park and Midsummer Meadow provide the perfect place for picnics and peaceful riverside walks.
Hunsbury Hill Country Park, to the south west of the town centre, includes an historic Iron Age camp, extensive walks, and train rides along an old ironstone railway.
Abington Park
Abington in Autumn
Hunsbury Ironstone Railway
Close to Northampton are castles, historic houses, wildlife parks, farm attractions — all within the unspoiled countryside of spires and squires.
Attractions include: Rockingham Castle built by William the Conqueror; Althorp House,(family home of the Princess of Wales) with magnificent paintings and porcelain; Castle Ashby which has extensive landscaped gardens open to the public; Sulgrave Manor, ancestral home of George Washington; and the delightful Canal Museum at Stoke Bruerne.
Burghley House, Warwick Castle and Woburn Abbey are also within easy driving distance.
Northampton is perfectly placed as a touring centre with a wide range of accommodation to choose from, ranging from luxury fourstar to comfortable family-run hotels and guest houses.
Special weekend breaks are on offer at many hotels.
There's also Billing Aquadrome, popular for caravanning and camping.
Sulgrave Manor
Althorp House
The Street — Rockingham Castle
Further information about Northampton including places to visit, what's on and where to stay is available from: Tourist Information, Visitor Centre, Mr Grant's House, 10 St Giles Square, Northampton, NN1 1DA.
Tel:(0604) 22677.
In August 1991, Northampton Borough Council opened a new Visitor Centre in buildings restored to their original Georgian/Victorian character.
As well as a Tourist Information office, it contains a Craft Shop, Tea Room, audio-visual display about Northampton's history, and a bridge link to the Central Museum & Art Gallery.
Stoke Bruerne
Warwick Castle
Lamport Hall
THE PLOUGH HOTEL NORTHAMPTON
Situated in the centre of Northampton
Within five minutes of the railway station and the main shopping precinct.
The Plough Hotel offers its guests relaxed surroundings within easy access to the M1 Motorway.
There is ample car parking facilities for 50 cars.
The Hotel has great character and is steeped in history.
An Inn has stood on the Bridge Street crossroads for many years.
The cellars of the present building are adapted from the cloisters of a medieval monastery.
The impressive Victorian building has recently been refurbished and restored bringing back the old fashioned courtesy, charm and service of a bygone era.
Mulliners Bar & Restaurant
The most popular and sophisticated meeting place in town, buzzes with vitality and excitement for all.
Our friendly bar with its extensive range of beers, real ales and cocktails, combined with the latest music, dancing and entertainment, adds up to a memorable evening in a convivial atmosphere.
Be it an a la carte dinner or a quick snack, Mulliners is the place to eat, drink and be merry.
Comfortable Accommodation
The Plough has 27 bedrooms, the majority of which have private facilities.
All have colour televisions, direct dial telephones and tea and coffee making facilities.
There is 24 hour room service, and for the busy businessman a facsimile machine is available.
Mulliners Bar
Making An Event Of It
The central location of the Plough makes it the ideal venue for both business and pleasure.
The King Charles II Suite with its traditional oak beams, caters beautifully for romantic wedding receptions, and together with the adjacent Althorpe Suite, is also perfect for conferences, business meetings and all types of functions.
A visit to Northampton wouldn't be complete without seeing Althorpe House, the home of Lord and Lady Spencer (parents of Princess Diana).
Also not to be missed is the Leathercraft Museum, The Derngate Theatre and the Northampton Central Museum and Art Gallery.
Sports enthusiasts don't lack for activities with Silverstone Race Track and the Delapre Golf Complex being amongst a host of activities and leisure pursuits just a short drive away.
Mulliners Restaurant
King Charles II Suite
Caring for our guests
The proprietors, management and staff of The Plough Hotel would like to offer you a warm welcome.
We sincerely hope you enjoy your stay with us, will visit us again, and recommend us to your friends.
If you require more information regarding functions, accommodation or booking please contact us at the address below.
If you have any problems or any suggestions for improving our service we would like to hear those too.
We are constantly trying to improve our standards so that we can continue to offer you the best possible service.
English Heritage Beeston Castle A Cheshire Landmark
BEESTON CASTLE
Rising from a high crag above the fertile Cheshire Plain, Beeston Castle stands out for miles around, drawing you like a magnet from afar.
Not surprisingly, the steep climb to the inner ward at the top is rewarded by possibly the most stunning views from any castle in England — to the west the Welsh mountains, to the east the Pennines and, on a clear day, the Wrekin to the south east.
Beeston's snaking walls and superb position are reminiscent of the crusader castles in distant lands from which Beeston's builder drew his inspiration.
But Neolithic tribesmen and Iron Age warriors left their mark on these slopes thousands of years before Ranulf, Earl of Chester, built his fortress in the thirteenth century.
Today, gazing out from Beeston's summit, you may feel that such a castle must have been impregnable.
Not so — for in one of the most gripping military adventures of the English Civil War, a brilliant escapade by Royalist commandos led to Beeston's capture from the Parliamentarians.
On the way down, there are many paths to explore, making Beeston an ideal spot for picnics.
These are just some of over 350 properties cared for by English Heritage.
We also provide expertise and funding to help conserve many other historically important buildings throughout England.
Without your support many fascinating places would otherwise be lost for present and future generations to enjoy.
English Heritage Boscobel House Charles II & the Royal Oak
THE ROMANCE OF BOSCOBEL
A visit to Boscobel House will take you to the scene of one of the most romantic stories in English history.
In 1649, after seven years of bloody civil war, King Charles I was executed.
The nation was declared to be a Commonwealth, and England was a monarchy no more.
But there was an heir, and the following year, the twenty-one year old prince, already Charles II to his followers, left the safety of Holland and made a desperate attempt to regain the throne.
After being defeated by the Roundheads at the Battle of Worcester in 1651, the future King was compelled to run for his life, and this was how he came to Boscobel.
Cromwell's soldiers were close behind, and Charles, on the advice of loyal friends, sought refuge here in what was then a remote hunting lodge, already known as a safe house for Royalist fugitives.
He was fed and sheltered by the Penderel family, spending a day hidden in the branches of an old oak tree with one of his trusted officers, William Careless.
Later, under cover of darkness, they crept into the house, where Charles hid for the night in the attic.
Eventually he managed to get away to the continent, and when he was restored to the throne nine years later, the story of the King's narrow escape seized the public imagination.
The Royal Oak of Boscobel can be seen to this day, painted on signs outside countless pubs all over the country.
A ROMANCE REBORN
Today, Boscobel is a delightful spot, although the buildings Charles knew have been much altered.
The dramatic story of the royal rescue has always attracted visitors, and an attempt to ‘restore’ the house to its appearance when Charles was here was made in the 19th century in deference to this appeal.
The result had as much to do with romanticism as historical accuracy, with simulated timber framing, and a Gothic chimneypiece decorated with scenes of the King's escape.
In more recent times, English Heritage has completed a refurnishing of the house and restored the surrounding buildings.
The house still has the romantic character of a Victorian historical novel — its chimneypiece is still painted with curious devices, and there are panelled rooms and hiding places, including the ‘sacred hole’ in the attic where Charles is said to have spent the night.
Outside is a pretty garden with knots of lavender in 17th century style, and a summerhouse on a mount where Charles is said to have rested.
There is a Victorian farmyard, complete with farm implements, a working forge and a display of butter churns, pats and stamps from the turn of the century, when Boscobel was still a working farm.
You can enjoy an exhibition that gives a vivid account of the fugitive King's perilous adventures.
THE ROYAL OAK
But perhaps one of the most special attractions at Boscobel lies waiting for you in the fields beyond the garden.
Although the original tree that sheltered Charles met an untimely end at the hands of over-zealous patriots, who hacked away branches and roots for souvenirs, you can still see a direct descendant of that famous oak, itself now nearly three hundred years old.
FREE ADMISSION FOR MEMBERS
JOIN ENGLISH HERITAGE for free admission to more than 350 historic places.
We offer you our nation's history — from prehistoric and Roman landmarks to medieval castles and abbeys, from stately homes to working industrial monuments.
Wherever you are, there is an English Heritage property nearby.
At only £15 for an adult and £30 for a family, joining English Heritage could mean substantial savings when compared with paying normal admission prices.
Other categories are available too, including life membership.
But just as important, you will be contributing to the conservation and protection of England's historic environment.
English Heritage is dedicated to preserving it all, not just the properties we currently manage.
We need your help to save the past for future generations.
JOIN US NOW
Join at one of the properties mentioned in this leaflet and you will receive your membership pack straight away, including your free guide and map.
Or just complete and send us the application form overleaf, and we shall send your membership card and pack within 28 days.
English Heritage Historic Landmarks OF THE EAST MIDLANDS KIRBY HALL LYDDINGTON BEDE HOUSE LONGTHORPE TOWER DENNY ABBEY RUSHTON TRIANGULAR LODGE
KIRBY HALL
Begun in 1570 and completed by Sir Christopher Hatton, an Elizabethan courtier who built on a scale matching his ambition to entertain the Queen, the ruins of this marvellous country house show the dawning influence of the Renaissance on more traditional Tudor forms.
Impressive in its sheer grandeur, the house is still partially roofed and glazed, with many rooms to explore, and a wealth of richly carved stonework to discover.
The ornamental gardens, now being restored to their former glory, were once amongst the finest in England and were the pride and joy of Christopher Hatton IV, who gathered many rare plants from all over the world.
LYDDINGTON BEDE HOUSE
Amidst the picturesque golden stone of the Leicestershire village of Lyddington, next to the handsome medieval parish church, stands the attractive Bede House.
For more than 300 years, since 1602, the building was used as an almshouse, but its beginnings were less humble.
It was once part of the rural palace of the Bishops of Lincoln, originally founded in the time of King John, and survived the Reformation by becoming a private house.
Many fine details — beautiful 16thcentury wooden ceilings, 15th-century painted glass, and a grand fireplace in the presence chamber — remain to remind us of this original purpose.
LONGTHORPE TOWER DENNY ABBEY
Longthorpe Tower is unique.
Nowhere else in England is there so complete an example of 14th-century domestic wall-paintings.
Little is known of the history of the tower, which is part of a late 13th-century fortified manor house, but the remarkable paintings — ranging from biblical subjects to scenes of everyday rural life — tell a fascinating story of their own.
Founded in the 12th century on what was then virtually an island in the fens, Denny Abbey was at different times home to Benedictine monks, Knights Templars and Franciscan nuns.
The remains of the church and refectory owe their survival to conversion for farm use, but still bear the marks of their complex history.
FREE ADMISSION FOR MEMBERS
JOIN ENGLISH HERITAGE for free admission to more than 350 historic places.
We offer you our nation's history — from prehistoric and Roman landmarks to medieval castles and abbeys, from stately homes to working industrial monuments.
Wherever you are, there is an English Heritage property nearby.
At only £15 for an adult and £30 for a family, joining English Heritage could mean substantial savings when compared with paying normal admission prices.
Other categories are available too, including life membership.
But just as important, you will be contributing to the conservation and protection of England's historic environment.
English Heritage is dedicated to preserving it all, not just the properties we currently manage.
We need your help to save the past for future generations.
JOIN US NOW
Join at one of the properties mentioned in this leaflet and you will receive your membership pack straight away, including your free guide and map.
Or just complete and send us the application form overleaf, and we shall send your membership card and pack within 28 days.
RUSHTON TRIANGULAR LODGE
Three walls, each with three windows and three triangular gables.
Three storeys topped by a three-sided chimney.
These are just some of the myriad architectural variations on the theme of three which grace this eccentric creation.
Why was it built like this?
The answer lies in the intense, if bizarrely expressed, religious convictions of its builder, Sir Thomas Tresham.
A Roman Catholic persecuted under Elizabeth I, he designed the Triangular Lodge in his prison cell as a symbol of the Holy Trinity and built it in the grounds of his home when he was released.
ROCKINGHAM CASTLE A Royal Residence for over 500 years
Rockingham Castle has been the home of the Watson family since 1530 when Henry VIII granted it to Edward Watson.
Today it is the home of his descendant, Commander Michael Saunders Watson and his family.
THE CASTLE
The Norman Towers — Entering through these it is easy to imagine the Knights of the Middle Ages setting off for battle, banners flying and a host of bowmen and falconers bringing up the rear.
The Tudor Great Hall — the display of arms and armour brings to mind the Civil War when Rockingham was captured and occupied by the roundheads.
The Panelled Room — 13th Century room, refurbished 1839, and now with a wide variety of impressionist and modern paintings.
The Long Gallery — In which Charles Dickens, a frequent visitor produced and acted in plays.
Today the Gallery houses a fine collection of furniture and paintings.
And yet more of interest and beauty in the Kitchens and Library.
THE GARDENS AND GROUNDS
Over 12 acres of Gardens ranging from the formal circular Rose Garden on the site of the Old Keep to the Wild Garden in the ravine.
The Street — Once the centre of the Castle's domestic and administrative life containing the Brewhouse, Bakery and Laundry.
The Church — The marble memorials in the Church and Chapel are exceptional.
Salvin's Flag Tower — Worth the climb up the steep spiral staircase for the views from the top.
See the armoury in the Tower Room.
CHILDREN
Children are particularly welcome at the Castle and special guide books are available as well as educational material for school groups.
In 1980, and again in 1988, Rockingham received the Sandford Award for Heritage Education.
Home-made cream teas.
Gift shop 
Rockingham Castle
‘CASTLES IN NORTHAMPTONSHIRE’
Northamptonshire is a county rich with fortified sites from Iron Age hillforts to Saxon ‘burhs’, from Norman castles of earth and timber to the stone built castles of the 12th to 14th century.
Few remain however with standing walls and buildings and Rockingham is the only one to have survived in regular use as a family home.
In conjunction with Northamptonshire Archaeology Unit, a special exhibition is being mounted at Rockingham which will be open with the Castle during the 1992 season.
The exhibition will tell the story of the development of the Castle through the ages, how they were built, how they were used, and how people lived in them.
The story will be illustrated by examples of Castles in Northamptonshire, in particular from Rockingham itself, built by William the Conquerer as a royal fortress and regularly used by the Kings and Queens of England for 400 years.
SULGRAVE MANOR The Northamptonshire home of George Washington's Ancestors
The Courtyard
Chintz Bedroom
Sulgrave Manor is a superb example of a modest manor house and garden of the time of Shakespeare, and was home to the ancestors of George Washington.
First mention of the Manor occurs in the Domesday Survey of 1086; it later belonged to the Priory of St Andrew, Northampton.
It was surrendered to the Crown in 1539, and sold by Henry VIII to Lawrence Washington, who built the present house.
His descendants were to live here for the next 120 years.
In 1656, Colonel John Washington left England to take up land in Virginia which later became Mount Vernon.
Col. Washington was the great grandfather of George Washington, first President of the United States of America.
In 1914, Sulgrave Manor was presented by a body of British subscribers to the Peoples of Great Britain and the United States of America, in celebration of the Hundred Years Peace between the two nations.
The House
Each room in the house is furnished to suit either the Tudor or the Queen Anne period, and the difference between these two styles is particularly striking when stepping from the stone flagged, Tudor Great Hall to the cosy, wooden panelled 18th century Parlour.
N. W. View of Sulgrave Manor
One of the most fascinating rooms is the fully furnished 18th century Kitchen, complete with open hearth and a huge array of pots, pans and other curious equipment.
Upstairs, the two 18th century bedrooms are elegantly furnished with exquisitely embroidered bed hangings and period items such as a spinning wheel, an embroidered waistcoat, shoes and samplers.
The third bedroom provides, once again, the contrast created by 200 years of development in comfort, it is the Tudor Great Chamber; a large, high ceilinged room with a broad fireplace and  sparse furnishing.
Beyond this room is a collection of fascinating items relating to the house and its famous connections.
Outside the house, the Washington coat of arms, said to have been the inspiration for the American flag, can be seen above the main porch.
Gardens
One of the many attractive features of the Manor is the garden.
To the East is the Rose Garden with its 16th century sundial.
Lavender grows in profusion, and many thousands of bags of Sulgrave Lavender have crossed the Atlantic since the house was opened to the public.
Beyond a yew hedge is the Kitchen Garden which would have supplied fresh vegetables for the household.
On either side of the porch are  herbaceous borders which in summer, are a riot of colour, brimming over with flowers which threaten to engulf the ground floor window.
Stretching southwards is the well kept lawn with its fine topiary work.
Great Bedchamber
18th Century Kitchen
On the terrace lawn there is a herb garden in the form of an Elizabethan Knot.
The Orchard, beyond, is underplanted with bulbs which provide a magnificent display each spring.
To the West of the formal gardens is a paddock planted with a variety of trees and  shrubs .
This affords fine views of the house and gardens, and is set out with tables and benches for picnicing.
The Brew House and Courtyard
The 18th Century Brew House has been converted to form a Visitors' Centre.
It now comprises on the ground floor, a shop, the Brewhouse Tea and Coffee Room and an Audio Visual Room.
Upstairs, the loft houses a museum of the Manor and surrounding village of Sulgrave.
The Courtyard provides a delightful setting for refreshment with tables and chairs placed outside in fine weather.
In one corner is the Brass Rubbing Centre, where rubbings can be taken of the Washington brasses and arms amongst others.
Educational Visits
A visit to Sulgrave Manor is especially worthwhile for children and young students studying lifestyle in the Tudor period and the 18th century.
It is not of overwhelming proportions and is presented as near as possible to a lived-in family home, rather than a museum.
A children's guide book and schools pack are available along with a wealth of source material relating to the house's history.
The house was used by Cynthia Harnet as the location for her children's historic novel, ‘Stars of Fortune’.
Preliminary visits are free and the Resident Director is happy to discuss individual school projects with teachers in advance.
Special rates apply.
Living History in the Great Hall
The Oak Parlour
Information
How to get there
Sulgrave Manor is situated in the village of Sulgrave just off the B4525 road from Banbury to Northampton, 7 miles N.E. of Banbury.
It is 6 miles N.W. of Brackley and the A43 and 10 miles west of Towcester and the A5.
Oxford and Stratford are approximately 30 miles distant and London via either the M1 or M40, 70 miles.
The nearest railway station is Banbury.
SULGRAVE MANOR
SPECIAL EVENTS
THE TROOP .
Cavalry Demonstrations in period costume with full authentic c. 19th encampment and equipment.
LIVING HISTORY 1644 .
For 9 consecutive days the Manor will be peopled and run exactly as it was in 1644 — the middle of the English Civil War — two years after the Battle of Edgehill and the year of the Battle of Cropredy Bridge, both within 8 miles of Sulgrave.
Everyone in period costume — meet the Gentry; servants; soldiers; craftsmen.
See the everyday happenings; the kitchen working and a full soldiers encampment.
OXFORDSHIRE VISUAL ARTS FESTIVAL .
Local artists and craftspeople exhibit their work, discuss and demonstrate their skills in the Manor and its beautiful surroundings.
The emphasis will be on needlecraft and allied skills, as the house has many fine period pieces of such work.
LIVING HISTORY 1746 .
For 9 consecutive days the Manor will be peopled and run exactly as it was in 1746 — Georgian times — one year after the abortive Jacobite Rebellion.
Come and see the whole household in their beautiful Georgian costumes.
Meet the Gentry, their servants, guests, estate workers and the local soldiery.
All dressed in authentic style with period equipment and period skills being demonstrated.
TWO DAY CRAFT FAIR .
At least 30 craftspeople will be demonstrating their skills and selling their wares, all beautifully sited in marquees on the lawns.
HISTORICAL RE-ENACTMENT by ‘55th INFANTRY’.
The American Civil War Infantry Unit will be demonstrating camp life and giving exhibitions of mock-engagements.
Authentic uniforms, weapons and equipment.
LIVING HISTORY 1560 .
Come and meet Lawrence Washington, the builder of Sulgrave Manor, direct ancestor of George.
Be taken round the Manor by him and his wife Amee.
Meet their household and see the Manor as it was in Tudor times with everyone in authentic Elizabethan costumes.
OPEN AIR THEATRE PRODUCTIONS OF SHERIDANS ‘THE RIVALS’.
Three productions of Sheridan's great c.18th romp first produced in London in 1776, the year the American war of Independence began!
All performers in period costume with period music.
Meet Mrs Malaprop and enjoy the farcical goings on in this witty comedy of manners from  England's greatest satirical playwright.
THE SIEGE OF SULGRAVE 1644 .
A re-enactment by ‘The Siege Group’ of an actual event that took place at Sulgrave in 1644.
Four Royalist Officers were captured after a short siege.
A performance each morning and afternoon.
See also full siege camp with exhibition of authentic costumes, artefacts and weapons.
HISTORICAL MURDER EVENINGS!
Get involved and have an exceptional evening of intrigue, mystery and fun.
Ring for details.
TWO DAY WEDDING AND HOMES SHOW .
A continuous exhibition with demonstrations and shows set in a giant marquee in the Manor grounds.
WORLD WAR II AMERICAN AIRFIELD NOSTALGIA Northamptonshire Rose of the Shires A journey down Memory Lane
WORLD WAR II UNITED STATES ARMY AIR FORCE BASES IN NORTHAMPTONSHIRE…can be linked on a nostalgic 60 mile/100 kilometre journey through the picturesque countryside of Northamptonshire.
Rose of the Shires.
Spend several days visiting all 15 sites which include eight of Northamptonshire's U.S. air bases, memorials to the Groups who flew from them, nearby villages and churches which commemorate the airmen's stay and pubs and towns along the route, haunts of WWII servicemen, or pick and choose those sights of particular interest.
Northamptonshire was home to the 8th Air Force from 1942–1945 at seven airfields in the County.
At Grafton Underwood were stationed the 97th and 384th Bombardment Groups; at Deenethorpe, the 401st; at Kings Cliffe, the 20th Fighter Group; at Polebrook, the 351st; at Chelveston, the 305th; at Podington, the 92nd and at Harrington, the 801st.
The 315th Troop Carrier Group of the 9th Air Force was stationed at Spanhoe near Harringworth.
BEFORE YOU COME
Friends of the Eighth (FOTE)is an informal organisation, formed in 1972, by a nucleus of individuals interested in preserving the history of the United States 8th Air Force.
From the interest generated, friendships have developed over the intervening years between the various 8th Air Force veterans' associations in America and FOTE members.
Memorials to those who never returned have been erected at former 8th Air Force airfields.
Contact:Mr Brian Baldwin, 36 Fallowfield Walk, Hardwick Vale, Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk IP33 2QZ.
Additionally, the 8th Air Force Historical Society may be contacted through Mr Gordon Richards, 14 Pavenham Road, Oakley, Bedford, Bedfordshire MK45 7SY.
Buddies of the Ninth (BOTNA)was formed in the early 1980s by a group of English aviation enthusiasts who felt a particular affinity with the United States 9th Air Force in World War II.
It has members on both sides of the Atlantic and one of its ideals is to encourage contact between 9th Air Force veterans and British people.
All members receive a quarterly bulletin which is produced entirely by contributions from members.
Airfield and group histories related by experts assist in the sharing of information about the 9th Air Force.
Contact:Mrs Bob Mynn, The Dell, Kiln Hill, Ixworth, Suffolk IP31 2HW.
1.
GRAFTON UNDERWOOD AIRFIELD on the Geddington to Grafton Underwood road was originally the home of the 97th Bombardment Group and then the 384th Bombardment Group (Heavy) of the 8th Air Force.
Other units based briefly on the airfield were the 15th Bombardment Squadron, 305th Bombardment Group and the 96th Bombardment Group.
B17 Flying Fortresses flew the first and last missions of the United States Army Air Force over Europe in August 1942 and April 1945.
A granite memorial to these Groups stands at the end of the former main runway.
2.
In St James the Apostle Church in the village of Grafton Underwood a stained glass window was given by and commemorates the tenure of the 384th Bombardment Group stationed nearby.
3.
The Wheatsheaf Hotel , Upper Benefield, the haunt of many wartime American airmen, displays an impressive collection of memorabilia of the airfield at Deenethorpe.
4.
DEENETHORPE AIRFIELD , on the A427 road from Benefield to Weldon where the 401st Bombardment Group (Heavy) of the 8th Air Force was based from October 1943 to May 1945, is the site of a granite memorial dedicated in 1989.
‘The Best Damned Outfit in the USAAF’ flew B17 Flying Fortresses on 254 missions over Germany and occupied Europe.
5.
The Church of St Mary the Virgin in Weldon was the beneficiary of two memorials presented by the 401st Bombardment Group over 30 years apart.
The Group's departure in 1945 prompted the presentation of stained glass panels, the first such American memorial.
In 1976 a Treble Bell was placed in the church tower in memory of comrades who did not return from their missions.
6.
SPANHOE AIRFIELD near HARRINGWORTH on the road to Laxton is commemorated by a memorial erected in 1983 on the site of the main entrance to the airfield.
Home to the USAAF 315th Troop Carrier Group of the 9th Air Force, Spanhoe's C47 Dakotas towed their gliders which carried British, American and Polish paratroopers and supplies to the D-Day beaches, Arnhem and the Rhine crossing in 1944–45.
7.
KINGS CLIFFE AIRFIELD was seconded from the RAF by the 20th Fighter Group of the USAAF 8th Air Force which flew P38 Lightnings and, later, P51 Mustangs on bomber escort duties.
A memorial ‘to commemorate the eternal memory of those American, British, Belgian and Commonwealth airmen who gave their lives in the course of freedom, 1943–1945, prompts our thoughts, ‘Lest We Forget’.
The memorial is situated on the road from the village to Wansford.
8.
The historic town of Oundle , one of the most attractive market towns in the County, is set in a loop of the River Nene.
Because of its numerous pubs and inns, it was the meeting place of many airmen from Deenethorpe, Kings Cliffe and Polebrook.
9.
POLEBROOK AIRFIELD , home to the 351st Bombardment Group (Heavy) of the USAAF 8th Air Force — including one of its captains, Clark Gable, who flew several missions from here as a gunnery officer in 1943 — is commemorated by a memorial, dedicated in September of 1980, which is located on the old runway off the Hemington road.
B17 Flying Fortresses flew 311 Group combat bombing missions from the airfield between 1943 and 1945; 175 aircraft and their crews were lost.
10.
In the north transept of Polebrook's Church of All Saints is a Memorial Book containing the names of those who served on the airfield and other memorabilia.
Memorial services are still held here and strong links are maintained with the 351st Bomber Group Association.
11.
The 16th century Woolpack Hotel in the village of Islip was a traditional watering hole of wartime airmen stationed nearby.
(Islip, Long Island in the U.S., was founded by the son of a Northamptonshire emigrant who became the first mayor of New York City in 1671.)
Today the hotel also contains the Visitor Centre of Rockingham Forest, an area which encompassed many of the local airfields.
12.
Near the junction of the A45 and the B663 stands the site of CHELVESTON AIRFIELD , the base of the 305th Bombardment Group (Heavy) of the 8th Air Force from 1942 to 1945.
From here the 305th flew 337 missions in B17 Flying Fortresses.
Two local village churches have been the recipients of the Group's generosity: in 1958 the Church of St. James, Thrapston, received the pews which had previously been installed in the Chelveston base chapel and the tower of the Church of St John the Baptist in nearby Caldecott-cum-Chelveston was restored with the help of the 305th.
13.
PODINGTON AIRFIELD , just over the Northamptonshire border near the Hinwick to Wymington road, was home to the USAAF 92nd Bombardment Group (Heavy) of the 8th Air Force.
Podington's B17 Flying Fortresses flew a total of 308 missions.
A memorial plaque in the village Church of St Mary commemorates the Group's stay and contributions.
14.
St Andrew's Church , Great Cransley, is the site of a particularly interesting stained glass window, the gift of the 384th Bombardment Group of Grafton Underwood which pictures a number of scenes of Britain's impact on American history.
Among the figures depicted are Winston Churchill, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, John Cabot, the Pilgrim Fathers, Thomas Hooker, William Penn and Abraham Lincoln.
15.
On the site of the old HARRINGTON AIRFIELD stands an impressive memorial to the men of the USAAF 801st Bombardment Group of the 8th Air Force who, operating with the Office of Strategic Service (U.S.), flew special missions in their B24 Liberators and other aircraft.
The memorial stands on the Harrington to Lamport road.
.
PLEASE NOTE: All wartime airfields have been returned to private ownership and permission should be sought before entering them.
Please refer to the list of contacts given
THEN, STAY A WHILE LONGER IN NORTHAMPTONSHIRE TO DISCOVER OTHER AMERICAN CONNECTS
A number of premier families of the United States can trace their roots back to the County:
The ancestry of George Washington can be observed in the Northamptonshire villages of SULGRAVE, GREAT BRINGTON, THRAPSTON and ISLIP.
Sulgrave Manor, a perfect example of a small manor house and garden at the time of Shakespeare, was the home of the forebears of ‘the Father of his Country’ for over 120 years.
A 14th century church, several special gardens, a visitor centre including a gift shop, museum and tea room and a courtyard brass-rubbing centre complete the various facilities.
The Church of St Mary the Virgin in Great Brington contains the tombs of Lawrence, the great-great-great-grandfather of George Washington and the former's brother Robert and sister-in-law which date from the early 1600s.
The Washington brothers came to the Bringtons from Sulgrave seeking positions on the estate of their cousins, the Spencers, the family of HRH The Princess of Wales.
Also in the village are the reputed sites of the Washington's homes while they were residents of the area.
St James Church in Thrapston is the site of a stone tablet bearing the arms of Sir John Washington, uncle to John Washington, George's great-grandfather who sailed to America in 1657.
Sir John is buried somewhere in the churchyard; along Chancery Lane in the village is Montague House, his home as Lord of the Manor of Thrapston.
Islip's St Nicholas Church contains a tablet to Mary Washington, wife of Sir John.
(Interestingly enough, the Washington family coat-of-arms is composed of stars and stripes.)
Josiah, the father of Benjamin Franklin , was born in the Northamptonshire village of ECTON, which had been the Franklin family home for over 300 years.
Josiah sailed to America in 1683 and Benjamin was born there 23 years later, the seventh child of his second wife.
Various relics of the Franklins' presence in Ecton can still be seen including the graves of Benjamin's aunt and uncle in the churchyard, a plaque in the Rectory commemorating his visit to the village in 1758 and the sites of the family's home and blacksmith's forge.
LAMPORT HALL was the seat of the Isham family for over 400 years.
Chief among its descendants, who originally emigrated to America in the mid-17th century, were Thomas Jefferson and Robert E. Lee , who were distantly related through the Isham line.
From the village of ACHURCH in 1633 Edmund and Judith Quincy travelled to America and there founded a family and named the town of Quincy, Massachusetts.
A persistent tradition has it that ancestors of America's second presidential family, the Adams, originally came from the village of FLORE.
In any event, members of the two families eventually intermarried; one offspring was John Quincy Adams , sixth president of the United States.
Then, too, the Garfields of KILSBY and ASHBY ST LEDGERS were the forefathers of another president,James Garfield , whose tenure, however, was one of the briefest in American history; his term was cut short by an assassin's bullet just a few months after his inauguration.
Today, both villages retain their quiet charm and are well worth a visit.
Great care has been taken in the compilation of this guide, but we would advise you to check that particulars have not been altered since the guide's publication.
The Northamptonshire Enterprise Agency Ltd cannot accept responsibility for any inconvenience arising from errors or alterations, however caused.
Published by The Northamptonshire Enterprise Agency Ltd.
Designed and produced by The Concept Partnership Ltd.
We would like to record our thanks to Ron Sismey and Gary Shaeffer for their assistance in the compilation of this leaflet, and Corby District Council for their support.
Photographs supplied by Quentin Bland, Ray Corby, Ron Sismey, the Military Vehicle Trust Northampton and Northamptonshire Libraries and Information Services.
Forestry Commission SALCEY FOREST
Owned and managed by the Forestry Commission since the 1920s, this ancient forest produces quality timber and provides a home for many animals and plants.
Salcey is open to visitors all year.
With any luck, you will catch a glimpse of some of its varied wildlife.
A Northants Forest District Trail
Great spotted Woodpecker
RSPB/M Walker
All Forestry Commission trails are being graded to show the degree of difficulty and ground conditions which walkers should expect.
Look out for these footprint symbols:
Salcey's Past
Originally Salcey was part of the chain of Royal Hunting Forests that stretched from Stanford to Oxford and dated back to the days of William the Conqueror (1066).
Used by royalty for hunting wild game, these forests also contained scrub and open grassy areas called ‘lawns’which were used to provide hay and pasture for deer.
Follow the Woodpecker
There are three circular trails at Salcey, named after the three woodpeckers found there.
The Lesser Spotted Woodpecker trail
— follow the black woodpecker symbol on a circular route that takes a leisurely 1 hour and has plenty of resting places.
The trail starts in the car park and has a hard level surface suitable for wheelchairs and pushchairs.
The trail takes you through both old and new plantations — look out for woodpeckers and birds such as long tailed tits and wrens which share their habitat.
In May/June butterflies can be seen along the open rides and in autumn there is a rich variety of fungi .
Don't forget to visit the Church Path Oak .
Lesser Spotted Woodpecker
The Great Spotted Woodpecker trail
— a longer walk that takes about 2 hours .
Parts of the trail may be muddy so bring your wellies.
Follow the red woodpecker symbol to the ancient Church Path Oak and along the edge of Salcey lawn before returning to the car park.
Great Spotted Woodpecker
The World of the Woodpecker
— centres around the old oak woodland which is equally important to a wealth of other birds.
Insects and mammals.
A visit to Salcey is all the more rewarding and exciting if you manage to see even a few of its shy inhabitants.
Try to follow these simple rules — make as little noise as possible, keep your dog under close control and above all…be patient!
Woodpecker Spotting
— not an easy task but well worth the time and effort.
The reward being the sound or fleeting view of these beautiful birds.
Where to look?
— woodpeckers generally feed and nest in mature oak trees .
The Forestry Commission has deliberately left areas of older woodland for their wildlife value, so concentrate your observations here.
The Great Spotted Woodpecker
— the most common woodpecker at Salcey; the same size as a blackbird, it moves through the tops of the trees in a series of hops with stiff tall feathers pressed against a branch for support.
It is noisy and can often be located by a loud drumming sound made by the bird hammering its bill on wood.
The male establishes and maintains its territory with drumming displays which you are likely to hear during the breeding season — mid March through to April.
The Lesser Spotted Woodpecker
— has similar colouring to the great spotted but is much smaller, about the size of a house sparrow.
It is selective and hard to observe though you may catch sight of it in the tree canopy feeding on wood boring insects.
The Green Woodpecker
— is the largest species of woodpecker in Britain.
Usually found around the edge of the forest close to open countryside, you are more likely to hear the loud laughing call of the green woodpecker than see it, as it is quite a shy bird.
It feeds largely on ants whose remains can be found in the birds droppings, which resemble cigarette ash.
The common doormouse , despite its name, is now quite rare but can still be found where there is thick scrub and hazel coppice.
The doormouse appears at night but the tell tale neat round hole it leaves in hazel nut shells, shows where it has been.
Ponds
There are several small ponds in Salcey which are home to a variety of animals including dragonflies and the rare great crested newt .
Dragonfly
The Rides
Open grassy tracks or rides that divide up the plantation were originally put in to allow machinery access to the forest and to act as firebreaks.
These rides are carefully managed by the Forestry Commission to provide a variety of shrubs, tall herbs and grasses ideal for butterflies.
Rare butterflies such as the wood white, black hairstreak and white admiral all thrive in Salcey where there is an abundance of the plants they feed on —vetches, blackthorn and honeysuckle .
Woodland plants grow well in clearings and along the forest edge and provide food for many insects and mammals.
Some rare plants such as orchids are found here.
Nettle Leaf Bell-flower
The Green Woodpecker Trail
For the more energetic with a particular interest in Salcey's wildlife conservation why not try this 2½ hour walk?
Don't forget your wellies!
Doormouse
Green Woodpecker
Forest Management — Past and Present
In the days of the Royal Hunting Forest, management involved coppicing (cutting the regrowth from stumps) of alder, hazel, birch and willow and allowing standards (timber trees) of oak and ash to grow up.
In the early 1830s the first oak plantations were established.
100 hectares of these early oak trees still remain and are particularly valuable for wildlife.
Mixed stands of oak and ash continued to be planted upto 1945.
Shortage of timber led to the increased planting of fast growing conifers such as Norway spruce .
Over the years a mix of tree species of varying ages has been established creating valuable wildlife habitats .
In 1970, 153 hectares were designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) by the Nature Conservancy Council and are managed for the benefit of wildlife.
Did you know?
some trees are left to become over-mature in order to provide homes for wildlife.
plastic tree guards act like miniature greenhouses boosting growth and protecting the tree from damage.
shorter tree guards are used to deter voles from debarking the base of a tree.
conifers are sometimes planted around oaks as a nurse crop , to protect the young oaks from winds, frost and to suppress weeds.
Today's forester is guided in his work by a number of considerations:
To produce quality timber by economic methods.
To protect and enhance the environment.
To provide recreational facilities for the public
Ride
natural regeneration
coppicing
Tree guards
How to get there
Salcey forest can be easily reached from both Northampton and Milton Keynes on the B526.
HILL FARM HERBS
The HERB SHOP is part of an old threshing barn.
It stocks seeds, essential oils, cards, books and posters as well as an ever-growing selection of herbal products for cooks and food lovers.
Our own range of herb vinegars, jellies and chutneys is on sale here and we also sell a large number of dried herbs and spices.
HILL FARM HERBS is set at the back of an old stone farmhouse in the Northamptonshire village of Brigstock.
We grow and sell a large range of herbs and cottage garden plants in pots and we also grow many herb flowers which we dry for use in herbal garlands and baskets.
The plants are displayed in the old farm yard and we have made many garden areas where our visitors enjoy browsing.
Most of the useful and aromatic plants we sell can be found growing somewhere in the nursery.
Our cottage garden is an informal mixture of herbs and other traditional plants — it is a haven for bees and butterflies.
This is the place to visit if you are planning a new garden or trying to give your modern garden the old fashioned look.
We stock an attractive range of terracotta pots which complement the herbs very well.
If required these can be purchased ready planted.
Please ask if you need any assistance, we will always do our best to help.
Our fragrant FLOWER ROOM is popular with flower arrangers.
We sell dried flowers and herbs by the bunch and a large range of baskets.
We always have a number of our own arrangements on display.
These are made in our workshop and we are always happy to carry out special orders.
Sacks of pot-pourri and other scented products give the room its special aroma.
WHERE TO FIND US
HILL FARM HERBS is clearly signposted by brown tourist signs from the A6116 on the South side of Brigstock.
If you are interested in our products but are unable to visit us please phone or fax us for our mail order lists.
We organise various courses over the winter period.
Please ask for details.
WHERE TO VISIT IN AND AROUND NORTHAMPTON NORTHAMPTON BOROUGH COUNCIL
AROUND AND ABOUT HOUSES & GARDENS
ALTHORP HOUSE
Home of Earl and Countess Spencer.
Built by Sir John Spencer in 1508, altered by Henry Holland in 1790.
Magnificent pictures, rare French and English furniture, exquisite porcelain.
Tea room, wine shop, present shop, toilets.
BOUGHTON HOUSE
A 500 year old Tudor monastic building gradually enlarged around seven courtyards until the French-style addition of 1695 based on Versailles.
Outstanding collection of 17th/18th century French and English furniture, tapestries, painted ceilings, notable works by El Greco.
Murillo, Caracci.
Celebrated Armoury.
State coach on view in coach house.
Beautiful parkland with avenues and lakes; picnic area; gift shop; woodland play area.
Teas.
BURGHLEY HOUSE
Built by William Cecil 1546–87.
Famous painted ceilings and a fine collection of 17th century paintings.
Also beautiful tapestries, china, silver fireplaces and historic relics.
Park laid out by Capability Brown 1760–80.
Famous Burghley Horse Trials: 10–13 Sept.
CANONS ASHBY HOUSE (The National Trust)
An exceptional small manor house c. 1550, restored gardens, small park and church, part of the original 13th century Augustinian Priory.
Elizabethan wall paintings and fine Jacobean plasterwork.
Home of the Drydens, visited by the poet.
Tea rooms and N.T. shop.
COTON MANOR GARDENS
An outstanding old English Garden of exceptional beauty.
Gardens laid out on different levels with herbaceous borders, lakes, water gardens, old hedges and lawns.
Ornamental wildfowl, cranes and flamingoes.
Home-made teas, unusual plants for sale.
COTTESBROOK HALL AND GARDENS
Architecturally magnificent Queen Anne house commenced in 1702.
Renowned picture collection particularly of sporting and equestrian subjects.
Fine English and continental furniture and porcelain.
Main vista aligned on celebrated 7th century Saxon church at Brixworth.
House reputed to be the pattern for Jane Austen's ‘Mansfield Park’.
Notable gardens of great variety, including fine old cedars and specimen trees, herbaceous borders, water and wild gardens.
Refreshment facilities.
DEENE PARK
Deene was acquired by Sir Robert Brudenell in 1514 and has been lived in ever since by his descendants including the 7th Earl of Cardigan who led the Charge of the Light Brigade.
Its appeal to the visitor lies in its indefinable atmosphere of a home cherished by the same family for over four centuries.
Large lake.
Park and extensive gardens with old-fashioned roses, rare trees and shrubs.
ELTON HALL
House dating back to 1475, lived in by the Proby family since the early 17th century.
Fine collection of paintings, furniture and books.
Gardens.
Teas.
HOLDENBY HOUSE GARDENS
Gardens incorporate remains of one of the largest Elizabethan gardens in Britain.
Original entrance arches, terraces, ponds, King Charles' Walk, a reminder of Charles I's four months' imprisonment here after his defeat in the Civil War.
Small museum, train rides on Sundays.
Rare breeds of farm animals.
Cuddle farm.
Falconry centre.
Play areas.
Croquet.
Plant and souvenir shop.
Victorian kitchen teas.
KELMARSH HALL
A mellowed red brick Palladian house, designed by James Gibbs for William Hanbury in 1728.
Furniture mainly English.
Spring garden, daffodils, fritillaries, rhododendrons, old-fashioned roses, herbaceous borders.
Lake.
Herd of White Park Cattle.
KIRBY HALL (English Heritage)
Outstanding example of large stone-built Elizabethan mansion with a rich variety of architectural detail.
Built by Sir Humphrey Stafford in 1570. 17th century additions in the style of Inigo Jones.
Gardens remodelled c. 1685 by 4th Sir Christopher Hatton — said to be ‘the finest garden in England’.
The gardens are currently undergoing restoration.
LAMPORT HALL
The seat of the Isham family since 1560, now maintained by the Lamport Hall Trust.
Present house mainly 17th/18th century.
SW front is a rare example of work of John Webb, built 1655, wings added in 1732–40.
Fine collection of paintings, furniture and china.
Garden contains one of the first rockeries in Britain, which houses the earliest garden gnomes in England.
Teas.
Programme of concerts and other events.
LYVEDEN NEW BIELD (The National Trust)
An unusual cross-shaped Renaissance building erected about 1600 by Sir Thomas Tresham to symbolise the Passion.
He died before it was fully completed.
His son was later imprisoned in connection with the Gunpowder Plot.
THE PREBENDAL MANOR HOUSE
The earliest surviving Manor in Northamptonshire, dating from early 13th century.
The present Manor overlays one of King Canute's Royal Manors and the site is of significant archaeological interest.
The Manor forms the focus of a group of stone buildings which include a fine 16th century Dovecote and an archaeological exhibition.
ROCKINGHAM CASTLE
Built by William the Conqueror on the site of an earlier fortification.
Lived in since 1530 by The Watson family.
Mainly Elizabethan house with walls of Norman Castle.
Fine collection of pictures, Rockingham china.
Close associations with Charles Dickens.
Extensive gardens.
Tilting lawn.
Home-made teas.
Gift shop.
RUSHTON TRIANGULAR LODGE (English Heritage)
Unique building built in late 16th century by Sir Thomas Tresham to symbolise the Holy Trinity with 3 sides, 3 floors, trefoil windows, and 3 gables on each side.
Reputed meeting place of Gunpowder Plot conspirators.
STANFORD HALL
Home of the Cave family, ancestors of Lady Braye, since 1430.
Present Hall built by Smiths of Warwick in 1690s and still occupied by the Cave family.
It contains antique furniture, fine pictures (including Stuart collection) and family costumes.
The grounds include a walled rose garden, nature trail, souvenir shop and a craft centre (most Sundays).
Also Motorcycle museum and a replica of Percy Pilcher's 1898 Flying Machine.
STOKE PARK PAVILIONS
All that remains of probably the first country house in England to be modelled on a Palladian villa.
17th century pavilions and colonnade attributed to Inigo Jones, restored in 1954.
Extensive gardens.
STOWE LANDSCAPE GARDENS (The National Trust)
Stowe was the birthplace of English landscape gardening, created by many of the great names of 18th century gardening, architecture and sculpture — Vanburgh, Bridgeman, Kent, Gibbs, Rysbrack, Scheemakers and Capability Brown.
The 580 acres are made up of landscaped hills and valleys, avenues, walks, lakes and cascades; 37 of the original garden buildings survive.
Refreshments available.
SULGRAVE MANOR
Early English home of the ancestors of George Washington, established in 1921 as a token of friendship between the peoples of the United States and Britain to whom the property belongs.
Good example of a small manor house and garden of Shakespeare's time.
Furniture of the period.
Outstanding kitchen.
WARWICK CASTLE
The finest mediaeval castle in England.
Magnificent state rooms, Ghost Tower, Dungeon, Armoury, Private Apartments, Madame Tussauds ‘A Royal Weekend Garden Party’ exhibition.
Extensive grounds with many special events from Easter to end August.
Refreshment facilities, restaurant, picnic areas and gift shop.
WOBURN ABBEY
18th century Palladian mansion set in 3,000 acres of parkland.
Impressive private collection of art on view to the public includes work by Gainsborough, Murillo, Reynolds and Van Dyck and early Tudor and Elizabethan portraits.
French and English furniture, European and Oriental porcelain, fine English silver.
Deer Park, Antiques Centre.
Refreshments and gift shop.
CHURCHES
BRIXWORTH CHURCH OF ALL SAINTS
One of the finest Anglo-Saxon churches in the country, mostly original 7th-century work, with much Roman material re-used by monks from the mother house at Peterborough.
Tower and rare stair turret were added in 10th century.
Curious ring-crypt around apse at the east end.
EARLS BARTON CHURCH OF ALL SAINTS
Earls Barton's Anglo-Saxon tower is one of the finest in England.
Built of stone with long and short work on the corners, it is in four stages with pilaster strips from the ground to the belfry, round arches in the second stage, pointed arches in the third, and narrow window openings in the belfry.
Also fine Norman arch in the main porch and Norman arcading in the Choir area.
CRAFTS
OLD DAIRY FARM CENTRE
Working farm with craft centre housed in old listed farm buildings, selling a wide variety of antiques, bygones, gifts and china.
Also new farm shop including Liberty goods and woollens loft with large selection of designer knitwear.
Licensed restaurant.
CASTLE ASHBY CRAFT CENTRE & RURAL SHOPPING YARD
The Centre offers an excellent selection of quality goods in restored farm buildings.
Farm shop, old granary showroom handcrafted country furniture shop, ceramics artist and Art Gallery.
Tea shop offers home-cooked lunches and teas.
MUSEUMS & ART GALLERIES
ALFRED EAST GALLERY
Gallery houses a collection of work by Sir Alfred East R.A. (1849–1913), and other artists with Kettering connections which are shown from time to time.
Regular programme of temporary and touring exhibitions.
ASHTON MILL, FISH MUSEUM & BYGONES
Mill with late 19th century machinery for water and electricity supply.
Fish museum, antique farm machinery, forge and tools, basket making and thatching exhibits.
Goats, Jacob sheep, tea room.
DAVENTRY MUSEUM
Permanent exhibition depicting the social and natural history of Daventry district.
Special features include a display about Daventry's BBC Radio Transmitter Station.
Series of special exhibitions throughout the year.
Tourist Information Centre.
MANOR HOUSE MUSEUM
Exhibits provide a glimpse into the social and industrial history of Kettering and include collections of agricultural equipment, shoe-making machinery and the 1907 Kettering-made Robinson car.
NORTHAMPTON
This guide lists a selection of places to visit in and around Northampton with opening times and admission charges for 1992.
This information is for guidance only and visitors are strongly recommended to check details prior to their visit.
VISITOR CENTRE
Northampton's new Visitor Centre, housed in attractively refurbished Georgian/Victorian buildings, is an ideal introduction to the town and surrounding area.
The Visitor Centre includes a large Tourist Information Centre, Craft Shop, Tea Room and an audio-visual display about Northampton's history, plus a bridge link to the Central Museum & Art Gallery next door.
The Visitor Centre is located opposite the Guidlhall as shown on the map below.
ABINGTON MUSEUM & MUSEUM OF THE NORTHAMPTONSHIRE REGIMENT
The museum is housed in a former manor house, parts of which date from the 15th century including a Great Hall and an oakpanelled room.
The collection is based on social history.
The museum also includes an exhibition of artefacts and pictures showing the history of the Northamptonshire Regiment.
Temporarily closed for structural work.
Re-opening expected Easter 1993.
BILLING AQUADROME
Billing Aquadrome is an established leisure park set in 270 acres of parkland, woods and lakes.
An amusement area provides a wide range of entertainment including a giant astroglide, dodgems, crazy golf and many children's and adult's rides.
Other features include a miniature railway.
CARLSBERG BREWERY LIMITED
Danish lager brewing specialists, visitors are taken on a tour of the brewing, bottling and packing processes.
CENTRAL MUSEUM & ART GALLERY
Displays include: the largest collection of boots and shoes in the world; two exciting galleries illustrating the history of Northampton from the Stone Age to the present day using objects, sound and film; a gallery of decorative arts including Chinese and English ceramics; Italian and English paintings and a programme of temporary exhibitions, plus a bridge link to the Visitor Centre next door.
CHURCH OF THE HOLY SEPULCHRE
The largest and best preserved of the four remaining round churches in England, dating from 1100.
Built by the first Earl of Northampton, Simon de Senlis, to commemorate his safe return from the Crusades.
Extensive naves (1300), Crusader window and Northamptonshire Regiment memorials.
GUILDHALL
Magnificent Victorian Gothic masterpiece by E. W. Godwin, extended by the local architect Matthew Holding in the 1860s.
Richly carved exterior depicts famous figures and scenes from Northampton's history, the interior is richly decorated.
Paintings in the Great Hall by Colin Gill.
HUNSBURY HILL IRONSTONE RAILWAY & MUSEUM & COUNTRY PARK
The displays show how Northamptonshire Ironstone was quarried, and transported to the blastfurnaces to be made into iron.
In summer trains run through the Country Park over part of an original ironstone quarry railway.
The country park includes an historic Iron Age camp and extensive walks, one of which links up with the walk along the Grand Union Canal via Green Lane.
Picnic/barbeque areas, play area, adventure playground.
MARKET SQUARE Northampton town centre
Northampton's historic market square dates back to 1235 and was the scene of many events and fairs.
Today over 200 stalls offer a wide choice of merchandise.
Full markets are held every Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday.
There are fruit and vegetable stalls six days a week Monday–Saturday.
A smaller brica-brac and craft market is held on Thursdays.
MUSEUM OF LEATHERCRAFT
This museum's displays illustrate the history of leather use from earliest times to the present day.
Among the exhibits are fine gilt leather panels, mediaeval caskets and modern designer leathergoods.
ROYAL PIONEER CORPS MUSEUM
This museum includes the history of the British Army's Pioneers and displays the history of the Corps since 1939.
Items of general Corps and military interest, including many German items.
Fine collection of hand weapons.
ENTERTAINMENT
DERNGATE
Modern multi-purpose entertainment venue for ballet, opera, concerts, sports events, theatre, banqueting, exhibitions and conferences.
Brasserie restaurant.
Gift shop.
Back stage tours by prior arrangement.
ROYAL THEATRE
Major regional theatre presenting repertory, studio, theatre-in-education and touring.
The building was designed by C.J. Phipps an eminent Victorian architect.
Back stage tours by prior arrangement.
TURNER'S MUSICAL MERRY-GO-ROUND
Unique collection of mechanical musical instruments presented in a spectacular show.
Dancing to one of the largest Wurlitzer organs in Europe.
Fairground carousel.
Classic car collection and Victorian post card collection.
PARKS & GARDENS
ABINGTON PARK
Abington Park is one of Northampton's oldest established parks.
126 acres of parkland comprise ornamental flower gardens, rare trees, a scented garden for the blind, boating lakes and an aviary.
The park also includes Abington Manor, which houses a museum of social history (temporarily closed for structural repairs) and the charming church of St Peter and St Paul.
Activities: boating, bowling rink, cricket tables, pitch & putt course, grass and hard tennis courts.
Picnic area.
BECKETS PARK
Beckets Park is situated close to the town centre, alongside the River Nene.
Visitors can enjoy peaceful riverside walks, a nature reserve, ornamental flower gardens, putting course, croquet and hard tennis courts.
Nearby, Becket's Well on Bedford Road commemorates the escape of Thomas A Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, from his trial at Northampton Castle in 1164.
DELAPRE PARK & GARDENS
Delapre, one of Northampton's most delightful parks, includes Delapre Abbey — a former cluniac nunnery, an Elizabethan walled garden with special herbs, ‘wilderness garden’, sculptures, lawns, shrubs and lily ponds.
Pleasant woodlands walks, lake with waterfowl reached via walk through ‘Charter Wood’.
The Eleanor Cross, at the edge of the park on London Road, is one of only three surviving crosses erected by Edward I to mark the route of Queen Eleanor's funeral cortege in 1290.
NASEBY BATTLE AND FARM MUSEUM
Miniature layout of Naseby Battlefield with commentary.
Relics from battle, swords, helmets, armour etc.
Collection of domestic bygones, farm hand tools and machinery, and vintage tractors.
WELLINGBOROUGH HERITAGE CENTRE
Listed building housing a small exhibition on the history of Wellingborough.
Special exhibitions during the year.
TRANSPORT COLLECTIONS
THE CANAL MUSEUM
Housed in a restored cornmill, the museum collection vividly portrays the heritage of 200 years of inland waterways.
Working models, videos, pictorial and three dimensional displays portray every aspect of life on the canals.
The museum is complemented by the ‘living canal’ outside with its flight of locks, boats and the Blisworth Tunnel.
Boat trips nearby.
NENE VALLEY RAILWAY
Standard gauge steam railway running over 7 miles through the Nene Park, between Wansford and Peterborough via Yarwell Mill and Nene Park.
Locomotives and stock from nine countries.
Shop.
Refreshment coach, Bar car.
Museum coach.
NORTHAMPTON & LAMPORT RAILWAY PRESERVATION SOCIETY
The Society aims to re-open as much as possible of the old Northampton-Market Harborough railway line.
Collection includes steam and diesel locomotives (working and under restoration), plus other rolling stock.
COUNTRY, LEISURE & WILDLIFE PARKS
BARNWELL COUNTRY PARK
37 acres picnic meadows, lakes, wildlife, Kingfisher hide.
Fishing facilities (small charge).
Ranger Service.
Visitor Centre, Information.
BRIGSTOCK COUNTRY PARK
Country park with picnic meadows, forest walk and wildlife observation.
Visitor Centre.
Ranger service.
BRIXWORTH COUNTRY PARK
Northamptonshire's newest country park covers 35 acres with splendid views over Anglian Water's Pitsford Reservoir and access to a waterside walk.
A new visitor centre with interpretation facilities will be open from 1st June, 1992.
DAVENTRY COUNTRY PARK
Country park situated around reservoir where fishing is available, nature reserve, nature trail, wooded areas, picnic sites and adventure playground.
Guided walks.
Visitor centre.
EAST CARLTON COUNTRYSIDE PARK
100 acres of parkland with nature trail and interpretation centre.
Rural craft workshops.
Steel Making Heritage Centre and blacksmith's forge.
Refreshments available.
IRCHESTER COUNTRY PARK
200 acres of a former ironstone workings, now afforested.
Nature trail, woodland walks, picnic meadows.
Narrow Gauge Railway Museum, the collection includes locomotives and rolling stock.
Railway operates last Sun every month.
SYWELL COUNTRY PARK
Country park with waterside walks, picnic meadows, wildlife observation, reception/visitor centre.
Ranger service.
WICKSTEED PARK
The oldest leisure park of its type in the country founded in 1916 and opened in 1921.
Large free playground plus ‘paid for’ amusements including miniature railway, Mississippi River Boat, skateboard and BMX track, waterchute, roundabouts, Cine 2000, swimming.
Refreshments, Craft Workshops, gift shops.
WOBURN WILD ANIMAL KINGDOM
Drive through safari park of 300 acres.
Tigers, lions, rhinos, hippos, giraffes, monkeys, camels, Canadian timber wolves and many more.
Pets corner.
Picnic areas, restaurant, gift shop.
Tours of the UNEXPECTED AN INSIGHT INTO INDUSTRY Northamptonshire Rose of the Shires
An invitation to glimpse behind the scenes from a diverse selection of Northamptonshire businesses and public sector organisations.
May to December 1992
Tours of the UNEXPECTED AN INSIGHT INTO INDUSTRY
Have you ever wondered what goes on behind the scenes in our country's commercial, industrial and public service organisations?
Blacksmith or brewery, craft shop or credit card company, leisure park or leather works…
Northamptonshire boasts an impressively diverse range of manufacturing and service industries.
These include farming, printing, finance, footwear manufacture, distribution, newspaper publishing, cultural and sporting facilities, Formula 1 racing, helicopter assembly, flour milling and boat building, not forgetting the retail sector, the Royal Mail, the public utilities and Local Authority services.
Each has its own secret world.
‘Tours of the Unexpected’ unveils a host of fascinating experiences for you.
You may be studying particular aspects of business or wanting to spend a couple of very pleasant hours learning about a new environment.
Of course, you may just be curious about how other people spend their working lives.
The economic prosperity of the county once relied on leather, footwear and other traditional activities.
A wide variety of other commercial and industrial organisations has since been attracted to the country, not least because of its central location and excellent transport links with the rest of the country.
This has resulted in an interesting array of old and new, of ancient craftsmanship and modern technology — some of it now available to you.
With nearly forty participants in this ingenious new venture, you have the chance to find out something of what makes Northamptonshire tick!
There are bound to be some tours which appeal to you.
Look through the brochure — the choice is yours!
ANGLIAN WATER
Effective water management is literally vital to our existence and yet, perhaps, taken for granted by many.
Anglian Water Open Days provide a rare opportunity to find out what is really involved in treating and supplying safe, clean water and in cleaning waste water for its return to the environment.
Information caravan.
Refreshments.
Notes Sensible footwear is recommended.
People in wheelchairs may find the tour difficult or impossible, depending on the site, but would still be able to enjoy the day.
ARK FARM DAIRY PRODUCTS
Situated on the edge of the attractive village of Tiffield, Ark Farm has evolved from a number of farms over the last 30 years.
Developed on a green field site in 1987, it is the only largescale, sheep dairy unit in Northamptonshire.
Follow the production of milk from the sheep, either grazing contentedly in the fields or relaxing in their sheds, through the milking parlour, to the finished products of yogurt and ice-cream in the Farm Shop.
Also see the young lambs, various breeds of cattle and the flock of free-range hens.
Notes Sheep farms are not recommended for visits by pregnant ladies, due to health risks at lambing times.
Sensible shoes are recommended, especially wellington boots in wet weather.
ARKLE PRINT
Founded in Kettering in 1970 by Mr Don Newitt, Arkle Print has gone through mergers, moves and a considerable growth period.
Now with some 70 employees and a turnover approaching £4 million, it is one of the county's busiest commercial printing companies, serving commerce and industry locally and nationally with quality print.
Visitors will witness the process of producing printed materials, including the production of artwork, planning and platemaking, single and multi-colour printing, guillotining and binding, as well as gaining an insight into management, administration and quality control.
Notes We regret that the tour is not entirely suitable for people in wheelchairs.
BARCLAYCARD
The Central Retail Services Division is Barclays Bank's provider of centralised financial and information-based services worldwide.
The Division's flagship product is Barclaycard — Barclays is the largest card issuer in Europe.
The Head Office is situated in Northampton and CRSD employs 6,600 staff, of which 3,300 are based in the town.
The tour will consist of a visit to four of the main operational areas relating to the card business:
BARKER SHOES
Barker Shoes is a family business founded in 1880 and manufactures men's and women's high grade shoes in many styles and constructions.
The company makes a whole range of types of shoe including dress, casual and traditional.
There will be an introduction to the company, giving the history and manufacturing processes, followed by a tour.
Visit the factory shop.
Note Please advise at the time of booking if you wish to visit the Museum which is on site.
BLACK AND DECKER
Visit Black and Decker's UK national distribution centre.
This company is the world's leading marketer and manufacturer of power tools and other quality products used in and around the home and for commercial applications.
A short film will be shown on Black and Decker prior to the tour followed by a question and answer session.
BRITISH GAS
Provider of energy to domestic, industrial and commercial users within Northampton, British Gas welcomes visitors to the Service Centre at St Peter's Way.
The tour will provide an insight into the modern technology used to co-ordinate an efficient service to over 200,000 customers.
Light refreshments.
Notes Strictly no smoking.
BRITISH STEEL
British Steel's Corby Works, the headquarters of the company's Welded Tubes business, has had a presence in the town since the early 1930s.
Employing around 1,600 people, the Works manufactures steel tube for a wide variety of applications in the construction, engineering and energy-related industries worldwide.
There will be a brief address about the company and Corby, a video of the process and a visit to the plant.
Notes Minimum age 12 years.
We regret we are unable to cater for people with physical disabilities.
Sensible walking shoes recommended.
Hard hats and ear protectors provided.
CARLSBERG BREWERY LTD
A unique opportunity to see the world-famous brewery in operation during which a short video will be shown.
You will be able to sample a refreshing glass of lager or a soft drink in the Visitors' Department afterwards.
Souvenirs are available following the tour.
Notes Minimum age 10 years.
No cameras are allowed.
There are a number of flights of steps and visitors will be walking on catwalks above some of the processes.
Therefore it is unsuitable for wheelchairs.
CHRONICLE & ECHO
A complete insight into how Northampton's local evening newspaper is produced and the chance to see the Chronicle and Echo rolling off the presses.
There is also a slide show.
Notes Ear protection is supplied.
CHURCH & CO (FOOTWEAR) LTD
Church & Co has been producing shoes in Northampton since 1873 and here is an excellent opportunity to see the many processes that make up the manufacture of men's welted shoes.
D B SHOES LTD
D B Shoes is a medium-sized footwear manufacturing company.
Formed in 1920 it has been making men's shoes in Rushden ever since.
In the 1970s the company expanded into Northampton where it makes girls' shoes, ladies' shoes and men's sandals.
The tour will show you the whole manufacturing process by following the progress of a pair of shoes from start to finish around the factory.
Factory shop.
Teas available.
Notes Large coach parties will be split into smaller groups.
DERNGATE
Derngate is a large flexible multi-media venue, playing host to a wide variety of art forms — drama, opera, ballet, classical and light music — and is also available for conferences and seminars.
Visitors will be shown the auditorium with a description of the alternative formats.
They will also go backstage to the Flying Gallery and understage.
There is a Gift Shop and also a licensed Brasserie.
Notes Minimum age 8 years.
Not suitable for wheelchairs as stairs are involved.
EAST MIDLANDS ELECTRICITY PLC
Recently privatised, East Midlands Electricity plc is a progressive regional electricity company supplying electricity throughout the UK together with a vast range of services.
These include electrical goods, energy-efficient systems, mechanical and electrical installations.
Of particular interest at Northampton is the expertise in street lighting and the 24-hour Customer Service Unit.
There will be a short talk with video and/or slides followed by a tour of the computerised telephone handling/work scheduling and electricity distribution system control and maintenance.
Notes Minimum age 12 years.
FOTHERINGHAY FORGE
Revived in 1979, the forge is a charming 18th century stone building with its original cobbled flooring and brick forge hearth.
The visit will include a brief history of the forge and a live demonstration of making decorative items such as rams' heads and owls for pokers and intricate scroll work, using traditional techniques.
A memento of your visit may be purchased in the small showroom.
Refreshments at the nearby hostelry!
Notes Casual clothes are recommended.
Bring your own eye protection (e.g. sun glasses).
T GROOCOCK & CO LTD
This is a family business founded some eighty years ago in the heart of the English shoe-making area.
A factory tour of welted and moulded shoe manufacturing processes is followed by a visit to the factory shop with a wide range of footwear at favourable prices.
Notes We regret the factory tour is unsuitable for people in wheelchairs.
GEORGE JAMES & SONS (BLACKSMITHS) LTD
A marvellous opportunity to visit a forge that has been in the same family for five generations to see a working blacksmith.
See them using traditional skills on new forged ironwork as well as restoration work.
Question and answer sessions gladly undertaken.
There is a static display showing work and photographs, also possibility of the purchase of small hand forged items as mementoes.
Notes Minimum age 8 years.
Eye and ear protection can be supplied if necessary.
JORDAN GRAND PRIX Jordan Grand Prix, Britain's newest Formula One team, finished 5th in the FIA Formula One World Championship in their first season of competition.
The team has a two-car entry in the 1992 Championship with Italian driver, Stefano Modena and Brazilian, Mauricio Gugelmin.
Enjoy a tour of Jordan Grand Prix 's Headquarters where the team's cars are built and prepared for competition.
Notes No infants.
The Living Landscape Trust
LIVING LANDSCAPE TRUST/BROUGHTON HOUSE
Northamptonshire has been the home of the Duke of Buccleuch and his Montagu ancestors since 1528.
The traditional estate is run on modern lines and consists of 11,000 acres with farming, forestry, game-keeping, conservation and leisure activities.
Here is an opportunity to see day-to-day activities relating to life on the estate — working farm with dairy cattle, sheep and arable crops — all set in attractive parkland.
Notes Outdoor clothing is recommended, including walking boots or wellingtons.
MOULTON COLLEGE
Moulton College is five miles north of Northampton off the A43.
It specialises in training for those engaged in agriculture, horticulture, equestrianism and other land-based industries.
The 1,000 acre estate has a wide range of livestock and crops, produces ice-cream and organic crops and has a garden centre, small animal unit and play area.
Refreshments.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE AMBULANCE SERVICE
The Northamptonshire Ambulance Service was born in 1974 when the former Northampton County Borough and Northamptonshire County Council Services amalgamated.
Since the beginning it has grown in capability, in scope and in expertise.
The modern service provides the busy and prosperous County in the 1990s with quality care and valuable resources.
Computerisation was introduced in 1979, followed by advanced driver and paramedic training in the early '80s.
The Service has the most advanced communications systems in the UK, operational 24 hours a day and available to a wide range of associated professions.
Visit the ambulance control and see the ambulance vehicles.
NORTHAMPTON COUNTY COUNCIL COUNTRYSIDE SERVICES
BRAMPTON VALLEY COUNTRYSIDE SERVICE
The Brampton Valley Countryside Service manages Brixworth Country Park and the Brampton Valley Way Linear Park, a former railway line running from Northampton to Market Harborough.
The tour members will meet at Brixworth Country Park and then travel by mini-bus along the former railway line.
The rangers will explain how they now manage the railway line for recreation and wildlife.
Notes Stout shoes should be worn.
We regret we are unable to accommodate wheelchairs or pushchairs.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL COUNTRYSIDE SERVICES
IRCHESTER COUNTRY PARK
Irchester Country Park, the country's largest, covers 200 acres and is 21 years old this year.
The site is a former quarry which is now managed for wildlife, informal recreation, environmental education and timber production.
The tour will include a visit to the timber workshop and provide an insight into the role of the ranger service in managing the park.
Notes Stout shoes should be worn.
We regret we are unable to accommodate wheelchairs or pushchairs.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL COUNTRYSIDE SERVICES
SYWELL COUNTRY PARK
Sywell Country Park consists of 143 acres of meadow and pasture and 70 acres of reservoir.
The park was opened in 1985.
The tour will include a view of some of the former waterworks equipment and will provide an insight into how the rangers manage the park and balance the needs of wildlife with those of the visiting public.
Notes Stout shoes should be worn.
We regret we are unable to accommodate wheelchairs or pushchairs.
NORTHAMPTON COUNTY CRICKET CLUB
A must for cricket enthusiasts of all ages.
Join a guided tour of the Northamptonshire County Cricket Club and learn about its history and that of the ground, as well as just what it takes to run a major sporting venue.
There will be a chance to watch some video highlights and to visit the shop, restaurant and bars.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE FIRE & RESCUE SERVICE
A chance to see the work of the fire service at Bolton House and Mereway Fire Station, including fire house and a visit to the control suite at Moulton Fire Station.
Return to Bolton House at the end of the tour.
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE NEWSPAPERS
Enjoy a tour of the Evening Telegraph which brings news to the county and beyond and is very much a part of the way of life in the area.
Tour around major departments to learn how the paper is produced.
Also visit the press to see that day's paper being printed.
There is the opportunity to have a look at a slide show and purchase promotional gifts.
PEARCE PRINT LTD
Pearce Print was set up in the centre of Northampton in 1979 and moved to the new Moulton Park Industrial Estate until changing its location to Kettering in 1991.
The company's main business is in sheet fed offset and it is at the forefront of printing on recycled paper.
Notes There are stairs to the office.
PEARCE TANDY LEATHERCRAFT LTD
Pearce Tandy Leathercraft is situated in the grounds of W Pearce & Co, a company founded in 1908.
For almost a decade it has been providing courses in the art of leather carving, tooling, dyeing and stitching as well as offering craft kits for sale.
The skills involved are a blend of American techniques and those used in the traditional Northamptonshire leather industry.
The visit will include a tour, a demonstration and a visit to the shop.
ROYAL MAIL NORTHAMPTONSHIRE
A chance to see the journey of a letter from the point of posting to delivery at the main sorting office for the Northampton area.
Notes Minimum age 15 years unless on a Youth Training Scheme.
Lift facility available for the disabled.
ROYAL THEATRE
Opened in 1884, the Royal Theatre is a beautiful example of a Victorian pit theatre, adorned with plush trimmings, uniquely decorated safety curtain and Waterford crystal chandelier.
The theatre produces between 10–15 shows a year, including a truly traditional pantomime.
It is the permanent home of the Northampton Repertory Players.
You will be taken on a guided tour of the theatre including the stage, auditorium, backstage, paintshop and dressing rooms.
The café-bar is open and why not enjoy a performance in the afternoon?
Notes There are several flights of stairs and only the auditorium is wheelchair accessible.
SCOTT BADER CO LTD
Scott Bader is a common ownership company and leading manufacturer of unsaturated polyester resins, emulsion polymers and surface coating resins.
Modern laboratories service the marine, building, transport, textile and other markets.
A video will be shown followed by a tour of the laboratories and other support services, the Commonwealth Centre and a selective tour of the factory area.
Refreshments and lunch can be obtained in the Commonwealth Centre and/or Social Club.
Notes Youngsters up to 19 to be supervised.
We regret the tour is unsuitable for people in wheelchairs.
Matches and lighters to be left at reception.
SLOANE HELICOPTERS LTD
Sloane Helicopters moved into its prestigious, purpose-built hangar in Sywell in June 1989.
Sloane is the world's largest dealer in new helicopters and has extensive engineering support facilities.
Sloane also operates a Pilot Training School and offers helicopter charter for all occasions.
Here is a chance to see a variety of helicopters on the hangar floor, with the possibility of seeing how new helicopters arrive, are assembled and test-flown.
Look/sit inside a helicopter.
Visit Technical Records and Overhaul Shop, Flying School Briefing Rooms and Pilots' Shop.
There will be a short presentation on flying the Robinson R22.
STOWE HILL MARINE
Constructor of quality narrowboats, Stowe Hill Marine produces individually designed and fully fitted traditional craft and also carries out refurbishment.
Visitors will receive a warm welcome from the small enthusiastic staff of this family-run business and will see the many operations involved, including welding, woodworking, painting and engineering.
Notes Children to be carefully supervised.
We regret that people in wheelchairs would not be able to gain full benefit from the visit.
TESCO STORES LTD
Records show that Tesco has been in the county from the late sixties.
There are now five stores — two in Northampton, two in Wellingborough and one in Kettering.
Weston Favell has one of only six Consumer Advice Centres in the country and Kettering is one of their most up-to-date superstores.
There will be a brief insight into the history of the company and how it got its name.
A look behind the scenes and an update on current issues.
The tour at Weston Favell will include a visit to the Consumer Advice Centre.
Refreshments will be served at both venues.
Notes Minimum age 16 years.
Overalls and hats will be supplied.
WHITE & CO (EARLS BARTON) LTD
This family-owned company has been in business for over 100 years.
It manufactures high quality men's leather Goodyear welted and high fashion Dr Martens footwear under licence.
Visit the factory and watch all the processes.
Received the Queen's Award for Export & Technology in 1990 and the Chronicle & Echo Business of the Year Award in 1991.
After the tour, call in to the factory shop.
WHITWORTH BROS LTD
A chance to see how wheat is cleaned and processed into flour at the Mill built in 1886 by J B Whitworth on the banks of the River Nene.
There is also an insight into the laboratory where all the incoming wheats are tested before being discharged into the silos and subsequently cleaned.
Notes Minimum age 17 years.
There are numerous flights of stairs, therefore the tour is only suitable for reasonably physically fit people.
WOODNEWTON CRAFT STUDIOS
The Craft Workshops are housed in a recently converted Methodist Chapel in the heart of the village.
Both craft businesses are run by professionals and courses are held on the premises.
The visit starts with a demonstration and talk on woodcarving followed by a demonstration and talk on the work of a potter.
There will be a display of work and photographs including pottery house plaques and carved coats of arms.
Notes Clothing and shoes to suit typical workshop environment.
Tours of the UNEXPECTED AN INSIGHT INTO INDUSTRY
HOW TO BOOK
Please telephone 0604 37401 and ask for ‘Tours of the Unexpected’central booking service, or write to:
Tours of the Unexpected , Tourism Unit, Northamptonshire Enterprise Agency Ltd, Elgin House, Billing Road, Northampton NN1 5AR
Please note that host companies are unable to accept direct bookings.
Early booking is recommended as numbers are limited on many of the tours.
There may be restrictions on age, physical mobility or special clothing recommendations; please read the notes on your chosen entries very carefully to avoid disappointment.
If payment is appropriate, please send a cheque with written confirmation of your booking, made payable to the Northamptonshire Enterprise Agency Ltd.
(Children's prices apply to accompanied youngsters 15 years and under.)
ONCE YOU HAVE BOOKED
A confirmation of your reservation will be sent to you together with directions on how to reach the venue.
Please present your confirmation slip when you report to the designated person or reception.
If you have to cancel a booking, please let us know as soon as possible.
This will allow us to offer your place(s) to people on the waiting list.
Any payment you have made is non-returnable unless 14 days' notice is given or there are exceptional circumstances to be taken into account.
Occasionally tours may be cancelled at short notice owing to circumstances beyond our control.
If possible an alternative date will be offered or any monies refunded.
Our thanks to all the participating organisations.
Their kindness and co-operation has allowed us to launch this exciting new scheme for the benefit of residents and visitors to Northamptonshire.
If your organisation does not appear in the brochure and you wish to participate next year, please get in touch with the Northamptonshire Enterprise Agency and establish your interest.
Tour details are printed in good faith.
The NEA accepts no responsibility for any errors, omissions or amendments.
All tours are undertaken at the visitor's own risk.
Neither the NEA nor the host companies accept any responsibility for loss, damage or injury, however caused.
Published by the Northamptonshire Enterprise Agency Ltd.
Northampton Rose of the Shires Daventry Leisure Drive A half or full day self-guided car tour
Daventry Leisure Drive Places to visit
Daventry Country Park
This mature Country Park covers an area of 123 acres and is set in the countryside surrounding a reservoir.
This was built to supply water for the Grand Union Canal as it still does today.
Day permits are available for fishing its waters.
There is a Nature Trail and Guided Walks are often available.
There are pleasant waterside and wooded areas to picnic in and extensive play areas for children.
Daventry Town
The name probably comes from ‘Dwy Avon Tre’ which means the town of two rivers.
In the 18th Century Daventry was an important town on the Holyhead coaching road and, lying on four main roads, it has always been a centre for travellers.
In its heyday in the 1820s, 80 horsedrawn coaches passed through the town each day.
It was an 8-hour journey from London (stopping for breakfast and lunch!).
It was noted for its lively horse and cattle fairs.
Today it still has a market as it has done since 1255 and retains its lively and bustling atmosphere.
The 18th Century Moot Hall now houses the Daventry Museum and Tourist Information Centre.
The Museum has a permanent exhibition depicting the social and natural history of the Daventry area.
There is also a series of special exhibitions throughout the year.
Knightley Way
The Knightley Way was Northamptonshire's first County Path and was opened in 1972.
Established on public rights of way, it stretches for 12 miles between Badby and Greens Norton near Towcester.
Much of the route passes through attractive undulating countryside formerly owned by the Knightley family of Fawsley Hall.
Leaflets showing the route and giving further information are available from Tourist Information Centres or from the Countryside Centre in Guildhall Road, Northampton.
The walk is marked on the Ordnance Survey 1:500,000 Landranger Map sheet 152.
Sulgrave Manor
The early English home of the ancestors of George Washington.
In 1914 the Manor was purchased by a body of British subscribers and presented to the peoples of Britain and the United States of America in celebration of 100 years peace and friendship between the two nations.
The American flag is flown here.
Visiting Sulgrave is to experience a vision of all that seems quintessentially English.
The old manor house itself is furnished in Tudor and Queen Anne period styles.
The kitchen is particularly fascinating with its full array of cooking equipment looking much as it must have done in the 18th Century.
The gardens offer a profusion of colour.
They include a Rose Garden with a 16th Century sundial and an Elizabethan Knot Garden amongst their many delights.
Refreshments are available in the Brew House.
Canons Ashby House (NT)
This National Trust property is an exceptionally fine manor house, built c.1550, overlooking beautifully restored formal gardens and surrounded by parkland.
It is one of the oldest country houses in Northamptonshire.
Elizabethan wall hangings and Jacobean plasterwork are to be found inside.
It was the family home of the Dryden family and was visited by the poet John Dryden.
The church was part of an original 13th Century Augustinian priory.
Lunches and afternoon teas are available in the Brew House which is open on the same days as the house.
Old Dairy Farm Centre
Situated at Upper Stowe, two miles south of Weedon.
The Old Dairy Farm is a working farm with a craft centre housed in picturesque, restored farm buildings.
Here many different crafts such as pottery, candle-making, wood-turning, toymaking and patchwork are on display.
A wide variety of antiques, bygones, gifts and china are for sale.
There is also a large selection of designer knitwear and clothes in the Woollens loft, a Liberty shop and Rowan Yarns display.
You may enjoy a visit to the farm shop or see the collection of animals, some of which are rare breeds.
The licensed Barn Restaurant is open for delicious home-cooked cakes, coffee, lunches and cream teas.
How to use this guide
A Leisurely Drive
The drive will take you through some of Northamptonshire's most beautiful and historic landscape.
The main route, travelling in an anti-clockwise direction, covers approximately 40 miles, so allow an hour or so for driving and as long as you like for stops!
It follows main roads with extensive views over the green and undulating countryside.
The route passes through picturesque villages and the fascinating Canons Ashby before returning to its starting point at Daventry Country Park.
For the most part the roads follow ridges but occasionally, east of Litchborough for example, the scenery unfolds to present a patchwork of fields typical of the traditional English countryside.
There are many opportunities to see the ridge and furrow patterning in the fields, evidence of mediaeval farming methods.
They are especially visible in low morning and evening sunlight.
Whenever you drive the route, try it again in another season when it will appear completely different.
In spring the hedgerows and verges are awash with blossom and wild flowers.
In summer the dappled light of leafy lanes awaits you, while the rich colours of autumn are always worth enjoying.
Even winter holds its own crisp, sparkling promise.
Ten areas of the County are designated by the County Council as Special Landscape Areas and the route passes through two of them.
These areas have particularly attractive landscape features and are protected by planning policies.
Four detours, each of about 5 miles are suggested.
These promise special discoveries along their more tranquil byways.
The detours are on country lanes and gated roads so special care is needed , but the traveller will be repaid by glimpses of hidden Northamptonshire, off the beaten track.
DETOUR DETAILS Detour 1 — Badby/Fawsley Park
Turn left into Badby at the sign ‘Badby Village’.
Take the second turn on the left.
This lane takes you up a hill, past the Chapel and out of the village.
At the crossroads turn right to Fawsley.
At the next crossroads turn right again into the gated road which leads into Fawsley Park.
This road winds through the Park before rejoining the A361.
Turn left to continue on the main route.
If you wish to explore the village of Badby on foot or join either The Knightley Way or The Nene Way, parking is available at the picnic area on the A361 (marked on the map).
A footpath links this directly with the village.
Detour 2 — Edgcote
Where the main leisure route turns left to Culworth, continue on the A361 through Chipping Warden and on to Wardington.
In Wardington take the first turn to the left on entering the village, it is signposted to ‘Edgcote’.
Follow this road until you reach Edgcote House.
It is approached via a short lane on the left which goes no further than the House.
The road continues through the park with views of the House and its landscaped lakes.
You will rejoin the main leisure route by turning right at the next main T-junction.
Here the 18th Century stone bridge called Trafford Bridge takes the road over the small stream which is the young River Cherwell.
Detour 3 — Sulgrave
On leaving Culworth turn right off the main leisure route and follow the signs to ‘Sulgrave’.
At the next junction turn left to follow the tourist signs to ‘Sulgrave Manor’.
Retrace this route to rejoin the main leisure route.
Detour 4 — Upper Stowe and Everdon Stubbs
Take the turn to the left off the A5 to Upper Stowe following the tourist signs to ‘Old Dairy Farm Craft Centre’.
The Craft Centre is at the end of the village on the right.
To visit Everdon Stubbs continue along the road which leaves the village towards Everdon.
Go straight across at the first crossroads.
At the next crossroads turn right to find Everdon Stubbs.
Limited parking is available in bays and pull-ins along the road through the wood.
On leaving the woods take the next right turn which will enable you to rejoin the main route at the A45 near Dodford.
Turn left at the A45 junction to return to Daventry along the main leisure route.
Things to spot & things to count — for young passengers —
Telephone Boxes
There are still some of the old red ‘K6’ telephone boxes left in Northamptonshire.
Soon all but a few protected ones will be replaced by modern boxes.
The first telephone boxes were designed by Sir Giles Scott in 1935, they were made of cast iron.
How many can you count?
Churches
Northamptonshire is often referred to as the County of ‘Spires and Squires’, but village churches often have towers.
How many towers AND spires can you count?
War Memorials
How many can you see?
They are placed in public spaces often in the centre of villages, to commemorate the brave local people who fought and died in the First and Second World Wars.
Date-Stones
In the past all sorts of different kinds of buildings had a stone placed in the wall to show when they were built.
You will pass many of these on your route.
Look out for: 1849 1862 1873 1890 and 1903.
Things to Spot
A Leisurely Drive Discovering Northampton
The Hills
The uplands around Daventry are mostly over 400ft and stretch northwest to Stamford.
They are the source of five of the major rivers of the Midlands.
They are rounded and undulating puddinglike shapes covered by a thick layer of clay, all  the sharp features being smoothed away by time.
Spinneys and woods are all that remain of once thick forest cover.
Watford Gap is the route through these hills for the M1 motorway as well as the Grand Union Canal, the railway and the Roman Watling Street (A5).
Arbury Hill is the highest point in the county at 734ft.
It is flanked by Big Hill at 705ft and Sharmans Hill at 700ft.
Badby Village
Its thatched ironstone cottages make Badby an exceptionally pretty village but typical of this part of Northamptonshire.
Its several greens with their majestic horse chestnuts are overlooked by the church from its commanding hilltop position.
The Knightley Way and The Nene Way begin here and there is a Youth Hostel.
Badby Woods
Famous for its bluebells, beeches, and beauty, Badby Woods covers 47 acres and is protected as a Site of Special Scientific Interest.
It has a continuous history of woodland cover going back 700 years and provides a habitat for a huge variety of plant, bird and butterfly life.
The Knightley Way skirts its western edge and many footpaths meander through the trees.
Discover the romantic ivy-covered Dower House of 1520, deserted since its last occupant Dame Alice Knightley died in 1702.
Built as a hunting lodge for the Deer Park it is said to be haunted by a huntsman in green!
Fawsley Park
In a delightful stretch of wooded and hilly countryside lies the Parish of Fawsley.
Coincidentally the Saxon word ‘Falewesle’ means the colour of fallow deer and earlier this century a large herd of fallow deer did roam the peaceful parkland.
The former royal estate was bought by the Knightley family in 1415 and the original hall was built in 1540.
It was their home until the last Baronet died in 1938.
After lying deserted it became a timber factory for a while in the 1960s.
The Church of St Mary stands alone, its village was deserted in the 15th Century to make way for larger sheep pastures.
The village now lies beneath the lakes created in the 18th Century by Capability Brown as part of a grand landscape scheme.
The house is not open to the public, but the church is well worth a visit.
The gated road offers an opportunity for a pleasant diversion through the park and a chance to join the Knightley Way.
The Lantern House
Built in local ironstone with its rich orangey colour this listed building made in the shape of an octagonal lantern was built in the late 18th Century as a lodge to Fawsley Hall.
Charwelton village
There were once two villages here, but only Lower Charwelton survives.
All that remains of mediaeval Church Charwelton is the 13th Century Church, Manor House and a barn.
These are worth exploring on a short but pleasant walk from the village.
A mediaeval pack-horse bridge over the Cherwell River can be seen as you pass through the village.
In the Middle Ages goods were generally carried by pack-horse rather than waggons so some rivers and streams were crossed by such bridges, only 3ft wide.
Charwelton Tower
This massive construction dominating Charwelton Hill is a telecommunications relay station between London and Birmingham.
Edgcote House
Rebuilt in the mid-18th Century, it stands on the site of an earlier house in which Charles I is said to have stayed before the Battle of Edgehill.
A charming cluster of house, rectory and church, it is a perfect gem set in peaceful parkland overlooking its lakes.
Bypassed by modern roads, access is along narrow lanes which seem to take one back in time to a more tranquil age.
The House is open to the public by appointment only.
The Railway Legacy
Disused railway lines criss-cross the countryside, a legacy of the days when most freight was moved by rail and passenger trains stopped at many villages.
Nearby, Woodford Halse lies at the junction of the Great Central Line 1899–1966 and the Stratford-upon-Avon and Midland Junction Railway 1873–1964.
Rows of neatly terraced redbrick cottages, built in 1896 to house the railway men, seem strange now in their rural setting.
Culworth Village
In the 18th Century this village was home to a band of robbers called ‘The Culworth Gang’ who terrorised Northamptonshire!
It is a handsome village with many remarkable buildings.
Several houses have interesting coloured brickwork façades.
On the village green is a stone block said to have been placed there by a local lord of short stature, to help him mount his horse.
It is actually the stump of the mediaeval market cross which stood here.
Look out for the old red telephone box which stands nearby.
Banbury
Famous for its cross of the nursery rhyme, the original Banbury Cross was destroyed by the Puritans in 1602 and the present one is a Victorian replacement.
Banbury Cakes, which originated in the town, are still made to the 300 year old recipe of flaky pastry lined with currants.
Some fine 18th Century buildings still remain as do some winding mediaeval streets.
Borough Hill
Borough Hill rises to 650ft and is a local landmark from which seven counties can be seen.
The hill was occupied and fortified as a major administrative centre in the Iron Age, being the largest of its kind in the region.
About 500 years later the Romans also favoured this site and built a villa here.
Centuries later, before the fateful Battle of Naseby, the Royalist Army of Charles I was encamped upon its slopes.
Today most of the hilltop is covered by the forest of aerials which is the BBC transmitting station for the World Service.
Canons Ashby Village
Canons Ashby is one of the vanished villages of the County.
In 1489 the Prior began evicting the inhabitants to make way for larger sheep pastures.
But only half a century later the Priory itself was secularised by Henry VIII and the land incorporated into the gardens and park of the house we see today.
This was built in the 1550s for the Dryden family, but some of the banks and ditches still remain in the fields opposite the Hall.
They mark the former habitation and cultivation patterns.
Sulgrave Village
In 1656 John Washington left Sulgrave and sailed for America where his descendant was to become the first President.
The family coat of arms can be seen carved at the main doorway of the house and in the Church.
Its three stars and two stripes are said to have influenced the design for the American flag.
Next to the church are the massive ramparts of the defended manor house of a Lord Ghilo who lived in the 11th Century.
Look out for the stocks on the village green.
The Rivers
This area is one of the most important watersheds in England.
Five major rivers have their origins in these gentle hills:
The Cherwell flows south from Charwelton to join the Thames at Oxford.
The Leam flows northwards initially, but eventually joins the Bristol Channel.
The Welland travels east along the line of the hills to form the County boundary with Leicestershire.
The Nene rises one mile west of Badby and flows on through the County, passing Peterborough and on to the Wash, 110 miles away.
The Ouse takes a slow and meandering course eastwards ending eventually at the Wash.
Weedon
There can be few places with such a concentration of communication routes going back over 2,000 years.
In 1803, during the Napoleonic War, when invasion was threatened, barracks, store houses and a refuge for George III were built here.
It was chosen because it is a central point in the country, furthest from the sea, but connected to the canal system.
Weedon Barracks were used until recently as ‘the biggest broom cupboard in British history’.
They were used to store such items as candles, dustbins and ashtrays for the Civil Service.
Everdon Stubbs
This Site of Special Scientific Interest covers 74 acres of beautiful ancient woodland of a type uncommon in the East Midlands.
It is owned and run by The Woodland Trust for community benefit.
Its varied character, bird life and rich ground flora, including wild daffodils, make it an enchanting place.
It is also an important locality for fungi.
Stowe-Nine-Churches
There has been a village here for well over 1,000 years.
The name of this parish is said to come from the legend that builders, on the orders of a local lord, tried to raise the church elsewhere eight times; on each occasion finding it pulled down at night and the tools moved to the present site.
A moral is sometimes drawn from this tale.
It is taken to mean that there are greater forces at work than the earthly powers of men.
The lower half of the tower dates back to Saxon times.
Upper Stowe was once called Butter Stowe because the London carrier collected butter here.
Fosters Booth
Named from the small house or ‘booth’ of a person named Foster the place had grown by the 17th Century to become ‘a fair street of inns’.
The former George and Dragon of 1637 (now a restaurant) remains and has pargeting (external decorated plasterwork) rare in this county.
It shows a huntsman and his hounds.
Towcester
Perhaps most famous today for its Racecourse, it was originally the Roman town of Lactodorum.
The roughly rectangular shape of the town centre still reflects the pattern of the old walls.
Edward the Elder fortified the town in 917 when Watling Street was the frontier between the Saxons and the Danes.
In 1643, during the Civil War, Prince Rupert fortified the town again as winter quarters for the King's Army.
In more peaceful times Towcester was renowned as a coaching town with Watling Street lined with inns, some of which still survive.
The Saracens Head Inn was mentioned in Dickens' Pickwick Papers.
The Post Office is only one of several fine Georgian buildings grouped around the square, dominated, at the southern end by the stone and slate Victorian Town Hall.
The Roads
We think of our modern road system as very complex.
But, since the earliest times man has made a network of tracks and paths to form routes across the countryside.
Some of these early tracks have been transformed into the roads we use today.
Banbury Lane
One of the earliest communication corridors, the Jurassic Way ran right across the country from the Cotswolds to Humberside passing through Banbury, roughly along the line of today's Banbury Lane, towards Northampton and on to Stamford.
It was one of at least four long distance ancient trackways used for trading purposes.
Turnpike Roads
Milestones can still be seen along the A361.
It was one of several turnpike roads in the area, the A45 and the A5 were two others.
During the 18th Century Turnpike Trusts were set up, partly to build new roads, but mainly to maintain old ones, many of which were poorly surfaced and too badly rutted to carry the increasing traffic.
To pay for the roads ‘tolls’ were collected from travellers.
The word ‘turnpike’ was derived from the pike or bar which was lifted to let vehicles pass.
Watling Street
Originally stretching from London to Chester this is the most impressive stretch of Roman road in the County.
From Old Stratford to Towcester it still goes in a straight line for 8½ miles.
Until the 1820s it rose and fell over a succession of steep hills and deep valleys but when it became the London–Holyhead road sections were totally rebuilt by Thomas Telford.
He widened it, evened out the gradients and put in sweeping curves.
Today's travellers owe more to Telford than to the Romans!
Welsh Road
Originally this was a track which followed a ridge of higher ground and later became a main route for Welsh drovers taking their cattle to be fattened in Northampton before going on to market in London.
Drove roads have wide verges originally to accommodate large numbers of animals on the move.
You will spot these in many parts of the country.