

LEARNING TO UNDERSTAND A CATTLE OWNER
I once asked Kalchu how he was able to tell his cows one from the other, and how he was able to distinguish his own from other people's.
To me all the cows looked similar — small and black all over although I did recognize that some had longer horns and a few had none at all.
He looked at me and said he often wondered how I told my books apart.
To him they looked the same.
We smiled, acknowledging the difference of our worlds.
THE CALF WAS BORN A MONTH PREMATURELY, IN MARCH.
THE nights were still so cold that icicles formed on the outside of the chutes that fed the water-mills, where the water churned white and spilled over.
In the day they dripped steadily and almost thawed, and then from dusk to the following sunrise they were slowly reformed.
As far as the eye could see the earth was brown: there were white pockets of unmelted snow, and sombre green pine thickets on the ridges, but no leaves on the deciduous trees and no bright green shoots in the withered remains of last year's grass.
Nothing was ready for new life.
I don't know what alerted Kalchu to go and look in the stable.
He may have heard the cow moaning as she gave birth, his ears sensitized to noises the rest of us would not have heard, as we sat talking and laughing around the fire.
Or maybe he had seen the onset of labour in the way she had acted earlier, when he and Kāli untwisted the bales of hay for the night and spread out the fresh pine-needle bedding.
He was gone for about half an hour and I don't think any of us even suspected that there was something amiss.
When he came back he was carrying the calf, his arms encompassing all four legs, so the hooves came together in a bunch, with the rump and tail protruding over one forearm and the shoulders and chest over the other.
The neck was stretched out in front so the head hung down low, almost as low as the tiny hooves.
Inside he twisted round and, leaning his shoulder and elbow against the door, pushed it firmly to.
Then, very gently, he lowered the calf on to the rug by the fireside.
As soon as the hooves touched the ground the legs crumpled and carefully he rearranged them, folding them over to one side, out of the way of the body.
Comfortable now, and secure in the warmth, the calf let its neck curl round — an almost involuntary movement — so the chin  skirted the ribs and the muzzle nudged the soft hollow flank.
Its ears rested flat back and the long dark lashes interlocked over closed eyes.
It could almost have been dead already: a passive progression from birth to death with no awareness of life at all.
The twins sprang up from where they had been sitting by Chola's side and ran round the hearth to have a closer look.
Squatting down naked by the calf they stroked it and ran their small fingers through its coat.
There were no traces of blood now, just a damp oily film where the mother's tongue had licked it clean.
Lāla Bahādur started to play with its stringy tail — twirling it round in the air, twisting and tugging it back from the socket — trying to provoke a reaction that would jar it to life.
But Hārkini just touched it gently all over, marvelling at the tiny, perfect form.
At first no one was quite sure what should be done.
Kalchu sat silently watching the calf.
He seemed resigned to this twist of fate that the first calf to be born into his stable for two years had been brought to life before it was ready, before the winter was even through.
There was no emotion in his face — no resentment, no sadness.
If there had been its time had passed.
Now he merely appraised the situation, calculating the odds for life against death.
In the end he judged that the investment of hope should be made: that they would fight for the calf's life and risk disappointment.
His decision resolved the confused inactivity.
If the calf was to be kept alive the course of action was clear and time was critical.
Nara was sent to get a bowl of milk from someone who had a cow that was yielding: Kalchu suggested maybe the  ā  gri or the  um in the bottom house on the corner.
At this time of year there wasn't enough milk anywhere in the village to borrow for more than a few days.
So if the mother was still dry then, there would be no choice but to let the calf starve.
‘I suppose I could always suckle it myself — give the twins one breast and the calf the other.’
Chola was leaning back laughing, making as if to enfold the old and new progeny under her two arms.
‘It's been done before — twice when calves were born to dry mothers, the women of the household fed them their own breast-milk  until they were old enough to wean.’
I looked at her dubiously, and she was still laughing and insisting that it was true.
But it was impossible to distinguish between the truth of myth and the truth of reality.
While we were discussing it, Kalchu was trying to inspire the calf with life.
He opened its eyes, and standing astride the small body, he clasped it between his rough hands and pulled it up.
When the hooves were in place on the ground he held the weight for a moment while the calf reoriented itself.
Then he let go.
Clearly there was some innate sense of balance: the calf lowered its head and stretched out its neck, then reeled slightly and righted itself.
But the muscles had no strength to sustain it, and it fell over forwards, hitting its nose on the ground.
When Kalchu pulled it up again there was blood trickling from its nostril.
This time it held out longer, and gradually it learned the way to work its muscles and to develop their strength.
Eventually it was standing so well that the twins were able to play teasing games with it, pushing and pulling and slapping its sides, so sometimes it fell and sometimes it lurched from side to side and recovered.
And we cheered and laughed at its chequered progress — and picked it up again and again because it was still too weak to get up alone.
The will and ability to stand is one of the most basic manifestations of the life-force, almost more basic than an interest in food and water.
I'd seen this attitude once before in the village when a cow, grazing on the cliffside, fell down into the valley below.
There was no doubt that its foreleg was broken: it was bent right out to the side from the knee.
But it was a valuable animal with many calves to its name and the owners hovered over it, beating it viciously, insisting that it stand up.
Eventually it did.
You could see that the pain of standing was more than it could bear, and it struggled to be allowed to collapse again but the owners made it walk: led it away stumbling on three legs with the fourth jutting out sideways.
And they were triumphant, as  we were now, because it was a sign that it was going to be all right: a clear confirmation of life.
When Nara came back with the milk, the calf had collapsed, exhausted.
Its legs were splayed out at awkward angles on the rug, and its flanks rose and fell with the deep breaths of sleep.
He had found milk at the  ā  gri's house and the old man had come back with him to see if he could be of any use.
He didn't advise but just stood there, nodding his head vaguely and smiling to himself while his hands — almost involuntarily — went through the motions of twisting the spindle he'd brought with him and winding on the wool.
Then he sat down quietly, reluctant to flaunt the experience of his years unsolicited.
And there was no doubt that Kalchu, though younger, had dealt with a great many premature births before this one.
He handled the calf deftly, with calm assurance.
None of us did anything; we sat there silently watching, deferring to his competence.
He was pulling back the calf's head so the brown eyes rolled up and only the whites were showing, and opening its mouth by slipping his thumb in at the side.
Then, keeping the thumb in place, he pushed the rim of a bowl in between the rows of teeth and poured its contents, a trickle of oil, right down into the throat.
The calf shook its head lamely, but Kalchu merely tightened his hold and stroked the underneath of the throat to make it swallow.
Then he let go and the calf sank back to sleep.
‘That's to make him shit,’ he said.
I wondered why it was important that it shat, but I didn't ask.
Maybe it was no more than another way of affirming its life.
The next thing was to make it eat and drink.
So, lifting up its head again, Kalchu offered it a finger coated with milk.
It was very weary now, so weary it only wanted to drop back to sleep, and yet too weary to fight for that freedom.
It ignored the finger and Kalchu dipped it into the milk again and forcibly opened the mouth.
‘If they don't suck by the second day,’ said the  ā  gri , ‘they forget how.’
So Kalchu persevered, and the calf reached out  its tongue and licked his finger, and then, at last, took it inside its mouth and sucked.
Before we went to bed we took the calf down to the stable to its mother.
‘It's important that they see each other tonight,’ Kalchu explained.
‘If the mother thinks her calf is dead, she'll dry up for good.
And the little one will lose heart and its life will drift away if it's cut off for too long from its own animal world.’
It was pitch dark in the stable and, even with the burning sticks of jharo we'd brought from upstairs, we could see nothing at first.
But it felt safe and familiar as it always did, with the sounds of chewing and the smell of sweat and cow-dung and half-eaten hay.
In the end the mother found us, grunting softly as she came over, nuzzling the calf and licking its cheek and neck.
When they had reassured each other, Kalchu put the calf down by her side.
She still hadn't completely shed the afterbirth and it was hanging down, a twisted sheet of blood and mucus, between her legs.
As he pushed the calf's head towards the udder he spat to rid himself of the polluting sight of birth.
The calf didn't recognize the teat, but standing there by its mother's side it shat.
And Kalchu was satisfied and picked up the quivering body to carry it back to the fireside.
The next morning each of us went in turn, as we woke, to have a look at the calf.
It was more alert today, staring out at its surroundings through moist brown eyes that were learning to focus, and playing with swishing its tail.
But it seemed very small, much smaller and more fragile than the night before, as it swayed from side to side in the bright sunlight.
And I noticed that the skin was hanging loose in folds over the shoulder and behind it, as if it had  fit a rounder form yesterday, before the rigours of birth.
‘The mother's still dry.’
Kalchu had anticipated my question.
It was a job that fell mainly to me, because I was at home.
Kalchu and Chola were both out all day at that time, preparing the winter land for spring.
In the mornings they left the calf outside on the roof, under an upturned basket to stop the crows  and vultures swooping down to peck out its eyes, and because sometimes, in winter, the jackals are driven by hunger right up to the houses, even in daylight.
Then they draped a rug over the basket, so the calf could be warmed by the sun, but not dazzled by its rays.
I found a medicine dropper and used that to feed it the milk they left me.
And when I went out I put the calf inside with its basket and rug.
In the evenings, when Kāli brought the cows home, we'd take it down to the stable to its mother and she would stretch out her nose to it and blow, and the breath would come out as steam in the cold, evening air.
But she had no milk to give it — so there was no reason for it to suck the teat, which would have helped the flow.
After ten days the calf had become a haunting presence.
Its body was hot and dry and the coat had lost its black lustre, so it stood up on end, pale brown and rumpled.
Most of the time it looked dead.
Its breathing was too light to move the flanks, so I'd go over sometimes and put the back of my hand to its nostril until I could feel the heat as it exhaled.
Its eyes were no longer the eyes of a cow — they were blue and vacant, like the eyes of a mad person sending images to the brain of a world other than it really is.
It rarely blinked, but sometimes the lids would close and then reopen, as if consciousness were slowly drifting away.
One night I dreamt about it: about the dog going over to look at it, as it sometimes did, and instead of sniffing it and walking away, it tore open the anus and started to pull out the innards.
I still fed it, but I recoiled from it.
I hated pushing the medicine dropper in between the rows of teeth, now permanently bared, and the hot dry lips, and watching the milk dribble out at the comer because it wouldn't swallow.
Kalchu and Chola had lost interest in it, like animals with their dying young.
Sometimes they'd stand it up and watch it fall over, as if justifying their negligence.
Then they let it be.
One morning Kalchu came up from the stable with a bowl of warm milk and poured half of it into a separate container for me.
He was pleased, proud that his was one of the few households with milk in winter, and apparently unruffled by the irony of its coming too late, when the calf was already more dead than alive.
The calf lived for fifteen days.
It was sad when it died; sad because of the memory of what it had been like when there was still hope.
But it was also a relief.
I didn't see it dead.
The  um leatherworker came and took away the body very early one morning.
Then, some days later, he brought it back — stuffed.
The fur was very dull now, and sparse, and the eyes were gaping black holes in their sockets.
It was a rough job, but somehow it didn't look that different with the skin stretched over straw instead of ribs.
Kalchu took it downstairs to the stable twice a day when he milked the mother.
He said that the dummy stimulated her to produce in the same way that the sight of the living calf should have done.
Then, not a week later, one of the ploughing bulls seemed to be ailing.
Kalchu had been working them, tilling the land on the south-facing slope of Jimale, where wheat and bitter buckwheat are sown alternately.
Those upland fields are the hardest land of all to till, not only because of the incline, but also because they've recently been reclaimed from the forest and the soil is still heavy with roots and stones.
He had been careful not to push the bulls too hard.
In the evening when they came back he would crumble salt on a flat stone for them to lick, and once, in addition to their hay, he gave them the heap of grain that was left at the bottom of the fermentation jar when the beer was finished.
Usually, he said, after ploughing for four or five days, he would keep the bulls at home for two.
But this time only one had rested: the other had worked right through, for a full ten days.
This was because Jakali's husband's ploughing bull had died and he'd pleaded with Kalchu to lend him one of his.
So now it was ill.
There were no visible symptoms.
Kalchu had gone right round it, feeling its legs and back and stomach, but he could find nothing.
There were no cuts or swollen bruises, nowhere that was particularly tender or sensitive to his touch.
He assumed that it was exhausted, wasted by the work at the end of the long winter, and he blamed himself.
He had lent it to Jakali's husband against his better judgement.
He had felt sorry for him when his own bull died and he was afraid it would be tempting fate to throw up this opportunity to redress the balance in their fortunes.
And if it was just exhausted, it was simply a question of postponing his own ploughing and resting it up for a day or two until it had regained its appetite and its strength.
But a week passed, and then ten days, and there was no change at all.
It just stood there, or sometimes lay down, in one particular spot at the far end of the stable, with its eyes half-closed.
There was none of the violence of illness in it, no writhing or moaning, and it was never impatient or irritable when Kalchu tried to feed it or probed it for sores.
Nor was there any instinctive offensive, no fight to transcend its condition and stay alive.
It was as if it was harbouring some great consuming sadness and had lost the urge to live.
One morning a  umini from Pere came to have a look at it.
She was a mantri , a person who knew certain magic incantations, and was reputed to be able to cure sick animals.
She told Chola she'd heard from someone in Pere that the bull was ill, and she knew she'd be able to cure it: she'd treated hundreds in her time and only one had ever died.
So Chola took her downstairs and led the bull out of its dark stable into the adjoining sheep-pen, which was enclosed by stone walls, but without a roof so there was light to see.
The mantri looked it up and down from the doorway without saying a word.
Then she sent Nara to fetch the things she would need: a piece of rope the length of the space between her hands when she held out her arms; a supple willow twig, the length of the space between Nara's hands: a sprig of the dā  telo bush in flower: and some wheat flour and tobacco for her own payment.
Then, still in silence, she picked up some cow-dung from the floor and rolled it into a ball between her fingertips.
When it was  the right shape she blew on it, then closed her fist around it and began to massage the bull's neck and shoulders and back and rump, tapping it hard and rhythmically with the knuckles of the clenched fist.
All the time she was muttering under her breath, not articulating the words so they could be understood, or so it was even clear what language she was speaking.
But her lips were moving fast and her voice rose and fell between breaths.
It seemed that all her concentration and all the power of every muscle in her body were focused on the point where her fist struck the bull's back.
And strangely, the bull was responding, shifting its weight from one side to the other, so it was leaning slightly towards her.
And around each blow the flesh shuddered — the same sort of involuntary movement a cow will use to despatch a fly, but the ripples were more pronounced and further-reaching.
While the mantri was working, Chola stood in front of the bull, holding its head down low and gently smoothing the tuft of coarse hair between the horns, reassuring it.
It took the mantri a long time to work right round the bull, from shoulder to rump down one side and then from rump to shoulder back up the other.
When she had finished she turned to Nara, who had just come back with the things she needed and was peering round the door, as if he was too scared of her magic to come right in.
‘Take this to the crossroads,’ she said, dropping the ball of cow-dung into his cupped hands, ‘and bury it so none of it's left showing.’
Then she took the willow twig, laid it across the bull's withers and secured it in place with a rope tied firmly beneath the soft folds of flesh on the underside of the neck.
‘That represents its ploughing yoke,’ she told Chola.
‘Leave it there.
In due course he'll rub it off himself.’
On her way out she paused, reaching up to slot the dā  telo branch between the stones above the lintel, and the bull lowered its head threateningly and took a few steps towards her as if it was going to lunge.
But then it turned round towards the  open stable door and went back to its place in the darkness,
Chola had taken the bull's high spirits and responsiveness to the mantri as a sign that the treatment was going to work.
But in the following days nothing changed.
When Kalchu brought it fresh hay and water and even maize porridge it remained aloof and indifferent.
And when the other cows were taken out in the morning and brought home in the evening, it stood there without even turning its head.
And the days passed and the nights passed and it seemed to be just waiting for death.
The next time the dhāmi was possessed by one of the village gods, Kalchu went to the shrine to ask for advice.
And the god, speaking in his high falsetto voice through the medium of the dhāmi , said without a moment's hesitation that Kalchu's bull's time had come, and there was nothing any of us could do to save it now.
He added that two of Kalchu's bulls would die this winter and the third would live.
After that the bull's willow twig yoke was replaced by a strip of red cloth blessed by the god.
It was fastened tightly on to the right horn, so it dangled down over the cheek and eye.
The dhāmi was right.
Nothing could restore the bull's heart for life.
One evening Kalchu came into my room and we sat staring into the fire for a long time.
Then he said that the bull had died.
He had gone down to the stable earlier and seen that it was missing, so he went to look for it.
He couldn't believe that it would have wandered far when it hadn't even been outside the stable for such a long time.
He searched everywhere for it, going right through the village, asking people if they'd seen it.
But no one knew.
Eventually, he found it, lying down on the Kālādika — an open, grassy plateau about a quarter of a mile outside the village — the nearest place where the cattle were taken to graze.
There was a young boy there with his cows at the time, and he told Kalchu that he had watched the bull and it had walked slowly right round the circumference of the Kālādika, before lying down where Kalchu had found it.
It wasn't dead, but it was dying.
‘I took a bowl of water and I gave it hirin , as if it was my father, or my brother,’ said Kalchu.
‘And then it died and I came home.’
I was shocked.
I hadn't realized the bull meant so much to him.
‘It ploughed my land for eight years.
It knew better than I did what to do.
It even knew which land was mine so I needn't even have guided it there.
It was part of my family.
It was part of me.’
I thought back over the times I had watched the ploughing; in late autumn at the potato harvest, and in the summer, slopping through the flooded paddy fields.
There had never seemed to be a particularly harmonious relationship between Kalchu and the bulls.
They had minds of their own, refusing to move one minute, and the next tearing ahead out of control, breaking down the mud banks that contained the irrigation between the paddy fields.
And Kalchu would alternately soothe and cajole and then whip and curse them.
There was no doubt he spoke a language the bulls understood, but no one could say they always obeyed him.
‘But you have other bulls, don't you?’
I asked.
‘Yes,’ he said sadly.
‘Two.
But they're young.
They're not strong enough and they haven't been trained.’
He sat silently for a minute and then he got up and walked out.
And still that wasn't the end of it.
Not long afterwards one of the cows died.
It happened at night in the stable, and in the morning the Untouchable women came and dragged it outside and butchered it just in front of the house.
Kalchu and Chola were both at home and from time to time they looked down, both repelled and fascinated.
And villagers walking past gave the gathering a wide berth, and spat in disgust with disparaging comments.
But the women were crouched so low over their work that their shawls shrouded their whole bodies, and I didn't once see them raise their eyes from the carcass.
It took them most of the day and, in the evening, they picked up their basketloads of red meat and carried them back to the security and acceptance of their own Untouchable community at the far end of the village.
But it wasn't just Kalchu and Chola's cows that were dying, and it wasn't just bad luck either.
They said that every year at the end of winter the cows are so thin and weak that diseases spread and wipe them out like flies.
And if the spring is late, like this year, then the supplies of hay that the women gathered all autumn from the steepest slopes where the grass grew longer because it couldn't be grazed just don't last out.
Everyone's cows suffer.
Last year too the spring was late and Jakali and her husband lost so many cows that they consulted the god.
The god said that the place where their house and stable were built was plagued with evil influences.
So they took the house apart, stone by stone, and rebuilt it twenty yards further south on a piece of land recommended by the god.
They built it around a makeshift shrine, with offerings to the gods, both good and bad, and it took them all the following winter, this winter.
And it was then, when Jakali's husband's ploughing bull died despite the new stable, that Kalchu had felt obliged to lend him his, and it had been overworked and died.
THE FULL-MOON FESTIVAL AND THE STORY OF THE MA   Ā
On certain occasions when the dhāma is possessed, the god he embodies tells the story of his life.
These stories are known as  pa  elis .
In essence all  pa  elis are similar; they tell of how the  Ma  tdotb; ā gods (the Bāra Bhāi or Twelve Brothers) wander the earth until they come to a place that they like in particular.
Here they make the land habitable, banish evil spirits (or convert them into lesser deities, the Bāhan) and care for the people.
The  pa  eli that follows is composite, made up from extracts from many different  pa  elis .
Most of these were recorded by Gabriel Campbell and Tunga Nath Upadaya in various villages in the Jumla area.
The transcription and initial translation into English were done by Gabriel Campbell, Prithivi Raj Chettri and Tunga Nath Upadaya.
With the permission and orders of the
king of heaven, Indra, I have crossed
mountains and rivers and hills and
other strange and lonely places and
have come to this world of the mortals.
IT'S THE TIME OF THE karāti , THE NIGHTS LEADING UP TO THE full-moon festival, when the gods enter the dhāmis and use their bodies to dance among the villagers.
Somewhere people are drumming — it must be at the far end of the village, because at times the rhythm is distinct but when the wind takes it it becomes muffled, merging with the roar of the full monsoon river.
Later, well into the night, Mina and Kāli wrap blankets round their shoulders and walk out through the village.
Dogs mark their progress, a different one barking from each rooftop they pass.
They sound anxious tonight and fierce, troubled by the full moon and the drums.
When they reach the source of the drumming they climb up one ladder and then another on to the top roof of the house.
Already there's a crowd — men, women, boys and girls, toddlers and babies.
The door of the shrine at the back of the roof is open.
Inside there's a group of men sitting round the fire, their faces striped with flames and shadows.
Outside young girls in pairs hold hands facing each other and, leaning back, they pirouette so fast that their shawls flare out from the tops of their heads.
One young boy streaks through the darkness, like a small fish, in and out of the groups, stinging ankles with a handful of cut nettles, then melting into the shadows before the inevitable angry rebukes.
I have plucked flowers from twenty-two
pastures and twenty-two mountains and 
from plateaux and green lowland meadows.
There are flowers of nine different
colours, and I gathered them and put
them into my hair out of sheer joy, and
they have become part of me.
The drum-beat intensifies.
The musicians are sitting in a row on the edge of the roof, facing inwards.
Their drums.
half spheres of hand-worked copper, are laid out in a line in front of them.
They're pounding them with bent drumsticks, hard and fast, with all the strength of their hands and wrists.
The roof is vibrating.
Inside the shrine the bells start ringing, rhythmically clanging as they swing up and down, round in an arc as the cord is pulled and released.
Close by the doorway two boys clash cymbals, hard so they hit together squarely, hollow full against cupped hollow.
Next to them a baby shrieks in its mother's arms.
For twelve years I have wandered through
different places.
I have walked in the
truth and spoken in strength, I have
shaken twenty-two regions with my power.
And I have done much that is good as
well.
I have made places of pilgrimage.
and cared for their pilgrims.
I have
built temples.
On the banks of a lake.
in a place called Garagāli, there was a
temple inlaid with gold and silver.
and
when you saw that temple, even if you
had never wept in your life.
tears would
fill your eyes and you would weep.
A man sitting in a group, leaning against the wall of the shrine, starts shaking and stands up, throwing aside the woollen blanket he wears as a shawl and kicking off his shoes.
His body still convulsing, he fumbles to untie his turban and release the long twisted tuft of hair, the dhāmi's insignia, that's always covered from sight except when he's possessed — when he becomes the  god.
The crowd clears back and he moves into the middle of the roof.
Standing alone in this pool of moonlight, he puts his thumb and forefinger into the corners of his mouth and, staring out across the houses and the fields and the river valley to the stark moonlit mountains, whistles long and loud into the night.
For an instant the moon disappears.
The sky is still bright and the roof illuminated, but where the moon had been there are now heavy black storm-clouds brightly outlined in white light.
Then it slides back, perfect in its pale roundness.
The dhāmi stands motionless before it.
It seems for a moment as if the world is peopled only by this god and this moon, facing each other through the aeons of the night.
His face is unearthly — eyes glazed in concentration, cheekbones and jaw protruding floodlit from heavy black shadows.
He disappears for a minute into the shrine and returns with two pairs of bells and with a yellow  ikā marked between his eyes.
He begins to dance, holding the bells — a pair in each hand — rigid by his groin.
He dances to the rhythm of the bells and the drums and the cymbals, moving fast, careening about from one end of the roof to the other.
His arms hardly move at all— just the legs move, and his bare feet on the ground as he jumps up and down, and the long tuft of hair that bounces back and forth over his shoulder.
He's wearing white, the only white on the roof, a symbol of his purity.
He wears white for the same reason that he never drinks raksi , and that he's eaten no food since morning.
It's a mark of reverence that the vehicle provided for the god to come to his people is pure and empty and won't pollute.
One place especially was beautiful.
The mist would blow off the top of the
mountains and there were always a few
fine clouds and a light rain.
It gave
me so much pleasure.
And near that
plateau was a forest of larch and
evergreen oak.
And below it the
wide- 
open grassland.
There I took twenty-two
stakes and in twenty-two hours I
pegged them into the ground and marked
out twenty-two boundaries.
Another dhāmi has joined him and they link arms for a while and then move closer together, stretching their arms across each other 's shoulders so they dance as one, their bodies tilting first forwards and then back as they bounce across the roof.
They're brothers, two of the Bāra Bhāi, the twelve Ma   ā gods.
They're smiling, eyes ablaze, lost in each other 's presence, in the dance.
They embrace, then separate, and one goes over to a woman in the crowd with a child cradled in her arms.
She talks to him, anxiously tilting her face upwards so it's exposed and openly imploring, a look designed to tap compassion.
He answers without looking at her, his eyes focused on space, on the moonlight.
His voice is high-pitched and breathless, floating in the back of the mouth, instead of pushing up from the throat and chest.
It's a voice that doesn't belong to one of the villagers and she seems not to understand: maybe she can't even hear, above the bellow of the drums.
Still twitching and shuddering, as if to the beat of the wrong pulse, the dhāmi looks at the child, willing his eyes to focus, be still.
Standing close above it, he presses the rim of a bell hard against its skull and, leaning forward, blows a blast of air into each ear, one after the other.
Then he stands back and, from a distance, sprays the child's face with a fistful of rice grains, and dances away.
There are three of them dancing now, sometimes together, sometimes separately, all in white.
Without warning one falls out of step and drops back to his place In the crowd.
Panting and breathless, but no longer shaking, he takes hold of his tuft of hair, winds it into a coil on top of his head and reties his turban.
His god has left him.
The other dhāmis carry on dancing for a while and then their gods go too.
The bells in the shrine have stopped ringing and  gradually the drumming abates and the vibrations are stilled.
People spill back across the empty space of moonlight, and the dancers' faces merge with the crowd.
Someone is closing the double doors of the shrine, fastening the chain latch, and firelight flickers out dimly between the slats.
There were rocks and boulders that made
it difficult to walk to and from that
place.
Those rocks and boulders were
like mountains.
And I took my stick
and swung it round, and my power was so
great and so terrible that the hills
and mountains shook.
And I split that
place in two and made a path for people
to come and go, and for their sheep and
goats.
And there was little water in that place.
So when I saw that, I dug my knee into
the ground and water welled up beneath
and flowers out around it.
And I dug
wells of milk and wells of oil.
And I
sowed seeds and grew plants and trees so
that that place would be still more
beautiful.
Ekādaśi, duadaśi, tetradaśi, chaturdaśi : the days of the karāti , when the gods dance at night.
Then follows the day of the full moon,purnimā , and the full-moon festival, called the pai  h .
It dawns sunny and clear, with a strong wind blowing, and storms of chaff from the barley-threshing on the roof rain down yellow against a peacock sky.
No work is done in the fields today and Kalchu is sitting in the sun, making a necklace of marigolds by sinking a needle into the yellow hearts and sliding them together along coarse black thread.
Chola is replastering the floor with fresh mud and cow-dung in deference to the gods' visit.
Since early morning there has been  intermittent drumming in different parts of the village and the echo rolls round the valley like the stifled rumblings of a caged lion.
There was a demon called Bānba, and
he was king of all the demons.
There
was a great battle between Bānba and
myself.
We fought for seven days and
seven nights.
Then I chained him to
the four corners of the earth, and I
danced on his chest and sat on his
back.
There was blood streaming from
his mouth and nose, and he was
frightened and said that he would
leave that place and would go to the
underworld.
I made him take an oath
that he would never frighten anyone or
cause them any harm — only then did I
let him go.
He even licked my feet —
first he wanted to fight, then he
licked my feet.
That made me laugh.
Mina and Kāli are taking their offering for the festival to the house where the dhāmis have been dancing at night.
Mina is carrying the wheat flour in a bronze plate and the oil in a smaller bronze bowl bedded inside it.
They pass a group of boys, a jangling procession, on their way to wash the temple bells in the stream — their annual cleansing and consecration.
They wait in turn while the  ā  gri , dressed in white, measures other households' offerings.
Two mānās of flour is the quota, plus one ladle of oil that's poured into a wide-mouthed container so that the yellow mustard oil, the greener walnut and hemp-seed oils and the cloudy melted ghee combine.
Later in the afternoon, while most people are still washing and dressing and getting ready, the preparations begin at the shrine high above the village, on a plateau under the shade of two juniper trees.
The wind is even stronger at this height.
It carries  the scent of pine and tosses the juniper branches back and forth across the sun, so the ground and the roof of the shrine are slashed with creeping shadows.
The  ā  gri is there, plastering the floor with a wash of red mud and cow-dung, filling and lighting the oil lamps, burning some sprigs of juniper as incense.
That's in the darkness of the inner room, with its raised seat for the dhāmi when he's possessed, and its rows of bells and strips of red and white cotton cloth strung in a jumble from the rafters.
Outside on the veranda, where the eaves are supported by pillars crowned with carved wooden rams' heads and the real skulls and horns of sacrificed rams and he-goats, two men are kneading the dough for puris , pummelling the flour of every household in the village.
They're talking and laughing as they work.
Beside them, tethered to the comer post, are six lambs.
One is alert and quietly bleating: the others are lying crumpled in a heap of fluffy whiteness in the sunshine.
It's almost evening when Kalchu climbs up the hill carrying Hārkini on his back with Kāli, Nara and Lāla Bahādur following behind.
The shrine is packed with people.
Children cram themselves into the doorway and cling to the window, like moths to light, hoping to catch a glimpse of the possessed dhāmi .
Inside, the god is reciting his pa  eli , the story of his wanderings through the earth before he settled in the village.
And people are asking for advice and blessings, telling him about the problems they trust him to solve.
Outside the shrine the crowd is waiting.
Almost everyone is there — the whole village dressed in its festival finery.
The musicians, six or seven of them, are crouched in a row behind their drums, playing abstractedly until the dancing begins.
One of the juniper trees is enlaced with the spread-eagled bodies of children, fighting for the highest branches and the best view of the dancers below.
At last the bells start to ring in the shrine and the drummers respond, picking up the strength and intensity of the previous  nights' rhythm, pounding again so the earth shakes.
The dhāmi bursts out through the crowded doorway, carrying his bells and a bronze bowl of turmeric-stained rice grains in one hand.
He dances about among the crowd, greeting people here and there by stamping yellow rice marks on their foreheads with the thumb of his other hand.
The evening sun is low in the sky with its rays almost horizontal, piercing the dhāmi's eyes as he turns back to face it.
It tints his white tunic orange and projects his dancing shadow right back across the ground until it rises up with the juniper trunks.
He doesn't dance on his own for long.
Soon two more dhāmis emerge from the shrine with their bells, and their heads bare and shaved bald except for their waist-length black tufts, braided at points with silver bands — gifts to the gods from their devotees.
Then other dhāmis , immersed in the crowd, stand up shaking, jostling their neighbours and struggling to take off their jackets and their  opis or turbans, and shoes if they have them.
Two boys and a woman, who aren't even dhāmis , leap to their feet, possessed, their bodies spinning-tops set turning by the strength of the gods' will to dance.
A man from the audience is walking out among the dancers.
He's wearing a garland of marigolds and carrying a bowl of yellow rice grains.
He stops in the path of one of the dancing dhāmis and drapes the garland round his neck and plants a yellow  ikā between his eyes, greeting the god.
The dhāmi stoops his head for the garland's embrace.
Other people follow suit and surge out into the space enclosed by the crowd.
And as the dhāmis dance in the sunshine, the tiers of yellow garlands collide with that hair and bounce up and down against their white tunics.
And there are flowers in their hair and loose yellow flowers strewn about under their bare feet on the ground.
To test me the Bārakote king made me
knead sand into a ball and made me carry 
a load with rope made of stones.
He
told me that if I had the power then I
could carry water to him in a basket.
And this I did.
And then the king said,
‘Now that you have shown me all that is
good, I wish to see all that is evil as
well.’
I told him that I could do
anything, but that he would have to
suffer.
Still he insisted that he
wanted to see all that is evil and he
forced me to prove my power.
So I brought about twenty-two earthquakes
and I caused that kingdom to tremble.
And when it had trembled for twenty-two
hours I told him that this glimpse
should be enough.
I reasoned with him
In all manner of ways, but still he
wouldn't listen, So I shook the houses
and the palace and destroyed them and
caused the black-and-white snake demon to
fall from the skies, and Tones and rocks
to fall from the skies.
There was no
chance of survival, And then, when the
houses and palace were destroyed, the
floods came and washed everything away so
that you couldn't tell that this was this
place and that was that.
Nothing could
be recognized.
Ten or twelve different gods are embodied now, and they are all amusing themselves in different ways.
Some are dancing on their own, or in twos or threes, as they did in the moonlight.
One is dancing his way round the outside of the shrine, carrying another sitting upright on his shoulder.
It's the Bāhan, one of the demons the gods defeated In the past, who then reformed and became a lesser deity.
Now he's restating his submission to the Bāra Bhāi and the forces of good.
There are others who aren't even dancing: one who has just gone over to the veranda and plunged his hand into the vat of boiling oil so he could offer a hot puri to a child in tears: another who is standing in the midst of the dancers being continually buffeted as they come and go, and hungrily eating a plateful of raw rice grains.
When he's finished someone takes him some water and he drinks it, spilling it over his face and down his chest and bare legs and feet.
The crowd is delighted by the gods' high spirits and pleasure in the dance.
People laugh and point as they recognize a particular god by his mannerisms, by the way he contorts the dhāmi's body to dance, or smile, or leap high into the air.
They've all come today: Bijulī Ma   ā, Thārpā Bāhan, Ukhā  i Ma   ā, and Bhawāni the goddess, younger sister of the twelve Ma   ā brothers.
Even Yā  gre has come, standing on his own with his back to the dancers, chewing marigold heads and squirting a jet of yellow pulp into a child's face.
It cries out, horrified by the affront.
There was a widow who came to me
saying, ‘There is no water in my land,
so I have no rice to eat.
My urine is
like blood.
I have come to ask for
the gift of water.’
And when she said this I struck the
ground with my fist and water sprang out.
I told that woman that if she offered me
rice on the day of the transplanting
there would always be water to flood her
paddy fields.
But because the woman was a widow and
contemptible to other people, they
rechannelled her water and she came to
me weeping.
So I destroyed that place to which the
water had been taken and I curse those 
people.
I cursed those people and said
that if ever they did scrape together
some little wealth.
then it would vanish
like ice in water, I cursed those people
and said that there would never be a
single day when there wasn't someone ill
in their house.
The sun sets and the harsh lines of sun and shadow dissolve into blurred shapes and muted colours.
The dhāmis look almost human — as vulnerable as actors when the stagelights fail.
They carry on dancing, but they're only holding the attention of a small part of the audience.
Most faces have turned to watch the  ā  gri who's just come out of the shrine and is standing in the doorway.
He's wearing only a new white dhoti and his body looks old, its loose flesh striated with veins and sinews.
In his right hand he's holding a curved knife with a short wooden handle.
He walks out of the shrine without looking at the crowd, picks up one of the lambs, frightened and bleating, and carries its almost weightless body round to the side of the shrine.
He puts it down at the base of the new li  ga — the stripped pine trunk that all the men brought back from the forest and erected early this morning — and pours some water over the lamb's head and in a stripe down its back to the base of the tail.
The lamb shrugs it off — nodding, they say.
the god's acceptance and its own acquiescence — and the  ā  gri stoops down and saws through its throat.
There's no resistance: it seems that the neck has no muscle, no bone, no leather hide, that it's just a blood-filled tube of white fur.
The  ā  gri holds the body while the young red blood squirts out and slashes the base of the li  ga in criss-cross patterns.
When it has stopped coming, he drops the body and goes back for another lamb and another, creeping down the earthen steps with his blood-stained knife and his feet and ankles splashed with red.
He sacrifices four lambs at the base of the li  ga , then takes two  inside and kills them by slitting open the throat and the chest and cutting off one of the forelegs at the shoulder, so the heart can be taken out, still pumping, and offered to the god on a plate on the dhāmi's raised seat.
The dancing has stopped now.
All eyes have turned to the killing.
And when the  ā  gri goes inside they remain fixed for an instant on the li  ga and the ground around it, with the four white bodies, and the separate wide-eyed heads, and the stains of blood going brown already in the trampled grass.
In those days I brought about stability
and made laws.
If there was anyone who
was suffering then I did whatever there
was to be done and wiped away that
person's tears.
And if there was anyone
who was causing suffering to others.
then I would build a trap of poisoned
bamboo, and I would ensnare and kill
that person.
I told them that I could
do whatever I wanted — if I wished to
do good.
then it would be good and if I
wished to do evil, then it would be evil.
Suddenly the crowd rearranges itself, like the changing pattern in a kaleidoscope; one twist and the border of any empty space dissolves into small agitating clusters spread throughout.
There's a hiss of people talking and laughing, and the explosive shrieks of children playing, shaking off the intensity of the afternoon.
A man is passing round some morsels of raw heart and liver.
It's the prasād , food offered to the gods, eaten in essence and then passed back, blessed, for the people to eat.
The crowd lingers for a long time, until it's almost dark.
There's a sense of release after the excitement, of fulfilment.
The gods came: they ate and danced and then left contented.
Now they're honour-bound to watch over the crops and the livestock and ward off ghosts and evil forces.
A group of men are standing on the veranda.
They're calling out, one by one, the names of all the households in the village.
Shapes move forward in the fading light to collect their pile of puris , the due from their offerings of flour and oil, and a few small pieces of meat,prasād .
That place with its sweeping cedar trees
and juniper.
That place where I could be
blessed by Kaskā Sundari Devī in the
mornings and the evenings.
There I built
a shrine and sacrificed a he-goat in the
name of the truth.
If a bell is tied round the neck of a crow
then, as it flies about, everyone will hear
the ringing — so there was no one who did
not know about the powers of this god.
But
mostly his influence was barely perceptible,
like the blowing of a breeze, like the
sound of a butterfly wafting through the
air.
1.
Kalchu
2.
A house in the village: the stables are at ground level, the living quarters above, and a notched-pole ladder leads to the roof-top work area and small storage room.
On the hillside is a Ma   ā shrine.
3.
Children swinging on the big walnut tree.
4.
Sigarup, Hārkini and a pile of lukals filled with grain to be traded for salt at the Tibetan border.
5.
Chola washing dishes.
6.
Kalchu winnowing, with Patrāsi Himāl in the background.
7.
Jakali shovelling snow from the roof of her house.
8.
The  ā  gri 's daughter, Gai  i, smoking a chillim .
FOUR SEASONS WITH THE SHEEP
WHEN THE GODS WERE ASKED TO NAME AN AUSPICIOUS DAY FOR the sheep to go south to Aula for the six months of winter, they had said the twenty-second of Kārtik, November the sixth.
The night before, Kalchu and Sigarup went to the shrine, lit the oil lamp and tied two strips of new cloth — one red, one white — on to the rafters among the hundreds of old and blackened ones that had gathered there over the years.
It was as if those streamers, knotted to the shrine, ensured the gods' protection — that Bhawāni, who went south, would bring the shepherds safely home again and Maiyu would take care of all those who stayed behind: as if the streamers knotted autumn safely on to spring.
Before it was light Chola had lit a fire, and was frying puris and boiling a small pan of rice for Sigarup to eat before he left.
By dawn the room was full of people.
Murti Lāl and Māilo, Sigarup's cousin and uncle who were joining their flocks with Kalchu's for the journey, had come to check the final preparations.
Other male relatives dropped in to offer last-minute words of advice, or simply wish the party well.
Some had brought instructions for things they wanted from the bazaars.
Money changed hands.
Voices buzzed, then rose in laughter or to make a point more forcibly.
Kalchu and Sigarup were only half-attending.
They were busy packing a basket with the things that Sigarup would need, talking quietly, moving back and forth between the two rooms: collecting blankets, cooking pots, a bag of wheat flour, salt and chilli, the cotton tarpaulin that they stretched across upright sticks to make a tent.
When at last they sat down to eat, a small crowd of children had gathered in the doorway, drawn from their own homes by the smell of puris frying, knowing from this that today was a  special occasion.
Jakali shooed them away as she came in.
She'd brought some desu , flat buckwheat bread that's taken on journeys because it stays fresh for days, and some roasted amaranthus seeds in honey, wrapped in birch bark.
She put them into the basket and Chola stretched across the fire to pass her a puri .
They brought the whole flock of sheep and goats, thirty-five or forty of them, on to the roof to tie on the lukals — the double-pouched woven saddle-bags — stuffed with potatoes and Tibetan salt for trading in the south.
Śa  kar and Kānchho were down below steering them out of the sheep-pen, round and up the wide stone staircase.
Kāli and her cousin, Jit, were at the far end of the roof waving their arms, keeping the sheep contained at one end only, stopping them going back down the steps at the other side.
Hooves clattered on the stone stairway as the sheep bounded up two abreast, then more hollowly on the packed mud roof.
The first ones ran straight over to the corner of the roof, saw the drop and veered back, colliding with the others still pouring up the staircase.
Frightened now, hemmed into the confined space with no escape, they ran in unison, a few steps one way, then the other, heads thrown back above the shifting bodies, yellow eyes ablaze.
Kalchu grabbed hold of a ram that was panting on the outside of the flock.
He clutched it by two handfuls of thick fleece, bracing himself as it tried to lunge forwards.
Then quickly he put one leg over the body, gripping the shoulders between his thighs and the ram stood still, its head drooping sullenly.
Sigarup passed a lukal , and Kalchu slung it over the ram's back and tied the two sets of stings, one across the chest and the other round the hind legs and under the tail.
When he let it go the ram trotted off, barging through the other sheep with the lukal bulging out on either side across its ribcage.
It stopped abruptly at the edge of the roof, straining to balance its top-heavy body on slender back legs and egg-cup hooves.
Chola and Mina were watching from the doorway with the twins hovering behind, peering out, both curious and scared by the rush of trampling hooves.
Nara was perched safely halfway up the notched-pole ladder to the upper roof.
He seemed completely absorbed, his whole body thrilled with excitement.
When the sheep were calmer, Kalchu and Sigarup waded out among them, slapping rumps, pushing hard against firmly resistant flanks, piling the already packed bodies tighter together so there was more room to move about with the lukals .
By the time all the lukals had been tied on Murti Lāl and Māilo were waiting down below, their flocks merged together quietly grazing.
Kāli and Jit moved out of the way of the back staircase and the sheep flooded down past them.
Kalchu followed behind, raising his arms and whistling at the stragglers.
He would go with them at least as far as the bridge.
Sigarup picked up the basket, staggering slightly to readjust the weight, and Chola came out of the doorway with a bowl of rice-grains stained with turmeric.
She dipped her thumb into the bowl and then touched Sigarup's forehead, marking a yellow  ikā between his eyes.
Sigarup bowed his head and cupped both palms loosely in front of his face, as if none of the yellow rice should fall to the ground.
Afterwards he dipped his own thumb into the bowl and made the same yellow mark on Chola's forehead.
Then he turned and was gone.
Chola reached up to the arch above the doorway add seven times made the same imprint with the pad of her thumb on to seven discs of semi-dried cow-dung.
Then, with her back to the door, she sprinkled the rest of the contents of the bowl high into the air and out over the edge of the roof.
At the end of November, ten or eleven boys climbed the big walnut tree in the middle of the village, swinging about among its branches, and women and children scrabbled laughingly for the  nuts as they fell.
Soon afterwards a wind sent the last of its bright leaves spiralling down.
One stormy evening in December a party of Tibetan traders drove their yaks down the steep path into the village from the west.
They were silhouetted for a moment on the brow of the hill against a last pool of light among encroaching black storm-clouds.
They walked in a line, the yaks' bulky bodies braced against the wind, tails streaming out.
Then they rounded the bend by the Bāhan shrine and dropped down into the darkness of the valley.
They set up camp on the Kālādika, unloading the yaks and lighting a fire as the moon rose low behind the trees.
They stayed for two weeks, grazing the yaks.
One of the bulls had been bitten by a wildcat one night, on a mountain pass coming down from Dolpo.
The wound had become infected by the constant rubbing of a heavy load.
The flesh had had to be gouged out with a knife, and the wound swilled with water and coated with powdered herbs.
Three men held the yak's head down with ropes, their weight pitted against the great muscles of its neck and shoulders as it threw its head about, crazy with the pain of the knife in its withers.
Early one morning they tied their stripy woven bags of Tibetan salt on to the yaks and left for the south.
Their fires were still curling blue smoke into the frosty air as they filed out of the village and across the icy boards of the small bridge.
In January the first real snow fell.
Kāli stood outside and shouted, ‘Hiu  āgo !’ and, tilting her head back, mouth open wide, watched the flakes fall about her and felt them melt like icy duck-down on the warmth of her outstretched tongue.
For two days nothing beyond the ghost of the walnut tree showed through the flickering screen of brownish-yellow light.
On the third morning a gust of wind swept out one final flurry and cleared the sky.
Kalchu, Nara and Kāli fetched the wooden shovels and, standing thigh-high in the snow, set about the long  work of clearing the roof.
Right across the village, men and women stooped over, black forms against a world of white, shovelling great heaps of snow and tumbling them to the ground in frothy white cascades.
It was snowing again, or sleeting, when Kalchu's uncle died in February.
They bound his small and wizened body in a white cloth and two grown sons carried it out of the house on a pair of pine poles resting almost weightlessly between their four strong shoulders.
They took it down to the burning gha  where two rivers meet in a rolling pool of green and white, and where at night the restless spirits of the dead wall to the roar of the crashing waters.
Chola and Mina stood on the roof and watched them go.
The dead man was taken at the end of a winding procession, with one man from every house in the village barefoot and carrying a log for the pyre.
A long white strip of cloth linked them all from hand a hand as they made their way down through the sleet and the open snowy fields.
Later the women saw the smoke billowing up from the river valley.
When Kalchu came back his head had been shaved bald except for a short black tuft that arched out from the crown and drooped down behind.
He complained of the cold and started to wear a thick cotton turban instead of his usual  opi .
For ten days in March the water-mills froze solid.
The stream cascaded down, spangling sunlight on ice-capped rocks and luminous green weed, but the chutes were blocked and the water passed them by.
The supplies of flour ran out.
One night Mina and Kāli went to use the Chaura mill.
They wrapped themselves up in thick woollen blankets and, laden with a sack of grain and a bundle of firewood, set out across the darkness.
They lit a fire in the stone mill-hut and all night huddled round it, spooning ladles of pale maize kernels into the central  well of the grinding stone.
Outside the water churned down beneath them, pumping the mechanism, clashing wood against stone, stone against heavily-spinning grinding-stone.
At dawn they ate the potatoes that they'd laid around the fire to cook.
Kāli swept up the drifts of flour and, scooping it up in her limply cold hands, crammed it back into the bag.
Later the Chaura women came to use their mill.
March ended and a web of green enlaced the thorn trees.
One day, instead of the usual austere frost and intensely clear light as dawn subsided, the air felt thick and warm.
A band of cloud stretched low across the valley and it was raining slightly.
In the distance the pine-clad hills were bathed in a pale wash of greenish-purple light.
Groups of Tibetan traders filed through the village on their way back north from India.
Local men returned from their winter working in Jumla Bazaar.
Kalchu finished weaving the last whitish length of woollen cloth to make a jacket and put his loom away.
The following morning he brought the two black bulls out of the stable and went to start the ploughing.
When he came back in the evening he sat for a long time gazing out across the V-shaped valley leading south.
‘If they don't get back by Chait Dasai  — if Bhawāni's not here for her own festival — it's a bad sign.
It'll be a bad year for us all.’
One day, on his way to do the ploughing, he met a man who'd just come back from the south and had passed several flocks of sheep on the other side of Chhakuri Lekh.
He said that the rain we'd been having here had fallen as snow on the top of the pass.
There was a terrible wind blowing as well, sheeting across the plateau, piling the snow into drifts as high as a house.
He said that one group had foolishly tried to cross and sixteen sheep had been lost — some swept right off the path as they climbed to the top, some left injured or dead, buried in snow at the bottom of a hidden ravine.
The other groups had set up camp on the far side, waiting for a few clear days and the worst of the snow to melt.
It  was bitter, he said, so cold you thought your eyelids would freeze shut if you blinked.
Days passed.
In spare moments Kalchu and Chola would pause on the roof, anxiously scanning the valley from length to breadth, up and down.
Then one evening Kalchu spotted some sheep, a moving patch of white, away in the distance between Māthichaur and Gorigāu , slowly working its way down the valley.
There were three figures with them, black hazy shadows that swayed in and out of focus and occasionally flickered away to nothing.
Everyone rushed out when he called, screwing up their faces, trying to hold their vision steady long enough to tell if it was Sigarup.
But no one could do more than guess…and hope.
Kalchu put on his jacket and hurried down the path towards the bridge.
It was almost dark when the sheep squeezed through the narrow path between two houses and spilled out across the open village square.
There must have been a hundred of them — three flocks together — scrabbling over the stones, stretching out their necks and bleating.
Sigarup and Murti Lāl followed the last few through the gap, whistling long and low, a final command to stop and be still.
When Sigarup climbed up the ladder, straining under the weight of his basket, the dog sidled over to him with a low unearthly grunt of pleasure.
Hārkini rushed over and wrapped both arms round his thigh, burying her face deep in the folds of his matted wool trousers.
Chola, reaching up, replaced the seven yellow marks above the doorway with seven new ones and then, facing Sigarup almost shyly, she planted three  ikās firmly between his eyes.
Sigarup stooped and touched her feet.
Shafts of bright sunlight pierced the smoke as it welled up from the eaves and spread across the roof in a fine blue film., Kāli came out into the doorway with a plate of puris and a small bowl of oil.
The bronze plate caught the sun and flashed its glinting radiance back across her face.
She gathered up her skirt and climbed the  notched-pole ladder to the shrine on the upper roof.
Inside she put the puris down on the altar for Bhawāni and Maiyu and lit the lamp.
Sunlight filtered dustily through the slats of the door and dimmed its flame.
At night it would shine out brightly, projecting the shrine's own life back in wavering shadows across the walls and ceiling.
Afterwards the gods' puris were torn up and shared out as prasād .
There were more puris — a whole basketful — eaten with hot spicy potatoes, fried in mustard oil brought back from Aula, and there was rice for everyone, and an emerald green soup of wild young ka  kani leaves.
Kalchu had brewed some millet beer months ago to ferment out ready for today and it was sweet and clear and very strong.
Hārkini and Lāla Bahādur were lolling happily against Sigarup's knees, chattering incoherently as he started to unpack the basket.
There was cloth — yards and yards of tetua , cheap and coarsely woven cotton — and a shawl, finely printed in yellow and black, the kind that all the village women wear at festivals.
There were chillims — one rupee for seven.
There were brightly coloured   opis , a cigarette lighter and a set of batteries for the radio.
There were spices — a small cloth pouch of cumin and a bigger one of turmeric.
Kāli and Hārkini were huddled together in the corner of the room where sunlight flooded through the open doorway.
Kāli had fixed two new hairslides on either side of Hārkini's head and was holding her face at arm's length to see the effect.
The slides were white and round with protruding domes of multicoloured plastic.
Tilting Hārkini's head to catch the sun, Kāli angled the reflection on to the wall, casting a stained-glass disc of red, yellow, green, blue and orange circles — splaying it back and forth across the wall according to the movements of her sister's head.
She herself had plastic bangles.
They were multicoloured too, but not clear and translucent like the hairslides.
They were cloudy colours, pale and subtle with the milky sheen of pearls.
She squeezed them painfully, one after the other, over her hand.
When  all five were in place she raised her arm, and smiled, admiring them.
For a moment there was a quietness, everyone reflecting.
Then Sigarup sat up and pulled a large lemon out of his pocket.
Its rind was like wide-pored skin, shining greasily.
He cut it up lengthways and its tangy smell flooded out.
After he'd coated the segments in salt and chilli he passed them round, and everyone smacked their lips and screwed up their faces in pained delight.
He told them about the oranges and bananas that grow in Aula and the quantities of milk and curd, and then about the monkeys that hop around and eat the crops.
Kalchu stood up.
There was work to do.
He folded up the cloth: the tetua : the length of saffron satin to enwind his own or Chola's body when they died; the yards and yards of white muslin funeral cloth; and finally the phe  ā and pachyauro — turban and shawl — ritual gifts that, one day, Sigarup would give to the parents of the girl he'd marry.
He put them all away in the big wooden chest.
Then he told Kāli to go and graze the cows, and Bi  ā to tend the sheep.
Reluctantly they left.
Outside Sigarup and Kalchu started to unpack the lukals , slitting open the stitching at the top with a knife and tipping out the maize to dry in the sun before they stored it away in wooden chests and cylindrical clay grain vats.
Later, some of it would be loaded up again and taken north to trade for salt.
When all the grain had been spread out on every kind of tattered rug and mat that the house possessed, it stretched out almost right across the roof.
They had to pile it deeper in one corner to make a space to spread the chillies — five lukals of fleshy scarlet pods to be dried a crackling brick-red to last throughout the year.
At last they slumped down in the sunshine with two long bamboos to chase away the chickens.
Other men and children, mainly relatives, gathered round and Kalchu fetched the beer.
All through the afternoon they sat and drank and talked about the trip.
Sigarup said that three sheep had died — there was some  disease.
Kalchu laughed and, teasing him, asked how much he had sold them for.
Then they discussed the exchange rate: one of salt to five of grain, better than the year before.
But the price of tetua had rocketed because of the increased land tax in the villages that made it.
Kalchu picked up a handful of maize kernels, inspected them for a minute, and let them trickle back through his fingers.
He said the quality seemed good.
Towards evening the tailor came.
Sitting outside surrounded by the family, he unfurled rolls and rolls of cotton cloth and, pulling it taut, he measured it with string — a jacket for Chola, trousers for Sigarup and Nara, and an all-in-one toddler suit for Lāla Bahādur.
He marked the material with charcoal, cut it into lengths, and rolled it up again.
Chola fetched him some tobacco and a parcel of turmeric.
Later, when he brought the finished clothes back, he'd be paid in grain.
Two months later spring had opened into full-blown summer.
The lambing had begun and the sheep's tousled fleece had been shorn to a jagged grey stubble.
When the rains came Sigarup took the flock to the monsoon settlement to graze the mountain pastures.
They left in the early morning, swishing through the wet grass on the valley floor, then climbing steeply into the thick of the mist and cloud.
In August Kalchu began to fill the lukals , stuffing them with maize and barley, then sliding a knife between the grain and the cloth so the contents would settle and more could be crammed on top.
When they were bulging-full, he stitched them closed with a curved needle and woollen thread and laid them ready in a pile.
One evening Sigarup brought the rams and he-goats down from the mountain pastures and Śa  kar went to take his place, tending the ewes and lambs.
The following morning they lit the oil-lamp in the shrine and loaded up the sheep.
Sigarup and Murti Lāl exchanged  ikās with their families and, whistling and shouting, they steered the flock through the village and out across the bridge.
Slowly they worked  their way up the wide and gently rising river-valley until they were black sticks bent against their baskets of provisions.
At last they were lost from sight, merging with the river and the pine trees and the foothills of the looming mountain ridges leading northwards to Tibet.
They didn't get as far as the Tibetan border, where the exchange rate would have been better.
Twenty-eight days later they were back — they had only been as far as Mugu.
They had stayed there with their i   a , the trading partner whose family had done business with Kalchu's since before his grandfather could remember.
They bartered their grain for the salt he'd brought back from the border, where he traded with Tibetans who'd scraped it from the arid salt-lakes and carried it south on yaks across the windswept dust-blown plateau lands.
Soon after he returned Sigarup took the rams and he-goats back to the mountain pastures.
He spent one more month in that makeshift hut, grazing the sheep and gathering hātijaro, bal  u and katuka — wild herbs — to sell as medicine in Aula.
The rains were over now and the lambs were almost grown.
When the first frosts came he moved back down to the village.
Then, in a seance, one cold and perfectly clear starlit night, the gods were asked to name the day to go to Aula.
WHEN SIGARUP FELL ILL
SIGARUP HAD BEEN ILL FOR A WEEK.
NO ONE KNEW WHAT WAS wrong.
He had a fever and complained about a pain in his right thigh.
By the ninth day the pain had become intolerable.
All through the night he lay awake, twisting and writhing, and moaning in low desperate tones.
Kalchu sat up with him, keeping the fire alight, while the rest of the family slept.
Occasionally he would mutter a few words of comfort, or reach out a hand and lay it reassuringly on Sigarup's blanketed body to let him know that he was still awake.
But most of the night he sat in silence, gazing abstractedly into the fire.
In the morning Chola said that she too was feeling unwell.
When she went to fetch the water she felt sharp pains rushing through her body.
She was gasping for air, then her throat seized closed and she fainted.
Kalchu spoke to the dhāmi and asked him to call the god to the shrine that night.
When darkness had fallen, Bi  ā and Sa  kar climbed the ladder to the upper roof of Kalchu's house and brought the two copper kettledrums out of the shrine at the back.
Wrapped in thick blankets against the cold, they sat cross-legged behind the drums, beating them in unison, and the sound rolled out through the frosty night, letting the villagers know that the god would be coming.
Inside the shrine three men sat around the fire.
One of them was Kalchu, who had come early to make sure of a place at the front before the small shrine filled up with people.
Another was the  ā  gri , sitting beside a petal-shaped oil lamp which he replenished as soon as the flame began to dwindle from a bowl on the hearth.
The third, dressed in white, was the dhāmi .
They were talking quietly, waiting for people to arrive.
The shrine itself seemed to be waiting.
There was a strange  stillness in the air.
The fire was burning almost smokelessly, with just a thin trail of white projected vertically above the shifting peaks of orange flame.
The smell of juniper, burned earlier as incense, still lingered like the warm breath of the forest in summer.
Outside the open door stretched the immense blackness of night.
Soon people began to arrive, taking off their shoes outside the door, peeling back shawls and blankets from faces that glowed red with the cold.
Children fidgeted and chattered: mothers clutched babies in their arms and hauled toddlers on to their laps, making more room on the floor for people to sit.
Everyone had brought a small handful of husked rice, which they passed to the front to be put on a plate beside the dhāmi .
When the shrine was full, Kalchu began to pull the cord of the big brass bell hanging above his head.
The bell swung round, clanging and reverberating.
Like the sound of a gong, it was impossible to tell where the clash of the clapper on the bell ended and its echo began.
A continuous multi-pitched hum whirred deafeningly around the shrine.
Outside on the roof the drummers began to speed up, thrashing the great cavernous half-globes as fast as their hands could rise and fall.
The shrine and the whole house shook and the ground beneath it seemed to be shifting away as though in an earthquake.
It was a demoniac sound that made hearts beat too fast, heads and bodies reel.
The dhāmi was sitting cross-legged with his eyes closed.
Then, suddenly, he began to tremble.
His breath was coming in short irregular gasps.
Occasionally, as if he was trying to control it, he would exhale three times in succession, and the sound would be forced from his throat in rhythmic grunts: ‘Aha aha aha’.
Then, lurching to his feet, he moved over on to the only empty seat in the shrine — a patch of floor covered with a sheepskin rug.
There he pulled off his white turban and let his long black hair coil over his shoulder and drop down on to the ground.
The music stopped.
For an instant its echo lingered.
Then there was silence.
The dhāmi put his hand into the plate of rice, agitating the  grains, stirring them round, picking them up, then letting them sift back through his fingers.
For a long time he gazed into the depths of the rice, muttering.
Streams of words, too fast and tremulous to understand, poured from his mouth in the voice of the god.
Then the grunts came again: ‘Aha aha aha’, and the muttering continued.
At last, with his hand still shuffling the rice, he looked up, directly at Kalchu.
‘Child, your eyes are full of suffering.’
‘Lord, there is illness in my family.
My son is dying.
You must help me now.
I've lived a good life.
I've honoured the gods and cared for my family.
Tell me: if this is the punishment from you or another god for something I have done that's wrong then show me how to make amends.
I'll do anything, if only my son is spared.
Or if this is the whim of some trouble-stirring witch, you must beat her to the ground and punish her.
Make her stop.
That you owe me, Lord, as a man who's always worshipped you.’
There was silence for a minute.
Then the god's voice came again and Kalchu leaned forward, straining to hear.
‘Child, I see no witch and nothing you have done that's wrong.
But listen, if you lived a nomad's life wandering the high mountains you would understand.
Looking up at the north-facing slope ahead you would see snow and ice and you would tremble, but you would know that coming down on the other side, you would walk in sunshine, through green grass and sweet-smelling flowers.
Don't you know that in your life too there are mountains and there are valleys?
Times of trouble come and go — that is our lot.’
‘But my son — you must save my son.
If this son dies my life is finished.
I'll do anything.
I'll give you anything you want.’
Kalchu was distraught.
‘Child, listen to me.
Your son may live, or he may die.
But remember this: even if he dies, better times will come for you.
I will not see you suffering for long.
Trust in me and I will guide you through.’
The dhāmi picked up a handful of rice and blew on it.
Then he  passed it to Kalchu.
‘Take these grains as my blessing.
Tonight, scatter half into the wind to the north, the south, the east and the west.
Then give the rest to the boy to eat.’
There was a buzz of voices in the shrine.
A man beside Kalchu X and spoke to him encouragingly.
Chillims were lit and passed around.
The dhāmi was staring at the ground, blinking rapidly and trembling.
Beside him a three-pronged trident was staked into the low altar, and next to that a jumble of miniature statues danced with their shadows in the firelight.
There were men on horseback, sentries with their guns, a cow being milked, a woman with round breasts and her hair coiled with snakes.
To the left of them, a conch shell brought back from the Indian Ocean curled mysteriously in on itself, like the pink and white entrance to another world.
Then the god spoke to a woman whose baby was ill, and afterwards to a couple who were childless after three years' marriage.
He told the woman she was a witch and was holding her husband under a strange and evil power.
The woman said it was not true and the god asked her why she had come tonight if she thought that his words were ‘mere wind and breeze’.
She relented and the god said that if she sacrificed a chicken at the Bāhan shrine on top of the hill, that god would exorcize her evil.
She started to cry.
While he was still talking to that woman, the dhāmi's body slowly began to relax.
He was no longer shaking.
His eyes had lost their glazed intensity and the fits of rapid blinking had stopped.
Then calmly, in a voice that was his own, he said that the god had left him.
A cold breeze blew through the open door, stirring the fire so the flames shot up, flickering brightly.
For a moment, the tangle of small brass bells and strips of red and white cloth hanging from the roof were illuminated, then they were plunged back into darkness.
The dhāmi picked up his long tuft of hair bound with silver rings that had been given to the god he embodied, and carefully  wound it round his head again and covered it with his turban.
After the god had left, most people stayed in the shrine discussing what had been said.
When the light and warmth of the fire had given way to smoke, they put on their shoes and wandered homeward through the silent village and the frosty starlit night.
The next morning Chola seemed to be slightly better but Sigarup, if anything, was worse.
All day he lay in the dark windowless room, semi-conscious.
In the evening Chola woke him with some water to drink: he winced and then groaned as the pain shot out from his thigh and radiated through his body.
For a moment his eyes looked at her beseechingly, then they clouded over and were vacant.
He slouched back under his rug.
That night Kalchu's two brothers came to look at Sigarup, and the three men and Chola sat around the fire discussing in low worried voices what they were going to do.
In the end Kalchu and Chola agreed that Sigarup would have to go to the hospital in Jumla Bazaar.
Kānchho, Kalchu's younger brother, and Śa  kar would take him in the morning, and Kānchho would stay there with him — if that was how it had to be.
All that night again Kalchu kept his vigil.
Then, at the first light of dawn, the three men began their preparations while Chola cooked.
Together they cut a section out of a basket, from the broad rim right down to the narrower base.
The gap was about a foot and a half wide — wide enough for Sigarup to sit in the basket with his legs hanging down below.
When it was ready, they padded it with straw and blankets.
Then they packed another basket with some ro  is for the journey, and flour and potatoes and pots and pans for cooking when they reached the Bazaar,
After they had eaten, Kalchu picked up Sigarup in his blanket, holding the limp body draped across his two forearms as he would a child.
Gently, he carried him outside and put him in the basket.
Kalchu, Chola, Nara, Kāli and the twins stood on the roof and watched them go.
The two men were dressed in their best clothes for the Bazaar, with Sigarup, pale and lifeless, looking out backwards  from the shrouds of his blanket in the basket on Kānchho's back.
As they went down the steps, Sigarup's face contorted at the sudden jarring movements.
Kalchu's eyes filled with tears, and Chola, holding her face in both her hands, was racked with sobbing.
Late the following afternoon, Śa  kar came back.
He said that the doctor seemed to think Sigarup would be all right— although his chances would have been better if they'd brought him sooner.
He had an infection of the muscle and would have to stay in hospital for at least three weeks, maybe a month, while they treated him with penicillin injections.
Later in the evening, when the sheep and cows were in, and the family was sitting round the fire, Śa  kar told them the whole story of what had happened.
‘It seemed that we would never reach the Bazaar.
Although Sigarup's so thin now, it was a difficult weight to carry and we needed to rest a lot.
Then his leg began to hurt and we had to stop to rearrange the straw and blanket.
In the woods between Lāmri and U  hu where the path drops steeply down, the stream had frozen solid right across the path and we had to pick our way for half a mile, across the ice.
‘We didn't make it to the Bazaar last night.
We stayed in the dharamsālā , just past U  hu.
Although we found some firewood in the woods behind the hut, it was bitterly cold.
None of us really slept; we just lay there, listening to the wind and the jackals howling.
‘We got to the Bazaar soon after the sun was up this morning.
There was already a crowd of people sitting on the grass outside the hospital.
The doctor hadn't arrived yet, but another man wrote down Sigarup's name and village and told us to wait.
‘It was midday when Sigarup's name was called.
We went into a room and the doctor asked some questions and looked at Sigarup's leg and felt it.
Then he told us to go into the hospital where the nurse would show us what to do.
‘The hospital was dark and cold and there were two rows of beds, six on either side.
The nurse pointed to a bed in the corner where Sigarup would sleep, and another, next to it, for Kānchho Ba.
She took Sigarup's temperature and gave him an injection and some pills.
Then she told us that there was a hut behind the hospital where the patients lit a fire and cooked their food.
‘Inside, a boy was sitting by the fire.
The hut was filled with smoke.
He said that he'd been there three weeks.
He had tuberculosis and was getting better slowly.
But it wasn't easy.
In his valley the ploughing's started and, because his family's small, no one could be spared to come with him to help him fetch his wood and water — and although the water's nearby, the firewood's half a day away.
‘He was glad that Sigarup had come, because up to now he'd been the only patient staying and, alone at night, he was terrified of ghosts — of the restless souls of all the people who must have died there, far from their homes and families.’
Chola winced visibly at this, and Śań4kar carried on.
‘We made ourselves some ro  is , and when we'd eaten them, I set out for home.
Kānchho Ba says you mustn't worry — he'll stay with Sigarup however long it takes him to get better.’
Then he added, ‘If anyone from the village is going to the Bazaar we should send some more flour and potatoes and some more blankets.’
In the days and weeks that followed, Chola was sometimes well, sometimes ill.
She complained of headaches and exhaustion and often said her whole body ached.
Sometimes she thought she had a fever and, in the morning when she'd cooked and the family had eaten, too ill to work in the fields, she'd take a rug out onto the roof and sleep in the warmth of the winter sun.
Kalchu was busy all the time, working the land from dawn to dusk.
First he did the ploughing in both his own fields and Kānchho's.
Then as spring advanced, he sowed the barley, millet, potatoes and the maize — his own and Kānchho's.
One day he didn't work.
Early in the morning, dressed in his  best clothes — his blue cotton tunic and trousers and his Chinese canvas shoes — he left to go to Chaura to consult one of the Chaura village gods.
Another day he went to Gorigāu , then further to Padmāra and to Rini.
But always, coming back, he would be disconsolate.
Always the message was the same: ‘Child, I could set fire to green grass, but it would not burn.’
The gods saw no solution and were steadfast in denying him the solace of their lies.
Then, late one afternoon when Chola had been ill for three consecutive days, Kalchu asked the dhāmi once again to call the god to the shrine on the roof of his own house.
The drumming began and Kalchu went to the shrine with his handful of husked rice, a red and a white strip of cotton cloth and a small bell to give to the god.
Again the music rang out and the god answered the summons.
In the flickering firelight Kalchu beseeched him, ‘Lord, you are the one who, when we have nothing, feeds us with water and clothes us with the wind.
Help me now.’
That afternoon the floor of the shrine had been freshly plastered with mud and cow-dung and was smooth and clean, and the hearth had been cleared of its old ash.
The fire was burning steadily, the flame of the oil-lamp dipped and bobbed and the sweet smell of incense filled the air.
In that quiet order the god replied, ‘Child, there is a woman.
There is a woman, your wife.
Many years ago she was married to a man in Lāmri.
Then, when she met you she fell in love and wanted to come and live with you.
In those hard times she turned to the god in the village where she lived, and that god stood by her.
That god stood by both of you.
You paid her husband three thousand rupees and you took away his wife.
‘Now you have five sons.
You have crops that flourish in the fields.
You have cattle in your stable and a flock of sheep.
But you have neglected that god.
Now your wife is ill, and your son too may die.
Tomorrow you must go the shrine of that god in Lāmri and sacrifice a he-goat.
Then, once every three years, on the full  moon in Kārtik, you will remember that god and you will offer him a lamb.’
The dhāmi blew on a handful of rice and passed it to Kalchu.
‘Take these grains as my blessing, and may your days be as bright and continuous as a garland of flowers.’
The following morning Chola dressed in her best clothes: her blue printed cotton skirt, a freshly washed white waistband, a clean shawl and a pair of canvas shoes.
Kalchu went down to the stable and selected a he-goat.
Together the two of them set out for Lāmri, leading the goat on a length of rope.
When they came back, soon after midday, Chola was in good spirits.
The goat had been sacrificed at the shrine and the meat shared out among the villagers.
They had stayed to eat with the family of Chola's former husband, and they had been feasted with raksi and rice and the meat of the sacrificial goat.
The next day Chola was feeling well, and she and Kalchu and Kānchho's wife, Sita, worked in the fields all day and finished sowing the buckwheat.
In the evening Kalchu went round the village from house to house until he found someone who was going to the Bazaar the following day.
He asked them to bring back news of Sigarup and to take some flour and potatoes and a small parcel of rice grains blessed by the god.
Word came back in two days' time that Sigarup was getting better.
Soon afterwards another message came.
Sigarup was setting out for home.
He could walk now with a crutch, but the going would be slow, and they would spend the night in Lorpa.
The journey took them two full days.
They left the hospital in the morning, and they didn't reach the village until the following evening.
As soon as they were back the room filled up with people: Kānchho's wife and family, Kalchu's other brother, Māilo, and his son and daughter, the  ā  gri from the house next door.
When everyone was sitting round the fire, drinking beer and asking  Sigarup about his leg, about the doctor and the hospital and the journey back, Kalchu disappeared outside.
The night was cold, the frost already settling.
There was a new moon, and its pale light cast soft shadows in the stillness.
Kalchu went to the chicken coop and lifted the hatch.
As he put his hand inside there was a squawking and a scrabbling of claws and flapping wings.
Eventually he found the cockerel and pulled it out.
Feathers flurried to the ground as it struggled in his hands.
To the west of the village across the stream, at the point where two paths meet, there is a small shrine.
Two stones, standing vertically, mark the spot.
Above them, tied to a thorn tree, faded red and white streamers dangle like the tattered carcasses of scrawny birds.
Holding the cockerel between his knees, Kalchu slit its throat.
Then he lifted the body so that the blood dribbled over the stones and spilt on to the ground in front of him, where it was littered with the remains of other, older offerings — dead flowers, grains of rice and barley, a few coins.
Late that night there was a feast of rice and meat.
Two weeks later Sigarup was still weak.
He couldn't stand or walk alone and the muscle in his leg had withered badly.
But his face was full and there was colour in his cheeks.
He talked and laughed a lot, and practised walking with his crutch.
Every day he rubbed some ointment on his leg.
It was red and smelled of perfume.
He'd bought it in the Bazaar from an Indian trader who told him it would make the muscle grow.
In the month of Sāun, Kalchu and Sigarup set out together across the mountains on a pilgrimage to Rānāmāche Lake.
On the night of the full moon, people gathered there from as far afield as Bārakot, twelve days' walk away.
In the moonlight they bathed in the lake and made offerings to the goddess Rānāmāche Mai.
There were people there whose parents, brothers, sisters, husbands — loved ones — had died in the course of the last year.
Standing on the edge of the lake, they threw some small memento  of their dead into the rippling water — a final request that their souls should rest in peace.
And there were others, like Kalchu and Sigarup, who'd come instead to thank the gods for the life they'd spared.
PHASES OF THE MONSOON
ONE MORNING EARLY IN JUNE, BETWEEN DAWN AND SUNRISE, THE headman stood on his roof and shouted out across the village that today they would build the temporary bridge over the main river and that one man from each household was needed.
Thirty or so men left together and others followed in smaller groups throughout the morning.
They crossed the river on the permanent bridge, couched solidly well above the water level on great wooden pillars carved at the top into the heads and shoulders of semi-mythical sentries, some holding rifles.
On the far side they followed the river about a mile downstream until they reached the same narrow point where the temporary bridge is constructed every year.
Here they left the valley and climbed up into the forest.
It took them all day to build the bridge — felling two of the tallest pines, stripping them bare, easing them with ropes down the steep slope to the river.
Some of the men undressed to their loincloths and waded out into the cold water while others pushed the trees from the bank.
Although at this time of year, before the monsoon, the water is at its lowest, it was nevertheless chest-deep in places and fast-flowing — turquoise and white where it swirled around boulders near the edge, dark green in the broad sweep of the central canal.
It was hard for the men not to lose their footing on jagged or slippery stones: harder still, leaning right back on the ropes, to counteract the relentless downward pull of the current and keep the tree on course for the opposite bank.
When both trunks had been hauled on to the far bank they used the ropes to bind them together at various points along their length.
Finally they wedged the ends in place between boulders and the bridge was complete.
All the next day, women filed back and forth across the bridge carrying basketloads of mal — the manured pine-needle  bedding from the cow-byres of last year's monsoon settlements on Jimale — to spread on the paddy fields directly opposite.
When the baskets were full the women couldn't look down: their heads were braced erect by the tension of the rope across their foreheads bearing the weight of the load on their backs.
But coming back, even with the baskets empty, they looked ahead not down, knowing that the sight of the water surging past only inches below their feet would have cost them their balance.
By the evening of the third day the cow-byres had been cleared and the paddy fields were dotted with deposited mal like chains of molehills.
Two weeks later the monsoon started: the river swelled under the double overload of heavy rain and melted snow from the mountains.
Soon it was wild and tumultuous, crashing in on itself, rolling and somersaulting into frothing white whirlpools and eddies, roaring out across the valley like the rumble of an interminable train.
The temporary bridge was first of all submerged then, like a matchstick, it was lifted up and swept aside.
It had been raining all night and in the stillness of morning the clouds and mist had not yet cleared.
From the edge of the village the whole valley — the fields, the growing crops, the river — had been transformed into a steaming white nether-world.
Mountains on the other side of the valley rose from the mist like islands, and here and there flecks of cloud, as pale and fine as sea-spray, trailed across their sombre, wooded slopes.
Mina was the first to leave for the fields.
She joined a group of young women, each wrapped in a shawl and carrying a short-handled hoe for weeding and a smouldering disc of dried cow-dung to ward off the midges that plague the mornings and evenings of the rainy season.
They picked their way slowly through the mud and puddles on the village path, unfurling a haze of blue smoke around them as they went.
Later, when they had eaten, Kalchu and Chola, Nara and the twins followed.
Chola was carrying a basket with the hoes and a  rug, some ro  is to eat in the course of the day and a bronze pot for fetching water from the spring.
Kalchu was carrying Lāla Bahādur on his back in a shawl and gently coaxing Hārkini along by the hand.
When they had left the village, passing beneath the clump of wild apricot trees, bespattered with blossom, they walked in single file between the fields.
Grass and tangled weeds criss-crossed the path, slashing their bare feet and ankles and saturating the clothes on their thighs where they brushed against them.
They passed through fields of barley, now as brightly green as the luminous weed in the stream: through potato patches: through fields of beans and millet and pumpkins as full and red as the morning sun in winter.
When at last they reached the maize fields they stopped.
Gradually other families arrived.
Kalchu's two brothers, and their wives and children, worked the surrounding plots.
their father's land having been split three ways among his sons.
In the corner of one of their fields the younger brother's wife built a shelter of leaves and twigs draped across with a shawl and put her baby beneath it to shield her from the alternate onslaughts of sun and showers.
Later in the afternoon the wind rose and black storm-clouds rolled inexorably down the valley.
When finally they opened, rain poured down in torrents, pelting the drooping maize fronds, pitting the bare earth where it landed.
Chola and Mina crouched under home-made umbrellas — sheets of birch-bark bound in a mesh of split bamboo — that spread across their backs like the splayed wings of a moth.
Kalchu, wearing only his loincloth. let the rain course over his bare skin.
Gradually, as they worked, their feet sank into the soft earth and wet mud oozed up between their toes.
When the sun came out, steam rose and the air was too heavy to breathe.
Chola lay down on the rug and fell asleep.
Mina went to fetch some drinking water, taking the twins with her to bathe in the marshy pool around the spring.
On the way back, she filled  a pouch in the corner of her shawl with the edible weeds that grow like tongues of spinach among the crops.
Towards evening dark clouds gathered again over the mountain at the mouth of the valley, slashing its face with rain in a slanting sheet of steel-grey light.
When the wind rose, cold with moisture, they began to pack up their things.
Kalchu cut and stripped two stalks of maize for Hārkini and Lāla Bahādur and as they ambled along they chewed them like sugar-cane.
When the sweetness was all sucked out they murmured that their legs were tired, and cried until they were picked up and carried home.
The first big globes of rain splattered their backs as they reached the village.
When Kāli came back with the cows only minutes later, she was caught in the full force of the downpour.
Rounding the bend from the top path down towards the stable she was brandishing a stick, beating the cows' dripping rumps and cursing them aloud for refusing to hurry.
Later, when the sheep came in, the rain had stopped.
The air was breathlessly still, spent with raining, and coils of midges spiralled silently up and down.
Although it was still early morning the air was stale.
No fresh cool wind had swept through the valley for days, and the same stagnant air had been breathed in and out a hundred times by the whole gasping village.
Chola was inside making ro  is .
In the added heat of the fire beads of sweat welled on her forehead, rolled down the furrows of her face and, gaining momentum, dropped weightily on to the ground.
Flies zigzagged across the room, speeding about their business like bees in swarm.
As Chola was kneading the dough, they hovered over it in hissing black droves, and she stopped occasionally to pick out the ones she accidentally squashed, like currants.
They ate outside but the flies, with dogged persistence, spoiled their food.
Everyone had seen the dead dog on the path, bloated and grey and bald where it lay in the mud, and the heaps of  excrement, all teeming with the same flies that were sharing their food: and the association flooded their throats like vomit.
Even the rain no longer seemed fresh: it congealed in the sullied air, splattering into filthy stinking puddles, hammering the roof and churning up the packed mud until it was slushy and loose.
In the mornings Kalchu beat the mud down with a flat wooden spade to compress and seal it.
But still the roof leaked, every day in a different place, a steady drip, drip of muddy water, like a clock ticking in the room below.
One evening the stars came out and the whole sky shone as clear as polished jet.
It was as though the village had been underground and now, as it surfaced, the space was dazzling.
Kalchu, Nara and Kāli slept outside under a rug.
But towards morning heavy clouds spread across.
Soaking wet, they moved inside and tried to sleep.
But the heat and the endlessly pestering fleas and bedbugs dragged them, again and again, back to consciousness.
Up on Jimale, the south-facing mountain slope where every year the cultivated land is extended further into the surrounding forest, they were harvesting the wheat.
When it had been cut and bound into sheaves, Kalchu carried it back to the village and laid it out on racks inside the house until it was dry enough to thresh.
It took him two days, making three journeys a day — down the slippery path through the forest, then a mile along the river-bank, across the permanent bridge and up through the fields to the village.
After the harvest Kāli brought up the cows to graze the stubble and fertilize the fields for next year's buckwheat crop.
At night the whole family slept in a rough shelter on the corner of their land and at the edge of the forest.
They rebuilt it every year out of slats of wood and branches, with sheets of birch-bark for a roof.
When Chola got up in the morning the hut was like a dark capsule afloat in mist.
She walked round and lifted one of the slats from the roof of the lean-to chicken coop.
Five hens and a cockerel  half-hopped, half-fluttered out.
The cockerel stood braced, shrilling its cry out into the mist, answering other calls from other compounds up and down across the hillside.
Chola stooped and felt around inside the coop for eggs.
Then, making a soft purring sound she scattered a handful of maize kernels on to the ground in front of her and the hens stuck out their necks and stalked across.
Adjoining the other end of the hut was a small cattle-byre.
Its three walls were built out of stones cleared from the surrounding cultivated fields.
There was no roof and the rain that had fallen in the night left dark stripes where it trickled down the greasy surface of the cows' rumps.
Kalchu had brought in the two calves from their separate pen and they were pumping their mothers' udders, bracing their hooves and thrusting with the whole length of their sketchy bodies.
He allowed them just enough milk to supplement the grass they were learning to eat and then pushed them aside, replacing their mouths on the teats with his fingers, squeezing the milk in short squirts into a frothing bowl on the ground below.
Later, inside the hut, the first rays of sun shone through the birch-bark roof, lighting it up like red cellophane and tinting the loose pine-needles on the floor the colour of ripe apricots.
The cooking fire had been put out, but the smell of wood-smoke lingered, mixed with the cloying richness of fresh and sour milk and pine.
Kalchu, Chola and the children were eating, sitting in a circle around the empty hearth — a pit in the earth surrounded by stones.
Behind them, stacked against the wall, were two folded blankets, some cooking pots, a sack of flour, another of potatoes, and a wooden jar where one day's surplus milk was set aside to curdle.
There were no windows in the hut, but the open doorway looked out over the mountainside across the valley to the emerald paddy fields and, far away to the east, the village.
It was raining on Jimale, Chola and Mina had taken their claw-shaped  wooden rakes and gone with a group of women to gather pine-needles in the forest.
Kalchu's younger brother had come over from his neighbouring hut and the two men sat spinning, talking and looking after the small children until their wives returned.
Kāli and three young friends hovered excitedly.
They were going to spend the day in the forest, gathering mushrooms and wild strawberries.
Where they entered the forest, at the same level as their plots of land, the trees were mainly deciduous — walnuts, chestnuts and birches.
It was sheltered inside, but they could hear the continuous swish of the rain in the branches high above them.
Occasionally a heavy drop would fall through and land with a splat as hollow as the sound of condensation dripping in an empty cave.
They wandered on up the hillside.
On the flatter stretches they talked and laughed: where the path rose more steeply they lapsed into silence, each lost in her own thoughts.
Somewhere out of sight, cicadas filled the air with their high-pitched whirring and, in the distance, a woodpecker shrieked as it swooped from tree to tree in a flash of yellow, green and red.
The first strawberry patch was in a clearing where the undergrowth was thick and leafy.
As they began to gather the berries, eating the sweetest, darkest red ones, and putting the rest into their baskets to take home, the sun came out.
For an instant its bright light glistened on a thousand shades of wet green leaves.
Then the clouds came over and the colours faded.
The path that left the glade was steep and narrow and spread across with ivy and clumps of mauve and white violets.
They'd passed beyond the deciduous woods, and the trees on either side were conifers — larch, spruce and pine.
Occasionally one or other of the girls left the path to go and pick a mushroom that she'd seen half-concealed behind a root or stone, or pushing through the surface of the pine-needles.
At one point they came across a patch that was filled with every different kind of mushroom that they knew — white ones that grew like  jagged clumps of coral, thick orange ones that oozed blue liquid when their stalks were broken, delicate saucer-shaped ones called ba  uka , meaning bowl.
When they left that patch their baskets were half-full, and the mushrooms, rubbing together and crushed, smelled of the forest, of dead wood and leaf-mould mixed with fresh wild herbs.
As they approached the top of the hill, the pine trees were taller and less dense.
They could hear the rustle of the wind tossing the highest branches and see the bright light of the sky opening out beyond.
The plateau stretched before them, an undulating sea of grassy dips and hollows.
Some horses from the village, which were left to graze untended for the monsoon months, looked up as they passed.
They walked on: the grass beneath their bare feet was smooth and wet and dotted with pink-and-white mountain flowers.
A swallowtail butterfly sauntered past.
After a while they came across a herd of buffaloes.
Beyond them was the Bārakotes' hut, made of wood and birch-bark like their own on Jimale.
Every year the Bārakotes brought their buffaloes north, walking for ten days, because their own pastures were overgrazed and arid.
Then, in winter, when this grass was deep in snow, the villagers here would take their sheep south to graze the Bārakotes' land.
They went into the hut and the Bārakotes gave them each a bowl of buffalo milk.
They sat there for a long time, drinking their milk, gazing out at the grey drizzle while the Bārakotes told them stories about their home in the south, about the brightly coloured saris that the women wear, about the bazaars, and all the shops and stalls with beads and bangles, oranges, lemons, spices, chilli.
When they left, the rain had stopped and the clouds had cleared.
Far away to the east a chain of jagged mountains jutted almost imperceptibly across the sky.
Suddenly a cold wind rose from nowhere.
They hurried across the plateau, afraid of being caught on the forest path after dark, glad that the wind was behind them, billowing out their skirts and propelling them forward on legs that ran involuntarily.
The village was almost deserted: only the old stayed behind — some were too sick or weak or crippled to climb the path to Jimale.
Even the animals had gone — the cows and chickens to Jimale: the horses wherever they chose to wander, where the wind blew and the grass was thick: the sheep to their mountain grazing-land to the north of the village, facing Jimale across the valley.
Heavy doors were pulled across, their latches slotted into place.
Weeds and thistles sprouted freely on the roofs, growing tall and strong, bursting into flower, then seed, triumphantly.
The upper path was deep in mud: the lower one was now a stream.
Everywhere mud and water mixed with excrement and filth.
Even the drinking water, gushing through the bronze cow's head water spout, was clouded up and grey with silt.
In any other season you could have looked down from a ridge just below the pastures where the sheep were grazing and seen the village in miniature, a doll's farm set in a patchwork of agricultural land that spread across the valley floor.
And if your eyes followed the river westwards, you could have looked up from the valley directly on to the bald patch that was the cultivated land midway up the forested slope of Jimale.
But now in the monsoon, Sigarup, Murti Lāl and the sheep inhabited a celestial world of their own, a patch of grassland in a stratosphere of densely swirling mist and cloud.
Sometimes, when the clouds were stretched more thinly, the confines of their world extended.
The patch of grassland became a narrow plateau.
To the north and east, banks of scree rose sheerly to the rocky crags and pinnacles surrounding the permanently snow-capped mountain peak, that in other seasons loomed like a sentinel above the village.
In the middle of the plateau was their shepherd's hut.
A stream meandered past it and cascaded into the depths of the forested  cliffside.
Flowing straight across the rocks from the slowly melting snow, the water seemed as cold and as perfectly clear as glacial ice.
In the morning Sigarup went with the dog to graze the sheep.
Leaving Murti Lāl at the hut to guard the lambs, he wandered off into the mist, whistling to the sheep as he steered them up across the bare rock face to a higher plateau, where the ground was marshy and the grass coarse and wiry and spiked with reeds.
Later in the season he and Murti Lāl would come up here to gather rare medicinal herbs to take to sell in Aula in the autumn.
All day he wandered through the muffling silence of the clouds.
Even the rain when it fell, fell silently: and the wind, when it came in occasional gusts, blew noiselessly over the treeless plateau.
The only sounds to be heard were the sheep's teeth tearing grass and their low, rumbling bleats.
Once Sigarup thought he saw a tār , a flash of greyish-blue streaking away into the mist.
It was here, in autumn and winter, that the men used to come and hunt the herds of tār .
Usually, at this time of year, they stayed out of sight right up in the highest mountain peaks, where the monsoon rains fall as snow.
Many years ago, one of the hunters had drowned in a shallow lake further out across the plateau.
For a long time afterwards the shepherds said they heard his ghost at night, quietly sobbing.
In the evening, when Sigarup took the flock back to the hut, the lambs that had stayed behind bleated and frolicked with excitement.
Murti Lāl held them back until Sigarup had milked the ewes.
Then they let them suckle.
Later, when it was dark.
they sat inside the hut beside a fire of thin bamboo, all there was to burn for firewood this high up above the treeline.
When they had eaten their meal of wheat ro  is and milk they kept the fire going for a long time.
Resting on three stones above the flames was a large copper pan full of milk, which Sigarup stirred from time to time as it was boiling.
Eventually, when it had reduced enough he would let it cool to a sweet sticky paste, called haut .
When the fire was out the hut grew cold and the two boys settled down for the night under their blankets.
Occasionally, they heard a pack of jackals howling, and the dog guarding the sheep outside would growl and bark a warning to them.
Sometimes the dog would bark for no apparent reason and they assumed that it had sensed a wildcat or a leopard stealing up in silence through the darkness.
At the end of September it seemed as if the monsoon was drawing to a close.
Often at dawn the sky would be perfectly clear and the air had the crispness that heralds the first night frost.
In the afternoon clouds still swept through the valley, but the showers were lighter and less prolonged.
People had moved back down from their temporary dwellings on Jimale and the village was once again alive with activity.
Then one morning, unexpectedly, the familiar, charged stillness of the early monsoon again hovered over the valley — enclosing it like a cocoon, with its own slow pulse-beat and heavy silent breathing.
Later in the afternoon the first peals of thunder rolled across the sky.
Gradually the sound came closer until it was bellowing overhead, hurling its echo from mountain to mountain over the valley.
With the first gusts of wind black clouds spread across the sky, growing slowly thicker until it was almost as dark as night.
A buzzard soared overhead, its heavy wings braced so that it rose effortlessly, drifting with the air-stream.
Finally the rain came, slowly at first in single drops, then in a sudden burst that pelted the houses like shrapnel.
All through the night it continued, and all through the night thunder boomed and lightning ripped across the sky in jagged white flashes.
It rained for four days.
In the morning Kāli took the cattle out to graze, but after a couple of hours she came back soaked to the skin.
Everyone else sat inside, biding time, watching muddy water drip, then trickle through the roof, watching the puddles spread across the floor where it landed.
Sometimes in the evenings Kalchu would sit outside under the eaves, scanning the horizon, willing the sky to change.
He said he was worried about the crops, and he was worried about Sigarup still high in the mountains with the sheep.
He talked about landslides in previous monsoons that had opened gaping chasms in the cliff behind the village.
Sometimes, he said, he wondered if one year the cliff would topple completely, flattening the houses into a formless heap of rubble.
Then on the fifth day, mid-morning, a pool of light as pale and clear as moonstone appeared on the horizon.
Suddenly the wind rose and, within seconds, the light had extended in a broad band across the sky.
When the sun came out a rainbow formed and the air was so clear that each pine tree on the distant mountains, where usually the forest is a shadowy blur, stood out separate and distinct.
When the rain had stopped completely Kāli joined the flow of women making their way towards the stream to refill their water containers.
Chola and Mina set out for the fields to continue the millet harvest, and Kalchu fetched the flat wooden spade and began beating down the mud to repair the leaking roof.
Soon the whole valley was resounding with the same thud, thud, whack, from every rooftop in the village.
SĀUN SA  KRA  TI
EARLY IN THE MORNING, ON THE DAY BEFORE THE FESTIVAL OF Sāun Sa  kra  ti , Mina and Kāli went with their baskets to collect some clay from the seam outside the village.
Today they were going to replaster the house: not just the floor, which they did regularly when it became cracked and dusty, or on special occasions, such as when the house had been polluted by childbirth or death.
Today they were going to replaster the whole house: floors, ceilings, walls — inside and out.
When they came back with their loads, Kalchu and Chola had cleared the house.
The back of the roof was piled high with their possessions.
There were two hand-hewn wooden chests, one filled with grain, the other with cloth: there were cooking pots of all sizes, with their bottoms blackened from the fire: there were shiny brass plates and bowls: there were iron cooking tripods, agricultural tools, winnowing fans, pestles, balls of wool and spindles, rugs, blankets, clothes: there was Kalchu's locked box where he kept money and bits of broken jewellery.
Even the clusters of medicinal herbs, which were tied to the rafters to dry, had been brought outside and carefully stacked away.
Mina and Kāli dumped their loads and Kāli went down to the stable to fetch some cow-dung.
Cow-dung is said to make the mixture more pliable: without it the plaster would crack as soon as it was dry.
But cow-dung also purifies.
Smoothed over the floor and walls, it wipes away pollution in the house.
Standing on opposite sides of the pile, Mina and Kāli beat it with wooden spades, softening the clay and mixing in the cow-dung.
When it was ready they each fetched a huge bronze pan, the ones that were used for cooking rice at weddings, or boiling barley for making raksi .
Into these they put a few handfuls of the clay and cow-dung mixture and then, adding water, kneaded it until it was liquid and as pale and frothing as freshly-churned cream.
While they were working outside on the roof, Chola was inside sweeping down the walls and ceiling, the beams and rafters.
Torrents of debris were dislodged.
In places the accumulated plaster of years, too heavy to bear its own weight, had cracked and crumbled, and fallen to the ground before her brush like broken china.
Above the fireplace a layer of furry soot clung to the under-surface of the beams: on their upper surface flakes of chaff, from the autumn threshing on the roof, had lodged themselves in pockets, and as she swept, the black and yellow particles cascaded to the ground, then floated up on a cloud of swirling dust.
At last everything was ready.
Mina and Kāli covered their hair with their oldest shawls and, struggling together, slopping the contents, they carried the heavy pans into the house.
The previous morning Kalchu had gone to the forest and gathered an armload of bamboo plants.
At home in the afternoon he had bound them together in clusters to make three new brooms.
For plastering they had to be fresh and supple with the green leaves still intact.
Afterwards the plaster would be washed off and the brooms, now brittle twigs, would be used for months to come to sweep the floor.
Kāli and Mina swirled their brooms round the pan until they were saturated.
Then they pulled them out and, drawing their arms right back from the shoulder, swished them forward through the air until they slapped against the wall.
A fine spray of liquid mud and cow-dung showered across the room and, as the brooms hit the wall, ricocheted and settled on their clothes and faces.
Gradually the pale patches of fresh plaster spread across the blackened walls.
Mina did the ceiling because Kāli was too small to reach.
Stretching to her full height, she slapped the plaster on the sides and undersurface of the beams, and on the lengths of roof exposed between them.
From time to time, as she looked up, specks of gritty plaster landed in her eyes and, putting her broom down for a moment, she dabbed them with the corner of her shawl.
Kāli refilled her pan with plaster and kneaded it to the right consistency.
Then Chola helped her carry it through to the inner room where the family sleeps for warmth in winter.
She was working in almost total darkness.
There were no windows in the thick stone walls and the sunlight which brightened the outer room in a single shaft directed through the open doorway hardly penetrated the second inner room.
By the early afternoon the inside of the house was finished.
Mina and Kāli were drenched.
Their clothes and bare feet, their hands and faces, the wisps of hair that strayed from their shawls were stiff with slowly drying mud.
Even their teeth and lips were speckled brown.
Chola went for a third time to fetch some water from the river while Mina and Kāli set to work on the outside of the house.
A sprig of dā  telo had been fixed above the lintel to protect the house from evil, and Kāli left it in place, carefully plastering around it.
Then she coated the thick planks of the door and moved along to work with Mina on the walls and eaves.
Gradually other women finished the insides of their houses and came outside to work in the sunlight.
Right across the village muddy figures worked on every rooftop, thrashing walls with brooms in rhythmic sweeps, projecting showers of spray high and wide all around them.
When at last the work was finished, Mina and Kāli packed a basket with some clean clothes and went together to the stream to wash.
In the warmth of the afternoon sunshine they took off their jackets and, hitching up their skirts to their knees, waded out into the water.
Torrents of mud poured from their bodies, flowed for an instant in a homogeneous brown cloud, and then dispersed, filtered by the current.
As the afternoon wore on, more and more women began to arrive.
The river-bank echoed with their shouts and laughter and their splashing as they washed.
Some were rinsing brooms; some were scrubbing clean the pans they'd used for plastering, scouring  them with river silt and grass.
Mina was squatting on the bridge.
beating her muddy skirt with a piece of wood, then trailing the yards of material into the water so the loosened mud was washed away.
Kāli was rinsing her hair, bent double under the brass cow's head water-spout out of which water, redirected from the river further up, gushed white and frothing.
When they'd finished washing Mina and Kāli draped their clean wet clothes among the hundreds of others stretched between the scraggy thorn trees.
The river bank looked like the breeding ground of a flock of giant bats, their tattered wings extended and ruffled slightly by the wind.
They joined a group of women sitting talking on the bank.
Someone lit a chillim and passed it round.
One of the women was cleaning a necklace of silver rupees with an old toothbrush, scrubbing the coins one by one, then leaning over the bank to rinse them in the river till they shone.
Mina began to comb Kāli's hair, carefully easing out the tangles, and squashing lice between her thumb-nails.
When the sun began to sink and the evening grew cold, they stripped their clothes from the thorn trees, collected together their pans and bamboo brooms and set out across the bridge for home.
The following day was Sāun Sa  kra  ti , the eve of the month of Sāun and the day of the festival.
As the first rays of morning sunlight streamed through the open doorway, the newly-plastered room looked as though it had been covered in the night by a fine layer of pinkish-buff snow.
Everything was the same colour — floor, walls, ceiling, door, the three cylindrical grain containers in the comer.
Every angle, line and contour were gently rounded as though the snow had drifted slightly in the wind.
At midday, Chola, Mina and Kāli came back from the fields to prepare the food for the evening.
Mina and Kāli went to husk the rice at the stone mortar in the village square.
Standing on opposite sides of the mortar, they pounded alternately to a rhythm Mina  chanted as she lifted her arms up, then brought the pestle heavily down, so it landed, thud, in the centre of the pool of grain.
When they'd finished, Mina put the rice, a handful at a time, into the winnowing fan and tossed it into the air.
The loosened husks floated away with the wind and the heavy whitish grains dropped straight back down.
As they were working, the smell of puris frying wafted over from the houses round the square.
At dusk Śa  kar came back with the cows.
He was carrying a bunch of ragwort that he'd picked while the cows were grazing on the Kālādika.
He handed the flowers to Kāli, then drove the cows in through the stable door.
Kāli took the flowers up to the roof.
At the top of the ladder she X, and balanced a single flower on the uppermost notch.
Then she moved about a yard to her right and laid another one at the edge of the roof with the yellow head pointing outwards.
She went right round the edge of the roof, carefully distributing flowers as she went.
While she was working, Kalchu came up the ladder carrying a basket of jharo , the resinous wood that's gouged from deep inside the trunks of the oldest, tallest pine trees, then cut into chips and burned for lighting.
He arranged the jharo in two pyramids at the edge of the roof, between the flowers.
Slowly dusk began to settle into darkness.
From the height of the rooftop they could see right over to the Kālādika, where one patch of sunset still remained, splashed across the sky, like a spilled pot of paint.
To each other on the roof, they were shadows moving round, bending down.
Only the flowers stood out brightly, as though in the half-light they were very slightly luminous.
Much later — at the time of night that belongs to owls and jackals, when human beings are strangers — Kalchu left the house and climbed the hill behind the village.
At the top as he walked across the plateau, he could see the light from the fire in the main shrine, flickering through the open door and out between the pillars of the veranda.
Already there were people there, silhouettes that wandered back and forwards in the firelight.
Kalchu took off his shoes and went into the shrine.
Inside he lit a piece of jharo from the fire.
Then, carefully shielding the flame with his cupped hand, he carried it back to the village.
All the way from the shrine down the hillside and through the pine trees, hundreds of flames glowed like the roving eyes of night-prowling animals.
Only when they came close was it possible to make out the dark shadow of a hand and arm carving each one, the sketchy outline of a black body behind, and above, a ghoulish half-lit face with gaping shadowy craters for mouth and eyes.
Kalchu climbed on to the roof of the house, and with the flame he'd brought from the shrine fire set light to the two piles of jharo .
Soon afterwards fires were blazing on every rooftop in the village, and in every shrine all around its outskirts to the north, the south, the east and the west: in the fields, at the crossroads, by the river, in the forest.
The whole family was outside now.
The twins and Nara were chasing each other round and round, hiding in the shadows, then bursting out on each other, screaming, wild with uncontrolled excitement.
Sigarup picked up a piece of unlit jharo and held it in the fire until it was blazing and drips of flaming resin fell from it, spluttering to the ground.
Then he hurled it off the roof as far as he could, shouting at the top of his voice a threat to all evil spirits: warning them that tonight was the night they must leave the village for good.
The jharo flared through the darkness, twisting and somersaulting, spiralling down until it landed in the village square, flickered momentarily, then died.
Kāi lit another piece of jharo .
As she bent down over the fire, her nose-ring and the silver coins of her necklace glinted fiercely.
Then, standing up and leaning back into the shadow, she flung the jharo with all the strength she possessed across the border of flowers and into the dark pool of space beyond the firelit roof.
‘Get out of our village and don't ever come back.’
On other rooftops black figures moved back and forth between  firelight and shadows.
Missiles blazed in every direction through the darkness, crossing paths in zigzags.
Some soared up and down in gentle arcs: some shot horizontally: some rocketed high into the sky, then turned about and suddenly plummeted.
Women's voices, men's voices, children's voices screeched out curses and threats.
Individually, each one would have been lost, swallowed immediately into the immense space of the night.
But together they surged like a tide across the valley, seeking out witches, ghosts and demons: purging their haunts behind rocks, in the highest swaying branches of the pine trees, in the whirlpools by the burning gha  where the two great rivers meet.
At one end of the village a gun was fired.
Before its echo died another sounded, and another, followed in quick succession by two more from the opposite side of the village.
Dogs began to bark, triggering a rallying cry, a droning chorus broken occasionally by one or other's high-pitched howling.
Then, from somewhere, the sound of kettledrums rolled out.
Another set pitched in from the north of the village, another from the south.
Their rumbling vibrations set the whole valley quaking.
Far in the distance the fires of Pere village shimmered like the electric lights of a city.
And on the other side of the river, Gorigāuń4, hidden From sight by the curve of a wooded hillside, projected above itself a pale orb of hazy reddish light.
Kalchu came up the ladder carrying a cockerel.
In the firelight its comb and the loose folds of flesh at its throat glowed like broken mirrors reflecting the embers of the fire.
The feathers of its tail, shiny strips of shot-silk in blue, black, green and russet, drooped down over the dark folds of Kalchu's sleeve.
Its eye, a tiny pinprick, gazed unblinking into the darkness.
Kalchu put it down on the roof and clamped the body between his knees.
Then, stretching out its neck with his left hand, he sawed off the head.
Dark blood welled up and spread, like a slick of oil, across the feathers.
Kalchu held a bowl of rice grains to catch some drops of blood.
Then he released the headless cockerel.
The body  convulsed, flopping around the roof in a series of uncoordinated half-somersaults, leaving a trail of blood like footprints.
Kalchu stood up, holding the bowl of rice and blood, and threw a few grains into the air in four directions.
‘Before you go, we offer you the life of this bird.
We bear you no malice and hope that when you leave our valley your journey is a good one.
But we ask you now, Spirits of the Night, never to return.’
He muttered the incantation so it was barely audible.
Then he went up to every member of the family, beginning with Chola and ending with the twins, marking blood-red  ikās between their eyes.
The fire was dying.
The twins stood over it, stirring the last embers with their feet.
For a moment bright flames danced out of the charcoal, then there was darkness.
Downstairs, inside the house, Kalchu was preparing the cockerel by plunging it into a pan of boiling water, then plucking out its feathers by the handful.
When it was as pale and bald as a fledgeling, he dismembered the body, hacked up the meat with a small adze and dropped the cut pieces into a pan of hot oil.
While the meat was simmering, they ate puris and spiced potatoes.
Kalchu's two brothers came in and they too were given puris and bowls of raksi.
Chillims of tobacco were lit and passed around.
Then, when the rice and meat were ready, Mina fetched some pots of river-water from the big copper container in the corner and everyone washed their hands where they were sitting round the fire.
Chola sprinkled a few grains of rice from the top of the pan into the fire for the gods and began to serve the food.
When everyone else had finished eating, Chola filled her own plate with the remains of the meat and rice.
Mina piled up the plates and took them outside to wash, and the dog rummaged round the floor in search of bones.
After the fourth and last bottle of raksi had been drunk, Śa  kar got out the double-ended drum brought back from India by his grandfather many years ago.
After a few false starts he found his  rhythm and everyone began to clap in time.
Then Kalchu, the only one who knew the words to the Indian song, started singing.
A moment later, amid great surges of laughter, Kāli wound her mother's necklace of silver coins three times round her slender ankle, pulled her young cousin to her feet, and together the two of them began to dance.
It was Indian dancing: poised and erotic, unlike the sombre local dances.
Only children ever danced like this, and when Kāli was older and married she'd probably be ashamed to admit she even knew the movements.
Very slowly, she began to roll her hips, young girl's hips without a trace of roundness.
Her hands were held out to the sides, circling supplely, fingers gesturing elegantly.
Her bare foot stamped the ground and the necklace clattered.
Once, for an instant, she lost her concentration and a smile cracked across her features.
Then the Indian dancer's mask was back: head held up defiantly, lips pouting, eyes seductive yet reproving.
As soon as the song finished she grabbed her cousin and the two of them sank into a heap on the floor, hiding their faces and giggling.
Everyone else was laughing too.
A crowd of people who'd heard the music and the laughter from outside stood in the doorway, smiling bemusedly.
Then they came in and joined the others sitting round the fire.
Not long afterwards, when the visitors had left, Chola fetched the rugs from the inner room and the family lay down around the fire and slept.
Dawn came, a thin band of light as clear and colourless as water.
Kāli was the first up.
Still half-asleep, she began collecting the flowers she'd arranged the night before.
The roof was littered with charcoal, debris from the fire; the flowers, scrunched and trampled under many feet, were pale and wilted.
When she'd been right round the edges of the roof and gathered all the flowers into a bunch, she climbed down the ladder and began to walk along the back path out of the village.
The air was very still and drops of dew were poised in perfect globes on blades of grass and leaves.
A new crop of irises had opened since the day before and the long grass on the river-bank was flushed with blue and purple.
Kāli crossed the small bridge and followed the path until it split in two, one continuing west towards the Bazaar, the other heading north across the Kālādika towards Chaura and Chhuma.
At the point of the crossroads there was a heap of dead flowers.
Kāli threw down her bunch of ragwort and it landed, splayed out limply, on the top.
On her way back she stopped to wash her hands and face in the cold water.
When she was almost home she picked a sprig of dā  telo , pricking her thumb on a thorn and sucking the blood that rose to the surface.
At the doorway she reached up and slotted the new dā  telo twig between the stones above the lintel.
Then she pulled the old one out and threw it away, over the edge of the roof.
THE KARASO 
ONE AFTERNOON KĀLI BROUGHT THE COWS HOME EARLY AND CAME rushing over to ask me to go to the forest with her to collect a load of pine-needles.
Her mother had told her to bring back at least one load before it got dark, and it would be much more fun if I went with her.
I'd seen Chola and Mina setting out for the forest in the early morning, and three times during the day I'd watched them coming back, stooped over and staggering under the weight of the enormous loads that spread across their backs, stretching three times broader than their shoulders and several feet above their heads.
Each time I'd wondered how they carried such a heavy load: how the pine-needles even stuck together, bound as they were with a single length of rope.
‘All right,’ I said.
‘But I'm not sure how much use I'm going to be.’
Kāli was delighted.
Smiling broadly to herself she closed the heavy wooden door behind us and fastened the little chain latch on to a nail on the adjacent door.
Then, standing on tiptoe, she reached up into the eaves where the agricultural tools were stored, and pulled out two wooden rakes,karasos , and two lengths of hemp-fibre rope.
She carefully wound one of the lengths of rope round and round, from hand to elbow to form a coil, then tied it in the middle so that two loops, like the loops of a bow, protruded.
Into one of these she fixed the karaso .
The other she draped across her forehead, so the karaso dangled down her back.
She smiled as I watched and copied her, carrying my tools the local way.
We climbed down the notched-pole ladder and picked our way through the muddy ground towards the back path, passing the neatly stacked woodpile and the growing heap of freshly gathered pine-needles.
‘It gets bigger every time you look,’ said Kāli proudly.
‘Yesterday it was only up to my knees: by tomorrow or the next day it'll be this high at least.’
Grinning conspiratorially, she reached up  as high as she could, contorting her small body but not quite jumping.
The season for gathering pine-needles had begun five days ago.
There'd been a ceremony called ban pasāi , the entering of the forest.
All the women in the village had dressed in their best clothes with their hair freshly oiled and plaited, their earrings, nose-rings and necklaces of Indian silver rupees washed and glinting in the sunlight.
Together they'd made their way to a place on the opposite side of the river, where the forest dropped right down, meeting the bank.
Here some of the younger women had thrown down their tools and gathered in a big circle, singing and dancing, while older women and children watched from the sidelines, shouting encouragement.
Then, as suddenly as lightning streaks through the sky, they'd disbanded, scrabbled for their ropes and karasos and disappeared, shrieking, into the forest.
When I'd asked Chola what the ceremony was for she'd said she didn't know: they'd always done it.
But in times gone by, there'd been a feast at ban pasāi ; the women had brought rice and huge copper pans to the forest.
There they'd lit a fire and cooked the rice, but before starting to eat they'd made an offering to Ban Bhāi, god of the forest, asking permission to plunder his lands.
In those days too, there'd been another festival a month or so later, called ban chho  āi , the leaving of the forest.
After that, even if your pile at home was only ankle-deep, no one was allowed to take a single load of pine-needles out of the forest.
‘Last year,’ said Kāli, as we walked along behind the houses, ‘Mother and one or two other women started before the forest was officially opened — before ban pasāi — and people were so angry that they made the women's husbands go to the headman and pay a fine of five rupees each.’
‘Why was that?’
I asked, wondering if they'd been angry on behalf of Ban Bhāi because Chola and the other women hadn't waited for his permission, or because they'd cheated, sneaking out first and grabbing all the pine-needles at the edge of the forest without having to climb at all.
‘I don't know,’ said Kāli: it was possible that the festival of ban pasāi had lost its association with the god of the forest before she was even born.
‘But Father and the other men had a great time at the headman's — getting blind drunk on the raksi that they bought with the proceeds.’
Kāli chose the steeper, shorter route to the forest and we climbed at a leisurely pace, stopping occasionally to catch our breath, lurching drunkenly and bumping into each other when the gradient increased and we were too lazy to keep up our momentum.
There'd been a frost in the night, but now in the mid-afternoon the sun on our backs was strong and warm.
The leaves on the thorn trees were almost open, and when we turned to look back at the distance we'd climbed, there were clusters of vivid green that trailed down the hillside and encompassed the village like waterweed.
There was a time when this entire hillside had been covered in forest but, being closest to home, the trees had been felled one after another for building and firewood.
Now the bare earth was pitted and ravaged and, during the monsoon rains, torrents of water swept down the loosened topsoil, carving out gullies and chasms that crumpled occasionally into landslides.
It felt, as we struggled up the last, steepest stage of the hillside, that we were swimming in the white light of the sun.
Slowly we made our way through the heat and the glare and arrived, at list, in the soothing shade of the trees.
Kāli sat down on a flat stone, sighing with relief.
In a moment or two, when she'd recovered, she produced her chillim and the little pouch of tobacco that she kept in her waistband.
During the time that it took to prepare, I stretched out on my back, staring into the trees, listening to the wind teasing their branches.
‘Have you got a light?’
Kāli's voice brought me back to earth.
She'd obviously been counting on me having one, because the chillim was poised at her lips, ready for her to pull in deeply when the surface leaves caught fire.
‘No,’ I said, and dejected but resigned, she took it from her  mouth.
We were about to carry on when we saw two women with their loads of pine-needles coming down the path towards us.
As they approached and noticed the unlit chillim , one of them passed us her tinder, commenting with a smile that they'd got here just in time for all of us: they needed a smoke, and we needed a light.
While Kāli fumbled, striking the flint against the steel, trying to produce a spark that was strong enough to light the little piece of cotton, they told me how pleased they were to see me working just like them.
We smoked the chillim together and continued on our separate ways.
After a while, I turned to watch them as they receded down the hillside — two lumbering animals, with bodies grossly disproportionate to their slender stick-like ankles.
Although the outskirts of the forest were carpeted with pine-needles, Kāli led me higher and deeper into the trees.
Occasionally.
as we walked, sunshine seeped through the canopy of branches, bathing the forest in clear pools of light, and women raking in the distance would be suddenly spotlit, their pine-needles turning from tawny to amber.
‘This'll do,’ said Kāli at last, and we stopped in a glade that was dominated by three great larches.
I dropped my rope at the base of one of the trees and started to rake, struggling to keep from slipping on the steep slope with its loose pine-needle surface.
Kāli stood over me for a while, watching critically.
‘That's fine,’ she said approvingly, and wandered off to begin her own pile twenty yards or so away.
The scent of the pine rose instantly, warm, fresh and powerfully evocative.
In some places the needles were several inches deep and easier to rake than autumn leaves on a tended lawn; elsewhere they were saturated and packed, or buried among tangled creepers and virulent, shining ivy.
Once when I looked up Kāli was nowhere in sight.
I wondered if she'd moved on to another place in the forest without saying anything, but when I stood perfectly still, I could hear the rhythmic scratching of her karaso from behind some trees, and the  occasional tearing sound when she accidentally caught it in the undergrowth.
Sometimes too, I could hear the distant sounds of other women, coughing or calling out to one another, laughing.
Their voices sounded shrill and incongruous, violating the silence that was appropriate in the great dome of the forest.
My pile was growing.
I wondered how big the pile at home would have to be to last the year.
Every evening Kāli spread a new layer of pine-needles in the stable as bedding for the cattle.
I'd often watched her carrying them from the pile outside, spreading them out, fluffing them up.
At night the stable was always warm and dry, smelling of pine and the grassy breath of animals; in the mornings it was damp and ammoniac.
The stable was mucked out properly only once a year, in winter.
Sometimes fresh cow-dung would be collected for plastering the house, for rituals, or for sealing the clay fermentation jars.
Otherwise the shit and piss were left and, day after day, the soiled bedding was trampled down and compressed.
After a year it was so hard that Chola and Mina had to hack it out with adzes.
Last year it took them three full days to clear the stable and make a heap of the black peat-like mal outside.
During that time the stench around the house was terrible.
Then, every morning before the sun was up, Chola and Mina would take the mal in basketloads and spread it on the paddy fields as fertilizer.
Clouds of steam would rise as they scooped beneath the surface of the warm fermenting heap, and as they carried their loaded baskets through the frosty morning air.
In the springtime, after the irrigation channels had been opened and the paddy fields flooded, Kalchu would plough the mal into the soft wet earth, ready for the rice to be transplanted.
In the course of many years the accumulation of mal had made the soil in the paddy fields so dark and rich that it was used as a black dye, together with the red and green dyes from wild plants and flowers, for printing skirts.
‘Are you ready yet?’
Kāli had come over and was eyeing my  rakings, stacked against a tree on the upper side of the incline to stop them slipping down.
‘What do you think — is that enough?’
I asked, unsure how much my inexperience showed.
‘It looks pretty good to me,’ she said.
‘I'll show you how to bale and tie it up.’
She fetched my rope and laid it out on a clear patch of ground.
Then, with great bravado, she attacked the pile of pine-needles, scooping them up between the giant clutch of her karaso and her own small hand, depositing them in another heap that she was building on top of the rope.
When the entire pile had been transferred, she bunched the needles together with her hands and alternately stroked and beat them with her karaso , knitting them into a kind of rudimentary bale.
When she'd retrieved the ends of the rope and tied it all together, she sat with her back against the load, adjusting the carrying rope over her forehead.
I stood behind her and, when she said the word, helped her to heave the load from the ground.
Staggering slightly, she eventually lurched to her feet.
Although she was gripping the rope at her shoulders, easing the weight on her head, her neck was fixed and immobile: to look at me she had to turn her entire body and raise her eyes in their sockets.
‘How does it feel?’
I asked.
‘It's fine,’ she said, but as soon as she took a few practice steps forward, the edges of the bale, on either side of the binding rope.
started to sag and collapse.
It wasn't long before a steady stream of pine-needles was flowing down behind her like water from a leaking gāgro .
Disconcerted, she admitted that she'd only done this once before, that, in all honesty, I could probably do it equally well on my own.
So she untied her disintegrating load and we started again, Kāli working on her own pile this time, I on mine.
But, try as I might, I just couldn't grasp the principle.
I couldn't understand how I could possibly make the individual pine-needles knit; it was like  trying to carry grain in a net, or water in a cloth.
Biting back feelings of inadequacy, frustration and anger I tied up the bundle as well as I could, resigning myself to losing most of it on the way down the hill, preparing for laughter and jeers when we got to the village.
Eventually we were ready to go and Kāli's load — for all her child's body — was considerably bigger than mine.
But as we made our way down through the trees, I realized that even if I'd been better at baling I could never have carried that load: my forehead hurt, my neck felt stiff and strained, and the pine-needles on the path, compressed and polished by thousands of feet, were as slippery as glass.
Even Kāli had become quiet and subdued.
Listening to her heavy breathing and her occasional vigorous sniffs, I could feel her concentration as she followed behind me as surely as a blind bat senses light.
Suddenly she stopped in her tracks, noticing something.
‘Where's your karaso ?’
‘I wedged it into the pine-needles, as you did with yours.
It must be there somewhere.’
So she caught me up and turned me round, feeling my load from top to bottom and every side.
But it wasn't there.
I couldn't believe it at first: I'd been so careful.
An overwhelming feeling of inadequacy flushed through me again.
Not only was I unable to help with the work, I couldn't even care for the family's tools.
‘I'll go back and find it,’ I said.
Kāli insisted on coming with me, kind and concerned, but I persuaded her, in the end, to carry on home.
‘Don't get lost,’ she called after me as we went our separate ways.
Without Kāli, the path seemed narrower, less clearly defined, and there were little forks and side-tracks that I only half-remembered.
But I followed landmarks — the glade of birch saplings; the drift of unmelted snow where Kāli had helped herself to a frozen drink: the huge pine tree whose trunk had been gouged  to a tenth of its width for jharo .
Kāli had told me that it was no longer used, that if one more chip were taken the entire tree would topple.
The inner flesh was as raw as a recent wound, and clear resin had oozed to the surface, trickled down and set into sticky pink runnels.
Last autumn, at the full-moon festival in Gorigāu , a jharo tree like that had fallen.
The dhāmis , possessed by their gods, had been dancing in a clearing above the village.
The drums had been too loud to hear the preliminary ripping, so when the tree suddenly crashed to the ground, no one moved.
Everyone just stood there, astonished.
The tree was so big that, if it had fallen into the clearing, it would have flattened most of the gathering, but luckily it went in the other direction, toppling over the cliffside.
For long stretches I walked with my eyes on the ground, mesmerized by the silence of the forest, by my own soundless footsteps.
The karaso was exactly the colour of pine-needles.
Thinking about it now, for the first time, I realized that I'd no idea how a karaso was made: an arm-length shaft of wood, smooth and shiny as a newly opened conker, with five prongs at the end that were perfectly shaped into the smooth curves of a grasping hand.
There were no special woodworking tools in the village — no saws or chisels or planes.
Doors, wooden grain chests, roofing beams were merely hacked into shape with adzes.
And it occurred to me that I neither knew how many the family owned nor how difficult mine would be to replace.
Sunlight penetrated the forest in long horizontal shafts.
There was no one else in sight.
I paused for a moment, unsure of which path to take.
At some point Kāli and I had stopped climbing and branched off to the left: but this was too narrow, an animal track.
It was difficult, too, to tell how far I'd come on my own: before, we'd been talking and time had probably passed quickly.
But I recognized nothing.
Sometimes the layout of trees seemed familiar, or the way a particular branch overshadowed the path.
But then all the different images of trees that I'd seen — textures  of bark, shades of green, angles at which the branches protruded — merged in my mind into one.
I realized I was lost when the sky suddenly lightened and I came out into a broad clearing.
It was the monsoon settlement of some other village — five or six huts and a small area of once-ploughed land, enclosed by a tumbledown stone wall.
Either the settlement was abandoned now, or the huts had been allowed to deteriorate during the winter.
Loosened birch-bark flapped from the roofs and sections of the wooden walls lay sprawled on the ground, flattened by gales.
I slumped to the ground, despair weighing as heavily as the load on my back.
At first I'd thought that Kāli was joking, that she'd sneaked up behind me, snatched the karaso and hidden it up her skirt or behind a tree.
She loved to play like that, but she'd have told me in the end, exploding with laughter at my angry duped expression.
Then I'd wondered if some women who'd stopped me on the path had taken it.
But why would they — because they needed another karaso ? as a practical joke against the foreigner?
A cold wind swept through the clearing and a few pinkish clouds passed out of sight.
The sky became as clear and grey as a mountain rock-pool.
Suddenly I felt totally alone.
I didn't want to return to the village: I wanted to stay here in one of the huts and not see any of them ever again.
But, after a moment or two, the childishness passed.
I hoisted my load from the ground and lurched to my feet.
It was much darker under the trees now and, afraid of not reaching the village before nightfall, I branched off on to what I thought was a short-cut.
But the path became narrower, more overgrown, and eventually petered out altogether, choked up with bracken and creepers and snarls of wild raspberry plants.
Retracing my steps, I realized with a shock that I was no more able to find my way back to the village than I'd been able to find the place we'd been raking.
I had thought that, if the worst came to the worst, I could always follow the hillside and make my  way down to the bottom.
But the forest proved me wrong — I'd underestimated its intricacies.
I was about to take off my load and leave the heap of pine-needles for someone else to find in the morning when I saw a figure approaching in the distance.
It was a long time before I could believe that it was really Kāli, come back to find me.
‘We were worried,’ she said.
‘We thought you must have got lost.’
‘I did get lost.’
She offered to carry my load, but I wouldn't let her.
I just wanted her to take me back, to talk to me as she always did.
‘Did you find the karaso ?’
‘I couldn't even find the place we were raking.’
‘Never mind,’ she said kindly, ‘maybe someone else will pick it up and bring it back.’
She talked almost all the way down through the forest: and then, when we were out in the open she started again, ‘Do you see those trees over there?’
She was pointing at four or five pine-trunks sprawled at awkward angles over the hillside.
‘That's the easiest way of getting your firewood — cut the trees at the edge of the forest and send them rolling down to the bottom.
But you have to leave the wood to dry for a year before you take it home.
If the forester finds green wood in your woodpile, you're in serious trouble.
This way he knows live trees are being felled, but he doesn't know who's felling them.’
The forester had passed through the village recently.
He was a city man, wearing a desert island shirt and a visor-cap that said Top Dog Disco in bold red lettering.
The headman had killed a chicken for him and someone else had contributed a bottle or two of raksi .
‘The trouble with foresters,’ said Kāli, ‘is that they're permanently hungry: feed them well and they'll leave you alone: forget to and they'll scour the entire village for evidence of green wood, musk,tār and all the other protected animals that you're not supposed to kill.
They're like dogs — every bit as greedy.
‘And you know the two foresters who live here in the village: they're fine when they're at home, but when they go to the village they're responsible for, in Dolpo, I bet they carry on like all the others do, terrorizing people.
‘Last year’— she smiled mischievously —‘something really awful happened to one of them.
They'd both been working for nearly two years, and all that time they hadn't been paid a penny.
Then, one day, their government wages arrived — all at once, thousands of rupees.
So that night they celebrated, getting roaring drunk, playing cards and gambling.
One of them staked everything he'd got, and lost.
Can you imagine’— she was giggling now —‘all that money in your pocket one minute, and the next minute — nothing.’
The path through the village, flanked on one side by the backs of the houses and on the other by the looming cliffside, was as pervasively dark as a cave and we kept stumbling over rocks, getting our feet wet in puddles and pools of mud.
Eventually we came out in the comparative brightness of the open space behind the house.
I sank to the ground at the base of the heap of pine-needles, relieved that there was no one around to witness my exhaustion and the miserable size of my load.
When I'd extracted my head from the carrying rope, Kāli untied the bale and started scooping up armloads of pine-needles and throwing them to the top of the pile.
‘I told you,’ she said, standing back when she'd finished.
‘Look how it's grown, just today.’
Inside the house the fire was burning and a couple of sticks of jharo , resting one on top of the other on the stone hearth, cast a stark and ambiguous light.
Everyone was eating.
As we walked in through the door Kalchu looked up from his food and said in a worried voice, ‘Where's your karaso , sister?’
I was about to explain when I realized that Kāli had told him already.
He started to smile, teasing me, and for the second time I was convinced that someone would flourish it back to existence, that it was all only a game.
‘How do you make a  karaso ?’ said Kalchu, repeating the question I'd just asked him.
‘Well.
first of all you have to find the right branch — a pine-branch that splays at the end into three, four or five separate limbs.
Then you strip it of its bark and, while the wood is still green and supple, you bend back the thin limbs and bind them in place with string, When you've done that you have to leave it on a drying rack above the fire for…oh, I suppose about three months.
Afterwards, when you take off the string, the soft fingers at the end of the arm have hardened into claws.’
‘And how does it get to be so smooth and shiny?’
‘That comes with years and years of raking: grass and pine-needles, grass and pine-needles.’
THE RED BITCH
WHEN THE RED BITCH CAME ON HEAT SHE WAS NEVER ALONE.
Dogs followed her everywhere, watching, waiting, sniffing and from time to time mounting her.
Sometimes she'd yelp and try to run away with her back hunched and her bushy tail sweeping the ground between her legs.
Sometimes she'd turn on her heel, snarling, and lunge at a dog that had gradually edged over and positioned itself expectantly behind her.
But most of the time she ignored the dogs that hovered around her as she slept in the sun or beavered around the village in pursuit of this or that scent.
Her patience did wear thin but, in general, she resigned herself graciously to being the leader of the pack.
One evening the commotion in the village square was louder than usual.
It wasn't just the sustained rumbling growls rising to a frenzy as two dogs threatened each other then lunged together in a bitter embrace, each asserting its place in the hierarchy, the priority of its rights over the red bitch.
This was different: these were the sounds of distress — short staccato yelps broken by prolonged baleful howling.
I went out on to the roof to have a look and at first I could see nothing amiss.
The dogs were there as usual, loitering in their pack.
But then I noticed a group of children on the other side of the square, pointing and laughing.
A stone hurtled through the air and the dogs scattered.
In their midst was the red bitch, standing rump-to-rump with the  ā  gri's black-and-tan mastiff mongrel.
The stone hit her square on the flank and she yelped, but their genitals were so tightly locked together that neither dog could move.
The puppies were born by the woodpile and the red bitch strutted around proudly, her feathery tail waving high in the air behind her.
Nara and the twins were endlessly fascinated with the little, blind, half-bald creatures, and spent hours picking them  up and playing with them.
Once they took one away from the woodpile and hid it in the stable and the mother searched everywhere, growing more and more distressed.
But they were unable to spin out their game for long; impatience got the better of them and they returned the puppy, which stood shivering under its mother's tongue as she licked it clean of foreign influences.
Not long afterwards the red bitch was sprawled on her side, asleep, with all six puppies climbing on top of each other, scrabbling for access to her swollen teats.
The red bitch was the seventh in a line of dogs that had belonged to Kalchu's family since his grandfather had brought the first one back from Tibet some forty years previously.
That one had been big and powerful, a trained hunter, providing the family regularly with musk,tār and wild boar meat.
But as the generations ran their course, each one interbreeding with the local village dogs, the successive progeny became smaller and relentlessly unimpressive.
If hunting had once been in the red bitch's blood it had long since been bred out and forgotten.
Her only real skill was her ferocity as a guard dog, watching over the sheep in the temporary grazing settlements high in the mountains or alerting the family to strangers within the village and intruders in the house.
But even in this, the red bitch was not to be counted on: fierceness and docility alternated as unpredictably as the direction of the winds that flounced through the valley in the early monsoon.
Out of every litter the puppy that was always kept was the biggest, reddest female.
One evening Kalchu went to the woodpile to choose which one it would be.
Four of them were female, two male: all were varying shades of russet or tawny, but only one was the deep red that he liked.
Squatting down, he picked up the other five squirming bodies and stuffed them into a cloth sack.
When he set off towards the river the red bitch followed.
He shouted at her and kicked out and she stopped in her tracks, yelping, but soon afterwards she caught him up again.
Finally he picked up a handful of stones and every time he looked round  and found her following, he threw one.
Some hit her, some missed.
Eventually she stopped, and sat motionless for a long time, watching him go.
Then she X and went back to her one remaining puppy.
The following morning when the twins found out what Kalchu had done they were angry and upset.
But the red bitch chose that same day to pick up the remaining puppy in her teeth and carry it by the scruff of the neck up the ladder and into the house.
The twins became preoccupied with the little round body, its eyes now open, as it trotted round the house playfully biting its mother's heels.
But in time the novelty wore off.
The red bitch became short-tempered, snapping at the puppy when it went to suckle her dangling teats, now empty of milk: pushing it aside when it clambered over her sleeping body or pummelled her head in a rowdy mock fight.
Chola too complained that there were now two dogs to get in the way and whinge for food.
She shouted at them twice as often and the dogs in response yelped twice as loudly.
Everyone in the village had a healthy respect for the dogs' fierceness; attacks and injuries were commonplace.
Usually it was safe to wander round the village in the daytime: the dogs knew their own people and, as long as neighbours stayed on neutral ground, they let them be.
But before climbing the notched-pole ladder to another person's house, it was best to shout up from the ground, because the household dog was often waiting at the top, snarling viciously and waiting to attack.
Most people, when they went out at night or approached another village, carried a stick or a handful of stones; if one or two dogs in a pack had been wounded the others would pick up the aggressive intention and drop back sullenly.
But more than fear I felt disgust; almost all of the dogs were painfully thin and many were diseased.
One had mange so badly it was nearly bald: it moped around, scratching the exposed pink  skin that had cracked and flaked where it stretched briefly over the jutting spine and ribcage.
Others had festering wounds that seemed never to heal, or had adapted themselves to a three-legged gait, running as fast as the other dogs but with one leg, withered or deformed from birth, tucked up under their bodies.
It was revolting to see these half-starved creatures snuffling around behind the houses or along the river-bank in search of excrement.
I'd often come across one or other of the twins, squatting down outside the house, with the red bitch hovering by, waiting to eat the faeces.
And when the twins were babies and shat in Chola's lap, she'd call out, ‘Chu chu chu,’ and the red bitch would come running in to clean the mess.
One summer, just before the monsoon, a team of government health workers came to the area to teach people about preventative health care and sanitation.
Sigarup was chosen as one of the village representatives and was paid twenty rupees for each of the five days that he attended the course.
The sessions were held in the schoolroom and three nurses, in rippling saris, stood at the front of the room and demonstrated, with the use of pictures and a dummy, how intestinal worms and diseases are spread by eggs and germs that pass from one person's faeces to another person's mouth.
On the fifth and final day theory was put into practice and pits were dug for latrines.
But after the health workers returned to Kathmandu little changed.
The latrines were proclaimed disgusting and abandoned for the privacy of open spaces, and the red bitch continued to lick out the dirty dishes before Mina swilled them cursorily with river water.
But for all her dirty habits the red bitch was part of the family and I liked her: we all did.
Too often she became a scapegoat for anger not strictly her due.
When Chola was kneading the dough for ro  is , tired after a day's work in the fields, exasperated by the twins' hungry grizzling, the chickens flapping around the bowl and the dogs' beady eyes, she'd lash out, screaming, and the red bitch would yelp exaggeratedly and skulk off to a corner.
But  when the puppy fell from the roof and broke its leg, Kalchu bound it to a splint with wool, replacing the bandage each time it slackened, until the bone had set.
And sometimes, when there were visitors and raksi to drink, he'd get the red bitch to sing — a mournful, wailing dirge that made us fall about with laughter.
On winter nights the dogs would sleep inside, curled up by the remains of the fire or with the children under one of the goat's-hair rugs.
Sometimes they'd wake in the night, alerted by the jackals howling on the outskirts of the village, and they'd nose open the heavy doors and go outside on to the roof, joining the other dogs in their chorus of barking.
Eventually, when the howling had subsided and the jackals had sloped off to the forest, the dogs would come back in, or they'd wander off into the frosty night and not return until morning.
One day, when Chola was releasing the hens from the coop, she noticed that the cockerel was missing.
The coop was on the roof, a few feet from the door to the house, and was a hollowed-out tree-trunk with a wooden slat for sealing the entrance at night.
Jackals and martens could hardly have lifted the latch and, even if they had found their way in, there would have been signs of a scuffle: dead chickens, scattered feathers.
The thief was human.
Chola was furious.
She went to the edge of the roof and shouted across the village at the unnamed thief that for this he'd be struck with paralysis; that he'd be smitten with cholera and die: that unless he owned up and returned the cockerel, the gods would punish his family with poverty and starvation for ever.
Then she turned to the red bitch and thrashed her for her negligence, calling her lazy, useless, good-for-nothing.
But on another occasion, not so long afterwards, she was glad that the two dogs had stayed inside.
At this end of the village the night had been quiet, but in the Untouchable quarter to the west, there'd been quite a kerfuffle.
No one had heard the jackals howling, but the dogs, alerted to something, had barked and barked.
Then, just before dawn, the barking had given way to the growls and scrabbling sounds of a fight.
When the first people left for the fields in the morning they found a dead dog on the path.
It was lying on its side with its legs drawn stiffly up to a grossly distended belly.
The jaw hung slightly open and the lips, peeled back in a snarl, displayed two rows of perfect teeth, the pink tip of a tongue, and a mouthful of blood-tinged white froth.
The dog was rabid.
Word spread quickly and very soon a crowd had gathered.
Some of the men wore striped, yak's-wool blankets draped over their heads and the shoulders of their thick woollen jackets.
The morning was bitterly cold and their breath formed clouds of steam as they stared and muttered.
No one approached the dog: it lay in a space of its own with its head and shoulders displayed on the icy stones of the path, its hindquarters crouched in the frosty grass.
When a young boy, overcome with curiosity, stepped out and prodded the dog's mouth with a stick, he was grabbed by the arm and hauled back roughly: and when a dog began idly sniffing the body, someone kicked out and shouted and it lurched away through the crowd.
Some time later a  um leatherworker dragged away the body and buried it, and at the headman's house a group of men had gathered around the fire, talking.
The rabid dog was not from here and no one knew a dog like it — big and black, with white on its chest and ears, and raw sores around the nose and eyes.
But yesterday it was seen in Chaura and in Chhuma, running through the outskirts of the villages: and the day before, a dog like that had chased a sheep in Pere, and clutched it by the neck, shaking it from one side to the other until it died of shock.
Everyone knew the tales of rabid dogs: how they suddenly went wild and uncontrollable, spinning round in circles, and rampaging through a village scattering chickens, or baying at the moon and running with the jackals.
And everyone knew of the people they'd bitten, like the man who went mad — wandering round the village in search of water, complaining of aching limbs and an unquenchable thirst — and whose body was found, months later, washed up in the river at Lāmri.
The men at the headman's house decided, on behalf of the village, that every dog that had been out in the night, possibly taking part in the fight and helping bring down the rabid dog, would have to be killed: and all bitches on heat, whether they'd been inside or out, must also be killed.
Anyone who'd paid money for their dog, or didn't know where it had been, should take it to the god in Lāmri to be blessed and cured: and if anyone had been bitten recently, or had been in contact with the rabid dog, they too should see that god.
In the days that followed many dogs were led through the village on their way to Lāmri.
They came from Chaura and from Chhuma, from Huri, Muri, Pere and from Gorigāu  — the mad dog on its final rampage had run for miles, and in every village the dogs had scrapped and wrangled with it.
No one knew how the Lāmri god acquired his reputation for treating mad dogs, but it dated back for several generations.
The god had been incarnated in five successive dhāmis , possessing each one during seances for the whole of his adult life.
When one dhāmi died the god chose another and was embodied in him so that, although dhāmis came and went, the god's reputation endured.
His power was said to be so great that each one of the dhāmis , when possessed by him, could split an iron cooking tripod with a single blow of his naked hand.
The  ā  gri took his mastiff mongrel together with a parcel of rice for the dhāmi : when he returned in the evening he said that the dog was no longer afflicted.
The dhāmi , possessed by the god, had exorcized its sickness, stroking its head and back with an eagle's wing, then sprinkling rice grains while muttering a blessing.
But many more dogs were slaughtered.
Not everyone destroyed the puppies in their dogs' litters, as Kalchu had done with the red bitch's, and there were any number of dogs that belonged to no one— wandering through the village, scavenging what they could find, breeding and multiplying.
Almost all of these pariahs, as well as many household dogs, were killed.
It was mainly the young boys who did the slaughtering.
They led the dogs to a place where the river meandered and the shingle bank was broad and deserted, and they beat them with sticks or stoned them.
The carcasses were left to rot: vultures and buzzards patrolled the sky, homing in on tattered wings.
When the wind was wrong, the putrid stench was wafted up across the fields.
During that time few people left the village at night.
They were scared of the dogs that had been bitten and strayed: scared that the jackals, gone mad, would come in from the forest and molest them in packs.
At the crossroads outside the village a row of clay effigies had been placed by those who'd been bitten.
They were rough clay self-likenesses on to which the suspected disease was transferred.
And at night the disease, thus disembodied, could adhere to anyone wandering past.
But, in due course, life returned to normal.
No one in the village had contracted any symptoms.
The dogs that remained seemed more contented, better fed, and presented a less impenetrable front of barking to strangers passing through.
Memories died: and the dead dogs' bones, picked bare by the vultures, had been scattered on the shingle or swept into the river now flooded with melted mountain snow.
When spring had come, the village filled for a week or so with men from the Tibetan villages further north.
They'd spent the winter working in India or the bazaar towns on the border and were returning now to their wives and children and their homes.
Some still wore traditional clothing: sheepskin chubas slung rakishly over one shoulder, heavy turquoise and silver hoop earrings, embroidered knee-length boots.
But most of them wore Western dress: polyester trousers, anoraks and sneakers.
They were trading in the village, bartering orange plastic beads and metalware that they'd bought in India for flour and grain.
Kalchu's trading partner, his i   a , from Wangri stayed in the house for several days.
Their two families had exchanged hospitality and traded with one another for generations, when Kalchu's went north for its salt and his i   a's came south for  grain.
Most of the time their relationship was friendly and relaxed: in the daytime they went about their separate business and at night they came back to eat and sleep.
But one day a row blew up.
Everyone else was out at work, and the two of them were sitting inside in the semi-darkness drinking raksi .
The Tibetan was talking in loud self-congratulatory tones about the religious statues and paintings that he'd smuggled across the border and sold in India; how time and again he'd outwitted the border police, with silver, musk and contraband of every sort.
Most of his relatives, he said, traded in Bangkok and Singapore now, and everyone had a watch, a radio and money to spend.
Kalchu was sitting quietly, staring at the ground.
The Tibetan, growing ugly and aggressive, and slurring his speech, said that the trouble with Kalchu — like everyone else round here — was that he was ignorant, backward.
He knew nothing about the world — his children didn't even go to school.
All he did, day in day out, was sweat and slog in the fields, and even then there was never enough to eat.
It was true that at this altitude — where crops could be grown but only with constant attention — people were slaves to their land.
Further north and higher in the mountains, where most of the Tibetans lived, the land was virtually barren and people had been forced into trade.
So paradoxically, those with the poorest land came in the end to prosper the most.
Kalchu, his face red from alcohol and anger, his breath coming in short shallow gasps, said that he'd lived and worked in India for several years and that there he'd been nothing.
With no home.
no land, he was miserable, lost.
He stood up suddenly, kicking his empty bowl of raksi and, shouting abuse at the Tibetan.
made for the door.
The Tibetan followed him outside.
For a moment it seemed he would hit him, then the violence passed from his face and his arms relaxed.
But the red bitch, who'd been standing nearby, had sensed the aggression and, all of a sudden, crouching low to the ground and  snarling, she lunged towards him.
The Tibetan intuitively spun on his heel, raising his arm as if to throw a stone and bellowing great roars of abuse.
But it was too late.
The red bitch's jaws were clamped to his leg in an iron grip and she'd no intention of letting him go.
Immediately Kalchu rushed over, shouting at the red bitch to get back, kicking and thumping her.
Eventually he pulled her off and dragged her away by the scruff of her neck.
She was still growling warningly and when the Tibetan, incensed with rage, lunged for her, she flared up again, snarling viciously and struggling free of Kalchu's grasp.
But the Tibetan had no strength for revenge: the blood had drained from his head and he slumped to the ground, clutching his leg.
The wound was swollen and livid: the colours of bruising were showing already and a triangle of loose flesh shrouded a gaping red wound.
Crowds of people had gathered around: Chola and the twins, back from the fields, Sigarup, Kāli, Nara and Mina, all were staring, aghast.
Some of the older men began moving the children aside, giving instructions and taking control.
Recovering now, the Tibetan stood up and, dragging his wounded leg in its shredded covering of black polyester, he lurched his way over to Kalchu.
Standing directly in front of him, his face calm and assured, he demanded five hundred rupees as compensation.
Kalchu refused.
Again their voices rose in hostility, neither one relenting, and when violence was threatened, four or five men stepped in, restraining them.
Arguments followed.
Chola took Kalchu's side, saying that the red bitch had never harmed anyone before, that If the Tibetan had provoked her it was his own fault.
But some of the other men supported the Tibetan: within his own home Kalchu was responsible for his dog's behaviour.
Eventually it was decided that if Kalchu refused to pay the money the Tibetan should be allowed to kill the dog.
The effects of the raksi had worn off by now and Kalchu, quiet and subdued, went into the house to fetch the red bitch's chain.
She too was calm and stood patiently while he attached the chain to a length of rope around her neck.
When he led her away down the back steps the Tibetan followed and so did most of the crowd.
I put the puppy inside, closing the doors, and sat down on the roof.
Voices rose from the waste-ground at the back of the house — they were discussing how to chain up the dog.
Soon afterwards the yelping began.
First came the clashing sound of stone against stone and the resounding thud of boulders dropped to the ground; then the recurrent frantic yelping.
Sometimes I could hear the chain clanking as the red bitch moved around, running in one direction, and then, as the chain pulled her up, turning about.
And sometimes, when the heaviest boulders thumped to the ground, I could feel the reverberations jolting the house.
At last there was silence.
I watched the Tibetan walk casually out of the village.
Then, turning back, I caught sight of the red bitch: she was making her way slowly towards the woodpile.
Neither of her back legs was functioning and she dragged them painstakingly behind her, taking all the weight on her front legs, her head hung low.
The Tibetan hadn't killed her.
He'd mutilated her to the point of death but — being a Buddhist — he hadn't killed her.
All through that evening I pleaded with Kalchu to shoot her, but he wouldn't, or couldn't — none of us could.
At one point I took a bowl of water to her: her mouth was bleeding and a trail of saliva dangled from her lower lip.
She ignored the water.
After that I avoided looking down towards the woodpile until, when it was almost too dark to see, I glanced down one last time — and she was gone.
All of us assumed that she'd wandered off to die alone and that, sooner or later, we'd come across her body, sprawled in a ditch or hidden from view in a clump of thorn trees.
But that night as we sat around the fire no one mentioned it.
Kalchu was ashamed of his drunkenness and Chola grumbled and rebuked him for it.
but no one regretted its effect on the red bitch or mourned her loss.
The children chattered and squabbled as usual, and the  puppy, pleased with its solitary status, snapped up all the food that was offered and licked out all the plates by itself.
I went to bed feeling hollow — removed from the people I lived with.
But the following morning I awoke to the familiar sound of Chola shouting at the dogs and the dogs' yelping response.
The red bitch had returned, as insistent on food as ever, and limping only slightly as she trotted around, getting in the way, impeding Chola's cooking.
When the Tibetan returned some months later he was impressed that the red bitch had survived.
Joking with Kalchu, he said he could do with a guard dog like that, fierce and resilient.
And so when he set off for home the red bitch was with him, loping along by his side.
TWO GENERATIONS OF HUNTING
AFTER THE POTATO HARVEST IN NOVEMBER THERE WAS NO MORE work to be done in the fields until the ploughing began in early spring.
Sometimes groups of women would leave the village and climb the surrounding hillsides, cutting bundles of grass to feed to the cattle in the winter.
Sometimes men and women would go to the forest to gather firewood — building up the piles against the cold months to come.
But often people stayed at home, finding jobs to do around the house.
One day I was sitting on the roof with Chola and Mina, shelling wild walnuts for oil.
The afternoon sun on my back was gently warming and the light that it cast on Chola's and Mina's faces was as clear and richly brown as amber.
To open the walnuts we placed them on one stone and hammered with another.
Many were so hard that they seemed to be made of solid wood while others shattered like eggshells, but were virtually empty.
We had been sitting there since early that morning, cracking the nuts, picking out the flesh with needles.
Below us in the village square Kalchu had pegged out his backstrap loom and was weaving a length of grey goat's-hair cloth to make a rug.
A group of men had gathered round him, smoking chillims , talking.
Some of them had brought their wooden spindles and, from time to time, they abstractedly twisted them, spinning coils of fluffy wool into a smooth yarn as they talked or listened.
From where we sat we could hear their occasional bursts of laughter and the dim drone of their voices, but the words themselves were lost to us.
When the sun had finally disappeared behind the mountain Chola stood up to go and light a fire inside the house.
She'd almost reached the door when suddenly a gunshot sounded, shattering the stillness.
For an instant its echo rippled through the valley.
Then another shot was fired and the two echoes clashed discordantly.
Immediately the gathering of men disbanded.
Kalchu came rushing up the notched-pole ladder.
‘It's a boar hunt,’ he shouted.
‘I'm going to go and have a look.’
He hurried through the open doorway into the house and a few seconds later reappeared carrying a rifle which he passed from one hand to the other as
he struggled into his jacket.
He was already half-way down the ladder when he shouted back at me, ‘Don't you want to come along, sister?’
For a split second I hesitated, uncertain.
Then I grabbed my jacket and followed him.
From the path below I looked back towards the house.
Chola and Mina were at the edge of the roof watching the stream of men as they poured from the village.
Some were running: some were striding purposefully; some had rifles slung across their shoulders on rope straps.
Dogs ran in and out among their feet, barking, or with noses down, tails streaming, sniffed the ground for the boar's scent, knowing instinctively that this was a hunt.
The shots had sounded from the hills somewhere to the north, and rather than wasting time on the main path that rose with the gentle contours of the valley, we took a short cut up the steep, almost sheer, cliff behind the houses.
I followed Kalchu as he pushed his way into the line of men climbing in single file up the roughly carved, foot-sized steps, but most of the men simply scaled the slope, holding on to roots and tufts of grass.
At the top of the cliff we paused to catch our breath and look around.
From here we could see for quite a distance, but there was no sign of the hunt, nor any sound.
So we set out across the open grassy slope that led on up towards the forest.
At first the forest too was silent, apart from the men's voices calling out to one another as they searched for tracks.
But then another gunshot sounded, much closer than the first and as loud as thunder overhead.
The men immediately set off in one direction, scrambling down through the trees and undergrowth towards the subsidiary valley where the shot had sounded.
Minutes later, although we could still see nothing through the trees, we heard the dogs' excited, nearly frantic, barking.
Another single shot was fired and, above the shrill ringing in our ears as the blast subsided, there rose a high-pitched, almost human, scream.
Finally, as we approached the edge of the forest where the trees were thinner, we glimpsed the hunt.
Crowds of men were standing on the river-bank, pushing and jostling, craning their necks and shifting position, trying to get a view through the mass of bodies and out across the water.
The dogs, too, were focused on the water, poised on the edge of the bank, barking and snarling, or pacing back and forth between the men's legs, whining with impatience.
I followed Kalchu behind the crowd to a place where there were fewer people and we could go right up to the water's edge.
Looking back from here along the river, we saw the boar.
It had been wounded, and was struggling to stay afloat with its snout jutting horizontally above the water, its dark mane of bristle bobbing up and down amid the white rise of the current.
Suddenly the crowd started to stone it.
When the first stones hurtled towards the boar, it lunged forward, its head rising clear above the water so that we could see the downward curve of its tusks, the bead-like eyes wild with terror.
For a moment it seemed as though it had tapped some hidden reserve of strength and would ease itself up on to the opposite bank, and escape into the forest.
But then another shot was fired.
The boar keeled over instantly, and the water that flowed away downstream was a pale rusty brown.
The relief among the crowd was almost palpable.
People began to move about, the hum of their voices sweeping like a wave along the bank.
A faint smell of gunpowder still hung in the air and a trail of bluish smoke drifted off towards the forest.
Within minutes, five or six men had taken off their shoes, rolled up their trousers and were wading in the icy water.
Some of the dogs, too, had slithered down from the bank and were swimming out towards the boar.
Everyone watched as the water reached  the top of the men's thighs, then their hips, before finally becoming shallower again as they passed the mid-point in the river and approached the opposite bank.
For a while they just stood there, staring down at the boar, satisfying their curiosity after the brief and distant glimpses that they'd had on the hunt.
Then they became animated, gesturing and talking, devising a strategy to bring the boar back across the river.
Reaching into the water they grabbed hold of the boar's legs, and after several attempts swivelled it over on to its back.
While some of the men held the weight of the body in place, others bound the forelegs, and the hind legs, together with rope.
Some then leaned on the rope, hauling the boar through the water, while others stayed behind to guide it round rocks and counteract the drag of the current.
When they were close enough they threw the ropes up to the men at the front of the crowd, and all of them pushed from behind.
With one concerted effort, they heaved the boar out of the water and up on to the bank.
Immediately the men homed in on the dead animal with the single-mindedness of monsoon flies.
I waited for the crowd to thin out, then went to have a closer look.
The boar was much bigger than I'd thought.
It was stretched out on the grass: standing, it would have almost reached my waist.
There were two bullet wounds, one on the shoulder and a deeper one behind the head.
Dark blood was welling up from both of them.
For one brief moment I felt the full shock of its death; of a life, until recently, so remote, so inextricably part of the mountains and forests, now suddenly laid out at my feet.
Looking up, I saw that night had almost fallen.
The shapes of the pine trees on the far side of the river were already indistinguishable: the forest had become a dark impenetrable expanse that stretched from the water's edge right up to the horizon.
The river too was uniformly dark apart from the ripples and eddies which were thin ribbons of light.
I turned back towards the crowd.
Some of the men had been collecting driftwood and dry sticks and branches from among the  trees; a small fire was coming to life, crackling and spluttering sparks into the haze of heat above it.
Soon its warmth would be welcome: the night air was cold and the grass on the river-bank was already crisp with frost.
I looked around for Kalchu and eventually found him on the far side of the fire talking to a group of men, some of whom I recognized as being from Chaura and from Chhuma.
He was asking them how the hunt had begun, and what had happened before we joined it.
‘We started out from Chaura,’ one of them began, ‘early, before the sun was up.
For hours we searched the forests on the western slopes — nothing.
Then, just as we were about to give up, the dogs picked up a scent.
Moments later two boars came crashing through the undergrowth.
Someone fired a shot but the trees were too thick to see properly and the boars ran out of the forest on to the open plateau above.
We could see them clearly then, a male and a female, full-grown adults.
Someone fired again and the boars split up.
The female shot off into the forest and was lost: the male dropped straight down into the valley, right into the arms of the rest of the hunting party waiting here with guns.’
Kalchu was reflecting, wondering which of the shots we'd heard from the house.
I turned towards the boar again.
By the light of the fire the butchering had begun.
I watched as one of the men, squatting down by the boar, made a deep incision along the underside from chest to groin, then hacked through the ribs and breast-bone with an adze.
When the carcass was opened the men called over the dogs, which cowered back uncertainly.
For a few seconds they encouraged the dogs to sniff and lick the blood — to reaffirm their hunting instinct — then, shouting and waving their arms, they sent them scurrying back to the shadows to wait for bones and other bits of debris.
Kalchu told me later that the butchering and apportioning of meat strictly follows precedent.
The legs belong to the men who've organized the hunt.
These are almost always the same men, the ones who own the guns and the best-trained dogs, whose families  have been hunters for years, passing their knowledge and experience down through the generations until it's almost in the blood.
They also get the tusks and the bristles which they sell or barter in India, and a large proportion of the fat, which can be rendered down and used for cooking, or dried and preserved to smear on cuts and bruises.
The rest of the meat is divided up among all those present at the kill — the reason being that it's only by sheer force of numbers that any hunt succeeds.
Five or six young boys had come over to the fire with some scraps of meat and sections of cleaned intestine that they skewered with s ticks and laid on the embers to roast.
Every now and again they checked its progress, tilting their faces back from the heat as they reached into the core of the fire.
When the meat had shrivelled and curled they waved the sticks in the cold air for a minute, unskewered it, blew off the coating of ash and tossed it from hand to hand until it was cool enough to eat.
Soon pieces of meat were being roasted right around the fire, and the air was thick with the smell of charred flesh and singeing fur.
Someone leaned down in front of me with his cupped palms outstretched.
I helped myself to some of the raw still-warm liver he was offering, realizing that I was being especially honoured as a guest.
Much later when the butchering was finished, crowds of men stood arguing over the piles of meat.
Apparently, most hunts begin and end high in the mountains, far away from any village, and all those present at the kill have been with the hunt throughout.
Usually there are about twenty-five or thirty men, and an adult boar divided even forty ways provides a reasonable amount of meat for all.
But today's hunt was close to home.
Seventy or eighty men were at the kill and most of them, like us, had heard the shooting from their homes and hurried over just in time.
Their claim to a share of the meat was bitterly resented.
When voices started rising and violence seemed inevitable, Kalchu told me that it wouldn't be resolved for hours and, rather than waiting around in the cold on the off-chance of getting some meat, we might as well set out for home.
The forest path was like the strange, disorientating setting of a nightmare.
Tall trees and sweeping branches suddenly appeared from nowhere and vanished mysteriously into the all-encompassing darkness.
Every sound seemed a potential threat — the wind rustling in the pine trees, the flapping of a startled bird's wings, the jackals' baleful howling as they patiently awaited the abandoned carcass.
But Kalchu seemed familiar with the darkness and the narrow, winding path, and I followed as close behind him as I could.
When we left the forest, pale moonlight reflected dimly on the frosty ground and it was easier to see.
Kalchu X to me and, looking pleased with himself, opened out his  opi which was bulging full of meat.
I hadn't noticed that he was carrying, not wearing, it and I certainly hadn't seen him take the meat.
The following morning it was snowing lightly — the first snow of winter.
Kāli came to bring me some of the cooked meat, chewing some herself.
She was very excited about the snow and the hunt.
‘Weren't you ashamed last night?’ she said half-critically.
‘The only woman with all those men?’
‘A bit,’ I replied, ‘but I'm very glad I went.’
We talked for a while about the hunt — she wanted to know how much meat we'd eaten, what the men had talked about — and then she said she had to go and graze the cows.
Soon afterwards Chola and Mina set out for the hills to gather grass.
I went to sit with Kalchu and the children by the remains of their fire.
It was still snowing outside, and so cold that Kalchu decided, despite the extravagance, to build up the fire and keep it alight right through the day.
Kalchu's brother and several other men, seeing the smoke from outside, came to share the warmth of one of the few fires still burning.
Kalchu shut the door behind them.
The room was warm and dark and filled with smoke.
The only daylight came through a chink between the heavy wooden  doors.
Kalchu fetched a bottle of raksi from the inner room and filled a bowl for each of us.
Inevitably the conversation X to hunting.
‘If only the hunting now was like it used to be when we were their age,’ said Kalchu, nodding towards the twins.
‘In those days our fathers and grandfathers kept us well provided.
There was always meat to eat: fresh meat after every hunt, dried meat in between.’
‘But why was it so much better then?’
I asked, wondering if it really was or if his memory had become glamorized.
‘Well, for a start,’ he explained, ‘everyone had a gun.
The blacksmith used to make them for us out of wood and steel that we carried back from India.
He used to make the bullets too, little strips of iron that he heated, twisted, battered into shape.
They're the same guns — and bullets — that we use today, but in the whole village, only about seven or eight of them are left.’
‘What happened to all the others?’
I asked, curious now.
‘Oh, one day, quite a few years ago’— Kalchu's tone was flat with resignation —‘the Bazaar police came, issuing orders that from now on all firearms must be licensed.
They went around from house to house demanding the licensing fee.
You could either pay ten rupees or, if you didn't have the money, you could give a chicken, or three households together could give a sheep.
Almost all of us refused and they tore our houses apart and seized the guns.
‘Usually,’ he went on, ‘when there's to be a police raid of any sort we know about it before it happens.
Someone hears it mentioned in the Bazaar and runs to U  hu with a warning.
Then, from U  hu, someone else sets off for Lāmri and for Lorpa.
Eventually the news will reach us here, and one of us will go to Chaura and to Chhuma and to Gorigāu .
They shouldn't have found a single gun that day — we'd have buried the lot if we'd only known in time.’
‘So where are all the guns now?’
I asked.
Kalchu shrugged.
‘They took them back to the barracks in the  Bazaar.
Maybe they're still there — a great heap of them going rusty and covered in dust and cobwebs.
They're no use to anyone in the Bazaar, they all have modern rifles now.
When they took them away they said we could come and reclaim them any time we wanted, if we brought ten rupees.
No one ever went.’
The new wood that Kalchu had put on the fire earlier hadn't caught yet and clouds of smoke were billowing out.
His brother Māilo leaned forward, rearranged the logs and blew on them.
Within seconds the smoke had cleared and a flame shot up, strong and high.
‘Then some years after that,’ Kalchu continued absentmindedly, as though the story had its own momentum like a ball set rolling down a hill, ‘the Bazaar police came back.
This time they told us that we were to stop hunting musk and tār .
They said the government had declared them ‘protected species’ and that killing them was now a criminal offence.
At first we didn't take any notice, we just carried on regardless.
But we soon learned that the police have eyes and ears everywhere — every village, every forest, every mountain.’
Lāla Bahādur's desultory grizzling, which for some time had provided a steady accompaniment to his father's voice, suddenly broke into an urgent heartfelt wail.
Kalchu reached over to where he and Hārkini had been squabbling, picked him up by both elbows and pulled him on to his lap.
Heavy tears were brimming from his eyes, washing clear channels through the dirt and grime.
For a minute or two all conversation was silenced while Kalchu bounced him on his lap and muttered softly through his screaming.
When at last the child was comforted, Māilo looked up at me across the fire.
‘You wouldn't believe the amount of meat we'd bring back when we hunted tār .’
His eyes were bright with reflections of the flames.
‘Mountains of it.
There was so much that we used to cut it into strips and string it from the eaves to dry in the wind and sun.
We had to sit there watching it for days to  keep away the dogs and chickens and stop the crows and vultures swooping down and snatching it away.’
Suddenly his smile faded and he hugged his body, grimacing.
‘But it was always so bitterly cold.
You can only hunt tār in the autumn and the winter.
In the summer they go right up into the mountains, way beyond the permanent snow-line.
It's too dangerous to hunt them there among all those crags and chasms full of drifted snow.
But in the autumn they come down and settle in the grazing pastures where we take the sheep in summer.
‘That's where we used to go to hunt them.
Often we'd stalk a herd for days on end, and all that time we'd never even catch a glimpse.
We just followed footprints in the snow and sometimes, in the morning when the air was still, we'd think we heard them not too far away.
At night we'd sleep in caves, huddled up in blankets with nothing to burn for firewood, while outside an icy wind swirled clouds of snow-dust all around us.
‘But we'd always get one in the end.
We used to chase them down a narrow valley with a sheer cliff-wall at the end.’
He cocked his head, half-smiling.
‘They're cunning animals but they're used to being hunted by leopards, not by men with guns.
What they do then is scale a cliff, clambering from one ledge to another until they're perched on one so high and narrow that the leopard can't follow.
It goes as far as it can and waits there for a while, its big eyes staring up, tantalized.
Then it loses heart and goes away.
But what the tār doesn't realize is that it makes a perfect target for a gun, stuck up there with its pale fur as clearly visible against the dark rock as the moon is in the sky at night.’
Māilo's eyes always had a disconcerting twinkle: whatever he was saying I was never sure if he was teasing me.
Now for a moment I wondered if he'd made the entire story up — the elusive animal, the bizarre hunting technique.
‘What do they look like —tār ?’
I asked by way of checking.
‘They're a sort of greyish-brown colour,’ he said ambiguously, ‘a bit like a deer.
A bit like our goats, only much much bigger.’
At that point Kalchu stood up, rummaged round behind the  rafters and, after a while, pulled out a dusty horn which he handed me.
I looked at it and ran my fingers down its spiral-patterned surface.
‘A tār horn,’ he said, and a moment later added, ‘that's how the hunters carry their gunpowder: fill it up, stuff the top with a birch-bark bung and tie it to their rifle straps.’
9.
Mina and her baby.
10.
The  ā  gri smoking a chillim .
11.
Kalchu winnowing.
12.
The potato harvest, with potatoes baking in a brushwood fire.
13.
The village path in the early morning.
14.
Sauni, Kāli and Lāla Bahādur.
15.
Kāmi boys drumming.
Everyone watched me, pleased that I seemed impressed.
Then a man I didn't know who was sitting next to me nudged me in the ribs.
‘One year,’ he said, when he was sure of my attention, ‘the shepherds found a tār when they were crossing the high ridge on their way back from Aula in the spring.
There it was, just lying there, half-buried in the snow.
They thought that it could only just have died.
It was big and fleshy and the vultures hadn't touched it — even the eyes were still in place.
But when they had a closer look they saw that it was frozen solid.
It must have been killed in an avalanche or died in a blizzard earlier in the winter.
But it was quite uncanny — three days earlier it would have been completely covered in snow and they'd never have seen it: three days later it would have been stripped to a skeleton.’
He paused for a minute.
Then he added, ‘Nowadays, when the shepherds come back that way in spring, they prod every square inch of snow with sticks in search of buried frozen tār .’
Everyone laughed at this.
‘They'll never learn,’ he said, ‘that luck like that can only happen once.’
Kalchu stood up and went to fetch another bottle of raksi .
When he came back several minutes later, he was still smiling.
All of us watched as he poured some of the clear liquid into each of our bowls and then began kneading the tobacco to put in a chillim .
‘If they hadn't stopped us hunting musk,’ said Māilo, knocking the spent tobacco out of the chillim on the side of the hearth, ‘we'd probably all be rich by now.
And the beauty of hunting musk was that you didn't even need a gun,’ He passed the emptied chillim over to Kalchu.
‘All we had to do was take a basketful of poison-tipped bamboos into the mountains and stake them diagonally into the ground, right across the width of the valley.
Then it was up to us and the dogs to stalk a heed and chase them  in the right direction.
If everything worked the deer would kill themselves, impaling their bodies on the wall of bamboo stakes.
We'd usually get at least five or six that way.
‘One year’— Māilo's eyes lit up at the memory —‘I sold so many musk pods at the Indian border that I could hardly walk back, my pockets were so weighted down with silver coins.’
Kalchu searched in the fire for an ember, laid it on top of the chillim and drew in deeply.
When he breathed out again his face was lost for a moment in the smoke.
He inhaled once more and passed the chillim on.
‘Now that it's illegal,’ he said, coughing, ‘it's worth a thousand times what it used to fetch.
All those Tibetans who come back from India in the spring laden down with watches, silver jewellery, radios — where do you think they get their money from?’
It was a comment directed more to the other men than to me.
‘Ye-es,’ the man next to me agreed, ‘but it's madness unless you've got the money to bribe the right officials.
They caught someone in the Bazaar just the other day.
He only had a little bit, but they put him away for three years.
If it had been at the border they'd have given him five or even ten.’
Māilo suddenly started to laugh.
‘Gone are the days when we used to crumble half a  ola of it into a chillim of tobacco.’
‘Why did you do that?’
I asked.
‘Does it make you high like marijuana?,
‘Oh no.
It just makes it smell and taste…mm, wonderful.’
‘They'll never stamp it out completely,’ said Kalchu confidently.
‘In fact, if you ask me, there's as much goes on in most of these valleys as there ever used to be.’
He turned to the man beside me.
‘Last monsoon when I needed some musk to rub on a snake-bite, I didn't have to look far.
True, everyone had hidden their supplies — buried them in the tobacco patch or the bottom of the grain chest — and I had to convince them that I wasn't a forester.
But there was no shortage of it: and it wasn't all old and dry like walnuts, it was as fresh and sweetly-smelling as the day the deer was slain.
‘And that dog that was gored by a boar this time last year.’
he went on, ‘the one that they carried home and looked after like a baby for days until, in the end, it died.
That was no ordinary dog, that was a trained musk-hunter. they bought that do in Tibet for five thousand rupees.’
‘Where there's money to be made you can bet there's someone making it,’ said an old man who'd been silently working his spindle since the conversation began.
Kalchu poured out the remains of the raksi into two or three empty bowls and put some more wood on the fire.
‘You know what I think about this ‘protected species’ business,’he said, reshuffling the logs, ‘I think they're protecting all the game for themselves so they can set up a hunter's paradise for the rich — for foreigners and high-ranking government officials.
They're probably going to buy up all our land and evacuate us to the south, or let us stay and employ us all as beaters.’
I'd heard some of the other men in the village mention the possibility of a game reserve for tourists, and I held my breath, wondering if Kalchu was going to implicate me, as they had done.
But he was in a cheerful mood and he went on with another story altogether.
‘When we were boys — Nara's age — the king arrived in the valley with his hunting party in seven helicopters.
They paid the headman of the village five hundred rupees and all of us had to streak through the forest making as much noise as we possibly could to round up the game.
The king and his part had a feast at the edge of the forest.
There were tables with white cloths and chicken, rice,raksi , sweets — everything.
We watched it all through the trees.
Then when they'd finished eating they picked up their guns and the animals were there, ready and waiting.
Bang, bang, bang.
They did very well on that day.’
The door opened, letting in a flood of light, and Kāli walked in.
Her shawl was tightly wrapped round her head and shoulders.
It was dark with moisture and dotted with white flecks of snow.
She went over to the fire and squatted down beside the twins, warming her hands and bare feet.
Most of the men got up to leave, shocked  that the day had passed so quickly, that the cows were home already.
I went out on to the roof, glad to be in the fresh air after the smoky room and the raksi .
Snow was falling as steadily as the apricot blossom in the first monsoon storm.
But it wasn't cold enough to settle.
After a whole day there was just a thin layer of muddy slush.
As winter took its hold, banking up the short days, the long cold nights between autumn and spring, thoughts and imaginations often drifted to hunting.
The craving for meat seemed to grow with the cold; chickens were sometimes killed and eaten but never gratuitously, only in sacrifice at the gods' demand, and the sheep and goats were away in the south.
Nara, like most of the other young boys, laid noose traps in the snow for birds.
He once caught a pigeon, but it was mostly sparrows so small that, when he laid them on the embers to cook, they were ready by the time the feathers had singed and were hardly worth even sharing, except with the twins who insisted.
And almost every time a group of men sat round together — inside by someone's fire at night, or when it snowed: outside in the sun, when the sky was clear — they talked about going hunting.
But for one reason or another their plans were never carried out.
Then, towards the end of January, people noticed that at least one boar was coming right up to the village in its nighttime foraging: there were tracks in the snow and patches of scratched earth where it had been digging for roots.
One morning, someone found his potato-storage pit on the corner of his land ransacked and emptied.
It was this that finally resolved the men to organize a hunt.
When Kalchu and I set out for the headman's house several mornings later it was bitterly cold.
The mud on the path was frozen as hard as baked clay.
Snow from the last fall.
several  weeks previously, still lay packed in straw- and grit-speckled drifts on the sunless north-facing sides of the houses and thorn bush hedges.
Kalchu was wearing his rope-soled woollen boots and a red, brown and yellow striped blanket wrapped around his shoulders.
I had on my down-jacket, zipped and buttoned to my chin, and a pair of leather walking-boots.
The headman's house was already full of men, warming themselves and talking round the central fire.
We stood in the doorway for a while until our eyes adjusted to the darkness and then, stooping low to avoid the worst of the smoke, we made our way through the crowd to a space that had been cleared for us close to the fire.
One or two of the men greeted Kalchu with nods and comments and several of them expressed surprise that I was coming with them.
On the far side of the hearth the headman was sitting with his legs crossed, his back very straight, ceremoniously smoking a hookah.
Each time he drew on the mouthpiece, setting in motion the gentle protracted gurgle, he stared into space, completely absorbed.
Some of the other men were worrying, expressing doubts about the weather, wondering if the hunt should be postponed.
The forests, they said, were still deep in snow and, judging by the way the wind was stirring, there'd be another heavy fall before the day was out.
Eventually the headman passed on the hookah stem and stood up, saying he'd go and fetch the soothsayer.
When the two of them appeared in the doorway some time later, several of the men shuffled along to make a welcoming space by the fire.
The soothsayer sat down, nodding in general greeting, and held out his hands to the warmth.
Soon afterwards the headman came out of the inner room, carrying a plate of rice grains which he put on the ground beside him.
For some time the soothsayer continued to warm himself, staring into the flames.
Then, without a word, he picked up the plate and tossed a stream of rice grains into the air.
When they'd landed back on the plate, he leaned forward, studying the pattern  they'd formed.
Everyone was watching in silence, awaiting his verdict.
He put the plate back on the ground and looked up.
His eyes were the greenish-green of pine needles.
When at last he started to speak it was with his hands, in sign language.
Some of the men asked questions and made comments, also in sign language, and I asked Kalchu what they were saying.
‘There's no danger,’ he translated, his eyes on the soothsayer's hands, ‘but the boar that we want is as fast as the wind and as sharp as an eagle.’
He paused and then added, ‘In any case, everyone thinks we should go.’
When we left the headman's house we were joined by a group of young boys who'd been waiting outside with their dogs, and by other men from houses that we passed along the way.
All the men wore thick scarves wrapped around their heads and ears against the cold; the sky had darkened to the colour of a brownish-yellow bruise and the smell of snow was unmistakable.
Walking fairly briskly at first to keep the fire's warmth with us, we went down through the fields, crossed the main bridge and followed a tributary upstream until the valley narrowed out.
Then one of the men shouted something, waving his arms in the general direction of the forest.
Everyone stopped and looked around and one or two voices shouted back to him along the valley.
Then the young boys and some of the men split off, leading their dogs on chains up a steep animal track that climbed straight to the heart of the forest.
The rest of us watched them disappear among the trees and then continued on the broader path, climbing slowly.
Kalchu explained that every hunt begins like this: the dogs flush out the forest — the inaccessible chasms and the narrow hidden valleys — and when they've found a boar, they're trained to chase it downhill only.
So, if things go right, the men below should know from the dogs' barking where the boar is coming out and be waiting with their guns to ambush it.
We'd heard the dogs' barking spreading through the trees when  they'd first been unleashed.
But they were out of earshot now.
We were walking through a silent forest.
The snow on the path in front of us was flawless; behind, it was as churned up as a freshly-harrowed field.
In time the first snowflakes fluttered down between the trees.
I was surprised that the pace of a hunt could be so leisurely.
The men were ambling along, stopping every now and then for rests, biding time until their turn came round.
At one point they stopped to smoke a chillim in a glade where the conifers were thinner and dense clumps of feathery-leafed bamboo had spread across the open spaces.
Although it was midwinter now, the glade was as freshly green as the birch woods are in early summer.
While we were waiting for the chillim to be filled and passed around, Kalchu pointed out a conical heap of stones at the base of a great cedar tree near the edge of the glade.
He told me that it was a shrine to Ban Bhāi, god of the forest.
There was a time, he said, when every hunting party had sacrificed a chicken here.
If they didn't make the offering — if they plundered the god's territory without his permission — he'd punish their families with sickness or even death.
But now, he said, no one bothered any more.
Five or six stones had toppled from the pile and were lying half-buried in the snow, and some red and white cloth streamers that had been tied to a branch of the tree fluttered slightly in the breeze, torn and faded from the wind and rain.
Suddenly, as we were walking on, we heard the dogs barking in that frantic, menacing way that could only mean they'd given chase.
The men paused in their tracks, locating the sound, and within seconds we were hurrying back to a place that we'd passed where the sheer slope of the mountain was broken only by the deep rift of a water-course.
This, they said, was the only route for the boar to take.
The barking grew louder.
They were definitely coming this way.
The men positioned themselves with their guns ready and were straining to see, scanning the length and breadth of the  forest gully.
But it was still too soon, there was nothing to see, no movement in the branches, no rippling streak through the trees.
All of a sudden, mixed with the excitement, which was inevitable and contagious, I felt a strange weightlessness in the pit of my stomach.
I remembered another story they'd told me that day of the first snowfall: it was about a hunt several years ago, on a day like this.
The men had been in unknown country, chasing the boar uphill, when the rule is to chase downhill only.
Suddenly, the boar had been faced with a cliff too steep to climb and had turned on its heel.
The men, rooted to the ground in three feet of fresh snow, had been unable to move quickly enough, and the boar, finding its retreat blocked, had gone crazy and attacked indiscriminately.
Six men had bled to death there in the snow or in the arms of friends and relatives as they carried them home.
And I remembered too the guns they'd shown me, with the barrels roughly brazed to patch holes that had been blasted-out by home-made bullets too misshapen to find a smooth passage through when the gun was fired.
They told me that no one had ever been hurt like this; but wasn't it only a question of time?
The barking was getting closer by the second and we could hear the hunters whistling and shouting orders to the dogs, and the sound of the boar scrunching dried leaves and snapping dead branches as it hurtled down through the trees.
Then, unexpectedly, the barking stopped.
A strange silence followed, as though the entire forest was listening, waiting.
Occasionally one dog would bark in isolation: sometimes two or three more would join it.
But the dogs were no longer working together, no longer a single-minded pack in close pursuit.
Obviously they'd lost it.
The men stayed put for several minutes, hoping that it was just a temporary loss, but when the silence continued they began to move about, rubbing their hands together to warm them up, making light of their disappointment with careless shrugs of the  shoulders and wry half-smiles.
Someone filled and lit a chillim and everyone gathered round to smoke it, exchanging, now and then, laconic comments about the boar's escape, musing about what had happened and how different everything could have been if only luck was with them.
Then, looking up along the gully where the boar had been, Kalchu noticed a young boy leading his dog on a chain.
As he approached we could see that the dog had been wounded: it was limping and the fur on its flank was matted with blood.
The boy told us that his dog had been at the head of the pack from the start, biting the boar's heels and almost bringing it down.
Then suddenly the boar had turned about and hurled it into the air.
He said he was taking it home.
When Kalchu asked him what the others would do, he confirmed our suspicion.
It was cold, it would soon be dark, and the dogs were tired — they'd be following soon.
Some of the men had brought ropes and small axes with them so that, while they were in the forest, they could carry back a load of firewood rather than returning empty-handed if they didn't get the boar.
We were far from any village now and there was plenty of dead wood just lying on the ground.
As Kalchu and I and some of the other men set out for home, they started to gather it up and hack off the dead branches that jut out from pine-trunks like thin stumps of arms.
The snow was falling in earnest as we wound our way down through the trees, and the rich colours of the forest — the pine-green and henna-red bracken — were rapidly fading to ashen.
For a long time the sound of the men chopping wood stayed with us.
Eventually it was as faint as the steady tap-tap of a distant woodpecker.
Outside the forest the snow was already six inches deep and growing steadily, relentlessly deeper.
As we turned into the open fields an icy wind rose, blustering flurries of snowflakes into our faces and eyes.
I tilted my head down and tightened the cord on the hood of my jacket.
For a long time I walked with my eyes on the ground, watching my feet sinking interminably into the snow.
When at last I looked up we'd almost arrived at the village.
Blue smoke was billowing up through the snowflakes.
The house would be warm; the women had probably started the cooking.