

The International Auster Club has a fly-in at Old Warden on May 28.
Is learning to fly in the UK too expensive?
There are good reasons why it has to be more expensive than in the USA.
But that much more expensive?
Maybe; but maybe not, concludes Robin G. Burn
Hardly a month passes without that vexed question of the cost of flying being raised in the correspondence columns of Pilot and elsewhere.
As training and hire costs are comparatively low int he USA and certain other countries, it's not altogether surprising that our young, impecunious hopefuls feel frustrated at the much higher prices asked in the UK.
Why is there such a marked difference?
Is there any justification for accusations of exploitation, or is there indeed a quite rational explanation?
Recently qualified and having had similar thoughts, I decided to examine the facts and find out for myself.
From the evidence available, I have been forced to conclude that there are indeed good reasons for most, although not always all, of the large price differential.
While there are instances of seemingly unnecessarily high pricing, some at least probably arise more from inefficiencies than from exploitation — which of course does not bode well for the long-term survival of those establishments.
While the market in the UK is much smaller than that in the USA, there is still an abundance of flying training organisations in this country, which should provide sufficient competition and minimise opportunities for sustained over-pricing.
In our enthusiasm for flying we should not lose sight of the fact that it is a voluntary occupation and therefore subject to the normal law of supply and demand.
The message to the consumer of these services, if he or she is dissatisfied, must be to ‘vote with your feet’.
As long as there is an alternative, over-pricing ultimately brings its own downfall.
Basis of analysis
This has been largely published information, the directory ‘Where to Fly ’ in the April 1992 issue of Pilot , being especially useful.
Of course the accuracy of the analysis depends upon the integrity of the data supplied to the magazine by the flying organisations that contributed to the survey, and I have presumed, in good faith, that the rates quoted, except where indicated, are not only correct but are indeed inclusive of VAT and non-optional extras such as base landing fees.
A rough count of aircraft types given in the directory shows the following distribution of basic trainers offered by the organisations listed for Great Britain, minor discrepancies arising from such unhelpful entries as ‘PA–28’:
A realistic comparison of costs requires like to be compared with like.
Therefore, to avoid any confusion, the interpretations have been based solely on a comparison of the rates charged for Cessna 150/152s, as these make up about 45 per cent of the aircraft offered for the purpose of basic training or hire.
Incidentally, an estimated 110 organisations out of a total of 204   identified in the directory, i.e. 54 per cent, use 150/152 for this purpose.
What it costs and where
The statistics summarised in Table 1 are in a simplified form and indicate the ‘Lowest’, ‘Median’(i.e. middle value) and ‘Highest’ rates quoted for each region.
Selected regions are shown graphically in Figures 1 & 2 to indicate the ranges of rates charged.
It will come as no surprise to learn that the most expensive rages are in South-East England, where the highest are almost twice those of the cheapest in Wales.
The detailed plots for the South East (not shown) indicate the majority of rates, i.e. about eighty per cent, lie between £70–£90 per hour dual and £60–£77 per hour solo hire.
There is, of course, no information available about which training organisations do the most business.
In a free market, and all things being equal — which is not always the case in regard to quality of training, aircraft maintenance etc — the cheaper establishments should attract custom to the detriment of the more expensive ones.
These latter would normally have to reduce their rates in order to remain competitive — or ultimately go out of business.
That these same organisations apparently continue to do business suggests that either they do in fact offer something extra which the discerning customer wants, or that the demand is more elastic than one might expect, i.e. the average customer is not so very discerning after all and may have more money than sense.
Readers may have their own views on this matter.
With six of the most expensive training establishments in Great Britain located within less than an hour's drive of my home, no-one is more aware of the problem than me.
Although my own options were fairly limited — and moving was not one of them — satisfactory alternatives do thankfully exist.
In most industries economies of scale usually lead to cost reductions, and within limits, there is no reason why the same principle should not apply to flying training.
While big may not always be beautiful, it should be more cost-efficient and potentially cheaper.
It was with some surprise therefore that, on plotting size against cost for the Cessna-equipped organisations in South-East England, the reverse was evident.
Figure 3 shows a woolly, but definite, correlation between the number of aircraft of all types offered by a training centre and the rates quoted for dual instruction.
In general those operating from grass strips (mostly those below the best fit line) seem to be passing at least some of the savings on to the customer.
Many, but not all, of those above the line are based at the bigger aerodromes with concrete/asphalt runway(s), which often means higher rents, rates and landing-fees.
However, it is difficult to believe that this amounts to as much as £30 per hour.
One can fly for less than that in the USA, which brings me back to that vexed question.
Why so expensive in the UK?
Figure 4 graphically illustrates the massive difference between the rates in the USA and the UK.
The Pilot directory, on which these rates are based, is taken at face value, and no comment is offered on what one reader termed the ‘U.S. flight-school rip-offs’.
There have also been a number of memorable failures in this country, and having been caught out by one myself, I don't believe we are too well-placed to criticise the failings of others.
Caveat emptor: there are rogues, dreamers and incompetents in all walks of life; why should the flying fraternity be any different?
Certainly, while some type of guarantee scheme or bonding would seem to be desirable, the cost will inevitably be passed on to the consumer in the form of higher charges.
So why are UK rates so much higher?
To fully appreciate the reasons we must ignore the training aspect and look at the basic costs of flying.
Factor No. 11: capital invested
The aircraft
The vast majority of basic trainers are, or were, manufactured in the USA, and most of the remainder come from outside the UK.
A quick scan through the ‘for sale’ pages of U.S. and British magazines indicates that prices for aircraft in the USA are only about sixty per cent of those in the UK.
To import a light aircraft from the USA may not be overly difficult, but by the time the cost of the U.S. Export Certificate, British C of A, CAA registration and inspection and ferrying are added up, there is probably little change out of £6,000.
Then, of course, there is VAT!
All told, these costs can readily explain the large differential in prices.
In addition, the USA has a very much larger market in used aircraft and a constant supply of new ones, both of which act to depress prices.
Cost of finance
There has been a substantial differential in interest rates between the UK and USA for some time — currently it's six or seven per cent.
Most flying schools are businesses and not charities and have to purchase finance in the normal way.
The following simple example illustrates the double effect of higher interest rates and higher aircraft prices.
It assumes that the UK organisation is registered to recover VAT.
USA: C152 price £15,000 financed @ 8 ½ per cent over five years, costing £3,807 per annum.
UK: C152 price ex VAT £21,300 @ fifteen per cent for same term, costing £6,354 per annum.
The difference of £2,547 is a fixed cost, but even if spread over 500 hours per year amounts to more than £5 per operating hour.
Although the above allows for the cost of an aircraft to be written-off over five years, this is not especially generous by commercial standards.
While there will be a real residual value, after five years of high utilisation this will not be great and is ignored for the purpose of this comparison as being common to both instances.
Factor No. 2: spares and maintenance
Most spared have to be imported and, because of the much smaller market in the UK, alternatives are fewer, and consequently spares and maintenance cost more.
Evidence suggests the range is forty to sixty per cent higher.
While maintenance may not be a large contributor to running costs, it is still significant and such increases can account for an extra £2–3 per hour.
Factor No. 3: fuel and lubricants
Even when VAT is recoverable, prices are still 35–40 per cent higher in the UK, and would add another £3 per hour to the cost of operating a C152.
Factor No 4: Insurance, Cs of A and inspections
The higher UK prices for aircraft, spares and repairs result in higher annual insurance premiums.
Evidence suggests that Certificate of Airworthiness renewal and inspection are also more expensive.
The net effect may add a further £3–4 per hour depending upon aircraft utilisation.
Factor No 5: aircraft utilisation
This has a very significant influence on costs.
The substantially better climate and weather patterns — particularly in the southern USA — result in much higher annual utilisation and fewer cancellations than in the UK.
Utilisation can be twice as high and produces a double benefit:(i) lower costs per hour, and (ii) fewer aircraft needed to service the same sales volume.
The former is probably worth about £3 per hour, and the latter, which effectively halves fixed costs, is worth about £4–£5 per hour, depending upon utilisation.
The net effect
The above differences add up to around £20–£22 per hour, of which about £10 arises from the higher financing costs resulting from the lower utilisation and higher price of aircraft in the UK.
My estimates of operating costs are as follows:
The UK rates are ex-VAT for a fair comparison.
The difference between cost and hire rates represents profit plus overheads, and this ranges from £2.41–£4.53 for the USA and £5.53–£20.43 for the UK or £4.38–£11.62 for Wales.
Due to higher utilisation, overheads in the USA should be lower, but even so the profit margins seem thin and leave little room for error.
Either that, or a different investment ethic prevails there.
Conversely, in the UK the margins at the high end of the market could be substantial, especially if high utilisations and operating efficiencies can be achieved.
Vide my earlier comments about size and rates: I have resisted the temptation to calculate the possible profitability for a well-run establishment and leave it to those readers who are suitably motivated.
Discounts for block hours etc are widely available in both countries, and hence have little relevance to the comparison except in absolute terms.
Dual rates and the cost of instruction
A quick check with Table 1 will show that the extra cost for dual/instruction is about the same in both countries, averaging £10.20 per hour for the USA and £9.73 per hour ex-VAT for the UK.
As this usually includes preflight briefing and often post-flight debriefing, these rates do not seem unreasonable.
The extra for dual in the UK ranges from an average of £6.40 per hour for Wales to £12.23 per hour in Western England-South-East England for a change being close to the average.
However, individual schools vary from as little as £3 per hour up to £30 per hour — the latter regrettably in the South-East.
In about thirty per cent of the cases ground tuition is free, while for others it ranges from about £2 per hour up to £18.40 per hour ex-VAT.
In the USA ground tuition is usually extra, averaging about £8 per hour.
As ground tuition can amount to thirty or forty hours, it can be a  significant cost, adding an extra £60–£600 to a PPL course, which should be taken into account when comparing flying rates.
Conclusions
So what are we to conclude?
Certainly the cost of operating a basic training aircraft in the UK is substantially higher than in the USA.
The real cost, if true allowance is made for financing charges and lower utilisation, would appear to be about £18–£20 per hour more than in the USA, i.e. nearly twice as much.
With U.S. solo rates for C152s ranging from £19.40–£28.50 per hour, and allowing for higher unit overheads, this would seem to justify UK rates of, say, £41–£52 per hour ex-VAT, or £48–£61 per hour including VAT.
That range covers only about half of those organisations included in this survey.
However, if due allowance is given for the provision of free or low-cost ground tuition provided in the UK, the range should probably be increased by about £5 per hour to £53–£66 per hour, which covers about two-thirds of those establishments included in the analysis.
What about the other one-third?
Well, there must be those who are genuinely squeezed by operating from high-cost locations; some who are, and some who think they are, providing a higher-quality service; some simply over-priced due to inefficiencies; and a few possibly making hay while the sun shines but who are ignoring the storm clouds of the recession.
So, to answer my original question: yet, most prices seem reasonable, and yes, there are some which also appear unreasonable.
However, whether you consider flying in the UK to be expensive or reasonable depends largely upon where you view it from — the left-hand seat, the right-hand seat, or the school-owner's Porsche.
VIDEO Reviews By Peter Underhill
HIGHER, FURTHER & FASTER — The History of Supersonic Passenger Planes
Volume Ten in the ‘Wings over the World’ series.
Colour and black and white.
Fifty minutes running time.
£12.99 from most video outlets or direct from 
‘You cannot possibly imagine just how beautiful you look!’ said the pilot of the Meteor chaseplane during the first flight in March 1969 of Concorde 001 from Toulouse.
Although this video naturally concentrates on the only supersonic passenger aircraft remaining in commercial service, it also contains some excellent and rarely-seen footage of the development of its Soviet competitor, the Tu–144 ‘Concordski’.
The USA's answer, the Lockheed and Boeing SSTs — the latter cancelled by President Nixon in the same way Concorde was threatened with cancellation by the Wilson Labour Government — are also equally well documented.
The video theme of ‘higher, further and faster’ begins with an esoteric Hitchcockian opening sequence (the producer is one Stanley Hitchcock; any relation?), and gives the viewer a quick gallop through early piston-engined airliner designs with Richard Todd's mellifluous tones as voice-over, before describing the problems with the first passenger jet, the Comet, which was grounded after four crashes (later traced to fuselage metal fatigue).
This video shows a formation of BOAC Comets, moving on the battle between the boeing 707 and Douglas DC–8.
The latter initially looked like being more successful.
In 1963 came the signing of the Anglo-French agreement to build Concorde (or ‘Concord’ as it was at first spelled in Britain), and the video faithfully traces it right back to the earliest days of its conception.
The trials, tribulations (as when Pan Am, TWS and American Airlines all cancelled their Concorde orders on the day the Lockheed SST was announced) and the triumphs of the design, development and early flight testing are shown in some detail — including air-to-air footage of such one-offs as the BAC 221 test vehicle and the Olympus-engined Vulcan.
The Tu–144 part of the story includes some rare air-to-air shots of what was the first supersonic passenger aircraft to fly (it flew almost three months before Concorde, on the last day of 1968) as well as a brief history of Tupolev and his early aircraft.
Employing the same double-delta wing shape as the Lockheed design, originally pioneered by the SAAB Draken, the Tu–144 suffered the most public of tragedies when it crashed at the Paris Air Show.
Although completely redesigned and put into trans-Soviet service in 1977, it was withdrawn in 1978 and has hardly been seen since.
Even though the USA and USSR's potential competitors were no longer a threat, political pressures prevented ‘sales’ to any but the British and French national airlines.
Their thirteen examples are still flying safely and reliably and at an operating profit, and unless and until a new design is embarked upon (undoubtedly requiring massive joint international investment) then Concorde will almost certainly be the only way civilian passengers can travel at twice the speed of sound until well into the next century.
HOW THEY FLY THE CONCORDE.
Colour and black and white, fifty minutes running time.
Paul Havis is not a name you might immediately recognise, but it was this American 747 captain who originally made the 747 Pilots Eye View video regularly advertised in Pilot .
That original production was just a compilation of fairly amateur footage, but now Havis has moved into the big league with broadcast TV-quality programmes featuring the pilot's-eye view of a number of interesting routes flown by different airlines worldwide.
These include Great Barrier Reef trips in amphibians, Grand Canyon trips with Las Vegas's Scenic Airlines, the Bolivian 727 crews who routinely take off and land at airports over 13,000 feet amsl, and others.
Havis persuaded British Airways to let him ride along on a New York-to-London Concorde trip.
The result is perhaps one of the best insider looks at Concorde yet available.
Originally edited down to 22 minutes for a half-hour TV show (the other eight minutes being time for adverts and credits), Havis and his team had so much fascinating footage left over it was incorporated back in to produce this more detailed full-length video.
Havis himself did most of the cockpit shots, and these are skilfully intercut into air-to-air shots of Concorde, including a beautiful head-on one (used several times) of the Great White Dart skimming the cloud-tops leaving a vortex of white in its high-speed wake.
Apart from suffering from rather too much background noise to enable the viewer to clearly hear the challenge/response of those parts of the multiplicity of checklist and R/T calls that are included, the standard of photography, in such a confined space with rapidly changing lighting conditions, is surprisingly good.
We follow BA's Captain Jock Lowe and his crew through the intricacies of pre-flight preparation, take-off, climbout and that beautifully understated cabin announcement — with just a touch of pride — about how the aircraft will accelerate smoothly through the sound barrier, ultimately to reach Mach 2.2.
I don't think they've changed that since I few Concorde (my one and only time)‘twixt LHR and JFK in February 1978.
Equally interesting is the inclusion of some informative footage showing how a Concorde captain is type-converted.
Did you know that they do 64 hours on the Filtonbased simulator?
Or that one must approach at an angle of attack of precisely 10 degrees, and attain exactly 18 degrees on take-off?
Or that on their first-ever real takeoff during base checks at Prestwick, most pilots have as much difficulty keeping at 1,500 feet circuit height as does a low-hour student in a Cessna 152?
Some even overshoot up to 4,000 feet!
A short section of archive film shows the Bell X–1 and Chuck Yeager's successful mission to fly faster than sound, a clip from the old British black-and-white film The Sound Barrier (remember that one?), and some well-produced graphics describing the differences between the Boeing 707 and the Concorde, and the problems of high speed operation the latter aircraft has had to overcome.
How they fly the Concorde is as professional as 747 Pilot was amateurish, and leaves you wanting to have a go yourself.
Dream on, fellow PPLs.
You'll just have to buy this video to see how it's done!
de Havilland Beaver floatplane
This classic Canadian bushplane is Bob Grimstead's favourite seaplane ‘by far’; and now there's one in the UK — available with an AOC on a Public Transport C of A, no less.
‘Believe me, my young friend, there is nothing — absolutely nothing — half so much worth doing as simply messing about on floats.’
Had Kenneth Grahame known about seaplanes when he wrote Wind in the Willows that is what Toad would have said.
Despite the performance penalties and useful load restrictions caused by their weight, over the years floats have been fitted to almost every type of single-engined lightplane — and many twins.
Flying off water takes different and rather greater skill than boring ground-bound aviation, and while sometimes it is slightly less practical, it is always immensely more rewarding — and much more fun.
Since I got my FAA seaplane rating a dozen years ago I have become a complete convert to aquatic aviation, trying my hand at it whenever I get the opportunity.
Since then I have sampled as many types of floatplane as possible; but of all the seaplanes I have flown my favourite by far is the de Havilland (Canada) Beaver — familiar to anyone who has read Gavin Lyall's excellent flying thriller The Most Dangerous Game .
In the past I have had to search far and wide for opportunities to fly this wonderful big radial-engined workhorse, and my quest had taken me to Australia, Canada and various parts of the USA; but now, at last, 45 years after its first flight, we have a floatplane Beaver here in the UK.
What is more it is on a Public Transport Category C of A and operating under an AOC, will be available this summer for advanced seaplane instruction, charter and pleasure flying, scenic tours and corporate days-out.
The Canadian offshoot of de Havilland was formed in Toronto in 1928 to assemble and service their imported British products.
In 1937 de Havilland (Canada) started making specially  ‘Canadianised’ Tiger Moths in their own right, eventually building 1,500 of them.
Later in the war they built 1,135 Mosquitos, before going on to produce fifty or so Fox Moths — and then their own indigenous designs after the conflict ceased.
They had wanted to begin with a bushplane tailor-made to the unique requirements of their own rugged country, but advised to start on a simpler trainer, their first design was the DHC–1 Chipmunk.
This turned out to be so popular that production was taken over by the English parent company, leaving the colonial off-shoot to resume its original project.
Unlike so many manufacturers who are inclined to say ‘this is our aircraft, come and get it,’ DHC wisely began their design process by polling over eighty bush operators throughout their diverse country, as well as a few in other climes, to see exactly what they wanted.
What they did want was a spacious, easy-to-fly machine that was cheap to buy, long-lasting, simple to fix without the benefit of workshop facilities, and had a half-ton payload with superlative short-field performance.
It took the company less than a year to roll out their prototype DHC–2 — and it was a runaway success right from the start.
Over a twenty-year production run nearly 1,700 were eventually built, and they have served reliably in 65 countries in every climate and on every continent (including Antarctica).
Even today there are hundreds still flying.
At the head of Lake Washington in the Pacific Northwest Kenmore Air Harbor rebuilds old worm-out Beaver airframes to as-new standard to meet the unceasing demand for replacements.
When, in 1987, the British Army sold off their surplus Beaver fleet, a few optimistic Brits submitted tenders in the hopes of getting the odd bargain airshow and fun-flying machine.
They got a nasty shock: real bush pilots had been attracted to the UK from the four corners of the earth to get these well-maintained examples, and the high prices they fetched reflected the great demand that still exists for these superb workhorses.
Because of the hostile environment for which they were built and in which they excel, Beavers are rarely seen by us ‘soft’ folk from civilization; yet who knows how many are still soldiering on (Beavering away?) in the jungles, mountains, deserts and tundra of the world?
So imagine my surprise when, taking for a flight the farmer friend whose generosity allows me to afford to keep an aeroplane, he pointed out a familiar white outline on a lake below.
‘Is that a floatplane?’ he asked.
‘So it is.
In fact I think it's a Beaver.
Let's go down and see.’
Flying past at 400 feet, not only could we positively identify the big de Havilland gleaming in the winter sunlight, but we could also read its appropriate registration, G-DHCB.
Enquiries led me to owner Tony Allen and the information that it awaited final paperwork after having had floats fitted.
It had flown but a few hours in his ownership, and it might be available for a feature in Pilot .
But the wheels of bureaucracy take time to run, and British winter weather is rarely kind to fliers, while seaplanes have the additional disadvantage of needing several ground-crew and suitable tides as well as suffering all the constraints of more conventional land aircraft.
Months eventually elapsed before a breezy day saw me with a number of Tony's loyal friends on the slipway at Calshot, washing down his sturdy bird in the shadow of the sole remaining airworthy Sunderland.
Believe me, it is not until you are standing with a bucket of icy water in one hand and a wet sponge in the other, looking twelve feet up at a grubby Beaver, that you start to appreciate just what a big aeroplane it is.
Well over thirty feet long with a 48-foot span and stressed to 3.5h, it is a tribute to de Havilland engineering skill that at 3,600 pounds including floats the great lump nevertheless weight much less than a Jaguar XJ200.
The front fuselage is an aluminium-skinned steel-tube structure, making its interior easily accessible for inspection and repair, while aft of the cabin is a stressed-skin monocoque.
Behind  the rear seats a generous eight-cubic-foot luggage area has hatches in its back wall to allow stowage of slim freight up to ten feet long.
Behind this are a separate small locker, and the battery tray which slides out of the fuselage side.
The 24-volt electrics come from an engine-driven 1,500-watt generator and can power an optional engine preheater.
The 48-foot semi-cantilever two-spar wing is made for good STOL performance with a NACA 64A high-lift section, a high 9.2 aspect ratio and slotted flaps which, with the ailerons, add up to a quarter of the total 250 square feet wing area.
The ailerons droop down to fifteen degrees with the flaps to form full-span trailing-edge high-lift devices.
The cantilever tail surfaces are also all-metal, and are supplemented by a triangular ventral fin and arrow-shaped tailplane end-plates to offset the destabilising effect of the floats.
This machine has long Wipline 6000 floats with integral lockers rather than the standard Edo 4930 units.
(Float numbers indicate their maximum buoyancy, and since, for safety, each is required to support double its displacement, a pair of ‘six thousands’ will accept a 6,000-pound MTOW aeroplane.)
A water rudder on each float is connected by cables to the rudder pedals.
It took us all day to get the months' accumulation of gooey duck muck and seagull poo off the airframe, and despite getting soaked lying in cold puddles of grimy water under the floats we never did remove all the khaki slime from their bottoms.
But next day we were ready to take advantage of the high spring tide and fly.
Manhandling the aeroplane down the slipway on an old flat-bed trolley, five of us took just twenty minutes to get the big beast bobbing happily on the briny.
Or rather, it was bumping and grinding the heels of its expensive floats against the tarmac on a lee shore — so we all clambered aboard as quickly as possible.
Wellington boots are advisable, but they were not absolutely necessary even in this exposed situation, and we were each able to step onto the back of a float, walk forward along its non-slip top and climb the broad steps incorporated in their struts to enter the wide twin cabin doors.
The Beaver's 144 cubicfoot interior is divided into a two-seat cockpit and slightly lower 120 cubic-foot four-footwide 52 inch-high main cabin, in which Tony has fitted a pair of three-seat benches, the middle row having a split folding back for easy access to the rear ones.
Passenger seats and upholstery are brand-new, with similarly new airliner-style nonflammable light grey plastic moulded trim in the process of being fastened around the sidewalls and roof.
Each door has a broad bulged bubble window, while the aft cabin walls have over-sized fixed panes to give the rear passengers an excellent view.
the slightly foreshortened cockpit is a little less sumptuous than the newly-furnished cabin.
Standard controls are a single wheel on a fixed left-side-only or throw-over yoke pivoting fore-and-aft on a centreline pillar; but as it is partly intended for training G-DHCB has twin control wheels at either end of a Y-shaped structure.
Along the top of the instrument panel are amber oil and fuel low-pressure lights and the left-to-right mechanical flap indicator (there are five quaintly-named setting,full flap on the left,landing ,take-off ,climb and up or cruise at the right).
Basic flying instruments include ASI, DG and old black-and-white artificial horizon above altimeter, turn-and-slip and VSI.
A standby compass is mounted on the flat windscreens' central pillar.
Below the main array a full-width sub-panel carries the rotary fuel selector (fuel is carried three underbelly tanks with triple fillers neatly recessed in a panel just behind the door on the left side of the fuselage and accessible from the floats), switches for magnetos, generator, fuel pumps and all the other electrical equipment.
Both marine and aeronautical radios are mounted on the right panel.
The rounded grey coaming peaks in its centre to accommodate a high quadrant with man-sized throttle, pitch and mixture levers, each with its own friction knob.
Rpm, MAP, CHT, ammeter, carb temp and fuel gauges are set below, with carb heat, wobble-pump and emergency fuel and oil cut-off levers protruding beside the oil filler (which is in the cockpit by the co-pilot's left knee so a frozen frontiersman can easily check it and top up).
The pilots sit high on adjustable seats for the best panorama, and their doors have vertically-sliding Perspex windows and integral arm-rests.
Between the front seats are the flip-over flap direction selector (forward for down , back for up ), the long pumphandle for hydraulically shifting the flaps, and the very neat custom-made over-centre water-rudder retraction lever.
(Many floatplanes only have a handle on the end of the wire, and you have to hook it onto some convenient protrusion.)
Tony's Beaver still has its original inertia starter using a comparatively weak electric motor to spin a small flywheel up to high rpm, when the stored energy rotates the engine.
Getting the powerplant going with this is a multi-handed trick.
You pump up the fuel pressure, p rime, and raise the starter switch for twenty seconds to spin up the flywheel.
When the whirring reaches peak pitch you flick the switch down to engage, listen for a quickly descending groan, count two blades, switch on the mags and hit the booster coil before the flywheel loses all its impetus.
Above: ‘Brand new’ rebuilt Beavers at Kenmore Air Harbor o n Lake Washington.
Right: Beaver and Sunderland at Calshot.
Below: launching the Beaver from Calshot's slipway.
If you get it right the engine will catch just as it slows almost to a halt and, to the accompaniment of a swirling grey cloud of oily smoke stage right, the hiccupping bass thumping will grow into the irregular loping lumpy grumble of a healthy Pratt 986.
Except that this engine didn't throw any smoke.
Shooting a quick glance at the oil pressure gauge, I raised an enquiring eyebrow.
‘It's only done thirteen hours,’ he replied.
So that's why the Beaver's belly was so  clean!
Of course a seaplane has no brakes, so as soon as the engine was going we were off!
The four-and-a-half gallons of oil take about ten minutes to warm up to the minimum 40°C, and we used the time to taxi around the sheltered bay within Calshot Split, checking for debris and driftwood and surveying the area.
Burbling innocuously around the moorings, buoys, isolated pilings and crazily speeding windsurfers with the occasional whiff of avgas mixed with salt spray and hot oil, we towered over all the other waterway users — except the super-tankers bound for foul Fawley.
As we pottered around I mused; is it not weird that we island-bred British, only recently the greatest maritime nation in the world, have barely a handful of water-borne aircraft, and wherever these few appear certain English observers of this seriously endangered species cannot wait to render it extinct by outlawing it — or at least putting every conceivable obstacle, actual or procedural, in its way?
Once the oil was warm we were able to do the run-up at 1,750 rpm (and about twenty knots!)
Tony made a brief call to the harbour authorities, we turned into the north wind and I selected carb air to cold while he raised the water rudders and pumped down take-off flap.
Aiming to the right of a big black baulk of semi-submerged driftwood, I eased the wheel back and gently opened the throttle.
As the Wasp Junior is supercharged you do not just push the lever to the stop for fear of bursting it, so I relied on Tony to limit the movement of my left hand, revelling in the swelling thunder of the fifteen-litre engine and the surging acceleration as the nose reared under its power.
As American hot-rodders say about engine capacity: ‘There ain't no substitute for cubes!’
Floatplanes have some handling similarities to tailwheel aircraft and are rather different from tricycle landplanes.
At the start of take-off the stick is held fully back so that, as the aircraft accelerates, the floats' bow-waves build up to lift their fronts.
The growing waves move aft, further raising the noses of the floats (and so, the aircraft) until a stable maximum pitch — up position is reached and the speed will increase no more.
This is called the ‘hump phase’.
To accelerate to flying speed the noses of the floats are now lowered onto their bow waves, lifting their tails from the water and minimising drag by running along on their small middle portion, or step.
The pitch attitude for this phase is critical; with the nose over-high or -low too much of the float is in the water, and the considerable drag will overcome available thrust.
Maintain the correct stance and the ensemble will accelerate to flying speed.
I concentrated on keeping straight (easy) and feeling for the peak nose-up pitch that signified we were ready to lift onto the step (more difficult).
Perhaps this was because with two full tanks and six people aboard we were just short of the 5,090-pound max weight — or more likely Tony was deliberately limiting the output of his nearly-new engine below the normal 36 inches and 2,300 rpm, but the long Wiplines seemed to have a much less clearly defined hump than other floats I have flown.
After a while we appeared to stop accelerating in this nose-high stance — and of course we could no longer clearly see where we were going, so I eased the yoke forward to lift us onto the step.
The ideal pitch attitude was easy to maintain, being with the top of the engine cowling just below the horizon, and like this we quickly reached the fiftyknot lift-off speed to part company with the viscous sea and curve easily away over the Solent.
We had run for only a few hundred yards.
(When empty the heartily throbbing R-985 will heave a Beaver straight up and into the air in as few feet .)
Pumping the flaps up to climb and re-trimming with the dinky roof-mounted trim wheels, I reduced power to Tony's easy noise-abatement power of thirty inches and 2,000 rpm, subjugating the normal 750 feet-per-minute climb at 33 inches and 2,200 rpm in the cause of good neighbourhood relations.
When I first flew a Beaver its manoeuvrability came as a shock.
After all, this is a heavy, man-sized aircraft, so one expects he-man control forces.
Not a bit of it — do not know if W. J. Jakimiuk who was responsible for the Chipmunk's lovely qualities also devised the Beaver's agile handling, but I should not be surprised if he did, for it flies like a smaller aeroplane, with light forces and a roll-rate much better than that long high-aspect-ratio wing might suggest.
Nevertheless it is very s table in all axes.
Some floatplanes evince slight directional indecisiveness because of reduced stability from the large side area of the forward-mounted floats, but this aeroplane did not appear to so suffer.
‘de Havilland’ and proud of it!
The Beaver's panel with its rounded coaming carries the power levers — each with its own friction nut — on its top.
The pilots sit high on adjustable seats.
Yokes can be single, throw-over or — as here — dual.
With such a big wing and the drag of all those struts, mass-balance weights and dangling bits  of rope trailing in the slipstream, the Beaver was never meant to be a record-breaker, but the normal cruise speed of 95 knots at Tony's parsimonious power setting of 28 inches and 1,750 rpm burns a fairly frugal (for this big engine) eighteen gallons per hour.
This speed allows an absolute maximum endurance of five-and-a-half hours, is quite adequate for getting places — and ideal for the sightseeing and pleasure-flying that Tony envisages as its normal work.
The view is excellent from all seats, although the two passengers in the middle of the benches have to lean from side to side to make the most of it.
Higher speeds are possible, up to de Havilland's quoted maximum of 130 knots, but at the expense of the horrendous consumption of nearly thirty gallons per hour.
The Isle of Wight might well have been renamed the ‘Isle of Grey’ in the gloomy winter light, but while the photo session reinforced the Beaver's manoeuvrability it did highlight its inertia, even large power changes taking their time to have an effect.
The detail also invoked a new ‘first’ for me, that of flying formation in wellies!
Landplane engines always seem to run badly when crossing large stretches of water, but flying across the middle of the island we disproved the theory that a floatplane's motor might go into auto-rough over hard terrain.
This is probably partly because it is always possible to land one on grass (or any other hard surface) with remarkably little damage, especially if the ground is wet.
In Alaska I have seen seaplanes landed on tarmac in winter's first snow to have their skis fitted for the rest of the season.
It is even possible to take off from well-hosed grass in a lightly-loaded floatplane — and again, this technique is frequently used after conversion in the States.
The only damager that seems to occur to the floats is a light scuffing.
Cruising around in a seaplane is all very well, but water-work is always the most fun.
Flap limit is 91 knots, and pumping them down requires rather more muscle than retraction.
Circuits are normally flown with climb or take-off flap at eighty knots, reducing to seventy with landing flap on final approach.
Being seated well ahead of the leading edge it is easy to keep the landing area in sight, and the descent angle is simply controlled with the throttle.
Retaining a trickle of power through the flare reduces the rate of descent to near zero, and the aircraft is gently lowered to the surface in the almost-level planing altitude.
Once down, gently close the throttle and bring the wheel back to your chest, and with a rearing nose the aeroplane slows in a shower of spray and a surprisingly short distance.
Of course if you want real STOL performance — to get in and out of a small lake or tightly winding river, perhaps — this is the machine for it.
Using full (48 degrees) flap it glides like an auto-rotating helicopter with the cowling pointed well down towards the near shore.
Touchdown can be made remarkably close to water-edge trees provided some speed is kept in hand for a dynamic flare with a burst of power.
The nose then has to be hauled well up to break the descent rather than the aeroplane.
If you get it right the Beaver stops on a sixpence (but if you get it wrong, normally yielding water can be awfully hard!)
It is this flexibility and remarkable performance that makes the Beaver so versatile, and I would imagine that it is ideally suited to Tony's purposes.
Perhaps in conjunction with a yacht, motor-cruiser or smaller water craft the aeroplane would provide a smashing day out for the high-achievers in any organization, make an unusual fishing expedition to normally remote waters, take more passive passengers sightseeing, or allow access to many such widely-separated leisure activities all on the same day.
For those keen on flying but with an aquatic interest it would help make the perfect corporate day out.
The Beaver combines surprising manoeuvrability with impressive inertia, even large power changes taking their time to have an effect.
‘If you want real STOL performance, this is the machine…flexibility plus remarkable performance give the Beaver its versatility.’
(Mike A'Court)
Touring north-west Spain and Portugal
A holiday memorable for seafood and storms, and a useful test of the author's PPL/IR — and two folding mountain bikes.
By Peter Herold.
The idea of a holiday in the north-west of the Iberian peninsula had developed in the preceding six months.
We had bought Rudge Biframe folding mountain bikes specifically to go in the back of the 172, and trips to the Norfolk Broads, Dartmoor and west Ireland had allowed Anne and I to refine our planning so that not only the flying but — just as importantly for our holiday — the non-flying sections of the trip would be practical and highly enjoyable.
Portugal was the original target for our fortnight's holiday at the beginning of September, but Lisbon seemed a bit far, so we settled on Galicia, the north-western tip of Spain, and northern Portugal.
Our reading suggested an interesting mix of scenery.
Galicia was likened to Ireland (green and wet) with a quiet, spectacular coastline, while the interior of Portugal was much drier.
Both regions are famous for seafood, which we both love, and there appeared to be a reasonable number of airfields dotted about, ranging from little fields up in the mountains to Porto, one of Portugal's only three Customs airports — the others are Lisbon and Faro.
For planning, we spent long evenings poring over maps.
Anne read the guidebooks, while I'd say, ‘Hey, this looks like an interesting airfield!’ to which Anne would reply, £The fact that the place has an interesting approach does not mean that I want to spend my holidays there!’
After we'd agreed the itinerary I got on with the detailed flying planning, using the new French VFR maps and the American TPC (Tactical Pilotage Charts) which we bought from Stamfords in London.
The latter are the only maps available for Spain and Portugal, and although we saw a 1:1,000,000 visual map at a couple of airfields, despite our enquiries we were not able to buy one.
The TPC charts do not show civil airspace, so I used an Aerad radio-navigation chart to mark the boundaries of regulated airspace and nav-aid frequencies.
In addition, we had a 1989 Bottlang to give us the location of the Visual Reporting Points which are used extensively all over the Continent.
We also booked hotels in advance, since the guidebooks said that they tended to be busy.
As it turned out this was not necessary, probably because September is end-of-season.
Day 1 was planned to be to Biarritz via Jersey and La Rochelle, with Day 2 to Santiago via Asturias on the north coast of Spain.
The Special Branch man couldn't believe his eyes as all our clobber went into the plane at Elstree.
All went well as far as Jersey, where the Met man proclaimed that thunderstorms to the south would shortly ground all light aircraft, pointing to the yellow and red swathe on his TV monitor.
It looked better inland, so we decided to go and have a look.
A security guard came to smile at our picnic on the grass.
When a flash of lightning lit up the sky to the south we decided we'd better go now!
We told the controller that we'd keep clear of the storm as were cleared direct to Dinard.
We landed at Rennes in bright sunshine an hour later.
the next leg to La Rochelle saw us arrive five minutes after the pumps shut, so we were stuck there for the night.
The concrete silos that form the view from the airport are not too attractive, but La Rochelle itself and its restaurants in the little streets near the harbour are lovely, although we did get wet during a torrential downpour after dinner.
The restaurant awnings bulged with water as diners dodged from one to another.
hoping that the awning above didn't  choose that moment to disgorge its  contents over them.
The next morning we interrogated the Minitel terminal to confirm our suspicion that the weather was lousy, with low stratus and poor visibility.
We went on airways, which was less interesting in terms of things to see but got us safety to Biarritz.
After another picnic, this time on the steps of the control tower, we were off to Spain.
Immediately after take-off we passed San Sebastián on the north side of the coastline, making sure that another G-registered aeroplane heading in the opposite direction was south of it before being handed on to Bilbao.
Bilbao did not reply, so we circled while we asked the San Sebastián tower to telephone for our clearance into the Bilbao TMA.
A little later Speedbird 486B did us the flavour of relaying our intentions to Bilbao, and we were given a routing via the standard reporting points November One and November and holds while the British Airways flight landed there.
The ground around Bilbao rises to over 2,000 feet, and our route involved flying just above the tops of nearby hills.
Anne checked our navigation while I watched the hill on my side.
After a ten-minute delay we were cleared to resume our navigation along the north coast.
Bottlang was invaluable for this piece of navigation, particularly as we were starting to feel that the TPC map left something to be desired.
The scenery on the next section of the north coast was simply spectacular.
A green patchwork of fields comes right to the edge of huge limestone arches and blow-holes.
I banked over the let Anne see; the right-hand traffic rule is very unfair to passengers!
The industry of Gijón and Asturias followed, and shortly afterwards the airfield at Asturias, perched up on a hill.
On landing there was none of the Spanish bureaucracy we'd been expecting — you just need your passport number for the fuel bill.
This was the place where we saw the 1:1,000,000 map, but there were none for sale, and in general the airfield was pretty sleepy.
No Met nor Notam information was displayed, and we had to ask for the Met before filing our flight-plan to Santiago.
Flight-plans are mandatory in Spain for VFR as well as IFR flights; the landing fees office will not make out your bill until they have a copy of your flight-plan, and then the landing fee has to be paid in cash.
We were nearly there now, as we climbed up over Asturias to FL070 en-route to Santiago de Compostela.
Galicia is an autonomous region of Spain, with its own native tongue, Gallego, and almost in keeping with this has its own TMA, into which the friendly voice cleared us.
Halfway outbound in the hold the scheduled traffic for which we'd been waiting landed, and we swooped down, just catching the ILS.
Here we were, on schedule, and with considerable pride we unpacked our bikes and cycled the hundred yards from our parking space to the Llegadas Nacionales door.
The policemen were slightly surprised, and couldn't work out where we'd come from since there were no jetes there at the time; but we explained that we had ‘una avionetta privada ’ and they just looked bemused.
Santiago itself is ten kilometres from the airport, and after two solid days of flying it was great to be cycling.
The town itself is quite small, and easy to walk around.
It is a centre of pilgrimage, since the bones in the cathedral are said to be those of St. James, and the cathedral is a must, particularly the entrance from the Plaza del Obradoiro.
We also went to see the Museo do Pobo Galego, which has fascinating exhibits on rural life, including horréos or granaries, which are found in almost every country garden and look like a stone garden shed on stilts.
In the same building there is triple spiral staircase.
Imagine three spiral staircases starting from the ground 120 degrees apart in plan view, and twisting round one another!
This is exactly what this staircase is, and to get from one room to another you had to go down one staircase and up another.
In Santiago we had our first taste of the famed Spanish seafood.
Given that on average each Spaniard eats 66 pounds of fish and seafood a year, and much  of it comes from Galicia, you'd expect to see a lot there.
However, nothing had prepared us for the abundance and variety of scallops, mussels, every species in the shrimp to lobster continuum as well as some very funny-looking goose-neck barnacles.
In general it's all delicious.
The only dish that we did not like was fish cooked a la Galego , which seemed to mean boiled and then doused with  spicy olive oil.
Without Michael Fish (no pun intended) to tell me what the weather would bring the next day, I was very pleased to find that the local paper La Voz de Galicia carried an excellent synoptic chart and forecast.
This talked about tormentosas ,con gran aparato eléctrico , and we experienced one of these during an evening stroll up above the town and got completely drenched.
From Santiago we flew for an hour to Vigo, which has a smaller airport but is a much larger town and is in fact Spain's largest port.
It was cloudy enough to require full IFR flight, and we were cleared for the ILS at Vigo, but had to refuse since the VOR/DME there was out of order and there is no additional locator beacon to find the beam.
Instead we carried out a cloudbreak procedure using the NDB to the south of the field, which nestles in between some quite high mountains.
I can only suppose that commercial flights fly to where the VCR should be using inertial navigation, but this was not quite within our capabilities.
At Vigo we saw our first other light aircraft since leaving France.
I don't know why there aren't more, but suspect that it is a combination of the weather — high ground and prevailing westerlies give a lot of rainfall — and the cost of flying relative to incomes.
We cycled down through Vigo to the port, where we jostled with the locals to get the bikes aboard a ferry across the Ria de Vigo to Cangas on the Peninsula de Morazo, before cycling to the little sleepy fishing village of Bueu, which was quiet and unspoilt.
We spent three nights there, initially having a lazy day exploring the beaches, and the next day cycling up the coast fifteen kilometres to Pontevedra, another classic granite Galician town, before climbing up through cool forests to a TV masts on the 2,000-foot summit of the peninsula.
The whole area is beautiful and not at all busy.
We both loved to watch all the comings and goings by the sea.
Little fishing boats would chug in to the harbour all through the morning, and unload a couple of trays of fish which were sold immediately in the bustling market.
We discovered that a paella needed to be ordered at lunchtime for the evening, and went back to eat it while watching boats come back in the gathering gloom.
It was well worth waiting for, and was the best meal we had during the holiday.
From Bueu we reversed our tracks to Vigo, before cycling thirty kilometres to Tui on the river Miňo which forms the border with Portugal.
The patron saint of Tui is San Télmo, he of the blue discharge on pointed objects in electric storms, and from the cathedral you have a tranquil view over the Mińo to Valença in Portugal, to where we walked for lunch across the iron bridge built by Eiffel.
Bueu's bustling fish market.
This ‘sleepy little fishing village’ provided ‘the best meal of the holiday’.
By now it was time to fly again, and back at Bigo airport we prepared to go to Portugal.
There was the usual faff of getting back to the aircraft to get the flying bag, complicated by the imminent arrival of VIPs for the World Fishing Convention.
We then found that we didn't have enough cash to pay the landing fees, and in response I offered Portuguese escudos, converting at the rate in the newspaper.
‘Oh no, we can't use that rate’ was the response.
I made noises about the absence of a bank in this so-called international airport; but what choice did I have?
We filed VFR so as to be able to fly over Tui, on the basis of a sheet of actuals which gave a 3,000-foot cloudbase at Porto.
The Met Office was closed, so this was all we got.
As we set course down the first valley low stratus blocked our way, and since squeezing underneath received a thumbs-down from both pilot and passenger, we orbited and asked for an IFR clearance.
We were cleared for the ILS at Porto while still at FL070 (it's not that busy!) and given the QNH.
Since the controller wasn't busy I  asked for the rest of the weather, and was told three at 800, or 900 feet above the threshold of Runway 18.
When we actually saw the approach lights we were 450 feet above the threshold, and I was getting ready to go around.
On arrival I went to the Met Office to see the TAF which we'd been unable to obtain at Vigo, and the forecast was three at 2,800, with no mention of stratus!
With this drizzly weather we were stuck in Porto, and were glad that we hadn't tried to cycle into town as the taxi sped through steep cobbled streets.
IN comparison to the other places we'd visited until then, and to those we would subsequently see, Porto was the most touristy — but not unpleasantly so, and we strolled down to the river Douro where all the famous port cellars are.
As the other tourists sipped port by the river and watched the sunset, following our currency episode earlier in the day and failure to find an open bank we had to count out our escudos, only to find that we all could afford were a couple of beers.
Anne was not impressed, since she had predicted that we would not run out of cash!
Later, however, as usual we were saved by plastic cards for dinner.
Read on to avoid our mistakes!
Despite the five or so light aircraft sitting on the apron, when we went to Airport Information to ask how we should get back to our aircraft we were met by blank looks.
The words ‘domestic flight’ brought a smile and directions to gate 6, where we found two gentlemen and an X-ray machine.
‘Listos?’ they asked, and we looked at at one another, not able to explain our situation.
Eventually a man from the tower arrived, and a little bus came to take us to the aircraft.
After getting the flying bag and doing all the planning and paying Operations, we were so hungry that we had to go and eat at what turned out to be an excellent restaurant where all the airport employees go as well as the passengers.
We then went back to gate 6.
By now they knew that we were slightly mad and waved us through.
However, the man with the radio at the final door worked for TAP, the state airline, not the airport, so he could not open it for us.
Eventually the little bus was summoned again, and we jumped in thankfully and set off towards the plane, only to grind to a halt at Operations again.
The officer there apologised in excellent English as I tersely explained that we'd already paid.
‘Isn't there an easier way?’
I asked.
He replied that there wasn't, but that I should have asked for Operations when I got to Porto.
They speak good English and will look after you.
Remember that there is a snack bar in the Tower for sustenance, if it all gets too much.
From Porto, initially IFR at FL070 to avoid the sneaky stratus, but then VFR, we headed towards Bragança in the interior.
After all this instrument-flying it was great to simply have the map and compass.
We had learned that while the TPC maps are good for relief and water features, they are not so good for roads, railways and settlements.
There are many new motorways not shown; the detailed form of the roads is not reproduced faithfully; and what is shown on the map to be an isolated settlement turns out to be hardly any bigger than the many other settlements you can see.
We used the Michelin road map alongside the TPC chart — it's much better for roads and settlements!
Fortunately the visibility was excellent, and so we could fly at 3,000 feet above the terrain to give us a larger cone of vision as well as options in the event of engine failure.
Do not rely on flying beacon to beacon — there aren't many, and the mountainous terrain makes reception much more difficult than you might imagine or than Bottlang would suggest.
Bragança may well be on the 327 radial for the POR NDB 95 miles out, but this information will not help you find it.
At Bragança there was no response from the tower as we transmitted our intentions, landed and taxied in to the little apron.
It felt like the set of a Western, with the initially deserted field in the middle of rolling countryside, and the locals looking up only briefly at these strangers.
We learned that the fuel promised by both Aerad and Bottlang was there, but instead of avgas it was Jet A1.
(A Dornier 228 flies 4,000 people a year to Vila Real and Lisbon.)
With daytime temperatures over twenty degrees Celsius, and hills rising to over 4,000 feet, use of mogas was out, even before the hassle of getting it.
So I would advise visitors to telephone to check on the availability of fuel.
However, in half-anticipation, I'd calculated that after the one hour twenty flight from Porto we would still have a two hours forty endurance at 75 per cent cruise for the return flight to Porto in order to clear Customs back into Spain.
These difficulties were forgotten as we cycled down into town and in hot dry afternoon air, shouting ‘I thought that this was what the weather was supposed to be like!’
The following day we explored Bragança's castle, which is superbly preserved and houses a military museum, showing Portugal's colonial past and the role played in this by the menfolk of Bragança.
The castle walls surround the medieval town, which is still inhabited as it has been for hundreds of years.
We had to go back to Porto to clear Customs back into Spain, and getting decent Met information was proving difficult.
An evening thunderstorm suggested that the situation would not be CAVOK, and so I struggled with the telephone.
Portuguese, although appearing to be similar to Spanish on paper, is pronounced completely differently, and so despite the fact that we could communicate in French and Spanish, we could not make ourselves understood in Portuguese other than to ask, ‘Fala  ingles?— do you speak English?’
Many Portuguese people in hotels and restaurants speak French if not English, but unfortunately for us the Met people did not, in general.
We would phone the office in Port, ask if anyone spoke English, and be delighted to be told, ‘Yes, I do.’
The TAF would then be read out in a totally unintelligible fashion.
On the morning of our departure we managed eventually to get the TAF for Porto, which gave 4 ST at 600, TEMPO 1 CB at 1,300, with the 0730 actual giving 1 CB at 2,000.
We could get no Met information for the rest of our route.
There were no other forecasts, but the 0700 weather at Vigo was all right, which meant that we could possibly divert there, although this presented two problems for use as an alternate: our endurance would not leave safe reserves on arrival, and it was in Spain.
In the end we chose Viseu as a diversion, because it had a VOR/DME and we could descend safely overhead to 1,500 feet agl above the airfield.
Also, we were informed by a local that it had avgas.
We had no weather data for Viseu — it seemed that their phone number had changed, as the person looking after the field at Bragança tried to phone without success.
There was no landing fee at Bragança, but with a door locked for ten minutes on arrival, no petrol, no Met, and no radio, it's not surprising!
We had to climb to FL070 maintaining VMC before we could contact Lisboa Military, and after passing our estimates for the TMA boundary, immediately requested the Porto weather and reports of CB activity.
At FL080 we could just about remain out of cloud.
So far, so good: we decided to press on.
Almost as soon as we reached our cruising level we heard a German voice, ‘D-, I am IMC, I must descent.’
The military controller informed him that he could fly IFR above FL 110, or VFR below FL055 — the Sector Safe Altitude for IFR was 7,300 feet.
He replied that he was descending to FL080 to maintain VMC.
It became clear that he was heading east towards Zamora in the opposite direction to us at the same level after takeoff from Porto, and fully occupied flying his aeroplane — he did not respond to the controller's requests for position reports or estimates.
Neither his nor our transponders were being received, so the controller quite correctly told us to expedite a climb to FL090, ‘confirm you are leaving 80’.
I complied immediately, reminding the controller that we'd like the Porto and Viseu weathers ‘when convenient for you’.
At FL090 we were IMC in what seemed to be an aspirant CB.
I found a small but perfectly-formed hailstone on my knee, which must have got in through the air vent.
Anne wrestled with the ruler and map, putting crosses at our dead-reckoned positions since we still could not pick up any navaids.
I concentrated on flying at just below the manoeuvring speed as the big rain drops cracked against the windscreen.
The situation was not good.
The controller came back with the Porto weather: ‘1 CB at 2000.
We are trying to call Viseu.’
So much for the ‘TEMPO’ in the forecast, and the telephones!
We told the controller we would divert to Viseu, and were told to remain at FL090 until overhead the field, to ensure separation from the German.
This instruction felt like a prison sentence, and condemned to stay up in the cloud, I scanned the instruments nervously, waiting for an unseen gust to grab our little craft.
After what seemed like ages we popped out of the cloud and confirmed our dead-reckoned position as overhead the airfield of Vila Real, where we would have landed but it had no avgas.
We had about fifteen minutes to go, and decided to try to continue to Viseu, since we could now pick up the VOR, and therefore find our way back to Vila Real if we had to.
We nearly did go back, when despite picking what looked like the most innocuous section of the next cloud blocking the route, the VSI cranked round briefly to over 1,000 fpm ascent.
I said to Anne, ‘That's it.
We're going back.’
It seemed reckless to press on, and we had just passed a safe, if inconvenient, landing site.
At that moment we heard the German changing to Port — he was returning there — and I requested immediate descent, adding that we were in a CB.
There was no need for this last nervous remark to the controller, but I'd had enough!
We were soon visual and able to locate the airfield, where once again the radio was not manned, so we never did get a weather report.
It was very nice to be on the ground, refuel, and find a pilot who spoke excellent English.
He flew the fire-fighting aircraft based at Viseu.
These resemble crop-sprayers, but with piston engines — hence the avgas there.
These aircraft are directed to the fire by a helicopter and release their 2,000 litres of water in three seconds, and ‘then you have to push the stick forward!’
With the pilots' help we telephoned Porto to find that there was CB activity forecast for the rest of the day.
By evening the weather was better, but we didn't fancy another night in Porto, so we unpacked our bikes and cycled down through cool pine forests into the town for a well-earned rest.
Left: landmark lake between Porto and Bragança; cycling from Bragança's airport into town; the apron with a visiting Baron.
Above: Bragança's superbly preserved castle.
Right: fire-fighting agplanes at Viseu.
Next day we were able to get more weather information.
The TAF for Porto and the Met at Lisbon suggested that after 1200Z there would be no CBs.
We knew also that we could get Lisboa Military on the ground at Viseu, and checked on arrival at the field and on taxying out that the weather was good at Port — that is, there were no CBs.
We were still trying to go IFR, since the cloudbase looked low over the valley route to the coast.
Halfway to Porto the 1200 Lisbon Volmet said ‘1 CB at 2,500’, so back we went: we had tried, and had agreed not to repeat the previous day's experience.
Finally we reached Porto that afternoon, by flying VFR  through the valley route to the coast as the bases rose in the afternoon, and then up the coast at 1,000 feet, just below the base of the broken cumulus, with spectacular views of Porto, before nipping inland to the field to park next to the German aircraft — which we were relieved to see had landed safely.
In terms of advice to other pilots, we found Lisboa Military very helpful.
We gathered from their questions that before take-off from these fields without radio you should telephone your flight-plan to Lisbon, but they would accept airborne flight-plans without any trouble.
They were also very helpful in getting weather information.
The mountainous terrain does bring its own challenges, and I suspect that in summer there are quite often storms of the type we experienced, even though further inland it may be fine.
On the other hand, there are many small airstrips in northern Portugal without any navaids, suggesting that VFR flight is possible most of the time; so perhaps we were unlucky.
On the return journey from Porto we flew up the west coast of Portugal, over the places we'd cycled through, before cutting through to La Coruňa to land just before nightfall.
After our three attempts to get to Porto this was a beautiful calm flight.
La Coruňa was our favourite place of the whole trip.
It is built around a piece of land that juts out into the Atlantic, with beaches on the north side of the slender neck and the harbour on the south side.
Our hotel, the Atlantico, overlooked the harbour, and that evening we watched a local single-engined plane repeatedly flying over the harbour as low as a couple of hundred feet above the cranes.
The following day we spent an hour watching a barge crane lift an H-shaped concrete frame from the bottom of the harbour.
Our attention had been drawn initially by a hose snaking into the water and some bubbles rising from the depths.
A black flipper gave the game away, and then we saw the diver's head.
As the crane strained and the barge listed over, the crowd eagerly peered, perhaps expecting something macabre, but soon dispersing when the smelly chunk of concrete emerged.
Reluctantly, on the final Saturday of the trip we climbed aboard ‘EN to leave behind Galicia, its shellfish and its storms.
The weather was better for the flight back along the north coast, and we got views of the 8,000-foot-plus Picos de Europa which we'd missed on the way down.
With a 26 to 30 knot wind thirty degrees off the runway at Santander we had fun landing, before sadly working our way home via Bordeaux, Nantes and Lydd.
We had flown for thirty hours in the fortnight.
With the low volume of piston-powered traffic one would expect fuel to be expensive — and it is: 70–75 pence per litre.
Landing fees are not unreasonable.
In Spain it was £15–25 for landing and parking, since the first band of charges covers aircraft up to five tonnes for landing and two tonnes for parking.
Porto was much the same, even with compulsory handling.
Of course, this is extortionate by French standards, but no dearer than many regional airports in Britain.
Eurocheques are accepted for fuel, but for landing fees it is strictly cash.
Overall, I would thoroughly recommend our itinerary to other pilots of light aircraft — particularly if they want to broaden their horizons with a change of scenery and culture as well as flying conditions different to those in most of the UK or France.
I would also endorse heartily our bikes, which provided the icing on the cake.
Above: crossing the Douro of Porto; refuelling at La Coruňa.
Below: Spain's north coast between Asturias and Santander, with the Pico de Europa in the  background ; and on finals at Santander.
SUN ‘N FUN 18TH EAA FLY-IN 92
Photos from April's Florida bigger-than-ever fly-in — that's just the antiques & classics section in the aerial photo right.
Above: Gary Polizzotto's much-modified Pulsar SW (short wing) with winglets goes 160 mph on a 65 hp Rotax.
Below: judged best allwood aircraft was Darry Capps’ Osprey GP-4.
Right: first appearance of the U.S. Navy's new T-45A Goshawk trainer, whose marker board gave no indication of its British origin.
Below: ancient 11935 H-2 Taylor Cub (Taylor was also English) powered by a Szedely three-cylinder radial, originally 35 hp but now perhaps less!
Familiar sight to the large British contingent was this ARV Super 2, offered by Aviation Scotland Ltd. with a choice of three engines — two two-strokes and a Norton rotary.
A local pilot bought this demonstrator.
Above: Delmar Benjamin flies this replica Gee Bee racer he built with Steve Wolf and others.
Powered by a 450 hp $985, it ‘cruises’ at 250 mph, and has handling as extreme as the originals — every one of which crashed.
Right: Tom Hahn's 280-hp Questaire Venture won the Sun-100 race at 301.34 mph, a course record.
Neico Aviation won the Best commercial Display award with their Lancair 320 fastbuild kit exhibit.
In the new museum was this 1927 Ford Flivver, a replica of the example in which test pilot Harry Brooks lost his life off the Florida coast.
Replica Grand Champion was this exquisite Albatross D.Va powered by a 200 hp Ranger, from Frank Ryder's Replica Fighter Museum in Alabama — which plans a September fly-in.
NEW BRITISH CIVIL REGISTRATIONS from Ian Burnett
A bumper bundle this time after the winter doldrums, and while certain ‘market segments’ remain slack there are large numbers of airliners, balloons, and homebuilts to record.
Most interesting warbird is the Sea Fury G-BUCM: this is the former RAF Museum example VX653, and has been acquired by the Fighter Collection at Duxford in exchange for work carried out by them on the Museum's Hawker Tempest II.
Also at Duxford is the Old Flying Machine Company's Hunter F. Mk. 6A G-BUEZ, which spent many years at the Empire Test Pilots School at Farnborough and Boscombe Down as XF375 before being retired as an instructional airframe at Cranwell in 1982.
Other machines with military connections include another six ex-Air Cadets Slingsby Ventures, and a Beaver G-BUCJ from the Army Air Corps Museum reserve collection for Mike Somerton-Rayner.
On the debit side we find that Robs Lamplough's Yakovlev Yak C-11 G-KYAK, a familiar part of the North Weald scenery, has been sold to France.
Vintage aircraft include a couple from the April 1991 Duxford auction — notably the Stinson V-77 Reliant G-BUCH, and the former Dutch Auster Mk.
III G-BUDL.
Newer specimens feature Richard Goode's Sukhoi Su-26MX G-ORBY, where although the registration has been overtaken by events it has much more of a ring to it than G-YELT, for example!
The Cessna U206G Stationair floatplane G-SEAI is an interesting addition in an area of aviation activity sorely lacking in these islands, while in the lighter-than-air world amongst thirty-odd balloons we find a couple with apparent local authority connections; looking at G-BUES, we wonder whether the citizens of Bath are aware of where their community charge is being spent…!
In addition, now less than 48 microlights were cancelled by the CAA during February and March.
Too numerous to list here individually, most were of early-1980s, vintage and had not been airworthy for some time.
Air Mail
‘Where to fly guide’ cheats
It was nice to receive the April edition of Pilot , with your excellent ‘Where to Fly’ guide, in which we are pleased to be included.
Noting that certain of our fellow operators at Biggin appeared remarkably competitive, I took the trouble to telephone and check the rates as quoted.
Needless to say, the rates were cheap — until VAT and the landing fee were added, which can amount to £25–£30 typically.
That represented, in one case, about thirty per cent to be added to the quoted price.
As a long-term contributor to the feature we have always taken pains to ensure that the rates we have quoted have been correct at the time of the survey (usually December).
Costs do rise, as you are careful to point out at the start of the feature, but there can be no excuse for the blatant abuse of the costings given.
Perhaps any of your readers who find clubs at their local airfields who are similarly cheating with the rates quoted would care to inform Pilot ?
It would be nice to see such organisations excluded from future surveys.
Let us get our own house in order for the benefit of the regulation of light aviation in general.
Keep up the good work with your excellent magazine.
Our questionnaire form clearly insists that rates quoted must include VAT and landing fees, though we have noticed that some clubs do manage accidentally-on-purpose to leave these out.
Another popular cheat is to quote last year's rates, only raising them to this year's the day after the form is posted to us.
Sadly, we haven't the manpower to check on the honesty of the replies we get.
But anyone spotting a cheat is welcome to let us know — and we'll check then.
— Ed.
CAA vs.
American aeronautical charts
I am writing in response to Mr. John Goldsmith's letter in the April Pilot in which he claims that our 1:500,000 aeronautical charts suffer from an ‘appalling lack of clarity’ and are printed ‘through blotting paper’.
If Mr. Goldsmith would care to accept the invitation — clearly written in the bottom left-hand corner of our charts — to contact us, I would gladly explain to him in detail how we tackle the very complex task of chart production, and in particular how we go to the most extraordinary lengths to try to meet the highest standards of clarity and accuracy demanded by the wide range of our customers — when flying in UK (not USA) airspace.
Why are our airfields so overstaffed?
Why is it that when one travels abroad, say in France, they have such a different approach to aviation than we do in Britain?
Why is it that you can arrive at an aerodrome (they do not have the temerity to call them airports, let alone international) with facilities such as NDBs, localisers, clean eating facilities, tar macadam runways, and where landing fees are minimum?
Where radios use sensible frequencies, where you only see one or two staff who between them do everything such as operate the radio, do the paperwork, look after the fire appliances, sell fuel etc. and generally represent their respective communities?
Why do local communities abroad seem so proud of their airports?
Compare an aerodrome such as Troyes in France with, say, Southend.
Both have similar facilities; Troyes has an ILS localiser, while Southend does not.
Southend is kneedeep in staff, whereas Troyes has only one or two.
Southend's attitude is you are there for their benefit; Troyes make you welcome with a handshake greeting.
Landing fee for me at  Southend is thirty-odd pounds; Troyes cost just £2.50.
Both handle commercial traffic, training flights and have Customs, but they are obviously worlds apart.
Why do we require so many staff to do no more than our competitors?
The result of the above is that in one case costs are so high as to detract from its use, whereas the other positively attracts business.
Is it once again the respective requirements placed upon each of them by their respective regulatory authorities?
If so, how on earth can we as a nation compete in Europe?
The above-mentioned aerodromes are only two I have selected, but they could have been any of many in both countries.
Can we as a country survive if we do not change our attitudes?
How to fly for less
In his letter (April) Tim Coles suggests ‘that in this country a properly maintained and insured light aircraft is going to cost about £60 per hour however your view it’.
That may be the case if you want a full four-seater with a decent avionics fit, but if you primarily fly for the sheer thrill of flying and are happy with map and eyeball navigation, it is more than possible to fly for well under half of that sum.
With club rates varying from £50–£90 per hour depending on which part of the country you reside in, it makes economic sense if you can afford it to join a group — or perhaps if a little more of the folding stuff is available, to buy your own small PFA type or microlight.
Discounting the capital cost of buying a group share, which can often rise in value and can in any case be easily sold on if you wish to leave the group, rates of £35 per flying hour on a Cessna 150 are fairly commonplace.
Then again, if you choose a PFA Permit type machine the rates can be even lower.
A Jodel can cost under £30 per hour, an Evans VP-1 under £20 per hour, and fixedwing three-axis microlights such as the Mike Whittaker range of designs under £15 per hour.
Naturally these rates are variable according to hours flown and individual costs, but generally the more flying you do the lower the all-in hourly rate becomes.
So let's look on the bright side, Mr. Coles.
It is still possible to fly for reasonably affordable rates in this country despite the sometimes quite exorbitant sums charged by some flying schools.
I remember picking a Rallye 100ST at Dunkeswell for £12 an hour in the late 1970s, and my flying now costs me a little more than twice that per hour fifteen years later.
HIRTAS won't hurtya!
Your item in ‘Pilot Notes’ about Oakhanger demands comment.
I do not know who your CAA informant was in the matter of the effect on health of emissions from satellite ground stations, but the business about ‘extremely hazardous to pilots’ health etc.’is unmitigated rubbish.
‘The more flying you do, the lower the hourly rate’ says Keith Curry (letter below).
While the larger Jodel requires a C of A the older two-seaters on a PFA Permit can cost as little as £30 an hour.
Whatever excuse your readers may be seeking to wear aluminium underwear, HIRTAS  ain't it!
Emissions from satellite ground stations into the geostationary orbit are strictly regulated internationally to avoid interference to adjacently located satellites, and most carrier types used will in practice have an effective radiated power level of between 50 and 90 dbW.
These powers are produced by large, usually parabolic, antennas fed with typical microwave RF powers of between 10 and 1,000 watts.
Without going into calculations, virtually any realistic combination of antenna size and power at the feed will result in a power flux density a few metres in front of the dish of less than 10mW per square centimetre — the nationally accepted long-term human exposure level for electromagnetic radiation.
Since this energy will, on its way to the satellite, be reducing rapidly in accord with the inverse square law (i.e. double the distance and the power reduces by a factor of four) even at the lowest GA cruising altitudes such emissions will be irrelevant.
What the HIRTA might do to your avionics is of course a different matter.
Although I am not aware of any airborne equipment sharing satellite up-link frequency bands, I have no knowledge of the electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) of fly-by-wire or say computer-controlled weapons systems.
However I do not recall hearing of any problem every being experienced by low-flying military hardware or cruise-level GA over Madley Earth Station which I managed for several years prior to my retirement last year, and which I believe is a much larger facility than Oakhanger.
Light aircraft noise
It has been encouraging to read in your last two issues constructive recognition by Pilot readers and by you, the editor, that GA noise is an issue which needs to be addressed, both for the sake of those exposed to it, and for the long-term health of light aviation.
The AEF's very first publication was a commissioned study of the practicability (or otherwise) of reducing light aircraft noise at source.
At that time we were told by the GA lobby that such a solution was not acceptable to GA flyers because of cost, weight/performance penalties, design difficulties and so on.
However, this has not prevented other European countries from establishing legislation which demanded component change to achieve desired results, and this is still a trend.
Without this kind of legislation or GA's widespread co-operation in the UK, this route for real improvement has not been fully exploited here.
But in our view the wider problem centres on (a) the juxtaposition of airfields and housing (or other noise-sensitive development), and (b) the non-acoustical factor of a lack of trust and confidence between both sides of the argument.
We believe that this conflict will need to be faced and dealt with.
The current structure of decision-making in the planning system encourages an adversarial approach, with each ‘side’ obliged to make the best case it can to put before Planning Committees or inquiry inspectors.
We believe that what is needed is a systematic way of evaluating both the positive contribution made by the presence of an airfield as well as the adverse impact involved.
The AEF has come up with an idea for such a framework: its design would be based on sound data, put together by world experts (with advice from those with local experience), and monitored by representatives of (inter alia) aviation, government and environmental interests.
The AEF's concept is being taken forward by representatives of two groups which might be seen as having totally opposing interests: the IATA-sponsored Air Transport Action Group and the AEF — a co-operative effort which is in itself an encouraging indication of what can be achieved.
Many government aviation, union and environmental/amenity interests believe the scheme has the potential to take a lot of the heat out of the debate and to provide a rational basis for decision-making for aviation in the future.
We would welcome the involvement of GA interests.
And GA would welcome a cash grant like that the government gave the AEF. — Ed.
I live in Sevenoaks and on a nice sunny day have several light aircraft flying overhead.
The noise (if you can call it that), I find, is quite acceptable.
What I do find unacceptable is the noise emitted from two particular types of machinery.
The first is the noise from microlights that seem to buzz away for ages, probably because of headwinds and the fact that they are not very fast anyway.
The second is from 50cc motorbikes with silencers removed, no better than turbo-charged lawn-mowers, which constantly buzz up and down one's peaceful road shattering the peace, often late at night.
I think that there should be controls over noise; however I think that the controls should affect everyone — especially those closer to the ground.
As a student PPL I am made fully aware of noise restrictions, especially at take-off, ensuring that we keep left of certain farm buildings etc.
I wonder how many motorcyclists are made aware of the noise nuisance that they produce?
The aircraft at the club I fly (train) from are well maintained and do have silencers — albeit they do point downwards.
Trial by jury
As a Black lawyer and pilot, I disagree with one of the points expressed in your response to Donald Rochdale's letter, April issue.
I assure you that in my professional capacity I come across many jurors who are both indigenous Britons, and quite advanced in years, who do not fit into the ‘long tradition of honesty and fair-mindedness’.
I am baffled as to why ‘New Britons’— particularly those ‘too young to be yet imbued with the wisdom that comes with age’ should be singled out.
Such views to a very long way, especially when expressed in a credible magazine such as yours, in reinforcing subtle destructive prejudices against ethnic minorities in this country.
You produce a good magazine each month; the readers' letters alone are worth the annual subscription.
Why spoil it by a snide reference to a legal profession ‘in eighteenth century fancy dress’?
The reason why judges and barristers (less than ten per cent of the profession) wear wigs and gowns in court is exactly the same as the reason why professional aircrew wear stripes on sleeves and epaulettes copied from the ‘eighteenth century fancy dress’ of naval officers: in order to be quickly, easily and accurately identified in a crowd.
It is just as practical a uniform as that found on the flight-deck (which didn't even exist in the eighteenth century — which profession lacks originality?).
This silencer for a 172 produced by Germany's Gomolzig BmbH actually increases efficiency, but costs around DM10,000 (£3,400) to buy and fit.
As a retired lawyer with more than forty years experience of criminal courts and a private pilot of more than 25 years standing I think that, like many others, you badly underestimate the intelligence of both the legal profession and the average jury.
They do not have to be able to pilot a 747 or manage a public company share issue to comprehend the explanation of the standards expected of those that do.
If the chips are down I  would rather be tried by an average jury than the CAA or SIB.
When in doubt the jury tends to acquit and not convict the innocent, and plenty of lawyers can intercept and fly an ILS approach to CPL/IR standards.
I don't understand why you felt the need to include your racist views in Pilot .
I am an ‘old Briton’ who grew up and attended school and university alongside ‘new Britons’.
I consider the publication of your views offensive.
The major part of your argument about the inability of juries and magistrates to make fair judgments about technical matters was reasonable; however anyone taking a detached view can identify many examples of so-called ‘old Britons’ who one could not rely on to take an open and fair-minded view in a jury.
Anyone who has met a crosssection of ‘new Britons’ can identify people worthy of respect.
This country would be a better place if people were judged on their individual merits and behaviour, not on the colour of their skin.
If you thought you detected ‘racism’ in what I wrote, none was intended.
Some ‘lawyerism’, maybe.
— Ed.
An independent Met service recommended
Your correspondent Alan Lovejoy, writing in the February issue about Met services, may be heartened to know that there is an alternative to the expensive, user-unfriendly service on offer from the Met Office.
For several years weatherman Paul Damari has been operating an independent weather service for balloonists.
Now his company, Weather Communications, has extended its nationwide service to other aviators, since much of the information is relevant whether you are flying a hot-air balloon, a glider or a plane.
The Weather Communications Aviation Service offers a 24-hour telephone service whereby callers can talk to the forecaster or one of his aides at any time.
There is also a dial-up fax service where subscribers can poll the Weather Communications fax machine for reports which are updated twice daily.
Paul Damari offers information on wind speeds and direction, cloud cover, visibility, temperature and air pressure — in fact, everything you need to know before making a decision about flying.
His information comes via satellite from weather stations around the country, and his own weather observation unit is a Met Office-approved climatological station.
A Fellow of the Royal Meteorological Society, Paul Damari has 25 years experience of the weather business, and his down-to-earth, common-sense approach makes him a welcome change to the distant and expensive alternative, the Met Office.
As well as offering a forecasting service to aviators, Weather Communications offers an observation and reporting service, well used by commercial organisations and authorities requiring validation of conditions on certain dates for accident claims.
Farmers and horticulturists use Weather Communications for information about when to plant or harvest, builders about when to lay concrete, and retailers about whether to stock up with umbrellas or ice cream.
Hundreds of organisations have realised that an independent weather service can give them exactly the information they need, when they need it and for a realistic cost.
The Weather Communications Aviation Service starts at just £100 per year for a personal telephone service.
More details are available by ringing 0905 28888.
Aerobatics club in Scotland forming
May I as a regular reader of Pilot use its pages to announce and advertise a project of great interest to me and, I hope, to a few other Scottish pilots and aviation aficionados?
My particular interest is in aerobatics for fun, competition and display purposes.
However there is little activity in this line in Aberdeen particularly and Scotland as a whole as far as I know.
There is only one competition held each year at Glenrothes, which is insufficient incentive to that highly disciplined side of the sport, and little display or sport aerobating elsewhere.
The reasons for this dearth of activity may stem from a general lack of enthusiasm amongst Caledonian flyers (I accept that it is a minority interest) or, hopefully, from a lack of both events to stimulate interest or outlets for those who would wish to be involved.
Now to the interesting bit.
It is my intention to foster the formation of a body of people interested in aerobatics in Scotland, both pilots and non-pilots, with the purpose of increasing the awareness of aerobatics here and of promoting instruction and participation in the sport.
This might be in the form of a branch or sub-section of the BAeA or as a separate unit entirely.
To this end I have already started talking to as many people as I can in the local area, with some good response, but now wish to approach a wider audience — hence the appeal to you.
Locally we already have two Pittses and a Chipmunk group operating, and have aerobatic training available at both Perth and Dundee.
If you should be so kind as to print my name and telephone number in Pilot I would be more than happy to hear from anyone interested in the project and to act as an initial clearing-house for information.
I would like to stress that I wish to hear from all who may be enthusiastic, not just pilots; I have no wish to create a posing pilots' paradise.
Theft of aircraft radios
Five years ago I hired an aircraft to tour for two weeks in the USA and was briefed on the possibility of radio thefts and the method used.
The most popular venue was after dark at an airfield when there was pilot control of airfield lighting by radios used where there is no control tower or Flight Service Station or when the tower or FSS is closed; in other words, the airfield is unmanned.
An aircraft would arrive ostensibly for night circuits.
After the first landing and during the taxi back to the take-off point the thief would be dropped off.
He had previously ascertained that there were at least two aircraft with similar radio fits and noted their positions.
Whilst the aircraft continued night circuits the thief would remove radios from aircraft A and then turn his attention to aircraft B, the aircraft with a similar radio fit.
He would remove the radios from aircraft B and substitute them with the radios stolen from aircraft A. He would then be picked up by the  aircraft he came in, leaving with the radios removed from aircraft B.
The result of this subterfuge would be that the irate owner of aircraft A would report his radios stolen and publicise the serial numbers.
The owner of aircraft B would notice nothing wrong with his radio equipment, not realising that the serial numbers no longer matched those recorded in the aircraft log-book.
In the meantime the thief would be peddling stolen radios (from aircraft B) whose serial numbers had not been notified on the stolen list.
I mention this anecdote because reported stolen radios may be nearer home than first imagined, and a ‘cheap salvage set’ may not quite be what it seems.
Flying in Cyprus
For over fifteen years I have been a regular reader of Pilot and keep the back numbers which offer an extremely useful information source on a wide range of flying matters.
In preparation for my recent trip to Cyprus I recalled the letter which Ron Swinburne of Birmingham wrote to you many months ago about the flying services available on the island at rates far below those of the UK.
This is by way of an update for any of your readers who have plans to visit Cyprus and do some local flying.
Having just returned from this delightful island where the people are so friendly and courteous and where the cost of living is much less than in the UK, I thought the following information could be helpful.
1.
I could not contact the Cyprus Aeroclub, but in any case the airfield outside Nicosia is now closed except for emergency purposes.
2.
There is still no flying club at Paphos Airport, and very often the airport is completely closed due to the lack of other operations.
3.
The Albatross Flight Centre still operates from Larnaca International Airport.
 Their correct address is 6 Stassinos Street, Larnaca, but whilst I was there their Cessna 172 was having its annual and they had no other four-seaters to offer, only Cessna 152s.
On the other hand, a new training school has been set up where I did find excellent service, friendly and helpful instructors and a range of aircraft rates which are almost unbelievable.
Daedalus College of Aeronautics Ltd. also operates from Larnaca International Airport, where they have available Cessna 152s and 172s, Cherokee Archers and an Aztec and Navajo.
The instructors were all trained in the UK and could not have been more helpful when I asked at very short notice whether I could fly their Archer for £34.
The solo rate would have been only £28.
This rate also applied to their Cessna 172, and the 152s were even cheaper: £31 dual and £25 solo.
The rates for the Aztec currently are £100 solo and £110 dual, with the Navajo at £130 solo, £140 dual.
All these rates are in Cyprus pounds, of which you get about 80 in exchange for £100 sterling.
Nevertheless this is still cheap flying.
Examiner rates for PPL or AFI licences are £30 Cyprus and the I/R renewal test is £50.
I can thoroughly recommend Daedalus for local flying, and their training facilities appear excellent.
A full PPL course to CAA requirements should prove even cheaper than those advertised by many USA schools.
The 1992 Flyer Organiser
In his review of the 1992 Flyer Organiser Mr James Allan, among much other misinformation, states: ‘Should you ever want to fly (to Bodmin) please don't rely on this guide's little mini-map to show you where it is.’
This is hardly surprising, since the minimap of the British Isles in question measures one inch by an inch-and-a-half and the circle denoting the airfield is more than 40 nm in diameter in scale.
This feature is, of course, simple guide for less experienced pilots to finding the right half-mill chart for the journey.
I am sorry that we have misplaced the Blackpool NDB by .87 of a nautical mile, but we will be correcting it in our free amendment, and at least it gives Mr. Allan something to be caustic about.
I look forward to the day when he reviews the works of his own publisher, Mr. Pooley, with the same degree of scrutiny.
He reviewed Pooley's Flight Guide Europe pretty carefully in last November's Pilot.
— Ed.
Medical fees
Your correspondent, K. Foster (‘Medical fees a rip-off’) is fortunate that he had to pay only £45 for his annual medical and ECG.
Our local CAA-approved doctor charges the princely sum of £65 for similar services.
The medical examination, the ECG and the paperwork take on average 35 minutes.
Talk about money for cold rope — and I don't care how much a doctor had to study to become qualified; £65 for 35 minutes ‘work’ is ridiculous!
Several local PPLs, who have to go to him, have complained about this exorbitantly high fee, but it seems that there is little we can do about it.
At the moment I find that I can just afford my fortnightly twenty-minute flights, but in eighteen months time, when I reach the age of seventy, I wonder if I shall be able to afford £130 per year for the ‘privilege’ of flying?
Isn't it about time somebody did something about this type of rip-off?
I am assailed with feelings of irritation mixed with amusement at the number of pilots who, despite cheerfully paying many hundreds if not thousands of pounds on their chosen hobby, carp on about having to fork out three or four quid over the odds in selected landing fees, or as in the case of correspondent K. Foster £46 for a medical combined with an ECG.
The £46 fee mentioned represents about forty minutes flying time in a Cessna 150, much less in a more exotic aircraft.
As the medical he describes should take around forty minutes, this forms quite a neat equation.
Surely this is a very reasonable price to pay for the knowledge that if anything falls apart ‘up there’ it won't be you.
Those flying busmen
It was with great interest and nostalgia that I read ‘The Flying Busmen’ in the March edition.
As a young child living in North London it was a special treat to be taken to Broxbourne aerodrome on a summer Sunday to watch the magnificent men operating from this lovely little grass field in the Lea valley.
The price of ten shillings for a flight was two days' pay for my father, so our pleasure was to watch and munch on salmon and cucumber sandwiches, never ever thinking that we might at some time aspire to those heights.
I was subsequently paid to fly by the RAF; after a lapse of 33 years I returned to the skies five years ago, when I could finally afford a share in a Cherokee which I now fly regularly from Ludham.
Test pilot, by P.J.B. Lewis.
I learned about flying from that
Right from the very start I had wanted to be a test-pilot.
Unlike most of my contemporaries, who at a similar age had wanted to be train drivers, I wanted to fly .
I suppose that I was influenced by the exploits of the great test pilots of the day, people like Peter Twiss, Neville Duke and John Derry, who were at the time just coming to grips with high-speed flight and what was called the ‘sound-barrier’.
In later life I was lucky enough to be able to afford flying lessons, even though they cost a fortune at £5 an hour!
Some 10,000 flying hours later in all sorts of flying machines, including my own Starduster for play and the airline's 737 for work, I was a test-pilot.
To be more accurate, I had gained dispensation from the CAA to carry out test-flights for the renewal of a C of A and from the PFA for the test-flight programme of a new homebuilt aircraft.
John, one of the PPLs at our flying club, had made a beautiful job of building his little Jodel and I had followed his progress closely over the several years it had taken him to complete it.
I was pleased when he asked me to do the test-flying programme for him and I had no qualms in agreeing, as I knew him to be a meticulous engineer.
The test-flight was postponed over and over again, as I hit a busy spell in work — and as usual the weather had its say in the proceedings.
John assured me that it didn't matter in the least, and amused himself by taxying the machine up and down the runways, testing and running-in the VW engine at the same time.
At last a very rare event occurred: I had a couple of days off, and the weather was set fair for flying.
John had ironed out all the minor snags that had cropped up, watched over by Peter, a PFA inspector and builder of a magnificent WW1-type biplane.
I was confident of their work and confident of my own ability to cope with anything that this little aircraft could throw at me.
Besides, if it looks right, it will fly right, and this machine looked right.
On ‘the day’ I spend the entire morning inspecting the aircraft in between spells of taxying and short hops.
Gradually the short hops became longer hops, and it was evident that there was no reason why this aircraft should not be taken into her natural environment.
After a very pleasant lunch therefore, I taxied to the very end of the runway, turned into wind and took off.
It was all going entirely to plan and quite uneventful until we arrived at about 150 feet above the upwind end of the runway.
Either the rate of climb was not what it should be, or the instruments were lying.
A quick check outside confirmed my suspicions: we just weren't going up very fast.
No, be honest now : we weren't going up at all.
What the hell was wrong?
The throttle lever was still against the wall and the engine was making a healthy din up front.
Then I noticed that slowly and imperceptibly the rpm was falling while all other engine indications were normal.
Now we were flying level at about 200 feet, with no possibility of a further climb.
I didn't consider the possibility of turning back to the runway behind me, but at the time I thought that a very low-level circuit to the left would bring me round for a landing on an adjacent runway.
By now however, it was obvious that the aircraft would not even sustain level flight, and I was faced with landing out.
This particular airfield had been chosen for the test-flight because it was surrounded by open country, and there in front of me were fields from which I could choose.
I went through the drill that I had taught many times to my students, and with a little sideslip brought John's creation back to earth.
There was no damage done, and in a while, with many helping hands, we managed to push the aircraft back to the airfield.
Happily, she is now flying again, the rather unusual engine fault which led to the premature landing now rectified.
How had I done as a test-pilot?
In one sense quite well.
I had brought off a successful forced landing, with no damage to man or machine, and afterwards I was able to describe the symptoms which led to the failure, which in turn led to the fault being found and cured.
With hindsight, however, I consider that I spend far too long thinking of a circuit or turn.
Only split seconds perhaps, for the entire flight could only have lasted about a minute, yet a significant time in an emergency.
I had known that open fields lay at the end of the runway, so I should have closed the throttle earlier and completed the familiar drill.
The fact that I had not done so put me too high for the first available field, but with insufficient height for the next one.
I had spent many years teaching the EFATO to PPL students, but this was different.
In many ways a power reduction is more difficult to deal with, especially if the reduction is very gradual but progressive.
It is very difficult to cover all the possible eventualities in the forty-odd hours of the PPL course, but I now spend more time teaching emergencies connected with power reductions.
I am very careful in my advice never to say ‘never’.
Given a set of circumstances — and of course more height — I might have completed a turn onto an adjacent runway, but from low down and with a suitable field ahead I should have treated the reduction as an engine failure, and made an early decision to land.
I learned about flying from that.
Letter from FRANCE by Bernard Chabbert
TBM 700: the SuperSingle
It's not really much larger than a Piper Malibu, but it has that long pointed nose extending forever forward from a rakish windscreen, ending in the quadruple petals of that mean-looking prop, and that makes a difference.
That's why the TBM 700 is truly a Big Machine.
More than thirty have already been delivered to their owners some of whom have already done crazy things with them — like the man who tried to land on Meribel altiport's 400-metre long, 6,000 feet high uphill runway with a tailwind.
An expensive crunch was heard that day, and the dismantled aircraft can now be seen at Socata's Tarbes factory, ready for a total rebuild.
I do not mention that incident to make fun of someone who, obviously, made an unwise decision.
I think this kind of mishap is completely in character for the most exciting new single-engined aircraft in the world — a machine fitting into that adrenalin-pumping category which until now included only warbirds and other military equipment.
As a contemporary product the TBM 700 is truly Something Else, in a class of its own.
Park a 700 alongside other singles: it immediately assumes the role of 747 among DC-9s, 737s and A320s, towering above Bonanzas, Mooneys, Pipers and Trinidads.
Now come closer, inspect the aircraft.
This is no lightplane: from nose to rudder the 700 is nothing but a small Airbus.
Materials, including hi-tech composites for flaps and control surfaces, are exactly the same as those found on A320s and the new A340.
Manufacturing techniques and finish are the same; nuts and bolts come from the same vendors.
Open the slam-shell door and climb aboard: even the smell of brand-new airliners rolling down the lines at the gigantic Clément Ader factory in Toulouse is duplicated.
And that puts it in a different league from other singles.
The Paris jet and a Mooney its inspiration
The TBM 700 was the brainchild of a select group of businessmen and aviators, among them Alec Couvelaire, one of the most respected men in French commercial aviation.
Couvelaire started his business 25 years ago with a Cessna 182 and a Comanche after serving as a pilot in the French Air Force during the Algerian war.
Today his kingdom is called Euralair, a large multi-purpose airline based at Le Bourget with a fleet of Falcons, Citations, a dozen 737s, some BAe 146s operated for TNT, interests in Caribbean-based airlines, with A321s, A330s and Boeing 777s on order.
Alec also owns Mooney of Kerrville, Texas, and that is where the TBM 700 story started a few years ago.
When Couvelaire bought Mooney the company had a project called the Model 301 flying as a proof-of-concept prototype.
It was their equivalent of the Piper Malibu, but entirely constructed of composites.
It so happens that Couvelaire spends one or two weekends a month in his old family home in Biarritz.
He flies down there in his own old but immaculate Morane-Saulnier Paris III jet, and loves every second of it, summing up the Paris as ‘300 knots, 30,000 feet, six people: they're magic numbers’.
So when he saw the 301 project it gave him the idea of using ultra-modern airframe and engine technology and aerodynamics to achieve the same magic numbers with a single turboprop instead of two kerosene-guzzling pure jets.
He teamed up with Socata.
Engineers from Tarbes went to Texas, flew the 301, and rejected it: there was no way to attain such performance even with an updated 301, even though the basic idea had been sound.
Back in France, they set to work.
The project got a name: TBM, for Tarbes/Mooney, 700 for the Pratt and Whitney PT6A-64's power output (in fact, the engine is good for nearly 1,500 shp, but heavily de-rated to conserve take-off power up to 23,000 feet).
Among the fathers of the project was Denis Legrand, a close friend of mine.
A former student from Polytechnique (an elite French scientific school), Sup Aéro (French aerospace engineering school), Ecole de l'Air (our Air Force Academy), Air Force Mirage pilot, test-pilot, flight-test engineer, technical manager of the Istres Flight Test Center, Denis was one of the most gifted aviators in France's aerospace community.
He flew airshows in anything from Cap 10s to Yak 11s, Skyraiders and Roland Fraissinet's Spitfire and Mystère IV.
Then, one night, he took off from Toussus to return to Tarbes in a Turbo Trinidad, went up to FL 210, and passed out while on autopilot.
The  Trinidad crashed near Madrid, and to this day we still do not know for sure what happened.
Denis was dead, and then last year Mooney backed out from the TBM 700 project, leaving Socata alone.
These things happen in business.
After Legrand, the aircraft lost Couvelaire, the man who had the original idea.
Too bad for SuperSingle, though.
This is important: an aircraft's personality is always rooted somewhere in men's minds.
Trace its history back to its fathers, and you'll know how it flies.
Being a close friend of Legrand and Couvelaire, I was not surprised when I first flew the prototype two years ago: soft and light as a feather, brilliant as a refined piece of thinking on how an ideal aircraft should fly, powerful as a civilianised fighter.
It was a dream come true.
But today, things are different.
My idea now is to get a type rating on the 700, not to explore it as a journalistic exercise.
I know now that the prototype was a bit too light and delicate on the controls and that flying by subjective impressions has to be replaced by adherence to procedures and parameters.
It's time to learn.
The cockpit looks utterly contemporary, reminiscent of (guess what?) a small Airbus…same ambience, same grey panels, same switches and ergonomics.
It looks deceptively simple, in fact.
Nothing seems to have been put here or there by chance: this is a cockpit designed by professionals for people to do things professionally in.
The result is very user-friendly; logic dominates.
You get acquainted with the cockpit book-in-hand, and two hours can be spent there with an instructor to form a clear mental picture and acquire procedural reflexes.
Then you can step out and inspect the outside.
There's almost nothing to look at, really.
It's a big single, with three gear legs and their doors; two exhaust chimneys — not pipes — to inspect for birds' nests; a four-bladed de-iced prop with no nicks to point at yet; fuel drains (four under the wings, one under the nose).
Nothing spectacular, until you open the large, beautifully-shaped composite cowlings to inspect the engine.
The PT6 looks like a little pressure cooker lost in the middle of that long, cavernous nose — so different from our flat fours and sixes, so small, but so powerful!
This aeroplane costs the price of ten Ferrari 348s, but you have to be a bit of an expert in engineering and aerodynamics to see where the money goes, so elegant and refined is the blending of shapes, forms and functions.
A TBM 700 is a magnificent piece of design, the creation of some fine minds working with powerful computers.
So it's back inside the building, for almost two full days of theory.
The widest speed envelope
TBM 700s are bought by two different categories of owner-pilots: those who fly singles, like Bonanzas, Mooneys or Trinidads; and those who operate twins, either piston or turbine.
You might think that the second group find it easier to transition to what is, after all, only one half of the problems they've been used to cope with aboard their twins.
The TBM's ‘long, rakish nose ends in the quadruple petals of that mean looking prop’.
The ‘magic figures — 300 knots, 30,000 feet, six people’ are those of the old Morane-Saulnier Paris jet above.
Socata's engineers first looked at the Mooney 301 left, concluding it could never match such performance.
The TBM's cockpit is very professional, the cabin luxurious.
Wrong.
The TBM's character has nothing to do with it being a single-engined turboprop.
The main problem for a private pilot is that it has the widest airspeed envelope available this side of the Harrier.
There's one exercise in the book that sums it up, and the instructor is quick to demonstrate it as soon as theory has been tackled.
Swoosh towards the active runway at 230 knots and 1,500 feet.
Overfly the beacon and intercept the glideslope, 4.5 nm from runway threshold.
Now bring the throttle all the way back and maintain the five per cent glide.
The rate of deceleration is enormous and demands quick action.
Once under 178 knots you get the gear down and lower the flaps ten per cent; then under 122 knots lower full flaps and maintain ninety knots to the threshold using around 25 per cent torque.
This means that you thunder down the approach at Spitfire cruising-speed till, upon reaching a point one minute from the runway, you almost stop the aircraft in mid-air (sending anyone inside towards the windshield), then bring it down at Bonanza-pace to a  landing which, with practice, can be as short as 1,100 feet.
Those familiar with piston singles would think it not possible to slow down a sleek aircraft that fast, because even airbrakes cannot provide such deceleration.
But remember that the TBM is a turboprop, and it seems as if there is a direct, immediate mechanical link between power lever and airspeed indicator needle.
A good part of the time you spend airborne is devoted to mastering that seemingly magic characteristic.
That's very important to understand, for most of the aircraft's performance and behaviour is governed by its formidable ability to accelerate or decelerate because of the availability of power in large quantities and propeller drag in proportional amounts.
Emergency descent especially easy
For instance, being pressurised the TBM demands that its pilot be able to perform emergency descents from cruising altitude in case of pressurisation failure, just like any business or airliner captain.
You can imagine busy hands flying around the cockpit selecting emergency oxygen on , power down , airbrakes out , wait until speed is down to manoeuvring values, add drag if necessary, then push the nose down.
On the TBM everything can be done simultaneously: emergency oxygen on , power back to idle and start to dive at the same moment.
No need for airbrakes, no need to add extra drag, just use that wonderful propeller to provide precise speed control.
During flight training you'll discover that such high-speed dives generate a rate of descent of around 10,000 fpm.
The first time you try it you'll find it difficult to keep the nose planted that far down, Stuka-like; but remember, starting at FL 300 even at that rate you'll need two minutes to get down to breathing levels, which encourages a firm push on the yoke.
The extraordinary deceleration possible is shown to converting pilots in the ‘High Speed Arrival’ exercise.
This ‘single-engined airliner’ also has fighter-like qualities.
(EFIS and a redesigned cabin with a bar section and disk player are recent options.)
TRAINING FLIGHT HIGH SPEED ARRIVAL TAKING GLIDE SLOPE OR REACHING 1500 ft  During training, the high speed arrival must be performed as much as possible on a straight in approach.
However, due to circumstances, it is possible to begin this operation from downwind leg or from base leg.
The necessary distance to obtain the deceleration is approximately 4 NM, but can be shorter in case of full idle engine.
Landing configuration and associated speed (80 kt) must be stabilized at 500 ft height at the latest.
Right after that you'll learn that once the bird is  stabilised in the dive it's all too easy to be a bit late recovering and end up pulling g.
Again, that's a neat example of what flying the TBM 700 is all about: speed control, or more precisely, controlling the airspeed at which events happen.
Nothing new there , may say the old hands and professionals, it's just a matter of staying ahead of the aeroplane.
Yes, sir, but this is an aircraft aimed at people more accustomed to Bonanzas, Mooneys and Trinidads, people who fly for pleasure as well as business.
Ground training focuses on how to use the avionics.
Standard aircraft come equipped with a magnificent array of these, and the engineering and flight test people at Tarbes have achieved a happy marriage between the aircraft's capabilities and its navcom/autopilot systems.
Obviously, this is a total IFR aircraft if only because it is pressurised, so some hours are devoted to what can best be described as ‘autoflight programming and monitoring’.
Socata's parent company Aerospatiale is responsible for the cockpit architecture of the Airbus line, and there have clearly been transfers of technology between Toulouse and Tarbes, the result being that the TBM 700 needs to be flown like some kind of! 320.
The rule is, use the automatics and you'll stay well ahead of the aircraft and keep a clear understanding of past, present and future situations.
Yes, but are the automatics trustworthy?
Part of the training is here to make that point very clear: the aircraft/avionics interface is designed in such a way that there can be no failure which will end in loss of control authority, but one must of course invest time and effort to understand the procedures.
Then it's time to fly.
The TBM 700's purchase price includes two type ratings, and the usual practice is for the owner-pilot to bring a professional flier with him to take the course.
So far, only a handful of candidates for the TBM 700 rating have been asked to thing about it more seriously and take some refresher training elsewhere before coming back.
The flying is done from the left seat, and follows a strict military/airline-style discipline.
Emphasis is put on speed range control, mastering emergency procedures and getting to be familiar with use of engine, propeller and the pressurisation.
There's almost no time left to play with the aircraft — and no need, because the flying program is devised so that getting the feel of this big personal fighter/business aircraft comes naturally.
Take-off the trickiest moment
Flying the TBM 700 is very easy.
The prototype was even easier, with its very light controls straight out from fighterland, but the FARs demand heavier feel and the production machine is solid, stable and predictable.
The biggest surprise comes from the very direct, dynamite-packed power lever.
First take-offs are a bit hairy, and despite the instructor's words of caution everyone ends up running behind a wildly-accelerating aircraft gently but surely swerving to the left.
Fortunately the low 85-knot rotation speed comes up in no time at all, providing a sense of relief at being airborne before losing control of the situation.
(Lift-off in an Alphajet was less brutal than my ham-handed early attempts on the TBM 700.)
Soon, however, you learn to caress the throttle and avoid pouring in more than 100 per cent torque.
Airborne, it flies like a dream — once mastery of pitch and rudder trims has been achieved.
Pitch trim is nothing new, but rudder-trimming has to become a habit; getting used to it is a nuisance at the early stages.
The controls are pure joy, though you can be surprised at the ease with which g can pile on in a sixty-degree banked turn at 230 knots.
Control in slow flight is fantastic.
A few low, slow circuits are all that are needed for you to feel in total control of high-drag situations.
Stalls demonstrate the near-perfection of the aileron-spoiler combination in roll.
The biggest surprise here is that the TBM 700 seems to shrink into a much smaller and lighter aircraft when flown below ninety knots and down to the gear-down/flaps-down 61-knot stall speed.
That's the result of the combination of outstanding flaps, a powerful elevator and exceptional roll control.
This, plus precision speed control, translates into a very tractable machine in the pattern.
Feather-like landings, though, do not come easily.
The landing gear is also a touch fighter-style — tall, thin and hard.
Judging the proper flare height demands practice, the tendency being to pull back a bit too high and try to land in an excessive nose-up attitude.
On the ground the aircraft has a nose-down stance providing an unobstructed view ahead, better than that of most touring singles, and this must be appreciated before smooth landings become the norm, otherwise, the result is slightly firm but still wellcontrolled arrivals.
Then there's prop reverse.
Having been airborne for a while and learned that this aircraft demands a gentle touch on the engine controls, the trainee who demonstrates prudent use of reverse derives huge satisfaction from the soft-but-powerful deceleration, bringing the aircraft to a stop in 400 metres.
There's also the impressive noise, emitted by the propeller when in Beta range!
A Jekyll-and-Hyde aeroplane
Once your classroom and cockpit introduction to the TBM 700 is complete you find yourself studying two different aircraft.
The first is a very high performance aircraft that can be flown like a fighter, using a mix of hand-flying and the automatics.
The second is nothing but a single-engined airliner with a 737's rate-of-climb and rate-of-descent capabilities, able to mix with Dash 8s or ATRs along the airways.
Think about that for a while.
Achieving such a comfortable blend of Doctor Jekyll and Mister Hyde is unique, and maintaining the balance is entirely the pilot's responsibility.
That's why the TBM 700 is Something Else.
Once you've got the rating, you know that you've never before enjoyed such flying freedom.
The only snag is that freedom does demand solid common-sense…
To Australia by Tri-Pacer in just thirteen months…finishing fourteenth out of 25 that started in the England to Australia rally, and the only all-woman team to make it!
By Sue Nealey
Forty vintage aircraft flying from London to Australia!
Faith Hillman and I thought we would enjoy this unique opportunity to fly over twenty countries, retracing the ‘Empire Air Route’ flown by mail carriers sixty years ago.
We both are experienced pilots, and initially, we thought it would be done as a visual flight, with a bit of adventure.
I have been flying for twenty years and doing aerobatics for ten years, having been taught to fly by my celebrated husband Tim, of Nealey Air Shows, in Chicago.
Faith also has been flying for twenty years.
She is a Continental Airlines B747 first officer, based in Hawaii, with more than 20,000 hours.
The rally was certainly not for rookies, as we found out at the onset; only the intervention of the King of Jordan could resolve some problems along the way.
To enter the rally was Faith's idea, and at the start I intended to fly only part of the trip — home from Egypt in two weeks.
Faith is single, but I have two young children.
But the excitement of adventure took over as we prepared Faith's 1954 Tri-Pacer.
Continental Airlines became one of our sponsors, offering tickets for my husband and I to go to London and to come home from Australia.
I decided to go all the way.
Not for a moment did I realise that we would be gone for almost three months, return home for nine months, and then spend one more month to finally finish in Australia!
Faith flew the Tri-Pacer from Texas to our airstrip in Chicago, where Tim and our local mechanic, Chuck Blanchard, did an extensive annual inspection and found it to be in good shape.
However, problems stemming from its lack of use in the preceding year became apparent later.
I flew it for the first time to Dupage Airport to replace the ninety-channel radio with a 720-channel unit, then on to Janesville, Wisconsin, for paint work and a new headliner.
Back home, the back seat was replaced with an eighty litres fuel tank.
The Tri-Pacer was disassembled and crated for shipment to London, but ten days before the rally started the container couldn't be found.
After several telephone calls it was traced to a dock in Canada!
There was no time to send it by ship, so with the help of B & F Aircraft, another sponsor and an $8,000 fee, it was freighted in a B747F.
A real dent in the budget!
A large crowd came to see the rally start at White Waltham on a cold and windy March 25 last year.
Only 25 of the forty aircraft entered were ready to start, and then several dropped out on the first leg due to mechanical problems.
Our callsign was ‘Rally Foxtrot Two’.
After the second leg, the teams — two women teams, four husband-and-wife teams, nineteen men teams — voted not to time the legs for the rally.
It had become so difficult that we needed to help each other make it; everyone who made it to Australia would win a trophy.
Most of our problems were due to weather and poorly functioning equipment: an extended-range Loran that never worked, an ADF that pointed in the wrong direction and a kaput old-fashioned venturi altitude indicator.
Even the compass disagreed with our back-up compass.
Most of our navigation was pure pilotage and dead reckoning over unfamiliar, sometimes hostile territory and some very bad weather.
We averaged 72 knots.
The European countryside, dotted with small villages, was beautiful, but when we landed in Cannes officials were waiting for us.
We had planned a stop in Grenoble and had filed for seven hours, with a one-hour stop en route .
The controller mistakenly put it in for one hour (we hadn't crossed our seven as they do in French), which caused the authorities to send out a search-and-rescue helicopter for us.
No wonder they looked upset!
After they saw our paperwork, they realised the controller's mistake.
We continued across Italy and Greece.
The first real scare came while flying over the Mediterranean.
We left Iraklion, Crete for the three-hour water crossing with another aircraft but, as we were so slow, he had to go on.
We held our heading and checked our tracking with his instruments before he left.
After three hours we looked for land.
No land.
Twenty minutes later, still no land.
We were being blown east; we corrected but with no DME we weren't sure how far east we were.
After several calls, we made contact and found the winds much stronger than forecast, at 24 knots.
Calling for help from radar, all we could raise was Alexandria, and they had no radar.
Cairo couldn't pick up our slow, fabric-covered aircraft.
The time seemed endless and the water deep.
But our correction had put us on course and we crossed the shoreline at Alexandria.
We were ten minutes from the airport when a jete flew overhead and the pilot said: ‘Welcome to Alexandria’.
That leg of the trip took five hours fifteen minutes and we had only thirty minutes of fuel left.
Faith was done with old-fashioned equipment; we needed more equipment to do the water-crossings ahead.
We crossed Egypt, the Nile and the Sinai Peninsula, stopping at the Jordanian resort of Aqaba, where we met Queen Noor.
We visited the ancient city of Petra and rode camels.
Our first serious engine problem was in Amman, where King Hussein, an avid pilot, had offered all rally pilots free maintenance.
The flight crews eagerly accepted the King's hospitality; our Tri-Pacer had been running so well we had little maintenance to do.
But, on the morning of departure we could not develop full power, and then spent four frustrating days trying to fix it.
Sue Nealey left, and Faith Williams, captains both.
King Hussein was informed of our problem, and he had his royal crew uncover the gremlin — a short in the electrical system.
The delay gave us a chance to get to know the King a little better.
We were so far behind the group that King Hussein got us permission to fly the pipeline across Saudi Arabia; the group which did not have the same permission had to backtrack to Luxor, before crossing the Arabian Peninsula.
Our route, although a time-saver, took us near Iraq — over the area that became the battlefield for Desert Storm a few months later.
It is an area where women aren't exactly liberated.
They don't let women drive cars, let alone fly an aircraft.
Following the pipeline in Saudi was a life-saver.
Swirling sand made visibility terrible — I had to fly the aircraft looking down through the side window because I couldn't see ahead.
We wore our full uniforms and covered our heads for a refuelling stop at Arar in Saudi Arabia.
We were treated very well and given fruit and drinks — despite it being the holy fasting month of Ramadan.
From there, we flew over more sand, pipeline and an occasional camel, to Kuwait, where we stayed the night.
The next morning we found the aircraft had blown a gasket.
I had to show the local mechanic what to do; he knew nothing about small aircraft.
Amazed that the little machine had brought us so far, he gave me his prayer beads and wished us a safe trip, ‘Allah willing’.
(King Hussein, our guardian angel for the trip, settled the landing fee and hotel bill totalling $800.)
We flew through much haze before landing in Bahrain to refuel.
It was so hot.
We then set out for Muscat, but with nightfall approaching, we landed in Abu Dhabi.
An  American controller on duty when we requested permission to land later took us to a hotel at 10 pm.
We were in Muscat by 10 am the next day, glad to have caught up with the group which was preparing to leave.
We could now back up our dead-reckoning on the next leg over water.
The next stop was across the Gulf of Oman to Gwadar in Pakistan, close to Iran's border.
Need I explain?
The trip through Pakistan and India was very hot and bumpy, with immense paperwork for Customs and airport authorities.
It seemed we needed thirty copies of everything, stamped and signed at least twice.
Crowds of people met us, including dancing girls and a sprinkling of holy water in Jamshedput.
Along the way, we lost our brakes and our airspeed indicator.
It seemed as if we were flying in the 1930s.
Problems with our clearances across Burma delayed us in Bangladesh, the scene of the most dangerous part of the whole trip — a wild taxi ride to the airport.
The car hit a brick wall!
Fortunately, we escaped with only bruises.
Getting across Burma was a real problem.
At first they refused to allow us to land anywhere.
The faster aircraft could make it across without landing, and when they got permission to fly at 10,000 feet, they left.
But the slow aircraft, or ‘snails’, needed to refuel to make it across.
Two days later, with pressure from the group ahead and the U.S. Embassy, the slower aircraft were allowed to land and refuel in Rangoon.
We were told to stay at 10,000 feet — unrealistic for our Tri-Pacer — because the terrorists in the mountains might shoot at us.
Clearance came at 10 am which made it difficult to get to Bangkok before dark, so we carried our own fuel to make sure we could continue from Rangoon.
Refuelling at Rangoon, we knew we would be flying after dark but the six ‘snails’ decided to leave, anyway.
No one wanted to stay in Rangoon.
It was getting dark as we got to the mountains of Burma.
We had lights but no instruments, other aircraft had instruments but no lights, so we flew close together.
Our aircraft didn't have enough fuel to make Bangkok, so we called the Thai military base and Kamphaeng Saen and got permission to land.
We stayed together, and landed on a dark, windy night with no airspeed indicator or brakes.
After an hour at Customs, a military officer took us to a restaurant and then to the barracks to sleep.
The next morning, we found another blown exhaust gasket, but Thai Air Force mechanics helped us to fix it, with no charge.
We arrived in Bangkok as the group was preparing to leave.
Faith's boyfriend met us and we stayed an extra day sightseeing.
(The Tri-Pacer acquired the name Tuk Tuk ,à la the motor tri-shaws that zap along the streets of Bangkok.)
We had flown most of the trip alone, so one day wasn't a big deal.
Boy, wasn't it!
We refuelled, repaired the brakes and emptied some sand out of the aircraft, and the next day we checked the aircraft and weather and did some minor maintenance, returning to the hotel at 3.30 pm.
We were greeted at the hotel with several messages from the airport.
‘Plane destroyed…come and identify’.
I thought it was a sick joke, but it wasn't.
Typhoon Marion had tossed our Tri-Pacer on its back.
It didn't have a chance.
I faxed pictures of the damaged Tri-Pacer to Tim, who thought it could be fixed.
Faith and I laughed.
The Tri-Pacer tossed on its back and badly damaged by Typhoon Marion at Bangkok.
‘Only the intervention of the King of Jordan could resolve some of the problems…‘
We had telephoned and faxed King Hussein all along, informing him of our progress.
Now we talked with his chief pilot and told him Tim  thought the Tri-Pacer could be fixed.
We asked if Royal Jordanian could help fly parts from New York to Bangkok, a route it operates.
That night we had messages back from Royal Jordanian and the King's pilot.
They had lost no time.
They knew I lived somewhere in Chicago, so they called Mayor Daley, who found out exactly where I lived, and then they located Tim and hand-delivered first-class round-trip tickets and baggage vouchers from Chicago to Bangkok.
We needed a new propeller, windshield, wing struts, rudder and other parts to repair the fabric.
B & F Aircraft had the parts ready to despatch within 24 hours.
Meanwhile, King Hussein also sent two Royal Jordanian mechanics to Bangkok to help us and, in two unbelievable weeks Tim and the mechanics had the Tri-Pacer flying again!
We wasted no time taking off over the rice paddies of Thailand.
The weather in Malaysia was at times a wall of rain, forcing us to seek permission to land at Alor Setar.
The rain passed and we took off, only to be forced to land at the military airbase at Butterworth.
We had blown a gasket and told them of our problem, but we did not declare an emergency.
Still, they met us with fire trucks; we were politely assigned an armed guard and warned not to take pictures.
Mechanics pushed our aircraft into a hangar and machined us a new stud for our exhaust pipe.
In the bar that evening we felt as if we were in the movie Top Gun as U.S. Navy pilots sang, ‘You've Lost That Lovin' Feeling’ to us.
The problems continued.
More work was required on the Tri-Pacer in Singapore because it wasn't producing power the way it should.
The 135 hp engine was used to operating on 80 octane fuel but we had been using 130 octane avgas.
All through Indonesia, as we flew past volcanoes, the aircraft ran well.
Large thunderstorms in the late afternoon forced us to stop flying by 2 pm each day.
We flew over Bali, with its temples and beautiful beaches, before being slowed by head-winds, landing at Waingapu Island, only to find there was no fuel at the airport.
We caught a local bus to the town and found ourselves seated among chickens, fish and women chewing beetle nut.
We bought containers and fuel and returned to the airport, where we strained the fuel for water before departing for Kupang, on the island of Timor.
The next leg from Kupang would be across the Timor Sea, known for its sharkinfested waters.
I fixed the brakes again while Faith prepared the flight-plan.
We took off at daybreak, but after ten minutes the engine was running rough, shaking the whole aircraft.
We landed and changed the plugs but it still ran rough — too rough for the Timor Sea!
Faith has to return to work; she had been away for almost two and a half months, but Continental Airlines generously sent Tim to Kupang to see if he could help.
We worked on the Tri-Pacer then tested it.
It seemed to fly OK, so we prepared for the 482 kilometres water crossing to Australia.
After take-off, we climbed for altitude, but after twenty minutes, the engine heated up and started to shake.
It felt like ‘Rally Foxtrot Two’ was coming apart, so we landed and did another engine run-up and re-taped some of the fabric.
Another attempt to depart saw us just make it around the airport pattern.
It was June 10, 1990 and that's where we thought it might end.
We took out the Magellan global navigation system, borrowed ADF radio, life-raft and vests and packed our bags.
We gave the aircraft keys to our new friend, Ronnie Bala, from the Flobamor Hotel and asked him to watch over it.
We hoped to be back!
Almost nine months later, we found an engine without the accessories, and Continental Airlines once again came to the rescue, flying Tim, our mechanic Chuck Blanchard and me out to see if we could get the Tri-Pacer flying again.
Faith, still hesitant of the water-crossing over the Timor Sea, met us in Hawaii and travelled with us to Denpasar, Indonesia.
After several days of paperwork in Bali and with the help of Continental's cargo agent, Putra, we got the engine box out of Customs and on a Bouraq Airlines flight to Kupang.
Tim and Chuck went ahead to Kupang to start work on the Tri-Pacer.
Faith, her boyfriend and I waited to ride on the same flight as the box.
Two days later, with the new engine in place, Tim and Chuck found a crack in one of the cylinders!
But we were not about to give up.
We called friends in Australia and amazingly, they found a cylinder we could rent and shipped it to Darwin.
A mechanic friend at Merpati Airlines picked it up for us.
Switching parts around, old push-rods and rockers and changing the studs to fit, we all cheered as they pulled the propeller through.
The engine ran smooth and strong after several hours of running it on the ground.
Tim test-flew it.
Faith and I also flew around the pattern and it felt great despite small problems with the tape out on the aircraft to protect the patches stitched on in Bangkok.
We prepared to leave the next day.
The girls toasting their — eventual — arrival in Australia; and back home in Chicago, after the Tri-Pacer's propeller had been removed to send as a memento and thank-you to King Hussein.
The anticipation of this leg was immense.
We  tried to keep our minds off the thought of all the sharks in the Timor Sea.
We had to hand-prop to start the engine, use a hand-held radio and our hand-held Magellan, purchased for this leg.
We were off!
Darwin reported reliable weather and we felt secure in the winds ahead.
Our Magellan failed 24 nm out but we were determined to continue.
After four hours over water and navigating around the clouds with a compass and a clock, we were exactly on course.
Troughton Island was a sight to see, with an 853 metre runway and threes houses!
Another hour and we were over land, the desolate Australian Outback.
I see now why many men were lost out there.
A total of six and a half hours and we were over the small, dying town of Wyndham.
The ‘sheriff’ came out and said that Customs wanted us to fly to Darwin for clearance, but we begged for mercy and he let us stay and gave us a ride to a lodge in the police wagon.
The room was free, with a bottle of champagne.
(Champagne's a tradition set by the early pioneers for those who dare to cross the Timor Sea.)
Before departing, we added more tape to the top of the fuselage, where it had come loose.
Our four-hour leg across the Northern Territory was over a vast emptiness, with occasional small homesteads with small landing strips as we neared Darwin.
We were greeted with paperwork and dogs sniffing the Tri-Pacer for drugs.
Tim and Chuck, who had flown ahead by Merpati Airlines, checked-out the aircraft and did some re-taping to protect the fabric — a constant battle.
The route south followed the roads across the wilderness of the Outback.
Good reason…there is nothing out there.
Problems with the protective tape began to slow us down, so we decided to land on a road between Tennant Creek and Mt Isa.
The road was just as wide as the Tri-Pacer, and fearing a truck would not see us if we pulled off to the side, we left the aircraft sitting in the middle of the road.
The driver of the first car that came by asked us for directions: we laughed and said we were flying, not driving!
I climbed on the aircraft to make the repairs all the while fighting flies.
Soon, we taxied back down the road while cars blocked other traffic for us to take off.
Finally, after six days of the Outback, we arrived at Hamilton Island, an island resort just off the coast of Queensland.
I never thought I would be glad to see water again after the Timor Sea, but the Pacific Ocean looked beautiful.
We relaxed on the beach and swam in the pool with dolphins.
The next day we landed at Mackay and re-fuelled for our last leg.
We finally arrived at Caboolture Airport near Brisbane thirteen months after leaving London, greeted by Australian friends and the press.
We were the fourteenth aircraft to complete the rally out of 25 that started and the only all-woman team to make it!
We had planned on selling the Tri-Pacer in Australia, but after 202 hours, 44 stops and 25,749 kilometres in it, we decided to take it home.
Continental Airlines again came to the rescue and flew it to the U.S. after our Australian friends had taken it apart.
Faith had flown the little aircraft across the U.S. before, which means the Tri-Pacer has flown (with some help over the Atlantic and Pacific) around the world.
Aircoupe
Designed some 55 years ago to provide ‘safe, easy stable handling’ for the aerial Buick drivers of America, this oddball design is unstallable and unspinnable and usually devoid of rudder pedals.
It still appeals as a simple, sturdy and economical two-seater, says Peter Underhill.
A thousand feet on the QNH in solid cloud and driving rain ‘somewhere near Maidenhead’ is not a good place for a young pilot to be — especially with less than eighty hours flying time, no ratings, and in an aeroplane flown for only a few hours beforehand.
Fortunately it was an Aircoupe, unspinnable, unstallable, and with a good ‘blind flying’ panel.
A very chastened and much wiser PPL lived to tell the tale.
The opportunity to fly down from Liverpool to a sales meeting at Maidenhead via White Waltham had seemed too good to pass up.
One quick telephone call had booked the aircraft, another fixed a rendezvous with a fellow salesman.
All went well until RAF Benson had chased him all round the sky and their MATZ before issuing their not unusual request to ‘resume your own navigation’ leaving him totally lost, heading into a nasty and unforecast rainstorm and trying to track into the White Waltham entry lane using cross-cuts on the single VOR.
ATC were still held in awe, and he hadn't wanted to admit to Benson that he was lost.
Contacting White Waltham for a QDM several minutes after he should have intercepted the Burnham VOR 280 degree radial (and not knowing why he hadn't) produced the instruction to tune Heathrow Radar on 119.9.
Immediately a very helpful female ATCO identified the Aircoupe (its pilot now concentrating his whole being on keeping straight and level in the pouring rain and turbulent IMC conditions) as being overhead Farnborough, and gave radar headings towards White Waltham, a cloudbreak at around 800 feet and a passable landing.
Parking in front of the clubhouse, our pilot grabbed his briefcase and splashed through the downpour to his colleague's waiting car.
The subsequent short ride into Maidenhead produced a very one-sided conversation and the return trip, in perfect VMC, was conducted extremely circumspectly.
More than that one pilot has blessed the ‘safety culture’ thinking of Fred E. Weick who, in 1936, developed and patented a two-control system for his W-1 and W-1A designs submitted for the American CAA (now FAA) Safety Plane Competition.
This system interconnected the rudder and ailerons and did away with rudder pedals; all the flying was done with the yoke.
Later he joined ERCO (Engineering and  Research Corp.) of Washington, DC where he developed the Ercoupe, with a (then almost unique) tricycle undercarriage configuration and the two-control system.
The first production model NC 15692 flew on January 19 1940, fitted with ERCO's own power unit, a 60 hp inverted in-line four designated the IL–116.
Both it and the original engine are now displayed in the Smithsonian Air & Space Museum.
Ten examples were built in 1940, four going to the American CAA for evaluation.
They subsequently announced a restricted two-control airman's licence, requiring only twothirds of the training time of ‘conventional gear’(i.e. taildragger) aircraft like the Piper Cub, Taylorcraft et al .
The 1941 Model Ercoupe 415, now with that reliable old sewing machine the Continental C68 installed in place of the IL–116, sold for just $2,640 ready to fly away, and was the perfect machine for the job.
I'm not sure if the U.S. CAA's ‘restricted licence’ option survived the war, with hundreds of surplus — and properly trained — pilots no longer requiring such leniency.
ERCO were soon to be kept busy producing war materials, and it was not until August 1945 that production of the Ercoupe resumed.
Meanwhile, Fred Weick had incorporated some improvements, like a C75 engine (with electric start) and an additional nine-gallon fuel tank in the left wing.
Seventeen were completed that year, all without rudder pedals.
The basic design lent itself to production-line techniques, and ERCO produced 335 per month at their peak.
Some 3,935 were built in 1946, until in November production was suspended pending the sale of 300 unsold examples.
Once they were gone, manufacturing resumed in February 1947 and another 771 were built, selling now for $3,450.
ERCO developed several different variants of the Ercoupe, including a retractable version (the Super Coupe); a floatplane version (the Sea Coupe — which was destroyed during spin-trials, fortunately without loss of CAA test pilot Dale Westfall's life); later a four-seat version which was 75 per cent completed; and a twin-engined retractable version which was ninety per cent completed when the company declared they were bankrupt.
The ATC type certificate and production rights were acquired in 1948 by Univair in Denver, Colorado who produced 152 aircraft at $3,590 apiece.
A jump-seat capable of carrying a seventy-pound child was added as an optional extra, but Univair made only 42 aircraft in 1950 and seven in 1951 before selling the ATC to Forney Aircraft of Fort Collins, who changed the name to ‘Aircoupe’, made a number of further modifications including fitting the Continental C–90 engine, built twelve, then changed the name yet again to the ‘Fornaire’, 82 being made under that identification.
Forney was then sold to Air Products Inc., a Carlsbad, New Mexico corporation which produced a further ten examples, plus a one-off retractable version capable of 140 mph, before going bankrupt themselves!
They were bought out by two businessmen, John Allen and Lee Higdon, who formed Alon Inc and continued production at Carlsbad before moving to McPherson, Kansas, where in 1965 86 of the A–2 Aircoupes were manufactured.
G–AVIL, the subject of this air test, is one such model, being number five of the Alon production line.
Alon also experimented with the basic design, building a 130 hp Franklin-engined version and a prototype Alon A–4 with a Lycoming O–320 160 hp motor, before selling the type certificate of the Aircoupe to Mooney Aircraft, whereupon Mooney changed it to a single-tail design and manufactured it as the M–10 Cadet, producing 61 at $9,295 each before shutting the line down for good in 1970.
At that point the peripatetic Ercoupe/Aircoupe/Fornaire/Alon/Cadet design had been  in production — on and off — for some 33 years, during which the original basic low-wing and steeply dihedralled tricycle monoplane had undergone innumerable detail changes.
The canopy shape had gone from sliding side windows to rearward-sliding bubble, allmetal wings had replaced fabric-covered ones, the elevator acquired a central cut-out, increased chord at its outer extremities and a restricted throw when it was found that disturbed air was affecting its pitch authority, and undercarriage design and powerplant options also varied between different manufacturers.
Many Ercoupes/Aircoupes also had ‘conventional’ dual controls with rudder pedals, but most manufacturers also offered what were called ‘Simplomatic’controls, i.e. sans rudder pedals.
Currently the ATC and production rights for the Ercoupe are stored in the safe at Univair in Colorado.
They have no plans to start up the line again, but do offer a full spares and backup service for existing Coupes — whatever the manufacturer's designation.
One of the earliest two-control Ercoupes was imported in 1947 by the Ministry of Civil Aviation at Gatwick and registered G-AKFC.
Later moving to the RAE at Farnborough, it acquired service roundels and serial number VX147, and its unusual two-control system was the subject of much investigation by them and by A&AEE at Boscombe Down.
Of particular interest were the methods employed to land in a crosswind approaching crabbed with the nose as far into-wind as possible while maintaining the centreline of the runway.
Touching down on the main wheels first, the Ercoupe twitched into line; they even tried it with the rudder pedals locked, flying on elevator and aileron only, but found the feeling ‘rather disconcerting’!
VX147 was later loaned to Lettice Curtis to take part in the Grosvenor Challenge Trophy air race, held in August 1949 at Birmingham's Elmdon Airport, before being further loaned to BEA for a series of trials while still in service colours.
It reverted to civilian identity in 1952, finally being destroyed in a crash at Halfpenny Green on August 13th (!) 1967.
Currently eight examples are listed on the UK register, of which Forney F.1A Aircoupe G-ARHF is perhaps the most interesting.
A two-control version (the FAA type certificate still describes rudder pedals as an ‘optional extra’) it has enabled one-time helicopter pilot Dick Nesbitt-Dufort, after a car accident some years ago left him permanently on crutches, to become a well-known and successful handicap air racing competitor and enthusiastic visitor to many foreign fly-ins.
The type is one of few aeroplanes which can be adapted for those with any form of physical handicap, which would otherwise preclude them from captaining a ‘normal’ aircraft.
Since Foxtrot Kilo , small numbers of various versions have been imported into the UK, and for many years three formed part of the training fleet at Stapleford Tawney.
G-AVIL is a 1965 Alon A-2 version flown in the USA for two years before being imported into the UK in 1967 by the Ulster Flying Club at Newtownards.
They sold it, together with an earlier Forney model, two years later in October 1971 through the then well-known aircraft brokers W. S. Shackleton of Coventry, whence it was bought for the princely sum of £2,150 by airline captain David Vernon, who has owned it ever since.
It has been a familiar sight at many PFA rallies and smaller fly-ins, and has recently been given a ‘facia-lift’(sorry!) with a full IFR installation and overhauled panel.
Apart from that and the unusual paint scheme applied fifteen years ago (but still looking tidy!)
‘IL is largely in original and well-maintained condition.
Ercoupe/Aircoupe owner and enthusiasts have their own club which, like the Jodel, Beagle Pup and the de H Moth Clubs is a fount of knowledge, source of locations of restorable aeroplanes and publisher of a professional-looking magazine,Coupe Capers .
A walk-around reveals some of the unusual features of the basic design, like the fullspan ailerons, trailing link undercarriage, differential rudders (the outgoing one travelling through twice the angle of its ingoing twin), and the elevator with its central cut-out and restricted movement.
It is this feature which, more than anything else, makes the Aircoupe safe, being impossible to stall, nor can it be spun: you simply cannot get the angle of attack to a high enough value.
The fuel system is also unusual in that the two wing tanks are linked, but the carburettor is gravity-fed from a header tank immediately in front of the facia.
The fuel gauge is a bent-wire-and-float arrangement in front of the windscreen, and the fuel pump actually keeps the header tank full during flight until no fuel remains in the wings, whereupon you have an hour's-worth of fuel left at normal cruising speed.
In the event of a fuel pump failure the same reserve holds good.
The bubbly canopy on the A-2 slides back to allow cockpit entry from either wingwalk which, on ‘IL, is the traditional rough black surface adjacent to the wing-root.
As getting in necessitates standing on the red leather trimmed seat, the manufacturers thoughtfully provide a ‘mud flap’ of similar material which can be flipped over from in front of the squab.
Seat adjustment is not so easy, however; if the seat is too close or too distant from the rudder pedals (in those models so equipped), then one must deplane, pick up the seat and re-position one of four pairs of locating holes on each lower seat tube, spaced about an inch apart, on to two floor-mounted prongs.
Get it wrong again, and it becomes a trifle tiresome!
That apart, the seating is comfortable, resembling an early Sixties sports racer position with the torso reclining somewhat and the legs almost horizontal.
Two flattened ‘U’ yokes protrude from the facia, which in ‘IL is nicely laid out with modern avionics to IFR standards including DME, glideslope and transponder.
The Continental C90–16F powerplant being equipped with a vacuum pump, the artificial horizon and DI erect immediately on starting and do not need to be spun up by the act of getting airborne, as happens with similarly-aged aeroplanes fitted with venturis.
Dave's improvements also extend to a vernior throttle and mixture control.
Half a dozen companies have built the design since production began in 1940; earlier examples were rag-winged, later ones metal.
Eight are currently on the British register.
‘IL is a 1965 Alon A-2 with an unusual, more recent paint scheme.
Twin fins were a common feature of American 1930s designs, but the nose-wheel then the very latest novelty.
(Mostly Keith Wilson photos.)
The Aircoupe has an unusual trimming device, centrally placed in front of the seat, best described as a screw-threaded brass plunger running in a guide, with a black plastic knob atop.
The natural inclination of a new ‘Couper is  to turn it with the fingers, but one quickly learns to run a palm across one side, either up or down, in order to change trim by rolling the black knob.
The aircraft is quite responsive to trim changes, but even with the plunger set fully aft or fully forward it is not impossible, just uncomfortable, to fly in the cruise.
Just forward of the trim is a flyoff hand-brake, further confirming the Sixties sports car image.
Firing up is Continental-simple; just turn the key and it runs.
When cold, several primes of the throttle are required, but no other special technique is needed.
Taxying out behind the camera plane, the sports car feeling re-appears again.
The pilot's bum is little more than a foot off the ground and one is towered over by a Cessna 172!
Taxying is easy using the steerable nose-wheel, with all four extremities and the nose fully visible through the bubble canopy.
After a simple pre-take off litany (minus the F for flaps) which should be familiar to any Cessna 150 pilot, the Aircoupe accelerated down Halfpenny Green's Runway 34 in a formation take-off, becoming airborne in a few hundred feet before I had to throttle back to keep in station with the hard-climbing 172 camera ship.
When evaluating any aircraft I prefer to fly it light, so that it performs rather more in the manner the designer had in mind.
Fully-laden take-offs and five-minute controlled climbs may be OK for a formal C of A air test, but you can't (or shouldn't) chuck an aeroplane around in that state.
Solo and with less than half tanks, ‘IL was light and showed almost 800 fpm climb at full power and 80 mph.
Max auw is 1,450 pounds, so the average Aircoupe can be flown with two ten-stone adults, 75 pounds of baggage and full fuel (20 imperial gallons).
The manual gives a maximum range, at ideal settings and altitude, of around 530 nm.
The obligatory formation air-to-air session was completed without difficulty as the Aircoupe, whilst not having the fastest set of control and throttle responses in the world, is nonetheless quite easy to place accurately.
The handling can best be described as ‘good’; with such a marked dihedral, lifting airfoil section and restricted elevator movement, you ain't going to set the place alight.
But an Aircoupe isn't meant to do that.
It was conceived to provide safe ,easy ,stable handling so that Joe Doe in the USA could fly it more easily than the taildraggers with which it competed.
If you will, it's the aerial equivalent to a Mk 1 Ford Escort 1100 — does everything at about six out of ten, except in edge-of-the-envelope handling, where it scores eleven.
How so?
The slightly reclined seating is comfortable.
‘IL's panel includes a modern avionics to fit to IFR standards.
Owner Dave Vernon has lately replaced it with a rare late-sixties single-tailed Mooney M-10 Cadet version (right) which he flew solo from Los Angeles to Miami.
It ‘isn't a patch’ on his old Aircoupe, he feels!
Cut the power and pull back the yoke fully, whereupon the Aircoupe will slow down to 50 mph and, because you can't stall it, will nod and mush downwards, the full-span ailerons remaining effective throughout.
Put in aileron, and the Aircoupe, instead of flicking, will enter a spiral dive.
Add power to cruise revs (all the while keeping the yoke fully aft) and roll on more bank until the upper wing is almost vertical, and the Aircoupe will twizzle round like a good ‘un, with nary a murmur or complaint, and will even climb in this state on a good day.
Some pilots might call such handling boring; others class it as ultra-safe.
In straight and level flight, 2,250 rpm gives 115 mph and a fuel burn under five gallons an hour.
At 75 per cent you see 124 mph, yet flat-out only adds a further 4 mph.
V ne is 144 mph.
The cockpit remains comfortable for reasonably lengthy flights, i.e. when touring.
Without headsets it is not overly noisy, and is well ventilated and warmed via cabin air/cabin heat controls.
I was testing one of the new Telex ANR noise-reducing headsets during this flight, making the Aircoupe eerily quiet — almost like being inside a cathedral.
Up to speeds of 70 mph (100 mph on N-registered ones!) the canopy can be slid back on hot sunny days; earlier ‘Coupes with the slide-down windows can also fly in ‘convertible’ mode.
Returning to the circuit after a fairly limited playtime (no aerobatics are allowed), a steady descent of 75 mph at around 1,500 rpm was maintained with full carb heat — essential at all low power settings, as C90s are notorious for icing-up.
This put me on to finals with the trim wound fully aft, and I was able to further check the aircraft's inherent stability by moving hands and feet from the controls for several seconds — the Aircoupe continued down the slope as on rails (there was little wind or turbulence) before a gentle flare demonstrated another safety feature.
The combination of the trailing link undercarriage and low-set wing and the ground-effect air cushion it creates enables almost every landing to be turned into a ‘CFi's greaser’.
As well as being easy to fly, the Aircoupe is a doddle to land.
Power applied for a go-around, acceleration was again brisk, and with permission from the tower (it was, after all, a quiet weekday) I flew a tight circuit back on ti finals for a short-field landing.
This needs an approach speed of 65 mph, which the full aft trim cannot hold, so positive aft yoke is required with just a tickle of power.
Cutting that over the numbers had me down and stopped well before the first intersection, a distance of around 400 metres, and I could have done much better if I'd heaved on the brakes, which are single Goodyear discs with excellent stopping power.
However one must exercise care, especially when light, not to lock up the wheels and scrub off expensive tyres when trying to land really short.
Post-landing checks while taxying required little other than switching off lights and radios.
There are no flaps, cooling ducts or other complications to mess with, and the Aircoupe pivoted back into its parking spot vacated forty minutes before, requiring only that the ignition key and master switches be turned off before the aircraft could finally be exited.
The Ercoupe/Aircoupe, call it what you like, is a simple, safe, sturdy and economical little two-seater that flies nicely, won't break the bank to buy or operate, and could, with a bit of arm-twisting at CAA and PFA headquarters, go on to a Permit to Fly — especially the older versions.
So why aren't there more over here?
The wings are easily detachable for transport — but therein lies the rub.
The centre-section stubs are wider than a standard forty-foot container, so each imported ‘Coupe would almost need a box of its own; not really an economical proposition with current £/; $ rates, 17.5 per cent VAT,et al .
But who knows — maybe when Cliff Lovell, Ron Souch and the rest of the UK's classic aircraft restorers have bought all the Cessna 120s and 140s, Luscombe Silvaires, Piper Cubs and Vagabonds going, perhaps the little ‘Coupes will finally come under their acquisitive eye, and more may appear in the UK.
They would certainly make a safer choice for a first aeroplane after the club trike than does the twitchy taildragging Silvaire and its lookalike cousins.
You only have to read the last dozen AAIB accident reports to see what I mean there.
People have mixed opinions about the Aircoupe.
Mr Editor Gilbert, on learning that I was going to fly one for Pilot , opined that it was a ‘bloody awful aeroplane’.
Dave Vernon, on the other hand, having owned ‘IL for a not inconsiderable time would, together with several thousand enthusiastic members of the worldwide Ercoupe Owners Club, express (I suspect quite forcibly!) diametrically opposed views.
He has recently bought and shipped to the UK one of the rare remaining Mooney M10 Cadets, which he flew solo from Los Angeles to Miami, the 2,267 nm journey taking almost two weeks.
Logically expecting the last of the breed to be the best of the breed, I was surprised to learn that the Mooney ‘isn't a patch’ on the Aircoupe.
Dyed-in-the-wool fabric-winged 65 hp-engined Ercoupe owners would appear to think the same about the metal Alon model in comparison to their own, if the Coupe Capers newsletter is anything to go by!
And me?
Well, all I can say, with hand on heart, is that I'm personally very pleased that Fred Weick designed such a safe aeroplane.
Just 1,000 feet on the QNH in solid cloud and driving rain ‘somewhere near Maidenhead’ is not a good place for a young pilot to be, especially one with less than eighty hours flying time, no ratings, and in an aeroplane flown for only a few hours beforehand!
Thankfully, both India Lima and I survived the experience!
Pilot Notes
OATS training MoD flying scholarship cadets
Oxford Air Training School is to train 65 young cadets this summer under the Ministry of Defence's Flying Scholarship scheme, which provides thirty hours of flying training towards the 42 hours needed for a PPL.
OATS had previously been part of the scholarship scheme, but dropped out about fifteen years ago when its commercial pilot training activities took precedence.
The scholarship training will provide the School with a useful introduction to military procedures for parent company CSE Aviation's bid to win the contract for operating the RAF/RN Elementary Flying Training School at RAF Topcliffe (see story this issue).
OATS has also won a contract from Kuwait Airways to train up to thirty pilots over the next two years.
‘The Kuwait contract is important as it not only features ab initio pilot training but is expected to include a requirement for the School to teach very experienced airline pilots the special skills required to become line training captains,’ says OATS' Principal Ken Meehan.
OATS' two LOFT (Line Orientated Flight Training) simulators are proving increasingly popular with airlines.
BA cadets do sixty hours of LOFT in the three-axis jet simulators after gaining their CPL/IRs, and Cyprus Airways, Gulf Air and the International Test Pilots School have also been clients for LOFT courses.
OATS currently has some 160 cadets from seventeen nations in training at Oxford, with British Airways being the largest client.
Despite the current employment situation in the UK, where some 280 BA-sponsored graduates from Oxford and Prestwick have yet to be employed as aircrew by the airline, Meehan is unequivocal in his optimism for the future.
‘Let there be no misunderstanding,’ he says.
‘There are terrific career opportunities in commercial aviation and within the armed forces.
Currently places within airlines are few and far between, but virtually all employable aircrew made jobless by the airline failures of the last few years have found new positions, although not always within the UK.
Airlines in the Near and Far East are still recruiting, and BA have not cancelled any courses at Oxford.
UK airlines are not sponsoring pilots at the present time, but the school is attracting an increasing number of young people, both from this country and abroad, who are prepared to invest something in the order of £50,000 to train as professional pilots…
They are using all sorts of means to raise the cash, and despite the sacrifice and the lack of vacancies today, I am convinced that those who join now will all get jobs when they are qualified.
Hundreds of pilots will retire over the next two years and all the signs are that the airlines are poised to grow strongly from now on.’
One additional burden facing British self-starters paying their own way to a CPL/IR is that — uniquely among educational courses — the cost is liable to VAT which they cannot recover.
In the United States young hopefuls are facing similar problems in getting flying jobs with the airlines.
The collapse of several large carriers, including Pan American, has provided a pool of very experienced pilots to meet the needs of surviving airlines, who in turn have not been hiring staff from traditional sources such as regional airlines.
Thus, further down the chain, demand for low-time pilots and ex-military aircrew has slumped and is not expected to pick up again until the pool of laid-off pilots has been used up, probably in a year's time.
In response to an order from Bulgaria Rochdale's Mainair Sports now offer three fibreglass/Kevlar floats for their Gemini Flash 2 Alpha flexwing.
The twin water rudders are connected to the nose-wheel steering mechanism.
Mainair have exported an aircraft to Ghana for anti-poacher work, and a ‘Cropstar’ sprayer variant to South Korea.
Too old to be safe?
An attempt by GAMTA to persuade the CAA to allow commercial pilots aged over sixty years to make single-pilot public transport flights for pleasure flying and also to undertake aerial work operations has been unsuccessful so far, the Association reports in the British General Aviation Bulletin .
Responding to GAMTA's request for more flexibility in applying the over-sixty regulations, Ron Ashford, Director of the CAA's Safety Regulation Group (SRG) replied: ‘What we aim to achieve by our regulatory controls is a public transport safety level.
Whether a public transport flight takes place entirely within UK airspace, entirely within foreign airspace or partly in each is immaterial to the achievement of a public transport safety level.
The medical advice remains that public transport single-pilot operations should not be permitted by pilots who have passed age sixty.
The risk of incapacitation increases with advancing years, and increases more rapidly after the age of 55.
The public transport safety target would not be achieved if single-pilot public transport operations by pilots over sixty were to be permitted.
More frequent medical examinations would not help reduce the risk; the tests currently available that might indicate, for example, whether an increased coronary risk does or does not exist, themselves carry a risk that exceeds that which we are endeavouring to protect against.
‘The question of whether a pleasure flight…could, or should, be removed from the definition of ‘public transport’ is more complex to review than the medical situation of over age sixty pilots…
The rules which apply to such flights in various European countries differ quite widely.
We do not believe that such operations can be shown to meet our public transport target safety level, and it may be that some of our European colleagues do not consider such operations to be public transport, or do not apply the  same target level of safety to such operations.
Clearly, this is another aspect of the European playing field where it would be desirable for some levelling to take place…
The JAA Ops committee is about to address the subject of general aviation operations…
The CAA SRG input to them will be that a passenger who has paid to be flown, as a passenger, has the right not to be exposed to a higher risk than any other passenger who has paid to be flown.
Any proposal that would introduce different risk levels for different fare-paying passengers would have considerable political overtones…
Would a European consensus emerge his summer that is more ‘liberal’ as regards this case, we will consider amending the UK position without delay.’
Says GAMTA: ‘Once again the CAA is side-stepping this issue and passing it off to JAA…
We will have to marshal our arguments now and attempt to get support from the French, Germans, Danes and the Dutch to produce a unified voice.’
172 birth ‘on hold’
Sporty's Pilot Shop's Hal Shevers has temporarily postponed his plan to produce ‘clones’ of the Cessna 172 Skyhawk (Pilot Notes, March) following Textron's acquisition of the Cessna Aircraft Company.
Shevers, who had already dropped the name Hawk 72 for the new aircraft, opting instead for ‘Liberty’, says he is concerned that Textron, which already produces engines for light aircraft, may decide that resumption of single-engined aircraft production does not represent such an increase in its product liability exposure as it did for Cessna's former parent General Dynamics.
He has the financing to produce his 172 ‘clone’, but will not proceed if Cessna resumes production of the Skyhawk or a derivative.
NTSB recommends inspection of Lycoming fuel lines, Continental cylinders
The U.S. National Transportation Safety Board has asked the FAA to require inspection of fuel injector lines on Lycoming engines to ensure the lines remain attached, following the fatal crash last summer of a Piper Saratoga in which the stainless steel fuel injector line between the fuel manifold and No. 1 cylinder nozzle had separated.
The NTSB says such lines can become sensitised and susceptible to corrosion when subjected to high temperatures, possibly during the brazing process used during assembly, and warns: ‘Without adequate fuel line support, vibratory loads can induce fatigue cracking even on a line with no damage or defect…fuel lines on all fuel-injected engines manufactured by Lycoming should be examined for cracking and supported by clamps.’
The NTSB has also recommended inspection of components in six models of Teledyne Continental engines — the C-75, C-85, C-90, C-145, O-200 and O-300.
The component in question is cylinder part No. 641917 and earlier versions, which the Board says should be subject to an AD calling for periodic non-destructive inspection to detect cracks or defects in the rocker shaft bosses.
In 1990 a Cessna 150G crashed fatally in Florida after three rocker shaft bosses separated from the No. 3 cylinder head of its O-200.
Metallurgical examination revealed that a primary fatigue crack had started from stamped characters on the top of the centre boss.
Teledyne Continental Motors estimates that the P/N 641917 cylinder is in current use in some 25,000 light aircraft.
Pilatus PC-12 production launched
Swiss manufacturer Pilatus has abandoned its search for a risk-sharing partner for development of the PC-12 single turboprop utility aircraft and approved funding for production of an initial batch of 35 aircraft.
The decision to proceed alone is based on the success of the prototype's flight test programme and strong customer interest, says Pilatus, which holds paid options on the first 27 aircraft and is now accepting only firm orders for the $1.8 million PC-12, with performance and delivery schedule guarantees.
Thus far flight tests have demonstrated that the 1,200 hp PT6A-67B-powered PC-12 meets or exceeds all performance estimates, including a maximum cruise speed of 268 knots TAS at 25,000 feet and ability to operate from short, soft and grass runways.
A second prototype is expected to fly soon, and will be used for systems testing and certification trials.
Pilatus will build four production aircraft in 1993, with FAA certification expected at the end of that year, and 31 in 1994.
The company foresees a market for up to 640 PC- 12s, of which sixty per cent will go to customers in North America, where a completion centre will be appointed this summer.
Noteworthy design features of the Swearingen SJ30 include a tiny, highly swept wing with powerful high-lift devices, small-diameter cabin and marked area-ruling around the engines, giving a max cruise of 0.77 Mach despite its low power — its Williams/R-R fanjets have little more than half the thrust of a Lear 31A's engines.
Cabin air goes through the wheel wells when the gear is down, through a heat exchanger to wing fuel when aloft.
Deicing is by the (British) TKS ‘weeping wing’ system.
The fuselage has no separate stringers, these being integral with the chemically-milled heavy skin (which type of construction is credited with much of the Buccaneer's longevity).
V ref when configured for the approach (as here) at typical landing weight is around 115 knots.
The trailing-link mainwheels hang down some fourteen inches in flight.
SJ30 deliveries should begin next year.
Follow a Shadow
Disabled former Fleet Air Arm helicopter pilot Trevor Jones is planning to fly a CFM Shadow microlight across the English Channel later this summer, and would like some company.
Shadow owners who might care to provide an aerial escort should contact Vicky Blyth at the Trevor Jones Trust on 081 989 2304.
Shadow designer David Cook's company CFM-Metalfax is building the aircraft for Trevor's flight.
Alto sax?
From Skywings!the British Hang Gliding Association's journal, this incident report: ‘Householder reported dual flight over his house.
Second pilot playing saxophone.’
Big shows at Boscombe, Biggin
Two of the summer's biggest airshows take place on consecutive weekends this month (June).
IAT's Air Tournament International 92 is being held at the A&AEE Boscombe Down on the 13th and 14th, and promises more than 400 aircraft taking part statically and in each day's eight-hour flying display.
‘The Mighty Eighth’ is a major theme of the show, with the Confederate Air Force's Liberator Diamond Lil taking centre stage for the 8th AF 50th Anniversary celebration, supported by B-17G Sally B and an A-26 Invader, B-25 Mitchell, P-38 Lightning, p-47 Thunderbolt, P-51 Mustang and PBY-5 Catalina.
Modern military hardware will also be at the forefront of the Tournament, with  promise appearances by Su-22, Su-25, MiG-21, MiG-29, An-12, Tu-134, and L-59 of the Czech Air Force, a U.S. Navy Air Wing contingent from the carrier USS Saratoga , and aerobatic formation displays from Team 60 of the Royal Swedish Air Force, La Patrouille Suisse, La Patrouille de France, Patrulla Aereobatica Aguila and the Red Arrows.
An unusual warbird participant will be a privately owned Canberra from the USA wearing Royal Australian Air Force colours.
Fly-in visitors are, as ever, not accepted at Boscombe.
The organisers suggest using Thruxton or Old Sarum if you plan to arrive by air, but no transport has been arranged to the show.
Biggin Hill International Air Far on 20–21 June will be commemorating the Royal Air Force's 75-year association with the station, which comes to an end with the removal of the Officer & Aircrew Selection Centre to RAF Cranwell.
The Great War and inter-war periods will be marked by replicas of S.E.5As, a D.H.5 and Sopwith Camel, and the Shuttleworth Collection's Hawker Hind and Gloster Gladiator, before a dramatic set-piece reconstruction of a Luftwaffe attack on Biggin during the Battle of Britain.
Spitfire, Meteor and Hunter presentations will round-off the celebration of the station's active service through the 1950s.
Though Biggin was ever a fighter station, a second theme for the 1992 Air Fair is ‘Bombers’, with Diamond Lil making another appearance, along with Sally B , the BBMF Lancaster, BAe's Mosquito, the Vulcan and a Tornado.
Another highlight will be the Chilean Air Force's Halcones aerobatic team making their first British tour since they exchanged their Pittses for Extra 300s.
This year Biggin's organisers are opening the show site a day early, on Friday 19 June, to give the public an opportunity to see aircraft arriving for the Air Fair and watch performers practising for the airshow.
Entry on that day only is £6 on the gate, free for children under fifteen years of age.
You can fly into the Biggin Air Fair, but you will need to have a slot time allocated for your arrival.
To obtain a slot write, giving day of show, aircraft type, registration, point of departure and desired arrival time, to: For all other information on the show, and advance ticket booking, call 0959 540959.
Riviera Air Show cancelled
Too late to stop last month's story about the new-style Riviera Air Show at Cannes came news that the event, planned for 1–3 July, had been cancelled.
Organisers Editions Larivière says it made the decision not to proceed ‘for its own reasons’.
The Nice Côte d'Azur Trade & Industry Chamber is now considering the future of the biennial Cannes GA show.
Accident reporting confidentiality — or the lack of it
Remember the reader who wrote in suggesting that accident report forms sent to the AAIB at Farnborough were secretly — and irregularly — copied to the CAA?
We wrote to the AAIB asking them about this, but they never answered.
Now we've heard from another reader that his solicitor managed to ‘discover’ a copy of a standard form GTS 21/2 190582 the AAIB use to report to the CAA.
It includes this wording:
‘This has been forwarded to us ‘in confidence’ by AAIB and you are asked to treat the information accordingly.
‘It is permissible for the data to be used for accident prevention purposes, but the source of the information must not be divulged to anyone who is not a member of the Authority.’
We duly wrote to the CAA, asking them to confirm or deny this practice.
Once again the answer was a deafening silence.
Best assume, then, there's no confidentiality in reporting to the AAIB, and that the CAA will get to see it.
Czechmate.
Vic Norman's New Zlin 50 G-MATE, the 68th off the Otrokovice production line, is the latest Z50LX variant, with carbonfibre cowlings, lightweight starter, ‘blueprinted’ 330 by hp Lycoming, factory-installed smoke system and — at Norman's request — all fuel tanks located within the wing, obviating the need for the ferry tiptanks of standard models.
Want to help our gallant team at the World Aerobatic Championships?
They need funds — for their entry fees and training, pilot and accommodation expenses before July's contest at Le Havre, and are hoping to raise some £20,000 in all.
Pilot has kicked off the fund with a donation of £1,000.
If you'd like to make a contribution send it to:
This is your captain zzzzzing…
The FAA is considering allowing airline pilots on long-haul flights to take short nape in the cockpit under strictly controlled conditions.
Research conducted by NASA-Ames has shown that crews flying long sectors were more alert during approach and landing if they had been allowed to nap while cruising.
No malice in Dallas
Industry one, lawyers nil.
The much-hyped arm-wrestling match between Kurt Herwald, chairman of U.S. FBO Stevens Aviation Inc. and his opposite number at Southwest Airlines, Herb Kelleher (Pilot Notes, April) took place at the Dallas Sportatorium in Dallas in March.
The result was a victory for Herwald and commonsense, $15,000 for charities and the loss of a potential $500,000 in legal fees for lawyers who might otherwise have been called upon the resolve a dispute over who had the right to use the slogan ‘Plane Smart’.
‘Killer Kurt’ Herwald threw down the best-out-of-three challenge when Southwest adopted his company's slogan.
Sixty-one year old ‘Smokin' Herb’ Kelleher won the first round (by substituting a Texas arm-wrestling champion who had legally changed his name to Herb Kelleher for the day), but 37-year old Herwald took the final decision, then announced that Southwest could continue using the slogan ‘just to show there's no hard feelings or to be accused of taking advantage of senior citizens’.
‘I'm very happy to say that the lawyers didn't make a penny off this,’ said Herwald.
‘Both sides saved a considerable amount of money and we have set an example which we hope others will follow.
This country is far too entrenched in a litigation mentality that squanders time and money…an interesting thing happens when you settle a dispute without lawyers.
You get to talk to each other face-to-face…and now that we've had all this publicity from the event, the slogan is really much more value to both of us.’
Wot a brilliant idea: the arm-wrestling match in Dallas described here.
How level is that European playing field?
Not very, is the feeling among many UK general aviation operators as the Single European Market comes closer to fruition.
In particular there is concern within the British civil aviation industry about the level of costs being incurred by the CAA, and recovered from industry, in its work towards setting up the European Joint Aviation Authority and associated regulatory functions, particularly in this formative period when the British Authority continues to function as an autonomous body whose charges must also be borne by operators.
There is a suspicion that functions are being duplicated at home and in Europe and paid for twice, a situation not experienced by operators in other EC states which are members of the JAA because the CAA is unique in pursuing a government-driven policy of total costrecovery for its activities.
Addressing members of GAMTA on this subject, John Page, Head of Support Services at the CAA's Safety Regulation Group, admitted to ‘a grain of truth’ in the belief that charges are being levied twice.
‘To appreciate the real position, the relative size of costs in (CAA headquarters at) Gatwick and (JAA Headquarters at) Hoofdorp have to be taken into account, as well as the benefits that will stem in due course from the JAA-wide applicability of Certificates and Approvals.
If, by the question ‘Can duplication be avoided?’ you mean ‘Will we have to pay double?’, the answer is undoubtedly no.
If it means ‘Will we have to pay more?’, the answer is probably yes, unless we can compensate by reducing our charges for what we currently do.
The important questions are: ‘How much more will we pay?’, and ‘What will we get for it?’
‘We can look at JAA costs in three parts.
First, costs arising from JAA HQ, whose total budget for 1992 is a little over £600,000 spread between nineteen countries…(of which) the UK will contribute just over £145,000 and will recover this through our charging schemes as part of the overheads…
As JAA expands, its costs will increase, but the JAA Board have put very tight limits on how far it can go.
The forecast budget for 1993 will be around £750,000.
‘Secondly, there are costs incurred by the CAA in participating in study/working groups.
These are more difficult to quantify.
The CAA is making a major contribution to the development of JARs and the way JAA is organised…
We believe it is important that we participate fully in all these discussions as we think we have an important contribution to make from the substantial experience that we have, and I do not think you would find it acceptable for JARs to be binding on UK industry without us being in on every stage of their development.
We estimate that for 1992 the cost of this work will be around £1.2 million, or two per cent of our costs.
As more JARs become part of harmonisation regulation we hope that this work and associated costs will diminish in the next year or so, and the cost of work on JARs must be set off against work not needed on BCARs.
‘The last part (of JAA costs) is fees that you will pay for JAA Certification and Approval.
No firm decisions have been reached at JAA level on the method of cost recovery, but the principle is that for all JAA activities the (CAA) policy is to achieve full  cost recovery.
The two areas where there is JAA joint action at present are in type certification and maintenance approval.
Currently, where a joint team from a number of JAA states are engaged in JAA certification of a new aircraft or power-plant type, each state charges the applicant according to its national scheme, which may vary from zero to £100 per hour.
We are moving towards a position where JAA will probably receive and settle invoices from each national authority and send out a single invoice to the applicant.
As there may be some averaging of national rates and the UK's is probably the highest because of our 100 per cent cost recovery policy, this could result in the JAA invoice being lower than the UK one would have been, but I wouldn't bank on it.’
‘We are conscious,’ John Page concluded, ‘that our costs put quite a burden on some of you, and I believe we are going to have to look at that aspect of the ‘level playing field’because we know you think this unfair as not all countries are in the same position.
We are doing our best to keep our costs as low as possible, bearing in mind our primary duty of setting and ensuring safety standards.
There are and will be additional costs arising from the existence of JAA, not because the same job is being done twice, but because there is a need, if there is to be wide applicability, to ensure that common standards are being applied.
In any case, additional costs will represent a small percentage of the overall costs of safety regulations, in exchange for which there will be access to a very much wider market.’
CAA Chairman Christopher Chataway reiterated this view.
‘There are lots of very important issues between general aviation and the CAA: the cost of safety regulation, concern that there should be no overlapping between JAA and Safety Regulation Group activity, anxiety that we haven't yet succeeded with our European partners in finding a common way of funding safety regulation.
The British Government is not prepared to provide a subsidy from the taxpayer and requires probably uniquely that all costs be recovered from the industry, while most Europeans have large parts of their costs met by government…
The peak JAA activities for the CAA are 1990–93, when SRG's costs will rise by about two per cent as a result of JAA work.
I do recognise the need for extra vigilance about all expenditure during that period.
Our objective is to ensure that our charges, taking one year with another and despite the additional burden of JAA, don't rise faster than inflation.
The proposed increases for 1992/93 don't quite meet that criteria, although the AOC charges increase of 4.3 per cent is very close…
I am not such an optimist as to imagine that we are always going to agree with you about the type of regulation, or its costs, but I do want to emphasise that we are determined always to try to talk through contentious issues with you and to ensure that there is real dialogue.’
An associated issue which is concerning UK operators is the question, oft raised in the past but still showing no sign of solution, of mutual recognition of aircraft certification standards in the Single European Market.
European Commission spokesman Chris North says that the intention of legislation is for aircraft to be transferred between the civil aircraft registers of EC states without additional work, but that this will apply only to new aircraft, type-certificated under JARs.
It could be twenty or thirty years, perhaps more, before all new aircraft meet those requirements and non-JAA certificated aircraft have been retired.
In the meantime existing national rules such as the CAA's onerous and expensive Special Conditions modifications will continue to apply.
This is not such a problem in most other EC states which do not demand major modifications for acceptance of imported aircraft onto their registers.
North's belief is that the Joint Aviation Authorities will not adopt CAA Special Conditions requirements and that ‘if they don't enhance safety they should be dropped’.
He also recognises the potential problem of UK operators being at a financial disadvantage when the UK market is wide open to Continental competition after the EC's Third Liberalisation Package is adopted and, since it appears that AOC holders may be able to operate aircraft on any EC register, in the absence of action from the JAA and CAA, he foresees a situation where UK air taxi and charter operators will ‘go offshore’ or operate under ‘flags of convenience’.
‘We need to ensure that this situation does not develop.
The JAA will have to take action to protect UK passengers in that event,’ he says.
Defending the CAA's adherence to its own airworthiness standards for non-JAR certificated aircraft, Chairman Christopher Chataway says: ‘Different airworthiness standards will continue to apply in different European countries to aircraft type certificated before JAR 23 came into force.
You ask why the CAA can't just accept FAA standards?
Because that would be contrary to our statutory duty.
We can point to many instances where clear safety improvements have been effected by not simply accepting FAA requirements.
We feel we must continue to pursue that objective as new JARs are formulated.’
Operators remain unconvinced, pointing out that when liberalisation opens the way, Continental companies not faced with the cost of special modifications to aircraft otherwise identical to those of their British counterparts will, it appears, be able to ply for trade in the UK in competition with UK companies bearing the unfair burden of CAA certification costs.
What's more, if those ‘safety improvements’ really are all that tangible, will not those aircraft from other EC states which do not incorporate the CAA's modifications be exposing UK citizens to added risk when they are free to seek their business here?
Frenchman Clement Ader's bird-winged Eole may have been the first aircraft to take off under its own power (a 20 hp steam engine) in 1890, but never really flew , lacking natural stability and any control system — though Ader did invent what is still the French word for an aeroplane:avion .
This replica of the Eole was seen at a ‘ULM’(microlight) meeting at Metz in May: sensibly it made no attempt to fly.
CAA Library moved
The CAA's Central Library has moved from Kingsway to Aviation House at Gatwick, where it is open for reference and sale of CAA publications from 0930–1630 Monday to Friday.
Some stock, such as technical reports and back issues of periodicals, will be housed away from Aviation House, and the CAA suggest telephoning on 0293 573725 to check for availability before making a journey to Gatwick.
The UK Registers of Aircraft and Aircraft Mortgages will continue to be available for inspection at CAA House, Kingsway.
Decca safe until 2014
Racal-Decca Marine Navigation Ltd has signed an agreement with the General Lighthouse Authorities (GLA) for the continued operation of the UK's Decca Navigator System to the year 2014.
This brings the UK into line with the Danish, Dutch and Swedish authorities, who have already committed themselves to preserving Decca at least until the end of this century, while the positions of Ireland and Norway have not yet been declared.
The agreement follows the British Government's decision last summer not to share the cost of setting-up of a proposed North West European Loran-C network, and as a result eighteen UK Decca stations are to have their control and transmitting systems modernised and a new central control facility will be established.
Don't QSY when changing frequency
Much of the old three-letter ‘Q’ code, devised in the days when wireless telegraphy was the standard form of air-ground communication, has fallen into disuse, apart from the familiar QFE, QNH, QDM and QDR.
According the CAA's General Aviation Safety Information Leaflet some pilots are also still using the archaic QSY, for ‘am changing frequency to…
‘. The preferred R/T term is ‘changing to (station name and frequency)’, and pilots are urged to abandon QSY.
CAP 413 Radiotelephony Manual is presently being revised and will reflect this and other changes to R/T procedures.
GASIL asks: ‘For the real Q-code experts, who can recall the decodes of QGO and QRM?’ *
* QGO meant ‘Landing prohibited at…’ and QRM ‘Are you being interfered with?’
Avionics theft
The CAA reports regular occurrences of avionics being stolen from parked aircraft, often with damage being caused in the process of forced entry and removal.
‘Provided all avionics engineers are meticulous in checking the origin and the proper paperwork relating to any radios which they handle or install in aircraft, the stolen radios should be virtually worthless in the UK,’ says the authority.
‘Any owner offered second-hand avionics should check very closely the origin, and if they have any doubts, seek the advice of a qualified engineer who will assist in authentication of the origin of the radio…
With vigilance within the industry this should be a problem which can be stamped out.’
The recently-launched National Avionics Register (‘Air Mail’ February) is also a useful asset in, if not preventing theft, at least increasing your chances of tracking wayward radios.
It costs £40 to register, via Compu Tag (UK) Ltd on 0424 730760 or Polygon Insurance on 048 171 6000.
Avionics (and indeed aircraft) theft is a huge problem in the United States.
There, a number of anti-theft devices have been marketed to prevent thieves from extracting radios from instrument panels, and were recently noted in The Aviation Consumer .
Theft Guard is a folding sheet of 16-gauge stainless steel with foam rubber backing which locks onto the panel hiding both radios and instruments.
It costs $300–400 from Azvedo & Associates .
Radio Lock, at $99.95, is a steel bar  with lock which runs diagonally across the avionics stack and is attached to two steel nuts which must be installed in the panel, from Aircraft Security & Alert Systems  B&J Locking Bars comprise a cross-shaped steel tube arrangement specifically for Cessna singles and the Skymaster twin which is padlocked in place between the control wheel tubes, locking the controls and blocking access to avionics  Do readers know of any enterprising UK manufacturers or importers marketing such gadgets?
G-IV for USAF
Gulfstream Aerospace has made its first sale of a Gulfstream IV business jet to the U.S. Air Force.
The aircraft, which will be known as the C-20H in military service, will be delivered in October 1993 and will be based at Andrews AFB near Washington, D.C. for use by the vice-president, joint chiefs of staff and members of Congress.
The Veep's G-IV will cost $50 million — about double the price of a typical corporate aeroplane because of the need for development and installation of secure voice and data communications avionics packages.
Two further aircraft are on option.
The USAF already operates ten earlier model Gulfstream IIIs, which are also in service with the other U.S. military services.
‘No nest Net’ is a simple yet brilliant idea for keeping birds, insects, small furry creatures and other pests out of your aeroplane's engine compartment.
Fitting over front and bottom cowls of most engines and twins, ‘No Nest Net’ needs no airframe fixtures to install, and its smooth mesh allows natural air circulation to help prevent moisture build-up.
It weights just one pound and comes with a storage pouch.
More details from Easy Flight Inc 
More on that Toyota lightplane
From the United States come signs that the Japanese car manufacturers Toyota may be making its long-expected move to  become ‘a force’ in general aviation.
In 1989 Toyota, which then owned 41 per cent of Piper's Japanese sales agency, acquired an FBO at Long Beach, California which specialises in buying and selling used business jets.
The FBO was bought by Toyota as a first step in learning more about the GA business.
Heading Toyota Aviation USA, is Yuki Togo, senior Toyota executive in the United States and an enthusiastic private pilot.
In a recent interview with the Los Angeles Business Journal , during which he showed a model of a six-seat design by Burt Rutan which is believed to be that currently in flight test at Mojave (Pilot Notes, May), Togo commented: ‘I'd like to build such a futuristic plane.
My dream is to use an automotive engine for an airplane.
Some day, perhaps ten years from now, Toyota will have great airplane sales.’
Another Toyota official in the USA referred to the project as ‘Yuki's dream’ and downplayed the company's part in it, though he admitted to knowing few details.
Burt Rutan is characteristically coy about his involvement, pointing out that many projects undertaken by his Scaled Composites company are ‘proprietary’ and adding: ‘I can't even confirm that he (Togo) is a customer.’
According to sources in California the ‘Toyota airplane’(its registration N191SC suggests that it is Rutan Model 191, following previous practice) first flew in late 1991, is of all-composite construction and is ‘rather conventional looking’ compared with other Rutan designs.
It is thought to be powered by a derivative of the lexus automobile engine.
MoD privatising elementary flying training
The Ministry of Defence has put out to civilian tender elementary flying training for RAF and Royal Navy.
MoD is offering a ten-year contract, thought to be worth about £30 million, for the operation of RAF Topcliffe in North Yorkshire, currently home to the Royal Navy Elementary Flying Training School equipped with BAe Bulldogs.
When the civilian contract is in operation from July 1993, Topcliffe will also take over the function of the RAF's Chipmunk-equipped Elementary Flying Training School, currently based at RAF Swinderby in Lincolnshire.
Pilot throughput of the two EFTSs is about 177 per year.
The civilian operator will be required to own and operate a fleet of twenty trainers.
Known bidders for the contract, which will be awarded next January, include British Aerospace, which proposes using Swiss-built FFA Bravos/Wrens (as used by the BAe Flying College at Prestwick), and Oxford Air Training School.
OATS has proposed the use of either Slingsby T67s or Czech-built Zlin Z242Ls for the EFTS requirement.
During April a Swedish-registered Zlin Z242L (OATS's parent company CSE Aviation is Swedish-owned, and the Swedish parent has a Zlin dealership) spent a week in England, where it was evaluated for 23 flying hours by RAF personnel and also flown by OATS instructors.
The aircraft, which is a certification prototype, is due to return to England this month and will be displayed at the IAT Air Tournament International at Boscombe Down.
The Zlin Z242L is a development of the earlier Z142, with a 200 hp Lycoming AE10- 360 engine in place of the Avia inline, and meets FAA FAR Pt35 standards.
A four-seat version, the 2760 hp Z143L, has also been developed.
According to CSE's marketing manager Peter Moxham, if it meets CAA certification requirements without expensive modifications, the Z242L will be ‘quite an attractively priced aeroplane’.
Another non-stop round-the-world flight planned
Italian pilot Mario Mazzucchelli is planning an attempt to fly around the world nonstop, passing over both Poles, and doing it solo .
Sixty-year-old Mazzucchelli has hired Carlo Ferrarin, designer of the Caproni Vizzola A-21SJ Calif jet-powered sailplane and C22J Ventura light jet trainer, to design the vehicle for this exploit:Pellegrino , a twin-engined all-composite motor-glider with an 82-foot span Wortmann laminar flow-sectioned wing, which Mazzucchelli and a group of friends are building.
They estimate it will take them 20,000 man-hours to get the aircraft flying and ready for the round-the-world trip.
Italian sailplane builder Pietro Trezzi designed Katana, a contest aerobatic aircraft with alloy wings and tail and a steel tube fuselage with removable shells of PVC core/Kevlar/carbon cloth.
The prototype had a 300 hp Lycoming, but the definitive version has a 400 hp IO-720 driving a four-blade Muhlbauer.
It's available as a kit or fully built from Terzi Aerodyne 
Like Dick Rutan's and Jeanna Yeager's Voyager ,Pellegrino will be a centreline thrust twin, powered by a pair of 210 hp VM Motori TPJ 1304HF four-cylinder turbo diesel engines.
The front engine will drive a folding propeller similar to that on the  German Stemme S10 powered sailplane (Pilot , August 1991), while the rear one will drive a constant-speed Hartzell propeller.
The front engine will be used only for take-off and climb to cruising altitude, around 20,000 feet, Mazzucchelli predicts — and then shut down, though it will be kept heated in case an emergency re-start becomes necessary.
Sandwiched between the two engines will be a 6,500-pound capacity fuel tank and a pressurised cockpit with the pilot's seat on the left and a ‘couch’ to the right where Mazzucchelli plans to take short naps while Pellegrino 's dual autopilots fly the aeroplane.
Cruising at 150–185 mph, he expects the circumnavigation to take  five and a half days .
No date has yet been predicted for the attempt.
Astronaut rock
I wannabee a rock star.
I wannabee an astronaut.
The Max Qs are both — a six-piece band whose members are all NASA astronauts based at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas.
Max Q (astronaut-speak for maximum aerodynamic pressure) was formed in 1987 and includes founder member ‘Hoot Gibson’, who plays lead guitar alongside fellow shuttle pilots Kevin Chilton (rhythm guitar), James Weatherbee (drums), Pierre Thuot (bass), Carl Waltz (saxophone/vocals), and keyboard player Susan Helms, who gave up plans to become a professional pianist in favour of aeronautical engineering.
According to Air & Space the band plays at NASA employee outings, weddings, cocktail parties and occasionally guests at Houston clubs, performing a repertoire of 1950s–1980s material.
White Waltham's Joe Austin has spent a decade restoring this all-wood 1938 Chilton D.W.1.
Powered by a tiny 62 hp Czech Walter Mikron engine, it was timed around the 19757 King's Cup course at Baginton at an incredible 144.5 mph.
Harey landing
From The Moth , journal of the DH Moth Club, this member's account of an accident which  befell his pristine Tiger Moth last summer soon after it had undergone a complete rebuild at Maypole Farm in Kent and had accumulated only a handful of flying hours.
‘Whilst undertaking a textbook undershoot, the aircraft passed gently through the end of a cornfield, then a rather thick hedge, through the rough end of the strip and then hit this ******* great hare, spun round and turned over.
I knew it was the hare's fault all along.’
The Tiger is recovering.
As for the hare: ‘Tasted good, though expensive, as jugged hare goes…‘
Life-savers
The scenario came direct from Brian Lecomber's best-selling thriller Talk Down .
Non-pilot John Anderson had gone for a ride in father-in-law Les Rhoades’ Rallye Minerva.
Over the Bristol Channel Mr. Rhoades suffered a fatal heart attack.
John Anderson's garbled Mayday call was heard by Cardiff-Wales Flying Club instructor Robert Legg, aloft in a Warrior three miles away.
 Formatting to the rear of the Rallye, Legg established radio contact, and gently eased Anderson through a series of power adjustments and manoeuvres to make a practice approach at Cardiff before bringing him around for a successful, damage- and injury-free landing.
‘It was the most incredible fifteen minutes of my life — and his,’ commented Robert Legg afterwards.
‘He was fantastically calm.
When I kept telling him what controls to use, the repeated reply was, ‘OK, but I've never done this before’, but he never sounded frightened.
We had one chance to get it right and, thank God, we succeeded.
The worst bit was coming over the runway for the landing when I felt that I was no longer in control, but he made a perfect landing…a great landing for anyone, but incredible for someone who had never flown before.’
Private pilot Eddie Whittle was also instrumental in saving the life of another flyer.
En route in a Cessna from the Isle of Man to Blackpool, he was alerted by ATC to a JetRanger ditching after engine failure about twenty miles off Morecambe.
Mr Whittle saw the JetRanger enter the water and watched pilot Geoff Dodds climb out.
One of his passengers dropped the Cessna's dinghy to the JetRanger's pilot, who was subsequently picked up by an RAF SAR helicopter which took him to hospital in Blackpool suffering from hypothermia.
RAF winchman Alan Falconer said, ‘Mr Whittle's quick thinking and action undoubtedly helped save his life.
He wouldn't have lasted long in his condition in waters that cold.’
Sloane taking orders for R44s
Sywell-based Sloane Helicopters Ltd, which regularly clocks up record annual sales of the Robinson R22 helicopter, has been appointed UK distributor for the forthcoming four-seat R44.
Although it shares many features and concepts with the R22, the R44 is an entirely new design.
Non-refundable deposits of U.S. $15,000 plus VAT per helicopter are now being accepted to secure a production line position for UK delivery in mid-1993.
BAe seeking partner for corporate jets
British Aerospace is seeking a partner to take over ‘majority ownership’ of its successful corporate jets business which builds the BAe 800 and 1000.
A new company, Corporate Jets Ltd, was formed on 1 May to facilitate the sale to a partner, and will also acquire the Design Authority for BAe's bizjets from the company's Regional Aircraft Division.
Contracts have been arranged for the supply from other parts of BAe to enable the new company to operate autonomously.
The decision to search for a partner has been taken ‘in the context of competing investment requirements’ across the broad sweep of BAe's business interests.
‘Development of the business jet range requires a lot of money, and there are so many calls for resources within the company,’ spokesman Alan Piper told Pilot .
There is, apparently, no question of BAe's bizjets business being sold in total to another manufacturer, and regardless of the nationality of any partner, the company does not envisage manufacture of the BAe 800 and 1000, or future models, being moved from the present production site at Chester.
Kleinwort Benson has been retained to advise on a suitable partner.
Whilst BAe will not be drawn on likely candidates, rival Dassault (which made an unsuccessful bid for Cessna) is expected to show interest, as might Bombardier, which already owns business jet manufacturers Canadair and Learjet.
The BAe 125 series has been highly successful in a very competitive market.
More than 800 have been sold since 1964 — equivalent to one every seven working days — with 84 per cent going for export, sixty per cent of the North American market.
Speed mods for Comanches
Roy LoPresti, noted for his aerodynamic clean-up work on the Mooney series and, more recently, on the Globe Swift/SwiftFury, has set up a new company to market speed modifications for Piper Comanches and Twin Comanches.
First offerings include Speed Spats and a Speed Slipper, respectively fairings which fit aft of the aircraft's main- and nose-wheel wells, flap hinge fairings called Speed Splitters are being developed.
LoPresti and propeller manufacturer Hartzell are co-operating on new cowling/propeller/spinner designs for single and Twin Comanches which they predict will increase their maximum speeds by 42 mph and 35 mph respectively, through reduced drag and more efficient use of propeller airflow.
These improvements are expected to become available in the summer, and will be followed by similar modifications for the Piper Arrow.
While running LoPresti Piper Engineering at Vero Beach Roy LoPresti was working on plans to relaunch production of a much updated and aerodynamically improved version of the Comanche — subsequently abandoned in the face of Piper's continuing financial difficulties.
These aftermarket modifications appear to be spin-offs from that work.
More details from LoPresti Speed Merchants 
Pyxis GPS available in UK
Sony's IPS-360 Pyxis portable GPS, briefly mentioned in last month's ‘The brave new world of GPS’ article, is now available in the UK.
Pyxis's receiver tracks four GPS satellites simultaneously, and can store up to 100 waypoints with six-character indents.
It provides lat/long data; distance/bearing to destination/waypoint; groundspeed; heading; relative altitude from starting point and absolute altitude based on local coordinates; current time in hours, minutes and seconds; and ETA at next waypoint based on current groundspeed (with aural signal of waypoint passage), and also has a graphic display mode to enable current heading to be compared with true course.
The main unit measures 100 by 175 by 39 mm, weighs one pound five ounces including its four AA batteries, and comes with antenna, detachable compact LCD display keyboard, linking cable, 12/24 volt DC adaptor, mounting accessories and carrying case at £849.99 including VAT, plus £19.99 for the optional battery case.
Adams Aviation Ltd at Biggin Hill have been appointed aviation distributors for the unit and can be contacted on 
The circus leaves town
After 27 years at Sywell Airport, the Barnstormers Flying Circus have packed their tent and moved to a new home at Spanhoe Airfield, near RAF Wittering in the north of Northamptonshire.
Along with the Tiger Club, the Barnstormers, formed by the late Charles Boddington, revived the between-wars touring airshow, and have numbered many celebrated performers among their acts.
Despite lack of sponsorship (offers to the address below) the Barnstormers are looking forward to a busy 1992 season.
Bookings and enquiries to Ross Willis   
Propeller manufacturers Hartzell are offering three-blade propeller installations on the Piper Arrow, Mooney 20C-G, 201, 231, and 252, and Cessna 177B/177RG Cardinal.
Prop kits, including polished spinners, cost $5,995 for all models except the Mooney 231/252, which sell for $6,495.
Hartzell claim improved take-off and climb performance, reduced noise and vibration, and better ground clearance.
Details from distributors, or direct from Hartzell Service Center
Safety Matters
Flew into high ground in cloud
A Reims Rocket took off from Newcastle with four people on board for a fight to Carlisle.
The intended routing was not direct, but was left flexible, travelling south and west from Newcastle towards Kirby Stephen, then west towards the Lake District, thence to Carlisle.
Prior to departure the pilot obtained weather information from the Newcastle Airport briefing facility, which included perusal of the Met Form 214 (Upper Winds) and Form 215 (Fixed Time Forecast Chart).
The flight proceeded uneventfully, in visual contact with the ground, until the aircraft approached Keswick.
By this time the cloud base had reduced to 1,000 feet agl.
Rather than continue north, and being aware of the presence of high ground in the vicinity, the pilot elected to turn onto an easterly heading, and follow the A66 along the valley towards Penrith.
The cloud base reduced further, and he decided to climb to safety altitude, along what he considered to be a safe track.
Whilst still climbing in cloud the aircraft hit high ground, near the top of Clough Head at 2,200 feet ams!
It bounced on initial impact and came to rest inverted.
There was no fire, and all four occupants quickly vacated the wreckage with no more than minor injuries.
As the wreckage was situated in a very remote location, despite their injuries all four occupants undertook a two-hour journey down the hillside to seek assistance.
Visibility had been forecast to be generally over ten kilometres, but falling to three to five kilometres in drizzle, with scattered stratocumulus cloud to the east of the area, base 2,000 feet, increasing to broken cover to the west with a base of 1,500–2,000 feet, with occasional scattered/broken stratus base 800–1,000 feet.
Occasional rain/drizzle was also forecast along with hill fog patches.
Forecast winds were 290/20 at 2,000 feet and 300/15 at 5,000 feet.
The pilot commented that prior to initiation of the final climb on an easterly heading he had not noticed any appreciable drift, and that his misjudgement resulted in deviation from the planned track.
He also considered that the nature of the terrain in this area may have had a marked effect on forecast wind conditions.
Landing gear torn off by stone wall during forced landing
Ten minutes after take-off severe vibration was experienced, such that the pilot of the Stearman reported that he had difficulty in holding the control column.
After selecting a field he carried out his emergency drills and shut down the engine.
A Mayday was transmitted, but it later transpired that this had not been heard, probably due to a simultaneous transmission from another aircraft.
Once established on a final glide-approach to the field the pilot realised that the aircraft was likely to hit a stone wall and attempted to ‘stretch’ the glide.
However the aircraft's landing gear struck the four-foot-high wall and was torn off, but the aircraft continued and ‘landed’ on its underside in the field.
There was no fire, and the pilot and passenger were able to evacuate the aircraft unaided and unhurt.
Examination of the aircraft revealed a quantity of metal swarf in the oil filter, the nature of which was consistent with that which would be expected from a bearing failure within the engine.
The engine was recorded as having a total time of 302.30 hours at the time of the accident.
Loss of control taking off on a windy day
The pilot of a Rallye had intended to take off from one field and land in another to pick up two passengers for local flying.
His reasoning was that the first field was inadequate for operating with the additional load.
He had delayed his flight because he considered that the wind was too strong and blustery for an earlier departure, but later felt conditions had improved sufficiently for him to fly.
He estimated that at that time the local wind had become steady at 15 to 20 mph from 300°M, which was less than that on previous occasions when he had operated from the same field.
He calculated that the aircraft was fairly light, the only payload being himself with a twentypound bag and twelve gallons of fuel.
He calculated a ‘go/no-go’ point, but in the event reported that the aircraft became airborne within one-third of the take-off distance available and climbed ahead satisfactorily.
The latter part of the take-off run had been into-wind and up a slight incline towards a ridge topped by trees with a fall-away of the ground on the far side.
The pilot stated that as the aircraft rose above the treeline, at about 150 feet above the ground it involuntarily banked to the right, and despite maintaining the climb speed he could not prevent the roll to the right — which continued past ninety degrees of bank.
This caused the aircraft to turn downwind rapidly.
It did not respond to earlier or subsequent corrective action using the ailerons, and the nose pitched past the vertical in the ensuing dive.
The pilot assumed that at this point the aircraft had stalled, and he noted that the ailerons seemed ineffective as if (he said) they had become detached (subsequent investigation proved this not to be the case).
He made the decision to lessen the angle of impact by closing the throttle, applying hard up elevator and full right rudder.
He considered this action to have been successful, as the right wingtip struck the ground first, followed by the nose.
The aircraft continued in a wide arc, during which time the wings and the engine were torn off, apparently absorbing much of the energy.
During the impact the right side and top of the instrument panel was twisted upwards and to the left, causing it to strike the left-hand side of the straining bar beneath the canopy to the left of the pilot's head as well as impacting on the right side of the pilot's face, resulting in minor injuries.
There is little doubt that use of a full harness prevented serious if not fatal injuries to the pilot.
Fortunately there was no post-crash fire.
The pilot confirmed that to the best of his knowledge the autostat system had operated normally during the take-off — as had the engine.
He stated that he had later spoken to two observers who had been close to the ridge at the time of the accident, and they had apparently noticed that the wind had, momentarily, markedly increased in strength and had appeared to swirl up the hill towards the ridge, coincidental with the time that they saw the aircraft's wing drop and the aircraft begin to descend.
Aged 48, the pilot held a PPL with IMC and Night ratings, and had 920 hours, 112 of them on type.
From this spectacular wreck of a Saratoga at Sion in Switzerland three of the