

Expert Systems for Maintenance Engineering
Dr Mitch M Grigoriu
Abstract
It has been thought that aircraft maintenance problems i.e. planning/scheduling activities, aircraft system/equipment failure diagnosis, etc., are too large and complex to be tackled successfully with computers.
Many agree that for too many years we have been ‘data rich’ but not capable of computerising the knowledge and experience of highly skilled maintenance engineers.
Expert systems will change all that, promising many advantages and benefits to the aviation world.
What is certain is that expert systems increased the competitiveness of those companies who implemented them.
In this paper expert systems technology is explained and shown how it can be applied to ‘real’ aircraft maintenance problems.
Also described is how expert systems can enhance human expertise and allow it to be used more efficiently in the specific working environment of aircraft maintenance.
The reasons for using expert systems technology in aircraft maintenance are explained.
Knowledge in Aircraft Maintenance
1.1 Problem(s) Characteristics
Main characteristics of today's maintenance problems Many of the activities in aircraft maintenance, particularly failure detection, testing, diagnosis and repair, are knowledge-intensive and experience-based tasks.
These activities are performed to solve problems involving complexity, uncertainty and/or ambiguity that require intelligence and decision-making.
Such problems are of combinatorial type and algorithmic solutions do not usually exist.
A search through many alternative solutions is often required.
What is needed to solve today's maintenance problems?
Although test maintenance manuals contain recommended procedures for detection, repair, procedures alone do not assure successful completion of trouble-shooting and repair in a timely manner  for the following reasons:
there is near universal agreement that technical documentation is, for the most part, inadequate ;
the proliferation of technical manuals over the last twenty years has meant that the number of manuals supplied with complex aircraft/systems has increased to the point where it is practically impossible to access all the information in the ‘library’(Fig. 1 shows an example of technical manual growth rate within the Naval Air Systems Command);
for some systems, complex decision trees and flowcharts (logical fault finding) are part of the manual and are timeconsuming to read and understand.
Usually, failure events are analysed, evaluated and interpreted by merging highly diverse sources of data and information (i.e. analog/digital signals, logical variables and test outcomes, text from verbal reports, inspection images, information from manuals, etc.) with experience knowledge.
It means that there are not only data and/or information used the problem-solving process but expertise (knowledge + experience) and reasoning as well.
Today, the most important parts of an aircraft maintenance problemsolving process are expertise and reasoning.
Unfortunately they tend to be ignored as they have never been properly recorded and analyzed/evaluated.
They are becoming increasingly critical to aircraft maintenance operations due to the shortfalls in trained and skilled staff experienced by the aviation world.
1.2 The Expert
Skilled maintenance engineers, apart from using test procedures and maintenance manuals, use their intuition or heuristics and an understanding of how the system works to solve problems.
It is this ‘beyond procedures’ type of knowledge (the ‘grey knowledge’) that enables them to achieve high performance.
Their knowledge (rules, facts and ideas) has been acquired by study, investigation, observation and experience over many years of work in a particular domain, i.e. maintenance of a certain type of aircraft system/equipment.
The expert intuition is not found in manuals so skilled maintenance engineers use two types of knowledge :
public knowledge —‘publicly’ available (i.e. written in manuals, test procedures, etc.);
private knowledge — which is not written anywhere (i.e. it is in the expert's brain) and it consists mainly of the following:
intuition or heuristics;
an understanding of how the system/machine works.
Artificial Intelligence research has shown that when the maintenance experts are confronted with a problem they analyse the problem in a structured manner rather than randomly trying all possible alternatives.
1.3 The Expertise
Based on years of experience, a highly skilled maintenance engineer develops the following expertise :
an understanding of how the system/component works and its relation with the outside world (‘narrow domain’);
an intuitive understanding of how the system/component will behave when a certain sub-system(s) failed;
an understanding of the relationships between symptoms and failed sub-system(s) and symptoms interactions (‘deep knowledge’);
a familiarity with procedures and maintenance/service manuals.
Knowledge based on experience is not precise.
It contains:
less than certain facts;
heuristics from other domains;
assumptions which are made unless a contradiction is reached;
solutions proposed and tested.
An experienced maintenance engineer approaches a problem as follows:
1.
Problem identification/anticipation
a.
Setting-up hypotheses based on facts/symptoms.
The attempt here is to answer the question ‘which is the ‘real’ problem/failure/fault?’as in many cases the facts/symptoms could be misleading.
Fault diagnosis is only a small part of this stage.
b.
Trying to prove the hypotheses.
2.
Decision making.
To reach a solution several fundamental questions ought to be answered:
a.
‘What to do?’
This involves a criticality assessment of the problem as well, to decide if actions/measures are required immediately or they can be deferred.
b.
‘When to do it?’ and ‘who will do it?’
This depends mainly on the availability of resources, i.e. manpower, spares, tools, etc., and is interrelated with ‘what to do?’
c.
‘How to do it?’
This required rapid access to large amounts of technical documentation and/or maintenance procedures.
3.
Decision taking
4.
Decision/solution implementation and control.
An expert usually checks if his solution was right/correct or wrong.
The problem-solving process is iterative and flexible with the stages/steps described above changing order according to priorities/situation.
It can be seen that fault/failure diagnosis is a small part (on average only 8%) of the problem-solving process.
It is generally accepted that for both the ageing and new/modern aircraft, the complexity of maintenance problems (i.e. ageing — corrosion, modern — advanced avionics) increased dramatically in the last ten years.
This had a direct impact on the problem-solving time which is now on average 8.5 times longer than in the 1980s.
The ratio between decision making/taking and repair timings has changed as well.
The time needed to reach a solution to a problem is much longer (i.e. it could take several hours or even days) than the implementation/repair (i.e. replacing a module or a board/panel can take only 30 minutes).
It is evident that today the expertise (knowledge + expertise) and reasoning strategies used by highly skilled maintenance engineers are the most critical areas of the problem-solving process.
They have to be accelerated/automated and made readily available if we want to reduce the time needed to reach a solution to a problem.
The approaches described above can now be captured in computer programming using expert systems technology.
2.
Expert Systems
2.1 Symbolic Processing — the new approach to computing
When skilled maintenance staff carry out actions, such as fault detection, testing, diagnosing and repair, they do not do so by solving sets of mathematical equations.
Instead, they choose symbols to represent the problem concepts (knowledge) i.e. an  understanding of how the  system works, and then apply various techniques and heuristics (rules of thumb) to manipulate this knowledge (Fig. 3).
Symbols are a string of characters (i.e. ‘machine’, ‘fault’, ‘0.6’) used to represent real-world objects and properties associated with them.
They can be linked together into relationships, representing hierarchies and dependencies.
Symbolic processing is the manipulation by computers of information and knowledge represented as symbols, analogous to the way humans reason with the knowledge they possess.
2.2 Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a field of Computer Science concerned with developing intelligent computer programs.
AI programs are primarily symbolic processes that do more than follow an algorithm, as in traditional (procedural) computing.
In AI, knowledge-based tasks are performed to solve problems involving complexity, uncertainty and/or ambiguity that require intelligence and decision making.
Such problems (i.e. in aircraft maintenance fault diagnosis, trouble-shooting, monitoring, etc.) are of an combinatorial type and algorithmic solutions do not usually exist.
A search through many alternative solutions is often required.
Expert Systems (ESs) are intelligent computer programs that use knowledge and heuristics to solve complex problems.
They emulate the reasoning process of the human expert as well(Fig. 4).
ESs are increasingly being used to model knowledge which cannot be represented by conventional programming (Fig. 2).
Expert systems are the first commercial products to come from the world of Artificial Intelligence research.
Developed as a direct result of research into how the human brain works, expert systems are bringing a powerful new commodity to business — computer-based knowledge.
Expert systems can solve complex problems which previously required the aid of a human expert with years of experience.
They can produce these solutions with the speed, recall and immediate availability that only a computer can provide.
Expert systems handle data, information and expertise (knowledge + experience)— a revolutionary step for computers and for the people who use them.
Until now, computers have improved efficiency by storing and manipulating information faster and more accurately than people.
Modern business would be impossible without computers, soon it will be impossible without the help of expert systems.
Expert systems are taking computers one step further, they simulate the reasoning processes of human experts, applying the ‘rules of thumb’ that only experience can provide.
The reasoning mechanism (inference engine) used by an expert system is a program that contains generalized strategies used to solve problems to acquire knowledge and to interface with other systems.
It is independent of the application and it should facilitate explanations, i.e. explain why, justify, etc., for the reasoning process.
Each combination of the inference engine with a knowledge base becomes a unique expert system.
This is the fundamental difference between knowledge based systems (KBS) and expert systems.
KBS do not have a separate inference engine hence they are not capable of achieving the full range of reasoning strategies involved in aircraft maintenance.
Expert systems have the power and flexibility to bring the expertise of countless human experts to a single person via a simple desktop computer.
Expert Systems free the human expert for more efficient work.
2.3 Expert Systems and Traditional Programming
Conventional programs (Fig. 2) embed the knowledge in the instructions, making it very difficult for all but a few programmers to understand the logic of the program.
Updates to the data are inevitable, but each time the programmer amends the data the chance of introducing unplanned consequences increases.
Today's conventional data processing systems are often inflexible because they cannot be updated efficiently and rapidly.
Nor can they reason in such a way as to make their contribution relevant to the volatile, hurried and stressful conditions of commercial and industrial life.
Solving complex problems may require choosing from so many alternatives at each step that it is very difficult to algorithmically define solutions.
Configuring the cables of Shuttle Columbia with well over 7 million possible results is a good  example of a problem conventional programing just would not have been able to tackle cost effectively.
Furthermore, if a non-programmer stopped a conventional program in mid-run and examined the  code to determine what was happening he/she would not likely to learn anything useful.
Expert systems are quite different.
They represent symbolic processing (and not data processing) and are highly interactive.
All the knowledge needed to make decisions is stored in a separate knowledge base (Fig. 4) therefore the program is much easier to understand and anything in the knowledge base can be changed without a knock-on effect on the reasoning process.
A user without any computing experience can halt the processing at any time and ask why a particular line of questioning is being pursued or how a particular conclusion was reached — the expert system will explain and justify its line of reasoning.
2.4 Reasons for Using Expert Systems in Aircraft Maintenance
The main reasons for using expert systems in aircraft maintenance are as follows:
1.
Increasing demands for higher availability of the aircraft.
The aviation world today is highly competitive.
Operating schedules put pressure on aircraft downtime dictating that swift and efficient problem rectification takes place after defects/symptoms are reported.
The pressure is usually transmitted to the available servicing personnel affecting their performance.
In many cases the fault and/or recovery from complex equipment failure must be tackled on the spot and as fast as possible (emergency/panic situation that affects the servicing personnel's performance as well).
That requires fast response and qualified diagnosis of highly skilled maintenance engineers who should be available any time of the day and night for the whole year.
But we do not have, today, the same quality of expertise available all the time, especially for the night shift and holidays or when the expert is off sick.
Using an expert system (ES), it is possible to acquire the knowledge/expertise from experts and make it always available, i.e. to the less skilled servicing personnel.
In this way, the expert can concentrate on the most difficult problems.
2.
A company is often in danger of losing the expertise for ever if the expert retires, dies or changes employment.
If, however, an ES can ‘capture’ the expertise, it does not matter what happens to the expert; the maintenance staff can consult the ES.
3.
Although modern aircraft are more complex they are also more reliable.
Faults occur at less frequent intervals and this means that human maintenance expertise can deteriorate through lack of practice.
However, if maintenance expertise can be ‘captured’ in an expert system, then it is permanently available and unaffected by disuse or use.
4.
Knowledge about systems and equipment involves complex technologies from different areas.
Therefore, one expert is hardly able to possess all the existing knowledge.
Sometimes the maintenance engineer is dealing with a type of failure he has never had before.
He does not know what to do, and it takes time to solve the problem.
In such situations an ES can give advice based on knowledge acquired from experts in different domains or who have experienced that particular type of failure.
5.
Because of the variety of systems and equipment, a specialist cannot always be available and the service personnel have to solve the problem.
Artificial expertise can be easily transferred or reproduced.
Transferring knowledge from one human to another is a laborious, lengthy, and expensive process of training.
Expert systems can speed-up the distribution of expertise.
6.
Artificial expertise produces more consistent results than does human expertise.
Human experts take different decisions in identical situations because of emotional factors.
For example, a human could forget to use an important rule in a crisis situation (i.e. cognitive overload) because of time pressures, stress or panic.
An expert system is not susceptible to these distractions.
7.
Expert systems are affordable.
The development cost of the system is negligible compared to the saving achieved by increasing the aircraft availability due to fast/reliable and consistent diagnosis of complex failures/faults.
A summary of advantages and disadvantages of using expert systems in maintenance engineering is presented in Table 1, based on the discussion above.
2.5 Advantages of Expert Systems in Aircraft Maintenance
As it can be seen from Table 1, expert systems have certain fundamental  disadvantages against human experts.
It means that expert systems will never be able to replace skilled maintenance engineers.
The advantages of using expert systems are as follows:
Expert systems can help the human expert to have a better understanding of his cognitive knowledge.
Expert systems can help diagnose electrical, electronic and/or mechanical problems by accelerating the problem-solving process.
Expert systems are reliable.
Humans (even experts) can on occasion forget details which may be vital.
Expert systems do not fail to ask relevant questions, or  absent-mindedly ignore important factors in coming to a decision.
Expert systems are consistent.
Given the same input, the expert system consistently reaches the intended conclusion.
Expert systems are always available and can be interrogated by many users at once.
Human experts often have to travel to deploy their knowledge and are restricted by time and other business pressures.
Expert systems can be copied and distributed wherever there is a suitable computer.
Unlike human experts, they never take holidays and can be made available 24 hours a day.
Expert systems can teach people with a patience few human instructors could ever display.
Applications of expert systems in aircraft maintenance include:
1.
Planning and scheduling of maintenance activities
2.
Non-destructive testing interpretation
3.
Condition monitoring and/or signal interpretation
4.
Fault diagnosis/isolation of aircraft system(s)/component(s)
5.
Bridge the expanding number of technologies used in aircraft maintenance
6.
Computer based training (CBT) using real data/information
7.
Intelligent help facilities
The most important benefits gained by using expert systems in the above areas are a dramatic reduction (up to 80%) of the problem-solving time as the interpretation process is accelerated/automated and accuracy and consistency of decisions is improved.
3.
The Level of Application of Expert Systems Technology in Aircraft Maintenance
Expert systems is now established as one of the key software technologies of the future.
Expert systems sales are growing much faster than the software business as a whole.
The industry is becoming increasingly international.
The survey (6) of the applications and markets for expert systems shows that:
Expert systems is a substantial business in its own right, with sales of products and development services of over $400 million in the USA and Europe in 1989.
The market is growing at over 30% per year — much faster than the rest of the software business, or information technology as a whole.
However, it is estimated that although there is a lot of work going on in ESs in universities, companies and research departments worldwide, only a few dozen are in regular use in aircraft maintenance.
4.
Expert Systems: The Integrating Vehicle
The general view of expert systems used in aircraft maintenance is that they represent ‘just another island of automation’ in the general AT (Advanced Technologies) context.
Such a view is not correct because an expert system that automates the reasoning strategies/processes and knowledge of one/several maintenance expert(s) must contain the knowledge of operations expert(s) as well.
It must be understood that we can separate the operations data from maintenance data but it is impossible to separate the knowledge (operations from maintenance) mainly because it is too closely inter-related.
More than that, the expert systems technology is the only vehicle that can integrate cost effectively different aspects of aircraft maintenance.
Aircraft maintenance function would be considered today as having five generations of development, as follows (see Fig. 5):
1st generation: Breakdown Maintenance (BM) or Run-to-Failure (RTF).
2nd generations: Preventive and/or Predictive Maintenance (PM/PM), the emphasis being today on Condition Monitoring (CM).
3rd generation: Reliability Centred Maintenance (RCM).
4th generation: Computerised Maintenance Management System(s) (CMMS) or Computer Aided  Maintenance Systems (CAMS).
5th generation: Expert Systems.
The 5th generation — Expert Systems — must be seen as being applied to the first four generations of Maintenance but at the same time trying to integrate them as well.
Breakdown Maintenance + Expert Systems
Fault diagnosis expert systems is still the most popular application with the following characteristics:
stand alone expert systems with a transition towards embedded/linked systems
one-user at a time with a transition towards multi-user system in a LAN (Local Area Network);
input from the operator;
used as an advisor/consultant;
fault/malfunction diagnosis using hard logic with a transition towards soft logic.
(Soft logic involves vague reasoning.)
The transitions mentioned above are envisaged to become ‘standard development’ for expert systems in aircraft maintenance in the next few years.
Condition Monitoring + Expert Systems
This application is becoming increasingly important today having the following characteristics:
the expert systems will interact directly with health and usage monitoring data leading to ‘Intelligent monitoring’ applications;
such applications will deliver expertise that is ‘on line all the time’;
input could be automatic or automatic and manual (most recommended).
An intelligent monitoring system becomes highly efficient when it contains the knowledge for fault diagnosis/malfunction.
Such requirement is satisfied by integrating 1st generation (BM or RTF) with 2nd generation (CM) maintenance using expert systems technology (see Fig. 6).
Reliability Centred Maintenance + Expert Systems
This application would be in the form of a new ‘breed’ of expert systems that will be used in aircraft maintenance.
The new breed will be in the form of RCM dedicated development environments (i.e. customized expert systems platforms) that are now emerging.
Such expert systems would require the expertise of fault diagnosis/malfunction and/or preventive/prediction maintenance as well, which could lead to the integration of 1st, 2nd and 3rd generation maintenance (see Fig. 6).
Computer Maintenance Management System + Expert System
An expert system using the expertise in fault diagnosis (BM or RTF) preventive/predictive maintenance (PM or CM), reliability centred maintenance (RCM) and linked to, or embedding, a CMMS would represent the ‘complete’ solution only if it is integrated with Operations Systems (ie Operations Planning/Scheduling, JIT and Inventory Control Systems, etc.)
5.
Conclusions
Expert systems technology is not revolutionary at all.
It is simply an extension of computer science principles to new levels of sophistication.
ESs often run on the same computers that run programs written in FORTRAN or BASIC.
The development of an expert system for failure diagnosis/prediction, test and maintenance of complex machinery is affordable and achievable today.
It is important to start ‘small’ with an expert system shell on a PC, but to think ‘big’in terms of strategic development.
The problem solved with the ES must be in a narrow domain and of combinatorial type with many alternate solutions.
Incremental programming will be involved, starting with a few rules and, as more expertise is added, the ES gets bigger and performs better.
Developing the ES should start with a knowledge engineer, who will translate the maintenance expert's knowledge into neatly structured knowledge base(s).
The expert's willingness and ability to co-operate is vital to the success of the ES.
Strong management commitment to the expert system project is absolutely essential.
The application of expert systems in aircraft maintenance would lead to the integration of its four generations that are (more or less) used today in the aviation industry.
Expert systems technology should be also seen as the integrating vehicle of those four generations with the operations systems that are used today in the aviation world.
Table 1.
Relative Advantages of ES in maintenance Engineering 
Dr Mitch Grigoriu received a BSc(Hons) and MSc in Engineering, and spent seven years in industry, working for the Weber Carburettors Group.
He then moved to University where he spent eight years in research and development in Artificial Intelligence and particularly Expert Systems.
He received a PhD in Expert Systems for Maintenance Engineering at the University of Nottingham, UK.
After a successful academic career he moved back to industry.
Since 1985 he has been dedicated to the development and implementation of practical/operational expert systems for different sectors of industry including aerospace.
He is the founder and MD of Advanced Expert Systems Ltd.
Some of his expert systems have been used in plant/factory environments for several years (i.e. COATEX for the process industry, ESEMA for manufacturing industry, etc.) bringing benefits amounting to millions of pounds to AES Ltd customers.
His main interest is in developing practical expert systems that are installed in plant/factory/hangar environments.
FIG. 1 TECHNICAL MANUAL GROWTH RATE WITHIN THE NAVAL AIR SYSTEMS COMMAND.
Fig. 2 ALGORITHMIC PROGRAM Traditional/conventional computing
Fig. 3 HUMAN REASONING Real life problem solving REASONING Problem/Task: Keep a/c cabin temp.
at 20°C + 2°C What is the temperature of a/c cabin?
EXPERTISE (Knowledge & Experience) Ideas, theories, rules of thumb If temperature of a/c cabin  22°C then a/c cabin is too warm; adjust temperature control valve INFORMATION Facts, Symptoms The temperature of a/c cabin is 24°C DATA Parameter values 
Fig. 4 EXPERT SYSTEM Automated/computer reasoning
Figure 5.
The Five Generations of Maintenance
The Royal Air Force Experience of Artificial Intelligence Aircraft Maintenance Sqn Ldr G Sadler Royal Air Force
INTRODUCTION
1.
Over the next 40 minutes or so I hope to take you on a review of the practical application of artificial intelligence (AI) in the field of aircraft maintenance within the RAF.
In some cases, where I have personal experience, I shall go into the depth of the technical details.
However, I should stress before I start that most of the applications that I am going to describe are used in support of aircraft maintenance and are, therefore, not aircraft-based systems used for the operation of the aircraft.
To date, some work has been done in several areas including planning and learning and induction.
But, in common with most other work in this area, the majority of the effort has been upon expert systems.
Hence, the majority of this review will be about expert systems.
Furthermore, most of the work to date has been a drive to demonstrate the technology rather than a response to demand from users.
Being a historical review, I shall deal primarily with facts; however, on some occasions I shall be expressing opinions and I must make it clear from the beginning that these are my own personal opinions and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the MOD.
2.
Before I go any further, though, what are my credentials for giving this talk?
I have served for over 20 years now in the RAF specialising in the field of aircraft maintenance.
All of my experience has been gained on what we know as the fast jets; in the air defence role I have worked on the Lightning and in the  ground attack role with both the Jaguar and Tornado.
My experience also spans the full spectrum of aircraft maintenance within the RAF from turning them around for the next flight at the sharp end, through the deeper repair at station level to the major repair at remote sites.
I have, therefore, an in-depth background of aircraft maintenance in the RAF.
What of my experience of AI?
At the end of 1986 I started an MSc course, specialising in expert systems.
After completing the course towards the end of 1987, I joined one of the RAF Engineering Policy Branches within the Ministry of Defence.
Among my areas of responsibility was that of the application of AI techniques to aircraft maintenance.
This topic remained part of my responsibilities until the middle of 1990 when I was moved to one of the RAF information technology strategy studies.
3.
From the foregoing, you will see that my experience, and hence the bulk of this talk, revolves around engineering applications although for the last 9 months of my time in post I also was responsible for supply aspects of AI and I will cover this briefly.
4.
I shall divide this talk into 4 sections.
In the first I shall review activity within the Engineering Branch before I took up my post within the MOD.
During the second section I will look at the activities that I myself was involved with during my time in post.
Then in the third section, I will look forward to the activities which are likely to continue in the future.
Finally, in the fourth section I will cover a few miscellaneous topics which I think may be of interest.
PAST EXPERIENCE
5.
There has been a series of trials within the Engineering Branch of the RAF of the technologies related to expert systems over the past 5 to 10 years.
The first trial, predating expert systems proper, was an aid known as Computer Aided Fault Finding Equipment (CAFFE).
Essentially CAFFE was a device that presented a diagnostic flow chart to a tradesman in the manner of a programmed book and was a form of computer-assisted learning.
The primary reason for the failure of the CAFFE trial was the enormous skilled effort needed to prepare the flow charts.
The scale of the effort would have precluded updating the flow chart when new experience was gained or after equipment modification.
Secondly, CAFFE could not react intelligently to a user's needs.
Another reason for its failure was that CAFFE could only ever provide a single path through the diagnostic tree; there was no way to volunteer information and to jump ahead to a later section of the flow chart.
All the input data had to be available, and it had to be input in a pre-determined sequence.
6.
Despite its failure, the CAFFE trial showed that there was a need for an aid to diagnosticians.
As a result, the specification for the Station Engineering Management Aid (SEMA) identified the need for an expert system-based fault diagnostic aid as a longterm extension of the SEMA project.
The diagnostic expert system  was seen as using the SEMA faults data-base as a source for its knowledge base.
7.
Noting that there might be more roles for AI techniques in maintenance management Squadron Leader Tim Grant, successfully applied for a Defence Fellowship to survey potential applications.
HIs Defence Fellowship thesis resulting from a year's study at Brunel University was limited to surveying AI applications on flying stations.
Nevertheless, 3 major groups of applications were identified as being technically feasible either immediately or in the  short-to-medium term.
These groups were fault diagnosis, access to technical information, and maintenance planning and scheduling.
At least one application, fault diagnosis, promised to be highly cost effective.
The greatest area of risk was seen to be the managerial issue of integrating AI applications into the existing organisation and IT environment.
8.
After completing his Defence Fellowship, Tim Grant was posted as my predecessor in the Engineering Policy Branch in MOD and tasked with exploiting his thesis results.
In 3 years he launched 5 AI initiatives and identified 8 or 9 other possible applications.
Exploitation of AI techniques has been limited primarily by the scarcity of AI skills among RAF personnel.
A key feature of the 5 initiatives was the emphasis on developing AI experts within the RAF.
9.
The first initiative was an attempt to build an expert system aid for RAF aircraft fleet managers in handling serious faults, such as structural, undercarriage or major systems failure.
These are reported by means of a Serious Defect Signal (as they were then known) from the flying station finding the fault.
The main objective of the Serious Defect Signal Aid trial was to identify the organisational problems of developing and integrating expert systems with a secondary objective of producing a demonstrator to persuade higher management to fund AI more extensively.
The trial succeeded in finding several organisational problems but did not achieve its secondary objective because it became clear that the breadth and depth of knowledge needed by the individuals were implicit in the experience needed to do the job and that the individual could work quicker and chop and change subject more easily than the expert system.
10.
The second independent initiative was the funding under MOD contracts of expert system-based aids for equipment health monitoring and vibration analysis.
The concept is that an onboard device captures operating and maintenance data under specified in-flight conditions.
The data is subjected to conventional analysis to find exceedences over alarm levels or to measure amplitudes at certain critical frequencies.
The exceedence and measured parameters are then passed to an expert system which tries to diagnose faults down to individual components.
This is currently done manually.
The Raf is investigating the application of expert systems to equipment  monitoring of aero engines and vibration analysis of aero engines and helicopter rotors and transmissions.
11.
After considering the lessons learnt in these initial trials, Tim Grant launched a group of 3 initiatives: an expert system aid to wartime operations, a printed circuit board fault diagnostic aid, and joined PLANIT (the Alvey Community Club for applying AI techniques to planning and scheduling).
The initial phase of the wartime operational expert system was completed towards the end of 1987.
There has been some success in the initial aims of the project and at least some aspects are worth developing further.
It is hoped that a full scale project will be set in motion at a later date but, because it is primarily operational in nature and the expert system is only a part, it is now being sponsored by the Operations Branches.
What is already clear is that it has been a success in developing our own AI-skilled personnel.
Other lessons already gained from the trial are relevant to all AI projects.
The aid was developed using a commercial expert system shell, but we found it necessary to integrate the shell with a spreadsheet for data input, with an algorithmic language for certain numeric calculations and with a graphics package for presentation of the output.
In other words, the expert system techniques had to integrate with existing conventional software.
Moreover, the developed aid had to fit in with our existing hardware strategy, ruling out specialist AI tool kits and LISP machines.
12.
The purpose of the circuit board fault diagnostic aid is to assist the diagnosis performed using automatic test equipment.
When a complex piece of avionic equipment is introduced into service a suite of automatic test equipment programmes is written for each circuit board.
Sometimes with the test programme the contractor provides a set of diagnostic tables that point to a group of components on the circuit board to be considered suspect for each failed test.
On other occasions, the RAF construct their own.
However, the diagnostic tables are of a theoretical nature and are often not updated to reflect practical experience.
Furthermore, they do not identify uniquely which component to replace; that is left to the tradesmen to isolate by manual reference.
Modern avionics items exhibit such a variety of failure modes and are so reliable that the tradesman often forgets how he cured a particular type of fault when he experiences another of the same type.
Moreover, the reliability may mean that a tradesman only sees one example of a particular circuit board each month or even only a couple a year.
Therefore, there is a need to capture his experience as it is gained.
There is also the well-known need to capture the expertise of an experienced tradesman to aid novices.
Once again the effort required to write the automatic test equipment test programmes and associated diagnostic tables often precludes updating them in the light of experience or after modifications.
13.
Therefore, expert system techniques are attractive but there is a problem.
Since the fraction of faults that are unfamiliar, ie the novelty rate, is high, especially in the early years of repair, the rate at which the knowledge base is changing is also high.
Hence, there is a need to use some automated technique for rigorously incorporating new knowledge into the existing knowledge base.
Rule induction appeared to be a suitable technique.
So the aim of the circuit board fault diagnostic initiative was to study the feasibility of rule induction techniques in aiding avionics repair.
The initial study was carried out as the practical project for my MSc course in 1987.
Using historical data of 21 arisings of a particular type of circuit board it was possible, using rule induction techniques, to build an expert system.
When tested on the data from a further 9 boards, repaired since the initial data was collected, the resulting expert system correctly identified the faulty component on two thirds of the occasions and indicated the correct area on the remaining one third.
This performance was a substantial improvement over the current diagnostic tables.
Furthermore, the use of rule induction techniques enabled the project to achieve its objectives a month earlier than expected.
14.
So the project was expanded to include building an expert system for another, similar circuit board using exactly the same technique.
In fact, the second expert system was built by a Chief Technician under supervision and took a week to build.
The resulting expert system was built from historical data from 15 boards and tested with the data from a further 3 examples and gave similar results to the first expert system built.
The project was  extended in another direction by considering the method of presentation to the tradesman.
However, the results of this part was inconclusive.
Since then the maintenance unit (MU) have extended the work done and an 11-month practical trial of 3 developed expert systems commenced on 1 Jul 88.
It is also hoped to apply the  experience gained in other areas.
15.
The third initiative was somewhat different from all the proceedings one, in that it involved joining a Community Club sponsored by the Alvey Programme.
The aim of the PLANIT Club was to pull knowledge about the process planning, project planning and job-shop scheduling.
The Defence Fellowship thesis of Tim Grant had shown that aircraft maintenance planning had the characteristics of job-shop scheduling.
Furthermore, project planning techniques such as critical path analysis are in routine RAF use.
Therefore, the RAF applied successfully to join the PLANIT Club.
The PLANIT projects as originally conceived has now been completed with development of an expert system known as the Interactive Planner's Assistant (IPA).
Since it runs on an expensive AI computer with an equally expensive tool kit software, some of the PLANIT members funded an extension of the project to translate the IPA into a more readily available and cheaper expert system running on an IBM PC or AT class of machine.
The PC-based IPA is now available but still needs a PC with an extended working memory of 4 Megabytes.
It is still, though, a demonstration package and considerable development effort would be needed to  turn it into a commercially viable product.
It is likely to be some years before such a product is on the open market.
THE PRESENT
16.
When I took over from Tim Grant in September 1987, the PLANIT Club Project was nearly complete.
However, work on the War Time Operational Expert System was continued until it was passed over to another Branch and, of course, I have continued to sponsor the work on the Circuit Board Fault Diagnostic Aid since this was my own MSc project.
Furthermore, I have also set in motion several of my own initiatives as well as sponsoring the suggestions of a couple of other departments.
17.
Following the work that I had done at the MU on the Circuit Board Fault Diagnostic Aid in connection with my MSc project, 2 members of the staff had gained experience of expert systems: the Chief Technician and a civilian who had assisted me during the project.
They continued to do some work in this area and developed a third expert system for another circuit board in exactly the same way.
Unfortunately, they were soon moved to different duties, but before doing so they were able to train a third person, a Sergeant, who has since carried on the work.
The 3 expert systems that had been developed were made available to the shop floor, where an 11-month trial was carried out to compare the efficiency of diagnosticians working with and without the expert system aid.
The results of this trial were reasonably encouraging showing some improvement in efficiency, but nothing spectacular.
These results have, however, been used to justify the purchase of further expert systems in other areas.
Understandably, the expert systems did not assist the experts a great deal but came into their own when both of the 2 experts were not available and an inexperienced technician had to take over.
The inexperienced technicians also employed a standard diagnostic approach as a result of using the expert system.
The 3 expert systems then developed have remained in use on the shop floor since the end of the trial.
The increases in efficiency demonstrated were not sufficient to justify the purchase of computing for every individual work position within the workshop, but plans were already afoot to provide a widespread management information system within the MU and it was hoped to include expert system diagnostics within this faculty.
We also discussed with GEC Avionics the possibility of providing their diagnostic information in a compatible, electronic format as they had been doing some work in the same area.
However, the all too familiar constraint of funding has prevented much progress to date.
18.
The success of the expert system trial at the MU was in part due to the subject chosen, which involved an automatic test equipment that used logical testing in the first place.
Another trial was recently started at the MU to look at the use of rule induction expert systems in more manual diagnosis.
The subject chosen requires a considerable amount of stripping out to access certain parts and a wrong diagnosis early in the repair can  result in considerable nugatory work.
It was considered, therefore, worthwhile to apply an expert system in the early diagnosis and hopefully direct the diagnostician in the right direction and avoid the nugatory work.
This trial was only started shortly before I left post and the results are not yet known.
19.
During the past few years I have been fortunate enough to have a couple of RAF students each summer from the Royal Military College of Science at Shrivenham.
In the time available, each of these students was able to build an expert system demonstrator using rule induction or conventional expert system shells.
The work has been useful in 2 ways: firstly, it has yielded demonstrator programmes that can be used to convince more senior officers; and it has increased the number of people available with some knowledge of expert systems.
The areas covered included a guide to procurement of computer hardware and software within the RAF, a help desk to assist with the diagnosis of problems on the large variety of PCs within the Engineering Branch of the RAF and extensions to the use of rule induction techniques in the diagnosis of avionic faults at the MU.
(The latter led to the recent trial on manual diagnostic techniques using role induction which I mentioned earlier).
Although a couple of the other demonstrators also looked promising I have been unable to take them any further because of financial constraints.
Finally, one of the students whom I had worked with a couple of summers previously came back to me just before I left post to discuss his  third year project at Shrivenham and I was able to arrange for him to do a project involving the linking of a commercial graphical package  to the expert system developed as part of the war time operation aid mentioned previously.
20.
The remaining initiatives were the result of other people coming to me with suggestions.
The first concerned the licensing of premises used to store explosives such as bombs and rockets; this is currently done manually and is very manpower intensive.
The first stage of this initiative is to computerise the existing procedures using conventional techniques and this has been set in motion.
Once this has been done, it is hoped to set a second study in motion to consider the possibility of using expert systems to guide the personnel who do the actual licensing through the maze of rules and regulations that they have to consider.
The second initiative came from the station from where the RAF VC10 fleet operate and are maintained.
This proposal concerned the use of an AI Planning Aid to assist the major servicing of the aircraft and I believe more details of this will be given by Steve Docker in his talk this afternoon.
From my point of view, we had originally hoped to progress this proposal just over a year ago when spare money became available, but unfortunately, the bureaucratic process and conservatism of the people involved prevented us from doing this in time.
I had, therefore, hoped to obtain money in the current financial year for this proposal, but, as you've probably read in the press, the moratorium on expenditure prevented an progress on this proposal.
When moved, I had hoped that my successor, who arrived in post last October, would still be able to progress this case.
However, with the subsequent Options for Change proposals and the Gulf Crisis, planned expenditure during this Financial year has all gone awry.
Furthermore, expenditure in future financial years is now going to be difficult.
21.
The systems developed within the Engineering Branch have usually been PC-based and developed upon commercial expert system shells.
PCs have generally been used because of the cost of procurement and because they are more readily available within the Service.
Commercially available expert system shells have been used since most of the expert systems have been developed by engineering tradesmen, few of whom had a strong computing background.
22.
Since expert systems are easy to modify, their development is never really completed.
The task they serve evolves as they are developed, and it is tempting to continue tinkering endlessly.
For the same reasons, it would be easy to end up with different versions at different locations, especially if the users themselves have the capability to modify the expert system.
THE FUTURE
23.
One of the problems within the RAF generally and the Engineering Branch in particular is a knowledge of the potential  of expert systems.
Few people understand exactly what they are and what they can do and quite a few people have mistaken impressions from the media.
Hence, during my time in post I have made a positive effort to spread the gospel of AI within at least the Engineering Branch.
Tim Grant and myself have, I believe, been successful in setting up one or 2 areas of expertise in this area within the RAF over the past few years.
Furthermore, teaching of expert systems has now been introduced into some of the engineering syllabi in the training schools.
Finally, during my time in post I have lectured to every one of the Senior Engineering Management courses that have been carried out at RAF Cranwell.
Our work should bear some fruit in the future.
24.
In addition, I had hoped to put in motion programmes in 3 separate areas and I hope that they still may be started in the not too distant future.
Firstly, to brief top management on the possibilities of AI; although not likely to come into direct contact with AI they would be first to see the likely improvements in effectiveness and efficiency.
Furthermore, to make any significant use of AI, the expenditure and commitment will have to come from the top.
The second group are the likely end-users of the AI; they range from officers in middle management through SNCOs to the Airmen on the line.
Whilst a through understanding of AI is not required they should have a little background since all are likely to meet it at one time or another.
The final group are the developers of AI applications who will need specific, in-depth training on the AI tools and techniques they are going to use.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
25.
From the foregoing work that Tim Grant and I set in motion I believe that we have gained certain value.
True, the only continuing expert system programmes at the moment are at the avionics MU.
However, there are several others on the stocks ready to go should funding become readily available.
26.
The first benefit that I believe we have gained is a better ability to define what are and are not suitable  tasks for the application of AI, in particular expert systems.
When looking at military applications of AI the only field likely to yield viable and practical results in the next few years is that of expert systems.
The scope for military applications could include materials management, military intelligence, communications planning, maintenance planning, diagnostics and computer-based training.
27.
In all these projects, what has become clear is that software configuration control is essential.
One of the claimed advantages of expert systems are that  their knowledge basis can be amended quickly and easily.
However, we would not want everyone to have this capability or we would spawn lots of different expert systems.
Changes to expert systems would have to be done centrally and issued as amendments in a similar way to existing software or technical manual amendments.
28.
One of the aims of both Tim Grant and myself has been to build up expertise and knowledge of expert systems within the Engineering Branch.
This, I believe, we have been successful in doing.
 Not only have we been successful in raising the level of understanding of AI, expert systems in particular, but we have also now got several people within the Branch who have practical knowledge of applying the techniques; although not necessarily active in the field at the moment, this expertise must pay dividends in the future.
Moreover, we now have a small centre of expertise, albeit part time, at the MU and, hopefully, the work that Steve Docker has done on the VC10 maintenance will continue now that he has left.
29.
Another consideration that has arisen from the work on AI and, in particular, expert systems is that of the legal implications.
All work on aircraft and their association equipments is carefully controlled, all activities are signed for and the resulting work cards are legal records of the work carried out.
Since diagnostic expert systems merely advise the diagnostician and he must, by definition, have some minimum knowledge of the systems it is unlikely that he will carry out any ridiculous recommendations from an expert system should they arise.
Furthermore, an incorrect diagnosis will merely result in the tradesman replacing a wrong component or unit and when he tests to see if the fault is clear will find it is still there.
Hence faulty diagnosis is only likely to increase the time taken.
There are not, therefore, likely to be serious implications or  legal aspects in this area.
In the area of planning and scheduling there are unlikely to be any legal implications either.
30.
The other lesson that has come out of the work within the RAF and from the work done outside is that expert systems in particular, but AI in general will not come about as stand-alone, independent systems, but will be embedded or connected to existing or planned conventional computing.
Hence, these new techniques will become further weapons in the armoury of computing tools used to automate existing procedures.
Consequently, the use of AI will be transparent to the user.
However, we will still need to build up our level of knowledge and understanding of expert systems within the RAF and in particular amongst our computing specialists so that we can make best use of the facilities available when providing support to the user.
31.
Finally a mention of supply expert systems.
The supply branch computing specialists used a help desk expert system at the Supply Control Centre several years ago when a new unit supply system was installed on a large number of RAF stations.
The rapid installation of a large number of systems around the country and, in some cases, overseas created a large number of novel problems and as these arose they were fed into the diagnostic expert system in their central facility and were available for consultation when other units phoned in with a problem.
The system used a very early expert system shell and soon  runs out of capacity and so a later version of the shell was purchased that could cope with an  increased knowledge base.
However, the task of transferring the knowledge base from the older to the new version proved to be more onerous than expected.
This, combined with the reduction of novel arisings as the new systems settle down, led to the expert system help desk being discontinued.
I am not aware of any other work in the supply branch on expert systems following this one.
CONCLUSION
32.
I hope that this historical survey gives you some insight into the work that has been carried on regarding AI, in particular expert systems, for the maintenance of aircraft within the RAF.
With the limited resources available at our disposal we have not been able to build too many expert systems and most of these have been on a small scale.
Nevertheless, we have learnt several useful lessons and we have a couple of expert systems still in regular use, another trial in progress and several more ideas ready to go should funding become available.
Most importantly, though, we have increased our knowledge and spread it more widely and this can only be of benefit for the future.
KNOWLEDGE BASED SYSTEMS AND AVIONIC EQUIPMENT FAILURE DIAGNOSIS
Rick Magaldi
Abstract
Knowledge based systems (KBS) technology provides a powerful set of techniques for the support of efficient aircraft systems and equipment failure diagnostics.
Because intelligent reasoning and problem solving are a central feature of their operation KBS can offer significant gains in maintenance quality, efficiency and safety.
The results of KBS development work carried out at British Airways confirm this view, particularly in the area of intelligent support to ATE based avionic equipment testing.
This paper emphasises some of the findings and lessons learned during early KBS work at British Airways and describes the value the approach has given to the shaping of current work being carried out in KBS applications for aircraft maintenance.
Introduction
Airline operating schedules dictate that swift and efficient problem rectification takes place after defects are reported.
During such time-constrained investigations rapid assessment is required of the impact of proposed maintenance actions.
Certainty is required as to the relative merits of one diagnostic approach versus another.
A mis-diagnosis can result in unnecessary component removal and systems disturbance with the associated expansion of departure delay time.
Various airline industry estimates suggest that a one minute delay in scheduled aircraft departure costs between £130 and £750.
If delays are incurred due to technical defects the problems have to be dealt with speedily and with a high degree of certainty that the defect has been cured.
Efficient recovery from complex equipment failure largely lies in the hand osf the servicing personnel available.
However good diagnostic skills and experience are not uniformly available amongst staff at any given time due to a variety of factors.
The balance of required diagnostic skills and experience within the engineering community is constantly changing due to staff retirement and losses to competitors.
These losses are not easily replaced and are further compounded by the continuing introduction of new  aircraft types such as Boeing 747–400 and 767 into service, each with new complexities and associated diagnostic challenges balanced against the requirements of older fleet types.
Built in Test (BITE) where available has helped diagnostic procedures a great deal, but problems still remain.
These are evident, particularly within avionic system failure diagnostics and the sometimes high incidences of ‘no fault’ found after removal from the aircraft.
It is evident that better support to system and component failure diagnosis is currently required if problems of this nature are to be mitigated.
The complex and dynamic environment in which fault finding has to take place provides an ideal application area for knowledge based system technology.
Knowledge based systems (KBS) can accommodate a wide range of diagnostic applications by dealing with such things as uncertainty and complex pattern matching.
These types of systems have already demonstrated their potential within other areas of Industry and Commerce where significant claims of increased operational efficiency and cost savings have been made.
Given that these benefits are  transferable , then there is the potential for ensuring smooth aircraft operations and safety by providing intelligent decision support environments to aircraft maintenance staff.
The operational basis of such systems rests on the incorporation of human expert knowledge within them and the manipulation of this to solve problems.
The advantages to an organisation of eliciting and codifying human expert knowledge are:
The retention of knowledge as a company resource
Expert knowledge becomes available to those with lesser skill
The company is less vulnerable to fluctuations in expert availability
Artificial Intelligence: Background
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a branch of Computer Science that is concerned with making computers more intelligent and by this process more flexible in the types of problems that they can solve.
The main tools of AI have been borrowed from a wide range of disciplines including linguistics, mathematics, psychology and cybernetics.
The contribution of each has been influential in the development of such areas a robotics, natural  language understanding, speech recognition and expert systems.
It is the latter development that has had great influence on the creation of the commercial AI industry.
The earliest expert systems were built in the USA as part of academic programmes investigating the application of various AI computing techniques to problem solving.
ONe of these was the notion of compiling human knowledge as sets of ‘rules’ that could be manipulated and controlled by an ‘inference engine’, the purpose being to combine human type reasoning with the processing speed of the computer and by doing so to provide output that was similar to that of a human expert.
The results achieved by a number of research groups were sufficiently encouraging for many academics to form the first commercial companies to develop and market AI software.
This software enabled the first of a number of useful commercial applications of AI to be constructed; many of these can be considered as the second generation of expert systems.
Many have proved beneficial to areas such as medical diagnosis, geological prospecting and computer system configuration.
However, the skills required to build such systems were rare and also the required combinations of software and computer hardware were expensive.
This situation has more recently been reversed, and there is now a wide availability of reasonably priced expert system software that will function on low cost hardware.
This situation has accelerated the user experience of expert systems, and has given rise to the increasingly sophisticated applications in which expert systems can have combinations of simulation facilities, database links, graphic interfaces and speech recognition facilities.
It should be noted here that the terms expert and knowledge based systems have come into common usage, and are often interchanged when describing intelligent systems.
The term KBS is often used as a generic term for the type of AI system classified as expert.
However, few true expert systems exist, but many extremely useful systems that utilise human knowledge but don't necessarily perform at the expert level are in regular operation.
For the purpose of this paper these terms will be regarded as synonymous.
The focus of this paper is on knowledge based diagnostic systems and their potential within avionic components fault finding.
Recent claims suggest that ‘Diagnostic expert systems can be classed as the fastest growing functional area for expert system development today’, and that their application is making a significant contribution to efficient handling of complex system failure diagnosis.
To understand how such systems allow for diagnostic reasoning, some architectural features need to be recognised and understood.
Diagnostic Expert Systems
A commonly encountered approach to the construction of an expert system is to use a generic toolkit.
Basic examples of these are called ‘Shells’, and provide all the basic features required to build a functioning system.
All that has to be added to such a system is the expert knowledge, usually in the form of rules.
These are generally easy to use and are low in financial cost.
More advanced expert system tools have a greater range of construction and testing facilities and allow for very sophisticated representation of problems, but at much greater investment cost and technical requirement.
Toolkits optimised for the construction of diagnostic expert systems are currently available.
These allow for the representation and control of causal relationships such as symptoms and failures.
The manner in which fault and symptom relationships are handled is dependent on the chosen type of problem representation.
There are two main methods of representing and reasoning with diagnostic knowledge.
These are known respectively as:
Fault-response rule reasoning
Model-based reasoning
Fault-response rule reasoning is usually adopted when a ‘shallow’ representation of a system is adopted.
In this sense ‘shallow’ means that the physical principles  underlying system operation are not attempted.
The system model is confined to specific descriptions of fault, symptom and action relationships.
Diagnoses are based on evidence accumulated about failure modes, operator observations of symptoms and historical records.
Fault-response based systems are usually advocated when lots of reliable diagnostic information is available.
They can usually be built relatively quickly and at low cost and are easy to understand and operate.
However, they are very problem specific and therefore difficult to adapt to new situations, also large rule bases become very difficult to maintain (500 rules).
Model-based reasoning can be sued wherever there is the requirement to provide a ‘deep’ representation of system operating characteristics.
This type of reasoning is based on an understanding of the underlying physical principles and the relationships between system components.
These types of system require a greater investment both in cost and technical expertise but at the same time allow a modular approach to construction and greater flexibility in operation when dealing with new diagnostic situations.
The relative merits of both approaches have to be considered when opting for a solution to a particular diagnostic problem.
This process should be wherever possible part of a systematic analysis of diagnostic system requirements.
Various problems can be encountered if this is not the case.
Prominent amongst these is usually the selection of an inappropriate knowledge representation through absent or incorrect problem formulation.
Avionics and Knowledge Based Systems
The potential for a KBS approach to complex avionic component fault diagnostics via the use of limited but similar reasoning approaches to those adopted by experienced service engineers has great potential in the provision of intelligent support to equipment diagnostics.
The facility to support and track complex reasoning about events and system state allows for more certainty of judgement and fault elimination than that available via current approaches.
The provision of BITE and ATE facilities can only provide a partial solution to failure analysis and problem rectification.
Avionics now forms a substantial part of modern aircraft systems and the introduction of BITE to many of these has helped to reduce the number and types of diagnostic check required to determine system operating status.
However, it is known that for a number of avionic items removed there are a varying number of components which are subsequently diagnosed as ‘no fault found’.
Often the same or a similar fault can occur to the same aircraft a number of sectors later.
Many reasons can be advanced for these types of happening, such as:
Exact flying conditions irreproducible on the ground
Fault within wiring harness
Fault masked on ATE — tests not sensitive enough
Synergistic effects of particular LRUs when fitted together
This list is not exhaustive, but represents some of the hypotheses considered when faults are recurrent yet absent on testing.
Delays through recurrent faults are inevitable and play havoc with operational schedules and incur delay costs.
Punctuality of departure means that there is little leeway for prolonged diagnostic through and the  tendency under such conditions is to change the suspected LRU even though the BITE check if available indicated that it is functioning correctly.
The opposite is true of the component overhaul areas where more time for thought is available but there is always the inevitable backlog of components awaiting test and repair.
Complex component testing even with ATE available can take hours (>4 hours) and sometimes days, so it can take a lot of valuable testing time just to declare ‘no fault found’.
Clearly if AI is to have some role within avionics fault diagnostics it must provide systems with a wide range of capabilities.
For example, in time constrained situations a good decision support system is required capable of synthesising a great deal of information and from this rapidly producing the best solution with as little input as necessary from the aircraft engineer.
Conversely, it should allow for ‘what if’ model based solutions where perhaps unusual symptoms have occurred and time is not a critical factor against which analysis has to take place.
Similarly, within ATE areas testing could be supported by intelligent diagnostic information systems capable of guidance and support to the test engineer helping him assimilate complex failure history data and useful testing procedures.
The area of most impact potential for KBS's is in on-line ATE testing which has the potential for greatly reducing the overall number of testing steps, thus reducing testing time, and offering more refined fault isolation help to the user.
A number of industry groups are currently investigating these potential benefits of AI to aircraft operations safety and servicing efficiency including British Airways.
British Airways: CADDIS Programme
British Airways have been investigating the potential of AI to engineering diagnostics through a Computer Aided Decision & Diagnostics Information System programme (CADDIS).
The intention has been to stimulate interest within the British Airways engineering community towards AI based solutions to engineering diagnostics problems.
Central to the programme has been an awareness of the following criteria:
Need to win project approval and gain continuing funding
Need to educate and gain confidence of domain experts
Need to work on problem identified as being significant by BA Engineering and tractable with current AI software skills
Need for systems delivery within acceptable timescales
Need to keep development costs within acceptable limits 
Need to use existing ‘in house’ AI skills
The overall objective of the CADDIS programme is to produce a fully operational KBS capable of supporting a significant diagnostic area whilst aiding in the reduction of engineering operating costs and gaining improvements in quality, efficiency and safety.
The programme began approximately one year ago and focussed on support to automated test (ATE) of avionic equipment.
The initial goal was to prototype a KBS support environment for workshop based test engineers.
A prototype was constructed to assist with BAC 1–11 Pitch Monitor testing by helping with fault analysis and understanding.
The design objective was to provide a knowledge based testing and diagnostic support facility that would present information and advice in a familiar but more efficient manner.
Finally, to use the system as a test vehicle for generating ideas useful to further prototyping work.
The reasons for selecting the BAC 1–11 Pitch Monitor Unit were as follows:
The unit had a long servicing history
Failure modes were well understood
Fair degree of complexity (analogue operation)
It was important to initially construct a system whose outputs could be evaluated and understood by ATE experts and by doing so gain their confidence and support.
CADDIS Prototype
A rule response approach was chosen as a suitable method of knowledge representation.
The selection was based on a number of advantages such as:
Expert knowledge easily codified in rule form
Test procedures sequential
Extensive failure history available
The system was implemented using Crystal 3.5 expert system software with additional features being built using dBASE III Plus and Lotus Freelance Plus.
The main features of the system include the following:
Knowledge Base
Inference Engine
Graphics Interface
Database
The knowledge base contains the fault response rules derived from accepted testing procedures combined with the heuristics (rules of good guessing), obtained from ATE test experts.
This, under the control of the inference engine, forms the system nucleus.
The database contains failure history information and the graphics interface allows circuit diagrams and drawings to be displayed.
System control is via a standard computer keyboard.
The system is used by the test engineer in conjunction with test status information made available via the ATE during testing.
Whenever a problem is detected the appropriate test procedures can be located within CADDIS along with previous test history and any required circuit diagrams.
Failure history is available for any circuit area, both for the particular unit under test, and for all other units of that type.
Further system features include:
Expert and inexperienced level help
Test audit
Automatic database updating on test completion
During early system evaluation it was found that experts much preferred a simple direct dialogue style that presented basic diagnostic information such as test point values and component values, whereas the inexperienced required more directed problem analysis and advice.
This resulted in a change to the user interface so as to allow the test engineer a choice of system entry level and support.
In addition to user interface changes, a repair report generator was added.
This allows for the recording of test and repair information combined with a printed audit of all repair actions on satisfactory test completion.
This information is also automatically loaded into the testing and repair database at this time and is available for checking and inspection at any time.
CADDIS Prototype Evaluation
Experience gained in the design and construction of the CADDIS prototype has proved useful in formulating the content and nature of more advanced work currently being carried out by British Airways.
It was concluded that low cost tools have limitations but can provide useful experience to system builders that allows for the critical  selection of more advanced software.
More importantly, rapid prototyping of a basic rule-response type system was low in both technical and financial risk, this was paramount to the continuance of expert system development funding.
Early evaluation of the CADDIS prototype was carried out in conjunction with ATE personnel which resulted in greater confidence in the general approach coupled with acceptance and participation in the general approach.
It was indicated that testing times could be reduced and that the potential existed for cost reductions in component overhaul, although these have yet to be quantified precisely.
CADDIS: Current and Future Work
Current CADDIS work is directed towards the intelligent automated testing of Electronic Flight Instrument System components (EFIS) from the Boeing 757 and 767.
This phase will provide an intelligent online test facility combining both model and case based reasoning.
In addition, the use of neural net technology is being investigated as a means of including some learning features useful to the diagnostic process.
It is anticipated that intelligent testing should help significantly in reducing the ‘no fault found’ by trapping faults that currently remain undetected with more conventional approaches to fault finding.
Conclusions
The continuing trend in system and equipment complexity, particularly within avionics, requires a highly experienced workforce of engineers to be available, trained in and supported by BITE and ATE.
However, these facilities alone do not cope with all possible diagnostic problems.
Earlier generation aircraft without the benefit of BITE have their own particular diagnostic challenges.
This is further aggravated by shortfalls in trained and skilled staff, the effects of which are already being  experienced across the Airline Industry.
The inability to speedily and correctly diagnose aircraft system and component failures because good diagnostic skills are in short supply leads to departure delays and possible compromises in safety.
It seems clear that the introduction of systems that can complement and help guide good diagnostic judgement and reasoning is worth evaluation.
One technology that makes this possible is that of Artificial Intelligence in the form of KBS's.
The possibilities offered in the introduction of knowledge based systems are enormous.
The capability of being able to codify, store and build upon human expert knowledge has profound organisational advantages in the way personnel can be both trained and supported.
This is particularly true within areas such as avionic systems and component diagnostics.
Human capabilities to reason about complex systems states and the propagation of failure and associated systems are all available within the trained diagnostician, but can break down or fail for a variety of reasons including data overload, incomplete information and fatigue.
This situation becomes even worse when the inexperienced are expected to perform complex avionic fault finding and correction.
Expert or knowledge based systems can help guide and advise the individual by rapidly evaluating past cases of failure and alternative courses of action or provide solutions to previously intractable problems.
‘What if’ types of facilities when available will allow for the reasoning about complex failure models and effects.
Facilities such as these will allow the engineer to possibly gain deeper systems understanding and through this obtain greater diagnostic certainty.
It is concluded that AI based systems have great potential in offering support to efficient system failure diagnostics.
The Airline Industry has to date been slower than others in exploring the benefits to be achieved in using AI technology.
However, British Airways has acknowledged via its CADDIS programme the worth of investment in AI to engineering efficiency, cost reduction, departure safety and punctuality.
Advanced Expert Systems Increase Aircraft Maintenance Efficiency An Overview
Steve Docker
Abstract
Pressure continues to be applied to aircraft maintenance organisations with a view to improving the efficiency of their operations.
In particular, such organisations constantly strive to improve the productivity of their tradeforce and to reduce aircraft spare parts held.
Moreover, they seek cost effective ‘competency based’ training methods for their maintenance tradeforce.
Advanced expert systems provide a means to significantly improve performance in each of these important areas.
The Aircraft Maintenance Scene
Aircraft Maintenance in Context
Substantial investment is required in order to maintain aircraft in an airworthy condition.
Key resources are technical personnel and aircraft spare parts which account for the largest share of the maintenance budget.
However, maintenance is more than a cost centre because it affects aircraft availability.
In civil operations this affects revenue earning potential and therefore profitability and in military environments it affects operational readiness.
Increasing Maintenance Workload
In a climate of stronger demand for air transport capacity the number of new aircraft entering service grows rapidly.
In addition, technological developments in terms of aircraft design and manufacture continue apace.
Although such developments are primarily intended to introduce operating benefits, ie improved specific fuel consumption or thrust to weight ratio, reduced flightdeck workload etc, their maintenance workload implications are less certain.
Close to ‘state of the art’ aircraft operation can be achieved economically by modification or retrofit, ie hushkitting, reengine programmes, flight deck upgrades, etc.
Therefore, with demand outstripping supply for new aircraft production, existing in-service aircraft are replaced more slowly.
Mature aircraft however, suffer specific, age related problems such as corrosion, wiring integrity, increased structural cracking, fuel leaks etc, these require additional maintenance actions.
Under such circumstances a substantial increase in aircraft maintenance workload prevails.
Shortage of Maintenance Resources
During times of rapid growth demand for aircraft maintenance resources also tends to outstrip supply.
Aircraft hangarage and in particular technical personnel, require long lead times in order to significantly increase supply.
Operating schedules inevitably put pressure on aircraft down time and because aircraft manufacturers are operating to maximum capacity producing new aircraft, spare parts may also become difficult to obtain particularly for the more mature aircraft types.
The Climate for Change
The increasing size and complexity of the aircraft maintenance workload coupled with limited availability of resources to meet this commitment provide the catalyst to seek improved efficiency from aircraft maintenance organisations.
The burgeoning air transport industry is presenting huge opportunities for enterprise.
One such initiative is that presented by the application of advanced expert systems to aircraft maintenance operations.
Expert Systems
Problem Solving/Minimisation
Within a specific environment problems may be solved or they may only minimised depending upon external constraints imposed.
Problem solving/minimisation is a highly iterative process and consists of a number of stages from problem sensed to problem overcome.
However four main stages may be clearly defined, decision making, decision taking, solution implementation and control (Fig. 1).
The decision making stage is particularly dynamic often comprising numerous iterations in order to clearly identify/isolate the problem and then to identify/optimise solutions.
Important decision making variables are time to solution identification versus degree of solution correctness.
Problems may involve complexity, criticality, conflict or indeed a combination of these problem types.
However, one problem type will normally be dominant.
The raw materials of problem solving are data, information, expertise (knowledge plus experience) and reasoning.
Data, information and expertise are domain specific, ie they are specific to a particular application.
Reasoning is domain independent and consists of generalised problem solving strategies.
What is an Expert System?
Expert systems come from the world of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and are problem solving software.
They automate the handling of data, information, expertise and reasoning used for the decision-making and decision-taking stages of the problem solving process.
Conventional programs embed the expertise in the instructions, making it very difficult to understand the logic of the problem.
Updates to the program instructions and data are inevitable, but each time an amendment is made the chances of introducing unplanned consequences increase.
Expert systems separate out data, information, expertise and reasoning in an explicit way and are therefore able to offer a degree of flexibility not achievable by conventional programing techniques.
Practical features resulting from this are functions such as Trace, Freeze and Truth Maintenance.
Trace provides the ability to justify the line of reasoning, on demand, in a manner directly intelligible to the enquirer.
Freeze provides the ability to stop a session in order to obtain further input data/information or process a higher priority enquiry and then to re-commence session at the point of interrupt.
The ability to go back to a previous question in order to modify an answer/input in light of current best information is provided by Truth Maintenance.
Expert systems readily respond to business volatility being used for off-line, expert decision support (EDS) and/or on-line intelligent process control (IPC),(Fig. 2).
EDS type expert systems assist or advise humans to solve problems, however all inputs to a process remain the direct responsibility of the human operator.
In contrast to this, all inputs to a process are carried out automatically by the IPC type expert system without consulting a human operator.
The two can be combined, allowing IPC to control a limited and strictly defined range of actions ie rapid response to potentially critical situations and/or decisions of low importance.
In this way EDS and human experts can be protected from high pressure, rapid decision taking and disturbances of low importance.
Human expertise is essential to any organisation.
It is its greatest asset.
The skills acquired from experience are extremely valuable and difficult to replace.
They are also hard to share and communicate.
Expert systems cannot perform the full range of reasoning strategies handled by the human brain and therefore do not replace human experts rather they are complementary to human expertise.
However, expert systems technology allows specialists to transfer their expertise to a computer system providing a means to disseminate expertise in a comprehensive and cost effective manner.
Such systems have the power and flexibility to bring the expertise of many human experts to  a single person via a desktop or laptop computer.
Expert systems can produce solutions with the speed, recall, accuracy and consistency that only a computer can provide.
They can help the experts to focus on the more difficult aspects of their specialities and non experts to be more productive and take more accurate decisions.
Advanced Expert Systems
Conventional computing has improved efficiency by storing and manipulating data and information faster and more accurately than people.
However, efficiency can be further improved by integrating expert systems with existing data processing orientated, computer systems, ie databases, critical path planning, hypermedia, condition monitoring etc.
The integration of expert systems technology with existing real-world applications boosts the efficiency and productivity of those applications and the quality of their solutions.
Advanced expert systems provide for the integration with conventional applications software.
Moreover, in addition to covering the decision making and decision taking stages of  the problem solving process they also interface with the solution implementation and control stages (see Fig. 1).
They deal with the whole problem solving process from problem sensed to problem overcome.
Advanced Expert Systems and Aircraft Maintenance
Aircraft maintenance organisations do not operate within a vacuum, remote from other systems.
There exists a particularly strong relationship with aircraft operations which frequently impacts upon the maintenance function.
Advanced expert systems form an ‘integrating vehicle’ between these important functional areas (Fig. 3).
Within this environment, aircraft maintenance organisations strive to improve the productivity of their tradeforce and reduce aircraft spare parts held.
Moreover, they seek cost effective, ‘competency based’ training methods for their maintenance workforce.
Advanced expert systems provide a means to significantly improve performance in each of these important areas.
Maintenance Tradeforce Productivity
Three elements are vital to tradeforce productivity.
Maintenance workload definition, the optimisation of repair timings and the swift navigation through high volume, complex technical documentation.
All three elements have a significant effect upon the overall efficiency of any maintenance operation.
Workload Definition: Workload definition may be sub-divided into fault diagnosis/isolation, non-destructive testing (NDT) and predictive maintenance which includes condition monitoring (CM).
Fault Diagnosis/Isolation: Aircraft have become ever more sophisticated, integrating many technologies within a single airframe.
This has led to increased complexity of the maintenance workload.
Coincidentally, maintainability improvements, incorporated into designs, have continued in an effort to reduce the maintenance element of aircraft life cycle costs.
These two developments have altered the balance between time spent upon problem identification (fault diagnosis/isolation), solution identification/optimisation and that spent upon solution implementation and control (repair and rectification).
It is clear that a swing has occurred to a position where the greatest proportion of maintenance effort is now spent at the problem/solution identification stage.
Expert systems can significantly reduce time spent on problem/solution identification.
They are ideally suited and well proven in this particular area and in addition, can enhance the output from built in test equipment (BITE) facilities.
Expert systems bridge the expanding number of technologies incorporated into aircraft designs.
They support the concept of systems engineering and multi-skilling and encourage ‘total aircraft ownership’ rather than specific ‘skill ownership’.
The concept of total aircraft ownership will become increasingly important should the traditional trade structure be unable to cover the expanse of technologies economically.
Non-Destructive Testing and Condition Monitoring: The anticipation of maintenance problems is significant in terms of aircraft airworthiness and economic considerations.
Nondestructive testing and predictive maintenance offer the potential to enable the maintenance engineer to gain that important edge on the occurrence of maintenance problems.
However, the more sophisticated NDT and CM techniques remain inefficient.
This is because they generate excessive amounts of data and information that must be interpreted by specialists.
In addition, there is often a time delay in analysing large amounts of complex data/information and facts/symptoms.
This time delay can have safety and/or economic consequences hence the need to accelerate the experts' diagnosis and decision processes.
Expert systems coupled with NDT can greatly reduce the complexity associated with the interpretation of results thus speeding up the whole process and improving accuracy and consistency.
Health and usage monitoring systems (HUMS), typically employed for engine and helicopter rotor systems, are examples of on-board predictive maintenance.
Techniques include on-board wear detection, vibration analysis and oil debris analysis, rotor track and balance, engine power assurance and low cycle fatigue counting.
Such techniques provide maintenance engineers with extremely valuable data/information under actual flight conditions/loads which frequently cannot be reproduced on the ground.
They also provide the means for continuous, usage based, condition monitoring of critical systems where periodic time based maintenance may be inappropriate.
Increasingly, such techniques are featuring in safety regulations and design specifications.
On-board summation of results from HUMS may be provided but for more detailed analysis of results the data/information needs to be transmitted to a ground station computer at the aircraft's base.
This can be done post flight or via digital communication links whilst the aircraft is still airborne eg Airborne Communication, Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS).
As with the NDT, expert systems coupled with CM can greatly reduce the complexity associated with the interpretation of results thus speeding up the whole process and improving accuracy and consistency of ground based analysis.
Intelligent, on-board sensors incorporating inbuilt processing and reasoning ability could further improve on-board reporting and reduce the need for excessive data transmissions to ground computer systems.
Furthermore, intelligent sensors could provide the means to move from passive CM to active intelligent process control whereby some actions could be initiated automatically by the export system ie re-configurable avionic systems and automated adjustments.
Repair Timings: Repair timings may be considered at three distinct levels, the defer/do now decision, scheduled maintenance task sequencing and component life decisions.
Defer/Do Now Decision: With numerous disciplines and technologies incorporated within aircraft designs the task of assessing total airworthiness has become increasingly more difficult.
The defer/do now decision (sometimes referred to as the go/no go decision) is frequently encountered within the field of aircraft maintenance.
Such decisions often involve complexity and criticality, cross system/trade boundaries and are frequently made under pressure.
Vital to such decisions is a clear understanding of system functions, failure modes and the consequences of failure.
The exposure of hidden failure modes, cumulative effects and multiple faults/defects in combination is particularly important.
Expert decision support can be employed to give consistent advice to maintenance engineers ensuring that risk is correctly assessed and minimised.
Scheduled Maintenance Task Sequencing: Quality, cost and delivery performance (time) are important criteria upon which an aircraft scheduled maintenance organisation is assessed.
Delivery performance is particularly poignant and assumes a high visibility.
Therefore the plan of how the maintenance operation is to be achieved is a significant factor in underwriting delivery confidence.
Computer based, critical path planning (CPP) provides confidence that the organisation has carefully considered the requirements and has set itself realistic achievement targets.
Intelligent task planning and control (ITPC) featuring interactive, expert decision support, interfaced with conventional critical path planning software can be utilised to plan large and complex maintenance operations.
Such systems can be employed to provide planning advice and assistance in order to achieve the effective management of aircraft scheduled maintenance activities.
Component Life Decisions: The consequences of errors in component life values, both in airworthiness and economic terms can be extremely serious.
This is particularly so where the ‘safe life’ design philosophy has been applied.
Reliability centred maintenance and Maintenance Steering Group logic (MSG–3) provide a rigorous framework upon which to base such decisions.
However, expertise within a specific domain is needed in order for the techniques to be effective.
Expert systems can enhance such techniques providing decision support and technical audit facilities.
Technical Documentation: As aircraft become more sophisticated integrating many technologies, so the proliferation of technical manuals continues.
This makes reference and amendment difficult and time consuming.
At best inaccurate technical publications and documentation cause workforce frustration, lower productivity and reduced maintenance operation efficiency.
At worst inaccurate publications can result in fatal accidents.
Hypermedia is software that retrieves information from a variety of different sources, stored on different media, and presents all this information as a single coherent database.
It aims to mimic the brain's ability to access information quickly and intuitively by forming associative links between subjects.
Expert systems interfaced with hypermedia provide a powerful combination in terms of maintenance expertise superimposed upon differing display media.
Maintenance Logistics
Aircraft spare parts are important resources to aircraft maintenance.
They represent significant investment in terms of capital locked within the logistics pipeline  and therefore pressure is constantly present to reduce aircraft spare parts held.
The cost of spares and frequency of failure are important factors.
However, the consequences of non-availability of aircraft spares when called for is delay to the maintenance operation or the initiation of component transfer from one aircraft to another.
Such actions also represent considerable cost.
Advanced expert systems form an interface between maintenance and conventional, inventory control systems, assisting with vital logistics decisions and moving closer to just-in-time provisioning.
Computer Based Training
The incorporation of new technologies into aircraft design and manufacture increases the training needs of the aircraft maintenance tradeforce.
Such personnel are already in short supply and therefore efficient and cost effective training methods are required.
Computer based training (CBT) incorporating advanced expert systems may be able to ease the maintenance training requirements of the future.
CBT may be regarded as similar to expert decision support, an off-line supportive system.
Although CBT may not cover the full range of expert decision support facilities such systems incorporate additional, purely training features such as teaching, practice and checking.
CBT systems compare student performance against the ‘expert model’ providing feedback and guidance to the student.
This allows a move away from purely ‘time-based’ training to ‘competency-based’training, vital to quality aircraft maintenance engineering.
In addition, the incorporation of authoring systems allow experts in the field, non-programmers, to customise the software within regulatory authority guidelines to suit in-house training requirements and local circumstances.
Such systems offer scope to allow aircraft maintenance engineers to transfer between aircraft types more easily.
They are able to bridge the expanding number of technologies incorporated into aircraft designs supporting the concept of systems engineering and multi-skilling.
Therefore, such systems can make a significant contribution to maintenance tradeforce flexibility and job satisfaction.
Summary
In conclusion, methods are continuously being sought which will enable aircraft maintenance organisations to improve the efficiency of their operations.
Expert systems are not confined to the research establishments/academia, they are a mature and practical technology capable of boosting performance in a number of important areas within such organisations.
In particular, expert systems are able to accelerate the problem solving process, achieve consistency of decision making and most importantly, ensure the distribution of an organisation's expertise.
Advanced expert systems deal with the whole problem solving process from problem sensed to problem overcome, integrating with other conventional applications programs to provide extremely powerful software tools for aircraft maintenance.
Steve Docker is an aerospace consultant specialising in artificial intelligence techniques applied to aerospace and in particular, expert systems and aircraft maintenance engineering.
He is a chartered engineer and has served with the Royal Air Force as an aerosystems engineering officer.
He has also undertaken an MSc in Air Transport Management at the Cranfield Institute of Technology researching aircraft scheduled maintenance planning and control.
HIs work investigated the techniques of computer based, critical path planning (CPP) and intelligent task planning and control (ITPC).
Fig. 1 Problem Solving/Minimisation Process (From Problem Sensed to Problem Overcome) 1.
DECISION MAKING Decide what needs doing, when and how to do it
Fig. 2 Applications Areas of Expert Systems Technology Expert Decision Support OFF-LINE EXPERT SYSTEMS Intelligent Process Control ON-LINE SYSTEMS
Fig. 3 Expert Systems as the ‘Integrating Vehicle’ to Aircraft Operations and Maintenance OPERATIONS PLANNING GATE ASSIGNMENT CREW ROSTERING YIELD MANAGEMENT Maintenance Management Information System Reliability Centred Maintenance Condition Monitoring Preventative Maintenance Breakdown Maintenance Knowledge Based System/Expert System Computer Reservations System