

Company law and business regulation in the context of the single market
Introduction
The single market
One of the main tasks of the EC is to assimilate commercial activities in and between the twelve member states to commercial activities within a single state.
Thus, for example, customs duties, discriminatory internal taxation and quotas have been abolished.
Companies have the right to sell their goods and services across national frontiers, and to set up agencies and branches in other member states.
To facilitate this, many aspects of national company law have been ‘harmonised’, that is to say made uniform, by Community rules.
Proposals are also in train to establish a European corporate framework to operate independently of the various national systems.
Since one of the principal objects of this single market is to promote competition, restrictive trading agreements and unfair monopolistic practices are prohibited by the Treaty of Rome and Community regulations.
The EC competition rules now include merger control.
Attention has most recently focused on ensuring competition in regulated public sectors such as telecommunications, postal services, gas and electricity.
The borderline between permissible co-operation on the one hand, and impermissible restrictive practices on the other, may be a fine one, and it is important that companies remain abreast of legal developments in this area.
They will be anxious to avoid the stiff sanctions of the EC competition rules, and may themselves wish to invoke the rules against anti-competitive practices on the part of other companies.
The Commission is charged with the task of enforcing the competition rules, and enjoys discretionary powers to exempt agreements which, despite containing certain clauses which restrict competition, have the overall effect of promoting economic progress and benefiting consumers.
The Court of First Instance has been created to deal with the increased number of appeals to the European Court of justice from decisions taken by the Commission in the field of competition and a limited number of other areas, and in particular staff disputes within the Community Institutions.
It is likely that this competence will be extended to deal with dumping cases.
The process of completing the single market is not over.
Great advances have already been made towards the achievement of a Europe without internal frontiers on the target date of 31 December 1992, but even that date will not signal the end of the road for three reasons:
Most of the measures aimed at competing in the single market are in the form of directives.
Member states are not always as Community minded when implementing directives into their respective legal systems as they are when adopting them within the Council.
As at February 1992, the Commission reported a level of implementation of the directives for creation of the single market of 72%.
It is also important that national authorities administer Community rules in a coherent fashion and that companies are aware of their Community rights, some of which may be newly acquired, to ensure that they benefit fully from them.
The process of ‘neutralising’ the effect of national laws and practices on trade between member states must continually adapt to changing economic and political conditions in the Community.
UK companies are able to influence the content of the evolving Community rules through their representative institutions, which in turn exert an influence on the Council, Commission and European Parliament.
Thirdly, the Maastricht summit of December 1991 will bring about the most significant changes in European development since the foundation of the European Community.
It will have a major impact on many areas of business life.
The Community has taken on additional powers, particularly in the foreign policy and security area, and has expanded the role of qualified majority voting.
The European Court of justice has been given the power to fine member states for having failed to comply with a Court judgment.
In addition, the recent judgment of the European Court of justice in Francovich has established that individuals have the right to claim damages from member states for failure to properly implement Community directives.
The scope of this judgment is such that it is also likely that member states are liable in damages where they act in breach of Community law which results in an individual or company suffering loss.
The summit has also led to the Community strengthening its environmental policy and additional emphasis has been given to industry, the creation of trans-European networks and consumer protection.
In the areas of social policy, a separate protocol to  which all the member states except the United Kingdom are signatories, is likely to have a major impact on companies operating in the Community, including a probable ‘trickle-on’ effect to companies based in the United Kingdom.
(See pages 33–6).
Opportunities and risks
The development of the single market poses a challenge, which has no parallel in peacetime this century, to the resourcefulness of UK industry.
It provides the opportunity to exploit a ‘home market’ comparable in scale to that of the USA.
Yet competing successfully in Europe means competing according to Community rules.
This is so even if a company fails to export to Europe a single nut, bolt, software package or policy of insurance.
For the rules apply throughout the Community, and many of the company law and competition rules apply irrespective of whether or not a company is engaged in interstate transactions.
It is probably obvious that Community law applies when a stock exchange listing is sought in another member state, or a distributorship arrangement or joint venture is contemplated in another member state.
Yet Community law equally applies when a UK company is seeking a listing in the UK, or contemplating a takeover in the UK, or considering a joint venture or distributorship in the UK.
It has never before been more important to incorporate informed legal advice into corporate decision making.
Businesses cannot afford to ignore the European legal framework.
Infringement of European rules may lead to substantial fines and adverse publicity.
And it can be equally damaging if unfamiliarity with Community mechanisms leaves an enterprise exposed to anti-competitive practices where effective remedies lie readily to hand if the proper advice is sought.
Law making at European level
The grand design of a single market for Europe requires more than the guarantee of free trade found in the Treaty of Rome.
It requires that the political institutions of the Community — the Council, Commission and Parliament — co-operate in the making of legislation to meet the demands of the evolving European market.
Legislative decisions on most issues, including competition law and company law, are taken by ‘qualified’ majority before the Council, though in certain matters, such as tax harmonisation or the legal rights of employees, the Treaty of Rome requires unanimity.
The Treaty on European Union, which was signed at Maastricht on 7 February 1992 and is expected to come into force during 1993, has widened areas where qualified majority voting applies before the Council.
Moreover, the new Treaty sets out a new legislative procedure, namely the ‘co-decision’ procedure.
The ‘co-decision’ procedure applies to areas of law such as the single market, consumer protection, the free movement of labour and the right of individuals and companies to establish themselves in other member states.
Introduction of this new procedure results in there being two procedural options for the Community institutions over matters decided by a qualified majority.
It will increase the European Parliament's influence over Community law-making.
The Parliament will have as many as four opportunities to review proposed legislation before it is adopted.
It will be able to negotiate directly with the Council on proposed amendments rather than going through the Commission and, in the last resort, it will be able to reject the agreed position of the Council on legislation, although it is unlikely to do so often.
In other areas, such as environment and health and safety of workers, the present ‘co-operation’ procedure will continue to apply.
Parliament has less influence over such matters as it has either to depend on the Commission to incorporate its views into an amended proposal or to reject the Council's common position on legislation by an absolute majority (currently 260 votes from its 518 members).
Finally, certain matters will continue to be governed by requirements for a unanimous vote in the Council.
These include in particular taxation, but also the areas of industrial policy and research.
Since a measure's legal basis in the Treaty of Rome can influence the voting rules applied in the Council, legal disputes on such matters may call for resolution by the European Court.
For example, in 1985 the Council adopted a particular Directive by a qualified majority; the UK voted against it.
The Directive concerned the use in livestock farming of certain substances having a hormonal action.
It was based on the Treaty of Rome's provisions governing the Common Agricultural Policy, which require only a qualified majority.
The UK took the view that it should have been based on Article 100 of the Treaty of Rome (general harmonisation of national laws), which requires unanimity (in which case the adverse vote of the UK could have prevented the Directive being adopted).
The UK challenged the validity of the Directive in the European Court, but the Court ruled that majority voting was acceptable in this case since the Treaty gives precedence to provisions of a specific nature (in this case, articles on the Common Agricultural Policy) over general provisions relating to establishment of the Common Market (Article 100).
The episode illustrates beyond doubt that the majority voting rules of the Treaty of Rome have teeth.
There is no better example of the potential significance of voting structures for UK business than the company law harmonisation programme.
The proposal on the Fifth Directive concerning the structure of public limited companies is based on Article 54 (right for natural and legal persons to establish themselves freely in the Community).
Directives based on Article 54 require majority voting.
Some governments, notably the UK, argue that the Fifth Directive should be based on Article 100 (general harmonisation of national laws) at least in so far as the provisions on employee representation at board level are concerned, since it deals with the rights of employed persons which fall outside the scope of freedom of establishment governed by Article 54.
Article 100 would require a unanimous vote, therefore a member state could ‘veto’ the proposal if it were not satisfied with the content.
CALL THIS A LEVEL PLAYING-FIELD?
A further debate is also continuing in respect of the measures proposed by the Commission to implement certain aspects of the Social Charter; this was adopted by way of non-binding declaration of all member states other than the United Kingdom in 1989.
Again, the Commission has principally proposed that these directives be adopted on the basis of Article 100(a) and Article 118(a) of the Treaty of Rome.
Article 100(a) concerns general harmonisation of national law with a view to establishing the single market save for those relating to provisions such as rights and interests of employed persons.
Article 118(a)  is concerned with health and safety of workers.
Both of these require only a qualified majority of the Council.
It has been argued, principally by the UK, that these are not the most appropriate legal bases for the measures proposed.
In order for UK businesses to make their voice heard properly at the right level, UK industry must be aware, more than ever before, of the process of Community law-making.
To do so will help industry to select methods of effective lobbying.
This is explained in the next section.
Influencing Community legislation
Since the Community institutions make law, and since industry has a legitimate interest in the content of that law, UK lobbying is no longer confined to Westminster and Whitehall.
It is important that UK companies play a part in the legislative process.
Their role may vary from making suggestions of possible future legislation to appropriate Community and national representative bodies to commenting on proposed legislation and informing the Community institutions of the likely effect of a proposal on business.
This need is currently most acute in relation to the measures aimed at implementing the Social Charter, in that the measures proposed have a more profound effect on the activities and cost structures of companies in the UK than other Member States.
Since the powers of the European Parliament were enhanced by the Single European Act in July 1987, lobbying of MEPs and the European Parliament's committees has taken on new significance.
Especially where company law is concerned, the consultative role of the Economic and Social Committee gives UK businesses an opportunity, through the CBI, of influencing Community legislation.
However, under the Community's legislative procedures, it is the Commission which plays the most important role.
It both proposes legislation and has to decide (subject to any final decision by the Council) whether to accept any amendment put forward by the European Parliament.
In determining its position at any stage of the legislative process, and particularly when the proposal is still in draft, the Commission may be influenced by reasoned argument and a factual analysis by the business community.
Arguments designed to influence legislation should be presented in a balanced and non-doctrinaire way.
In dealing with the Commission, it is helpful if businesses know which Directorate-General of the Commission deals with the matter in question, and which is the responsible government department in the UK.
It is not uncommon for the same Commission  officials concerned with proposing draft legislation to be responsible for the enforcement of that legislation against member states when it is passed.
This makes a working relationship with Commission officials and appreciation of their approach to legal problems of particular value to businesses.
Very often an approach to a Commission official will be more effective if it is ‘pan-EC’, that is if made by a number of companies operating throughout the EC, preferably under an EC umbrella organisation.
This avoids any approach being viewed as parochial and makes clear that the views expressed have equal force throughout the EC.
The same kind of links which have been established over the years between law firms and business on the one hand, and UK government departments on the other, must be forged with European institutions.
A good working relationship with Commission officials has thus become a high priority for those law firms which offer advice on Community law to UK businesses.
A phone call to a particular official in the Commission can yield faster results than a written inquiry to a Directorate-General — and time is money.
Legal advice on European matters
Progress towards the single market provides as much of a challenge to legal advisers as it does to their clients.
For a commercial firm of solicitors, expertise in Community law does not simply grow like Topsy.
It requires a conscious policy decision to treat Community law as part and parcel of the legal framework in which day-to-day legal advice is offered to business clients.
Offering advice on Community law involves recruiting specialists, providing continuing legal education on Community law to lawyers in all departments, and equipping library and information centres with all relevant Community documentation.
For lawyers it is especially important to establish contact with colleagues in other member states.
Many business decisions require input from lawyers in several member states, who can advise on the inter-relationship between their national rules and the Community rules.
Technology can provide vital assistance in the provision of informed legal advice.
Familiarity with multilingual legal databases can provide up-to-date information not only on current legal rules but also on the course of legislation proposed by the Commission and currently pending before the Parliament or the Council.
It is for lawyers to make a reality of the single market for UK enterprises, wherever in the Community they choose to locate their business activities, or to sell their goods and services.
Impact and scope of the single market programme
opportunities in the single market
The aim of the single market is to integrate progressively the distinct national markets which have for so long characterised trade between EC member states, with the object of providing opportunities for economic growth irrespective of the location of producer, supplier, wholesaler, retailer or customer.
Although 1 January 1993 is often referred to as the starting date for the single market, this date is more a convenient expression than of specific legal significance.
Much of the legislation for completion of the single market has been adopted with a significant proportion already in force; other legislation, such as in the air transport sector, is only transitional, so that businesses affected have time to adapt to the changing environment.
Other areas, such as worker's rights or indirect taxation, remain politically controversial and legally complex and legislation may not be adopted for some time.
Even if companies do not export their goods or services to other Member States, they will have to adapt to Community legislation, which will alter national law in virtually every area of economic activity ranging from standards, labelling, advertising, product liability, to domestic intellectual property and company law.
Its impact upon the day-to-day running of any EC business is immeasurable.
In this chapter we consider briefly the scope of the single market and how its development and future evolution provide threats, challenges and opportunities for growth for all businesses, large and small alike.
Traditional barriers to trade in the EC and the single market
Before the establishment of the Common Market in 1957 the different national markets were separated by barriers of three distinct kinds:
Barriers erected by the member states themselves that isolate national markets and protect domestic monopolies; for example, customs duties, quotas, state monopolies, discriminatory taxes and other discriminatory measures, and state subsidies to local industries.
Barriers arising from the disparities between national legal systems.
Thus, for example, the different licensing systems in the different member states inhibit the provision of financial services between member states; and different systems of company law may make joint ventures and mergers more costly and complicated.
Barriers arising from the restrictive practices and cartels of business enterprises.
Agreements to collaborate rather than to compete reinforce the partitioning of national markets.
A similar isolation of national markets may result from the abusive and predatory practices of businesses which by virtue of their market share and technical and financial resources enjoy dominant positions on their national markets.
The single market programme
From the outset, one of the principal objectives of the Community was that a common or single integrated market should be created from the economies of the individual member states.
Goods, services, people, businesses and capital should be able to circulate freely throughout the whole Community, unobstructed by national restrictions as easily, say, from Greece to Denmark as from York to Southampton.
Competition within the single market should be free and fair, regulations and standards should, where necessary, be approximated to enable the single market to function efficiently and effectively in practical as well as legal terms.
During the 1970s the Community was preoccupied with enlargement of the Community, institutional crises such as the Luxembourg accords, following the refusal of France to accept qualified majority ruling in the Council of Minsters, frequent budgetary difficulties and differences of view as to how the Community should be financed which resulted in very little progress towards the achievement of a single market.
The oil crisis and following economic recession of the 1970s reinforced any protectionist tendencies of the individual member states and it was not until the early 1980s that the political will developed to re-focus the creation of a single market.
This time it was widely recognised that a change in policy was necessary if it was to be achieved.
Throughout the 1970s the leitmotif of Community activity had been that of ‘harmonisation’; national frontiers and barriers to trade would subside as detailed legislation on subjects as varied as car parts, pasta, animal fodder and professional training, were enacted to create common Community standards leading to a united economic market.
This approach proved impractical and inflexible and did not allow for innovation or different national traditions.
Most of these rules had to be adopted by the Council on the basis of unanimity and it became difficult, and in many cases impossible, to push through the amount and degree of legislation necessary to achieve the single market.
Against this background the member states of the Community asked the Commission to put forward proposals for achieving the single market.
Thus, in June 1985, the Commission published a White Paper that set out a programme and timetable for the adoption of 300 legislative proposals (later reduced to 282) to achieve a single market.
The Cecchini report, commissioned by the EC Commission in 1988, entitled ‘The Cost of Non-Europe’ estimated that the total potential savings to the Community as a whole from the completion of the single market at 1988 prices was about 5% of the Community's gross domestic product.
These savings would be created by the removal of frontier barriers, differing national regulations governing the manufacture of products and economies of scale for industry.
Some commentators now believe that these forecasts underestimate the benefits to trade.
The target date of 1992 was chosen for the completion of the single market and it was thought that it would take the lifetime of two Commissions to complete the programme.
The single market legislation envisaged by the White Paper is the specific expression and implementation of the fundamental principle enshrined in the EEC Treaty that goods, services, capital and people should circulate freely throughout a single economic Community.
In practical terms, a number of general fundamental principles have underpinned the development of the single market in all areas of economic activity.
Removal of physical barriers
Physical barriers to trade take a variety of forms varying from delays and unnecessary formalities at customs posts, and immigration controls, to searches of vehicles and baggage, transport and handling charges.
All these increase costs and lead to economic inefficiency.
A basic feature of the single market programme is the completion of the removal of all such barriers, including the introduction of a Single Administrative Document by 1 January 1993 for customs purposes, which subject to certain public security, public policy and public health exceptions, would abolish all frontier checks and formalities.
Removal of technical barriers
Technical barriers to trade arise from differing national product regulations and standards.
They, too, increase costs as businesses must surmount a host of differing national rules and regulations if they wish to trade in a number of Member States.
Producers are more likely to remain within their own national markets where they are familiar with the rules and standards to which their production facilities are adapted.
Differing standards also distort the pattern of production, erect barriers to entry to various markets and frustrate the emergence of a single market in industrial products and the provision of services.
The White Paper programme introduced a fundamental policy change to expedite and implement the removal of technical barriers leading to the ‘harmonisation’ of standards.
This approach, known as ‘the new approach’, is based on two principles:
harmonisation of (minimum)‘essential requirements’
mutual recognition.
These principles were inspired by an important case decided by the European Court of justice in 1979, known as Cassis de Dijon 
Cassis de Dijon
German legislation prohibited the import of ‘Cassis de Dijon’, a liqueur based on blackcurrant, as it required fruit liqueurs to have a minimum alcohol content of 25%.
The Cassis de Dijon in question, which was freely marketed in France, had an alcohol content of 15–20%.
It was argued before the Court that this was contrary to the fundamental principle that products must freely move throughout the Community, The European Court of Justice agreed and held that once a product had been lawfully produced and marketed in a member state, other member states must recognise that fact and allow it to be imported and sold in its own territory.
The ‘new approach’ Community legislation limits itself to setting the essential or basic standards and the detailed specifications that implement these standards are delegated to relevant European Standardisation bodies such as CEN (European Committee for  Standardisation) or sectoral bodies as, for example, CENELEC (European Committee for  Electro-Techinal Standardisation) for the building and electrical industry and ETSI (European Telecommunications Standards Institute) for telecommunications standards.
Sometimes, somewhat misleadingly, these standards are referred to as minimum standards.
They are, however, far from being the lowest common denominator.
Frequently they are more stringent than certain existing national standards and, indeed, the EEC Treaty provides that the Council should use a high level of protection when adopting measures that relate to health and safety consumer protection in the environment.
Member states are obliged to implement the essential Community standards into their own laws, but since they are only ‘essential’ standards, member states can adopt more (but not less) stringent standards for their domestic products or services; this is why the essential standards are referred to as ‘minimum’standards.
Member states may, however, demand standards which are more stringent than the ‘essential’ standards, but only for their own domestically produced products or services; they cannot prevent the importation of products that comply with Community essential standards even though they may fail to comply with the more stringent domestic standards.
In this sense, the ‘essential’ standards established at Community level provide a baseline; provided goods and services meet these baseline standards, they must be permitted free access to the whole Community market.
Mutual recognition
A product lawfully made or service provided which complies with Community essential standards must therefore be allowed free entry into all the Member States of the Community.
This is subject only to limited restrictions which member states can justify on the basis of public health, public security, public policy and certain other limited public policy grounds sanctioned by the Treaty and the case law of the Court of Justice.
Already, member states may not maintain restrictions on the access of, or marketing prohibitions on, products or services which do not comply with national specifications.
An importer will not have to prove that an imported product is not made under equivalent standards to those of the member state.
Most important of all, the importer of goods will not have to submit these goods to duplicate series of tests and certification procedures where it wishes to import a product.
In many cases, these procedures are in any event harmonised at Community level, which is often demonstrated by the  CE mark being affixed to the product in question.
All of this is clearly to the benefit of purchasers, including wholesalers and retailers as well as manufacturers, since they will be able to chose a supplier from anywhere in the Community without restriction.
Services
Within the context of the provision of services, the White Paper concentrates its main effort on financial services — banking, insurance and investment services.
The implementation of essential ‘Community standards’ has clearly had to tackle the difficult issues such as prudential supervision, authorisation and capital adequacy of undertakings to establish the basis for mutual recognition.
Similar principles to the ‘Cassis de Dijon’ principle pursued in relation to goods have been applied.
The banking sector was the first to furnish the EC ‘single licence’ system.
Once authorisation to carry on a banking business has been granted by the home member state to a bank in accordance with the Community's essential requirements, the Community legislative approach is to require the host country in which the bank may wish to provide cross-border services or establish a branch to recognise the validity of that authorisation, and to allow it to do so without making additional ‘authorisation’ requirements to the bank.
For that reason, authorisation under EC rules by a member state is now referred to as ‘the single passport’, since it permits the beneficiary to rely upon that authorisation from its home country throughout the Community.
A similar system applies to the insurance and investment services sectors.
For example, the supervision of firms which provide investment services will also be guided by the principle of ‘home country control’; the authorities that authorise the firm have the primary duty to supervise it.
An aspect of investment services, is, however, not clear: whether the home member state or the host member state should regulate the conduct of business of a branch in one member state which is established by a financial institution authorised in another member state.
Contrary to first impressions, it may be disadvantageous in these circumstances for firms to have ‘home country’ control of conduct of business rules, if the firm is authorised by a member state with a higher standard of regulation than that of the member state where the branch is established.
This is the case in relation to both the branch's competitive position in the host member state and, indeed, competition in the home member state from branches of firms authorised in other member states.
A series of judgments from the European Court indicates that until Community rules on conduct of business are introduced, the national rules of the host state will continue to regulate that matter.
This implies that, while the services which are undertaking may provide are subject to its home country rules (often referred to as ‘home country financial technique’), the question of how such services should be carried out (conduct of business rules) will be subject to the host country rules.
For example, a UK branch of a German bank will be able to provide investment services (even though UK banks themselves cannot offer this service in accordance with UK law), but the business conduct of this branch will be subject to the UK rules, for instance the newly issued ‘Code of Good Banking Practice’ issued by the British Bankers' Association.
General progress towards the single market
The process of adopting the programme of legislation which the White Paper had originally outlined is almost complete.
The Community has kept apace with the timetable set for adoption of the legislation by the end of 1992.
Of the 282 measures proposed, the Commission has tabled all of its draft directives and, as of 26 February 1992, the European Council had adopted 219 of them, leaving 63 still in the legislative system.
Again, as of 26 February 1992, 193 directives were already in force and the level of implementation was 72 per cent.
Some countries have implemented considerably more Community measures than others; Denmark has the best record and Italy the worst.
The Treaty of Rome has given the Commission the power to take member states to the European Court of Justice for not implementing directives within the required timetable.
The Treaty on European Union has now given the European Court of Justice powers to fine member states for having failed to comply with a Court judgment.
In addition, the recent judgment of the European Court of Justice in ‘Francovich ’ has established that individuals have a right to claim damages from member states who fail to properly implement Community law.
This development will help the enforcement of Community legislation already adopted.
The UK government, which is due to take over the presidency in the Council in the latter half of 1992, will set the enforcement of existing Community legislation as a top priority during its presidency.
Much of the White Paper's legislation is in the form of framework directives which provide a basis for future detailed legislation.
Controversial matters, such as the Investment Services Directive, European Company Statute, the Thirteenth Company Law Directive  concerning takeover and other general bids, the Tenth Company Law Directive concerning cross-border mergers between public limited companies, and the Company Taxation Directive concerning arrangements for taking losses into account, have been left until last and it is not at all certain whether all or most of these directives will be adopted by the end of 1992.
However, the completion of the White Paper Programme and the achievement of the ‘1992’ objectives is not an end in itself, but rather the accomplishment of one important step in the creation of a truly unified European Economic Community.
The process of completion and deepening of this Community will continue for many years into the future.
The Treaty on European Union will definitely take the Community to a new second stage of the process, through new legislative programmes encompassing further economic, monetary and political integration.
Establishment, services and EC company law in the single market
A single market cannot be said to exist unless companies incorporated in one member state are permitted to do business in another.
In practical terms, business across national frontiers may be conducted in several ways.
A UK company may set up an agency, branch or subsidiary in another member state, and carry on its business through that local office.
This form of doing business is known as ‘establishment’.
Investment in an agency, branch or subsidiary will be expected to pay for itself by generating extra business.
This may not be possible in the short term, and initially a UK company may prefer to make sales and win clients in another EC market without the benefit of a local office, through the activities of visiting marketing personnel or intermediaries.
This simpler form of doing business is known as the ‘provision of services’ and occurs where a business remains in the member state in which it is established, and provides services, from that base, into another member state.
Such services may include, for example, the giving of investment advice or the provision of legal services.
If the single market is to be effective, companies must be able to provide goods or services across state lines without setting up agencies, branches or subsidiaries where this would be superfluous, and without being subjected to more burdensome rules in the host state than are absolutely necessary.
Companies must also be entitled to establish agencies, branches or subsidiaries in other member states, without discrimination on grounds of nationality.
Developing Community rules will make it possible to comply with requirements in such areas as company law, securities listing, and insider dealing, that are either uniform in the different member states, or at any rate are regarded as being equivalent, instead of complying with a variety of different rules in different member states.
Finally, it will be possible for companies to co-operate with each other within the framework of new corporate forms — such as the European Economic Interest Grouping (EEIG) and the proposed European Company — based upon Community law rather than national law.
An integral part of the removal of barriers between member states  has been and remains the implementation of the fundamental principle of Community law that member states should not discriminate against one another and should assimilate the treatment they accord to nationals from other member states to the treatment they accord to their own nationals.
We describe below the practical application of this principle for establishment and the provision of services within the Community.
Equality of treatment for establishment
Abolition of discriminatory rules
Entry into the Common Market brought immediate changes in the terms of national legislation discriminating against foreign companies.
For example, the requirement that companies and firms not registered in Denmark obtain prior authorisation from the Ministry of Justice if they wished to acquire land was clearly incompatible with the right of establishment, and could no longer be applied to companies registered in other member states when Denmark joined the EC.
In practice, discriminatory rules may still be encountered in the member states and it is sometimes necessary to invoke EC rules in the appropriate national court in order to secure equal access to the relevant market.
The EC rules give EC companies the same rights as individuals.
It would have made no difference to the example below had the aggrieved party been a German company with a branch in France tendering for factory space.
The picture is complicated by the fact that national authorities may regard some discrimination between nationals and non-nationals as   being necessary in order to ensure the protection of national interests such as the collection of taxes.
A recent example illustrates the point.
Under the French Tax Code, credits against tax on profits made in France were granted to insurance companies registered in France.
However, such tax credits were not granted to agencies or branches of insurance companies which were not registered in France.
The Commission regarded this difference of treatment as deterring companies registered in other member states from setting up agencies and branches, since they were placed at a disadvantage vis-à-vis French companies.
The French authorities said that it was legitimate to differentiate between French companies and non-French companies in order to prevent tax avoidance by the latter.
This argument did not satisfy the European Court, which ruled that discriminating between companies on the basis of their corporate nationality would deprive the right of establishment of all meaning.
The effect of the Court's judgment was that insurance companies from other member states were free to choose whether to do business in France through an agency or branch on the one hand, or through a subsidiary registered in France on the other, without suffering any tax disadvantages as a result.
In the UK this problem has also occurred in the celebrated series of Factortame cases referred by the English courts to the European Court of Justice.
This arose as the UK government wished to ensure that the UK share of Community fishing quotas went to benefit UK fishers.
There was concern that ships from other countries, especially Spain, were registering as British ships and so were included in the UK fishing quota.
To prevent this, the UK adopted legislation so that only vessels owned by British citizens, or companies that were 75% owned by British citizens and where at least 75% of its directors were British citizens, could register as a UK fishing vessel.
The Court of Justice condemned this legislation and held that it was discriminatory and contrary to the right of establishment.
Registration as a fishing vessel was a form of establishment and although British citizens would have no difficulty in obtaining registration, EC nationals would have to change their nationality to register.
As a result of this case the UK is now obliged to change its legislation because Community law takes precedence over conflicting national law.
Disguised discrimination
National rules sometimes impose conditions on business activity which make no reference to nationality, but nevertheless have the practical effect of discriminating on grounds of nationality.
Such rules  are compatible with the right of establishment only if any differentiation which results in practice between local companies and companies incorporated in other member states is justifiable.
Suppose that national rules of a member state required that the sales managers of all companies marketing products in that state had the appropriate certificate of competence awarded by business schools in that state.
This would amount (as the case law of the European Court makes clear) to disguised discrimination, since the sales managers of companies incorporated in other member states would not be likely to have this qualification unless they had been recruited locally.
The EC rules on establishment require that in such cases evidence of equivalent expertise acquired in the other member states must be given full faith and credit in the host state.
Sometimes, however, national rules which are in practice more likely to affect companies from other member states may nevertheless be justifiable if their purpose is consistent with the aims of the single market and any effect on non-national companies is purely incidental.
In one case the European Court considered Irish legislation which exempted rural land owned by corporate bodies from compulsory acquisition if all the shareholders had resided for more than one year within three miles of the land.
In practice, of course, this condition would rarely be satisfied by foreign companies, or by Irish companies whose shareholders were resident in other member states.
However, the European Court accepted that one of the principal purposes of the legislation was to encourage the ownership of rural land by those persons who actually worked it, and that the law was applied equally to nationals and non-nationals alike.
The Court concluded that the law was consistent with the EC rules on the right of establishment.
Limits to the right of establishment
The right of establishment can be invoked by a company registered in a member state against the national authorities of that state if they seek to prevent it setting up agencies, branches or subsidiaries, or participating in the incorporation of a company in another member state.
However, a company cannot rely upon the right of establishment to transfer its central management and control (broadly, the place where board meetings take place) to another member state.
A UK investment company sought to transfer its central management and control to offices in the Netherlands for fiscal reasons, without the consent of the Treasury, which was required under the tax legislation of the UK.
Under the law of a number of member states (though not the UK), transfer of central management and control from the state of  registration is only possible if the company is wound up and reincorporated in another member state.
The European Court held that the existence of such different rules of company law in the member states precluded reliance by the UK company upon the right of establishment to transfer its central management and control to another member state.
Equality of treatment in the provision of services
Abolition of discriminatory rules
From the earliest days of the Community it was recognised that eliminating discrimination on grounds of nationality was as essential for securing the provision of services as it was for establishment.
For this reason EC Directives in the 1960s provided for the repeal of such legislation (in so far as it affected nationals of member states) as the requirement of West German law that foreign companies wishing to pursue business activities in West Germany must obtain special authorisation from the West German authorities.
Companies formed in the EC are similarly entitled to compete for tenders from public authorities, and to sub-contract work from such authorities, without discrimination on grounds of nationality.
They are also eligible under EC rules for any public subsidies available to companies incorporated under the law of the host state.
Disguised discrimination
We have already seen that national rules which do not expressly discriminate on grounds of nationality may nevertheless have this effect in practice.
The right of access and freedom to provide services
Whereas the right of establishment entitles a company incorporated in one member state to set up agencies, branches and subsidiaries, without discrimination on grounds of nationality, in the territory of another, the purpose of the freedom to provide services is to enable a company established in one member state to do business in the territory of another without setting up agencies, branches or subsidiaries, and indeed without complying with all the rules and regulations of the second state, as explained below.
Important consequences flow from this.
In the first place, the   nationality of the company vis-à-vis the country in which it is providing services is not the factor which triggers the application of Community law.
It is the fact that the company is established in a country other than that in which its potential customers are to be found.
Thus the right to provide services has actually been invoked by nationals against their own state, when they have taken up residence abroad.
Secondly, companies established in one member state and providing services in another through intermediaries may actually enjoy a legal advantage over companies doing business in the latter state through agencies, branches or subsidiaries.
The latter are, in principle, subject to all the rules and regulations of the host state.
The former, however, may not be required to comply with all the requirements of local law where this would place unreasonable burdens on a company from another member state and where the public interest is adequately safeguarded in the member state of establishment.
For example, as we explain in the Case Study on pp. 199–207, the European Court has condemned rules imposed by a number of member states which required insurance undertakings to do business in those states through persons established in those states.
In another series of cases  the Court has condemned national laws which require undertakings which are licensed to carry out particular activities in one member state having to obtain a second licence to provide the same services in another member state where the licensing requirements in the first member state adequately safeguard all necessary requirements for the protection of the public interest.
While the right to set up any agency, branch or subsidiary in another member state is invaluable when commercial considerations merit it, the obligation to set up such a local establishment may be a high price to pay for what is still only the occasional prospect of business.
National rules requiring such an establishment may well constitute improper restrictions on the freedom to provide services.
This was the European Court's view of the requirement of the West German Insurance Supervision Law to the effect that foreign insurance undertakings must set up an establishment in West Germany and ‘keep available there all the commercial documents relating to that establishment’, for which separate accounts must be kept.
In 1986 the European Court held that this requirement was incompatible with the right to provide services across national frontiers.
The requirement of establishment imposed by the West German rule could only have been justified by the need to protect policy-holders.
In the view of the European Court other means falling short of requiring a place of business on West German territory could have done this equally well.
One reason why companies established in one member state are entitled to do business in another without setting up a permanent place of business in that state is that such a requirement might unreasonably inflate their costs.
The right to provide services caters for the firm seeking to enter a new market, or dealing only occasionally across a national frontier.
National rules in the member states where services are provided can only be applied to the extent that the public interest requires it, and after due account is taken of the national rules applied to the company in the member state of establishment.
In the case brought against West Germany concerning the West German Insurance Supervision Law referred to above, the European Court indicated that there were cases where a provider of services might be exempted altogether from the supervisory requirements of national law, where the services were being provided to commercial enterprises who could look after themselves and did not need the same degree of protection as consumers.
It must be emphasised that this legal position, whereby the company is exempted from certain rules of the host state, can only arise in a case in which services are provided without a place of business being established in the host state.
However, where a company establishes itself in another member state all the rules of that member state which Apply to its own nationals apply equally to that company.
Harmonisation or mutual recognition and home country control
The removal of restrictions and the removal of discrimination to provide equal access does not itself create a single market.
The existence of different laws, regulations and administrative requirements in the field of establishment and services has the practical effect that the Community market remains partitioned and compartmentalised.
In order to create a single market, it is necessary either to harmonise all domestic laws, in order to have a common regime throughout the Community or for member states to recognise each other 's requirements as legally equivalent.
Reference has already been made to the opportunities now available to companies to establish agencies, branches or subsidiaries in other member states, and to conduct business activities in other member states through intermediaries without establishing a local presence.
In order to facilitate such cross-border activity, EC rules have in important respects harmonised the national systems of company law and business regulation, thereby providing the underlying framework upon which implementing national rules is based.
When it comes to such matters as the protection of creditors and third parties dealing with a company, the obvious way forward is for the Community to lay down in its Directives detailed rules which are to be given similar effect under national law in all member states.
This approach has much to be said for it, and certainly makes for equal treatment for shareholders, creditors and third parties, and equal terms in these respects for establishment in each member state.
It is however an approach which has its limitations.
It is based on the assumption that commercial confidence in inter-state transactions will only flourish when the framework of company law and business regulation applicable in each member state is the same.
Yet the Treaty of Rome itself describes one of the major aims of company law harmonisation as being to make safeguards for shareholders and third parties ‘equivalent throughout the Community’(Article 54(3) (g))
Equivalent (rather than identical) standards in the member states have certainly provided the basis for facilitating cross-border transactions in other areas of Community law.
For example, goods lawfully produced in one member state need not necessarily comply with all the technical standards applied in the various member states into which they are imported (such as the German prohibition on the sale of beer containing even harmless artificial additives).
Such goods can only be excluded by the state of proposed importation if they pose a sufficiently serious threat to public health or some other legitimate national interest compatible with the needs of the single market.
In the field of  professional qualifications, a directive is now in force that obliges professional bodies to recognise diplomas awarded in other member states after three years' training, when granting membership to a particular profession.
Any substantial shortfall in the nature of training may be made up, at the option of the applicant, by a period of supervised practice or by passing an examination.
Thus, an engineer trained in Germany may now be admitted to the profession of Chartered Engineers in the United Kingdom.
Similar measures have been proposed for diplomas awarded after less than three years' training.
In the case of Vlassoupolou,the European Court confirmed that professional bodies were under a general duty to recognise qualifications obtained in other member states.
A professional body may find that the qualifications of an applicant to the profession it regulates are only partially equivalent to those required of their own nationals.
If this is the case, the European Court held that it must permit the applicant to establish that since obtaining his/her qualifications, he/she had gained further knowledge and qualifications to bring him/her up to the necessary standard.
Techniques of harmonisation — from uniformity to equivalence
To reduce the complexities and costs of complying with a number of different requirements in different member states, the Community may co-ordinate, approximate or harmonise the relevant rules of national law, that is to say, lay down rules which must be adopted by all the member states.
These rules may provide that certain business activities are always regulated in a certain way, irrespective of where they take place.
For example, a condition of official listing on the stock exchange of any member state is that disclosure is made of certain matters required by Community law (see pp. 47–9).
Compliance with these rules will be enforced by the appropriate authorities in each member state.
It has already been pointed out that requiring the fulfilment of identical requirements in all member states may be unnecessary, and that recognition of equivalent standards may be a better approach, in particular to the question of harmonising the rules on the conduct of various types of business activities in the member states.
This approach may well bear fruit if applied to the future harmonisation of company law strictly so-called, and indeed to the harmonisation of national rules on the conduct of particular classes of business activity.
Directives in the field of banking and insurance already bear witness to the potential for such a flexible approach to harmonisation.
In such fields a double need arises: to harmonise licensing requirements  for companies intending to carry on the activities in question, and to establish essential standards for the prudential supervision of companies providing financial services.
The Community avoids the approach of harmonising all aspects of licensing and regulation of the conduct of business, but instead establishes essential standards.
The authorities of the member state that authorises a company are responsible for supervising the company with reference to these essential requirements.
It is important to note that these authorities remain free to demand more stringent standards of the companies for which they are responsible, but may not do so in respect of those firms trading in the member state but authorised in another member state.
The member state where the company or its agencies, branches or subsidiaries conduct business must recognise the adequacy of the authorisation given in the former member state and the efficiency of its prudential supervision.
Any outstanding supervision by a host state, such as in the banking sector in relation to liquidity, remains only in the absence of further harmonisation.
This special responsibility for verifying compliance with Community minimum requirements is known as ‘home country control’ and will be of increasing practical importance for UK businesses which venture abroad while remaining subject to such home country control.
As noted above, the supervision exercised by the member state in which the head office is located is exclusive, and will be shared only with the authorities in the member states where business is conducted.
Close co-operation between the authorities in the various member states will be essential for the successful implementation of this imaginative and pragmatic form of harmonisation.
Host member states remain competent in an important respect.
A host state may restrict the activities of a financial institution as far as it is justified by the general good.
Many commentators fear that this caveat may allow host states to erect barriers to the single market and prevent the marketing of innovative products as soon as the old barriers have been dismantled.
Certain judgments of the Court of Justice and the directives implementing the single market in respect of financial services do give some guidance as to the ambit of this competence.
In essence, any restrictions on financial institutions benefiting from a single licence will be permitted only where:
there are imperative reasons relating to the public interest that justify restrictions on the freedom to supply services;
equivalent protection is not provided in the rules of the home state;
the same results cannot be obtained by less restrictive means.
There is, however, a very important subsidiary question which is still a matter of controversy.
This is the question of whose rules regulate the carrying on of its business in the host member state, that is, the conduct of business rules, which is also discussed above at pages 15–16, in respect of investment services.
It is arguable that the application of conduct of business rules must be justified on the grounds of the general good, to which the above criteria will apply.
It is uncertain how these criteria will operate in practice, for example, whether they will allow a host state to maintain a prohibition on floating interest rates on mortgages where financial institutions authorised by other member states provide them freely.
Such national rules may have to be challenged by individuals in national courts or by the Commission before the ambit of this restriction of the ‘general good’ is finally resolved.
Home or host country control
The right of establishment granted by Community law includes a right for a company incorporated in one member state (the home member state) to establish a branch in another member state (the host member state).
The right of establishment also gives companies incorporated in one member state the right to establish agencies or subsidiaries in other member states.
In addition, the Treaty of Rome also grants such companies the right to provide services from their home member state to residents of other member states.
As a result of the right of establishment, a member state cannot keep out companies incorporated in other member states.
Clearly, however, even if a company can freely establish a branch in a host member state it is also necessary to decide whether the conduct of that branch's business should be regulated by the home member state or the host member state.
The question therefore arises as to whose rules should govern the conduct of the branch's business and this has given rise to much debate.
Where the branch manufactures a product (such as a car) the standards it must comply with are those of the host member state; conversely, where it sells a product made in its home member state the manufacturing standards of the home member state are normally the relevant ones, although the rules of the host member state would apply to its advertising in that state provided that they are justified as being for the public good.
However, the provision of services by a branch does not clearly fall within either of these principles, because the services are provided from the host member state itself, and  accordingly either alternative seems available.
The problem is most crucial in the case of the provision of financial services such as banking or securities trading; Community law implementing the single market provides for home country control but from the point of view of the investor in the host member state this is not necessarily the best solution, at least if the home member state's rules are more relaxed than those of the host member state.
Indeed, the fundamental reason for the controversy is that the Draft Directives do not actually impose identical conduct of business rules.
If they did, the only question would be the choice of regulatory authority and clearly each member state would want its own regulatory authority to supervise its nationals, even in the case of overseas branches.
The controversy is most acute in the case of the proposed Investment Services Directive, which, as its name implies, will grant a right of establishment and a right to provide cross-border services to EC firms providing investment services (brokers and investment managers, for example).
If a U K broker establishes a branch in France, the broker may without thinking about it prefer that that branch be subject to UK conduct of business rules rather than French because of course UK laws will be more familiar.
However, if UK rules are more stringent or more restrictive than French rules, the branch would be at an immediate competitive disadvantage against its local competition.
Conversely, if a French broker were to set up a branch in London and was subject to those more relaxed French rules, the branch would equally be at a competitive advantage as against UK firms.
The controversy will disappear once all the member states introduce equivalent conduct of business rules but that is unlikely to be achieved in the short or perhaps even in the medium term.
The controversy about which conduct of business rules apply to a branch is quite separate from the question of whether a firm needs to be authorised, or licensed, by the host member state in order to be able to establish a branch.
The requirement for authorisation represents a barrier which can keep out foreign firms.
Accordingly, the proposed Second Banking and Investment Services Directives prohibit member states from subjecting firms from other member states which wish to set up branches or provide cross-border services in their jurisdiction to their own authorisation requirements in the case of activities for which they are already authorised by their home member state.
The question of authorisation and its concomitant question of adequate financial resources is therefore properly a subject for home country control and supervision.
However, host member state authorisation is still required in the insurance sector pending adoption of the proposed Third Life and Third Non-Life Directive.
For home member state  authorisation to work, member states clearly have to have confidence that all member states impose satisfactory conditions for authorisation.
The approach taken by the EC is to impose not uniform standards but essential standards.
A company cannot be authorised if it does not comply with these essential standards but each member state can impose additional standards of its own on its own nationals (in the case of financial resources requirements, for example).
If they do so, however, this would put their own nationals at a competitive disadvantage.
None the less, it is fair to say that this concept of home country authorisation or the ‘single passport’(as it has become known) provides a potent tool for the establishment of a single market in financial services.
Accompanying the proposed Investment Services Directive is the proposed Capital Adequacy Directive that will establish minimum capital requirements to be met by investment firms.
The investment business of credit institutions, i.e. banks, that trade in securities may also be subject to the Capital Adequacy Directive at the option of the home state.
Otherwise, such business will remain subject to the Own Funds and Solvency Ratio Directives.
EC company law and business regulation: harmonisation and new corporate structures
For companies established or providing services in different member states to have to adjust to different regulatory regimes may lead to a duplication of accounting, licensing and countless other requirements.
This may act as a disincentive to penetrating other national markets.
It may reduce the opportunities for benefiting from economies of scale.
It is for these reasons that the Treaty of Rome provides:
For co-ordinating the legal safeguards available for the protection of shareholders and others, with a view to making such safeguards equivalent throughout the Community (Article 54(3) (g))
For co-ordinating the laws of the member states regulating the conduct of business activities in the member states (Article 57(2))
For approximating those laws of the member states which directly affect the establishment or functioning of the Common Market (Article 100)
In this chapter we examine how the Treaty rules are being implemented at Community level.
Company law is examined against the wider background of the Community rules which grant equal access to the markets of other member states, and which harmonise the conditions for the exercise of particular types of business activity.
Within the context of the creation of a single market in establishment and services described above, the Community rules seek to define conditions for equal access and to lay down uniform EC standards.
Equal access The primary objective of the EC rules with which we are here concerned is to allow companies situated in one member state to provide services across national boundaries, or, if they wish, to set up agencies, branches or subsidiaries in other member states.
It is easy  to illustrate the rules of operation with an actual example.
A few years ago, a Dutch business decided it would like to acquire the prestige of a UK PLC designation.
A UK company was incorporated, which then became the holding company of a company set up to run the Dutch business.
Unfortunately Dutch law did not provide equality of treatment in every respect for the subsidiaries of foreign parent companies — certain social security rules were not applicable to them.
On a reference from a Dutch court, the European Court in Luxembourg held that the Dutch company was entitled to the same treatment as other Dutch companies, notwithstanding that it was the subsidiary of a UK parent.
Whenever a company in one member state seeks to do business in another, whether by establishing a physical presence in the second state or not, Community law defines the conditions for equal access to the market of that state.
The Community legislation and proposed legislation to create an environment for equal access is considered later in this chapter.
Common safeguards If companies in Europe are to deal across national boundaries, it is important that investors, customers and creditors are able to deal with confidence with enterprises from other member states, whether directly, or through their subsidiaries and agencies.
The Community has adopted two distinct approaches to maintaining public confidence in cross-border transactions:
To date, in certain areas of company law, minimum standards have been laid down at Community level, and apply to companies throughout the EC, irrespective of where they are incorporated or have their central administration.
Investors, customers and creditors can thus rest assured that these rules apply whatever the location of the business transaction in question, provided only that the companies concerned are incorporated in the EC.
These minimum standards now comprise a significant part of the law applying to companies in the member states, and deal with such matters as the obligations of promoters, liabilities of companies, capitalisation, and the presentation of corporate accounts.
Steps to provide common rules for employee participation in the management of public companies have been more controversial, and it has been strongly argued in the UK that a voluntary approach, reflecting the differing traditions of the member states in questions of employer-employee relations, is to be preferred to compulsory representation of employees on company boards.
An alternative method of maintaining business confidence in cross-border transactions is to provide for the establishment of  EC companies, which would be formed and wound up according to Community rules rather than the rules of any particular member state.
Although this approach has not yet been formalised in the enactment of the proposed European Company Statute, this concept of a European company structure remains under consideration.
Once again, the question of the role of employees in the proposed corporate structure has given rise to some disagreement in the Council.
The Commission have more recently proposed a Directive on establishing European works councils that provides for informing and consulting employees within certain sized undertakings which operate on a Community-wide scale [see pp. 45–6].
An important first step towards a truly European corporate entity has been taken with the issue of EC rules providing for the formation of a European Economic Interest Grouping (see Chapter 4).
While the EC competition rules prohibit inter-company co-operation which stifles competition and innovation, recognition is given to the advantages which result from co-operation and joint ventures which have the overall effect of increasing competition in the Community and benefiting consumers.
Such co-operation is particularly favoured when the participants are small and medium-sized undertakings.
The Social Charter
The Social Charter may be described as the attempt by the EC Commission to introduce a ‘social dimension to the internal market’.
It arose from a groundswell of opinion in the EC that the internal market would be a success only where it had the support of both ‘sides’ of industry and if it was designed to benefit every citizen of the Community.
Moreover, the Commission considered that the social benefits that would accrue from economic developments arising from the internal market could not be left to chance.
Although the Social Charter as signed on 9 December 1989 by all the Heads of State of the EC, excluding the UK, is of no legal effect, UK companies cannot afford to ignore it.
At the instigation of the Council, the Commission have proposed a legislative programme of some 48 measures to implement the principles and aims set forth in the Social Charter.
The Commission claims that this programme respects the principle of subsidiarity; that is, the EC will only legislate in the areas best dealt with at Community level.
Accordingly, the Commission intends to limit itself to those measures that seem necessary to achieve the social  dimension of the internal market and to contribute to the social cohesion of the Community.
So in some areas the Commission has only issued a recommendation or communication, which are merely persuasive and have no legal effect, such as in the area of social protection, child care, minimum income and persons living in frontier regions.
In other areas, notably in relation to the right of freedom of association and collective bargaining, the Commission is abstaining from any action, because it believes that these measures are best dealt with by social partners of industry, or, as appropriate, by the Member States.
The Agreement on Social Policy annexed to the Treaty on European Union reflects this approach.
In certain aspects of collective bargaining, the Agreement specifically provides measures encouraging management/employee dialogue and the modes of implementation of agreements resulting from such dialogue, which keeps the involvement of the Community Institutions only where necessary.
As discussed on pages 7 — 8, the legal basis for these proposals remains controversial and it may be aggravated by the outcome of the Maastricht Summit in December 1991.
At the eleventh hour of the Summit, it was decided that instead of the United Kingdom ‘opting-out’ from the revised treaty provision on social policy, the other eleven would ‘opt-in’for a separate protocol and agreement on social policy.
The twelve member states, by a separate protocol, would authorise the eleven to use the Community's institutions for the purpose of implementing social policies pursuant to the Social Charter.
A separate agreement between the eleven is annexed to the Treaty.
The Agreement sets out parallel texts to the existing provisions on Social Policy in the Treaty of Rome which the eleven will apply in deciding social matters.
Articles 117–122 on social policy in the existing Treaty remain unchanged and will continue to affect all member states, including the UK.
The Agreement extends qualified majority voting (through the ‘co-operation’ procedure [see page 6]), to cover issues such as the conditions of workers, the information and consultation of workers, and equal opportunities between the sexes both on the labour market and regarding treatment in the workplace.
Areas including social security and protection of social rights of the workers and protection of workers when their contract has been terminated, are left to be decided by a unanimous vote.
The Agreement also revises text set out in the Treaty of Rome.
For example, Article 3 of the Agreement on Social Policy provides a legal basis for the consultation of management and labour at the Community level by the Commission before ii submits its proposals in the social policy field.
This article also sets out an opportunity for management and labour to conclude contractual relations including agreements at Community level, should they so desire.
Implementation of such agreements will be carried out in accordance either with the procedure and practices specific to management and labour and in the member state.
Matters covered by the Agreement on Social Policy may be implemented by way of Council decision at the joint request of the signatory parties.
Uncertainty exists as to the legal effect of the Protocol and Agreement, especially with regard to the special position of the UK.
The procedure envisaged is that a proposal in the social policy area would first be submitted to the Council of the twelve member states.
At that stage the United Kingdom could decide whether it was in favour of the proposed legislation.
If it was, the voting would be carried out on a unanimous basis.
If not, the proposal would then be put to the Council of eleven member states for a qualified majority vote.
There is no clear boundary between the measures that can be adopted under the Treaty and those adopted under the Agreement.
There is also a remote, but possible, danger that on contentious matters with a social context, the Protocol procedure could be abused for the purpose of eliminating opposition from the UK to measures where, for example, the UK, Spain and Portugal (a blocking minority of 23 votes) would oppose a measure of which the other member states were in favour.
In accordance with the Protocol and Agreement, UK companies with establishments in more than one member state could be faced with implementing two sets of policies incorporating the effects of adopted Social Policy legislation (such as the establishment of works councils).
Difficulty will also arise where the eleven wish to amend existing Directives in accordance with the policies of the Protocol and Agreement and the UK does not want to do so.
The question is whether the eleven member states could amend the existing legislation or whether they would have to adopt a parallel, but separate, legislation.
Negotiations on such draft directives as those covering working time and part-time workers will continue under the existing Treaty and existing voting arrangements until the Treaty on European Union comes into force.
If the UK government has not signed the Agreement on Social Policy by the time it comes into force, it will be possible for the Commission to present a revised proposal including those mentioned above, which could then be adopted by a qualified majority of the eleven signatory states [see page 34].
It is important that United Kingdom companies keep themselves informed of developments in these proposals, as many of them have a real effect on the day-to-day functioning of a UK company and its cost structure.
Proposals made thus far in this respect include protection at work for pregnant women or those who have already given birth; pro rata equation of the rights of ‘a-typical’(part-time seasonal and  temporary) workers with those of full-time workers; working hours; establishment of European works councils [see pp. 45 — 6]; proof of employment contract; and minimum safety and health requirements at temporary or mobile work sites, such as construction sites and safety signs in the workplace.
In the following sections, key harmonisation measures affecting company law in the Community are discussed, including the Proposed Fifth Directive on the structure of public companies, the proposed ‘Vredeling Directive’ on employee information and consultation, the Directive on insider dealing, Directives relating to branches and subsidiaries, the European Economic Interest Grouping and the proposals for a European Company.
A full table of company law harmonisation measures is set out on pp. 254–5.
Board structures and employee representation
At present in the UK, each company has a board of directors which manages its affairs; directors are elected, and may be removed, by shareholders in general meeting, and a general meeting normally also has a residual power, by a special resolution (proposed as such and carried by a 75 per cent majority of the shares voted), to give a management direction to the board.
Employees have no statutory rights of management or even (with limited statutory exceptions) consultation, although the board must have regard to their interests and, in the case of a takeover, an offeror must state the consequences for employees.
Radical changes to this pattern are contained in the Proposal for a Fifth Company Law Directive, in terms of both board structure and employee participation.
However, this Proposal was originally issued in 1972, and was re-issued in 1983 following discussions with the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee; its lack of progress reflects its controversial nature, and its future advance is unlikely to be rapid.
However, it is possible that it will be adopted by a qualified majority voting procedure.
As regards board structure, the Proposal suggests that, for all public companies (PLCs), whether or not their shares are listed or otherwise publicly traded, a distinction should be drawn between directors responsible for ‘supervision’ on the one hand and ‘management’on the other.
This could be achieved in one of two defined ways: a two-tier board consisting of separate managing and supervisory boards (on the present German model), or a one-tier board (as  at present in the UK) but with a split of the management and supervisory functions.
If the two-tier board structure were used, then the management board would have the sole power of day-to-day management.
Its members would be appointed by the supervisory board, who would have to be regularly informed as to the state of the company's affairs.
The supervisory board would have a ‘watchdog’ role, with power to convene a general meeting if it thought it appropriate; in addition, a company's articles could provide that certain major actions of the management board required the supervisory board's consent.
If the one-tier board structure were used, then the executive directors would ‘manage’ and the non-executive directors would ‘supervise’; to some extent, the boards of UK-listed companies are already moving towards this division, albeit not on a prescribed legal basis, with the establishment of audit committees of non-executive directors to whom the auditors report any matter of concern in the company's draft accounts, and with the determination of the remuneration of executive directors by a committee of non-executive directors, who also deal with ethical matters and conflicts of interest.
The Proposal goes on to require that a public company with 1,000 or more employees (including employees of subsidiaries) within the Community must  install a system of employee participation.
The precise system will depend upon whether the company operates a two-tier or one-tier board structure, but in essence there are three options:
Board representation for employees by way of electing between (at the option of the company) one-third and one-half of the supervisory directors or, alternatively, co-optation by the supervisory board subject to control by the general meeting or employees' representatives
A works council (a body representative of all employees entitled to regular information and consultation)
A collective agreement (i.e. with one or more trades unions) effectively giving the same rights as in one or other of the previous two options to the members of those trades unions (but not, it would seem, to all employees)
In the case of a two-tier board structure, the Proposal allows for the supervisory directors to be appointed by the supervisory board itself rather than shareholders or employees; in this case, employees would have a right of veto, as would shareholders.
The present UK government and the CBI have indicated strong opposition to these proposals, on the grounds that employee involvement is best left to a voluntary approach.
One particular matter of concern would be the election of directors by particular constituencies (shareholders on the one hand and employees on the other); if it were intended that they should represent those constituencies, this would conflict with the general principle of company law that all directors should look to the interests of the company as a whole.
A possible solution to this particular problem (which is not supported by the CBI) would be a quotient system of election, under which shareholders and employees jointly elected the board, with their respective votes weighted to give employees between one-third and one-half of the value of the total votes cast.
These proposals interact with those for employee information (see pp. 44–5) and for a European company (see pp. 53–4).
In December 1990, the Commission amended its Proposal for a Fifth Directive as part of a general policy of eliminating obstacles to  takeover bids.
The amendments would affect the voting tights of shareholders in two ways.
Firstly, a company would only be able to issue preference shares with limited or no voting rights up to 50% of its issued share capital and, if the preference dividends were not paid for three years, the shares would then acquire full voting rights.
Secondly, a company's articles could not require more than a 50% majority for the appointment or removal of directors, nor confer on holders of a particular class of shares an exclusive right to nominate directors.
The Commission could have put forward the first of these amendments separately from the Fifth Directive, and may have chosen its course in order to revive consideration of the Fifth Directive as a whole.
Accountancy and audits
A number of specific measures have been adopted or are in the pipeline in relation to accountancy and audit matters.
The Fourth Company Law Directive regulated the form and content of company accounts; the Seventh Company Law Directive dealt with consolidated accounts; and the Eighth Directive with the qualification of auditors.
These have been given UK legislative effect in the 1985 and 1989 Companies Acts.
Two amending Directives to the Fourth Directive have been adopted and must be implemented by 1 January 1993.
One of them extends the Fourth Directive to both partnerships (whether limited or unlimited) and unlimited companies, in either case where the partners or shareholders themselves have limited liability.
Under current proposals this will mean that a partnership or unlimited company so composed will be under the same accounting (and presumably also disclosure) requirements as a limited company.
However, in appropriate cases, this disclosure requirement may be avoided by the use of an EEIG.
The other raises the threshold for the exemptions applicable to small and medium-sized companies.
For the longer term, it is worth noting that a number of the member states have a more independent system of audit, under which a company's accounts are audited, not by its own accountants, but by auditors who primarily owe a public interest duty.
This may be a future subject for harmonisation, and indeed has been specifically reserved for further consideration by the Commission.
Branches and subsidiaries
One of the most interesting areas for future harmonisation relates to groups of companies, and branches of companies.
Under present UK law, a company has a separate legal personality; and its members, even if it is wholly owned by another company, are not — at any rate in theory — liable for its debts and other obligations.
In practice, however, the dividing line has been somewhat blurred; the owners of a smaller company often give personal guarantees to its bankers, and a parent company will give, if not a formal guarantee, then a ‘comfort letter’ relating to its subsidiary's indebtedness to banks and others.
The dividing line became even more blurred in December 1987, when the Commercial Division of the High Court, in the landmark case of Kleinwort Benson Limited v. 
Malaysian Mining Corporation Berhad , effectively held that a comfort letter which does not expressly and precisely state that it has no contractual force will have such force, if its terms are sufficiently precise to be capable of interpretation.
This came as no surprise to lawyers, who had long warned that the term ‘comfort letter’ was a misnomer, with each document having to be construed in accordance with its precise terms, but was a considerable shock to the business community.
The decision was reversed on appeal on the facts.
In any event, it is still the wiser course for a comfort letter expressly to exclude legal liability if such is the intention.
In the pipeline is a Draft Ninth Company Law Directive, which has not yet reached the stage of a formal proposal and indeed has not progressed since 1985.
In effect, it seeks to establish a formal group structure where an undertaking controls a public company (whether or not its shares are listed) even if that company is not its subsidiary; an undertaking can be a person, firm or company.
The suggested Directive's objective is to protect minority shareholders against abuses of power by regulating the way in which the controlling undertaking exercises its dominant influence over the public company by interfering in its management.
Where a dominant influence exists over a public company, the dominant undertaking will be liable for any damage suffered by the public company and, more radically, for any debts incurred by the public company as a result of its acting at the direction of the dominant undertaking, although this will seemingly not be the case if the dominant undertaking's influence is in fact exercised in the best interests of the public company.
Control contract
A different form of control liability will, however, apply if the dominant undertaking — whether or not a shareholder — has formalised  its relationship with the public company concerned by a control contract which provides for it to manage the company and in which it offers the minority shareholders a buy-out or, at the shareholders' option, to pay them an annual protected dividend.
The control contract must be registered and shareholders have three months after registration to demand to be bought out.
A control contract is subject to shareholder approval by a majority vote (including any shares held by the dominant undertaking: but, in the case of a company whose shares are listed or publicly traded, the domestic regulatory authority may — as the Stock Exchange presently does — ban an interested shareholder from voting in this type of situation); such a contract may therefore allow predators who have obtained board control of a company to make that company effectively subservient to an external body without the formalities of a takeover.
A control contract may be terminated by agreement, by notice or, in extreme cases, on an application to the court.
Once a control contract has been entered into, the dominant undertaking and the public company will in effect be treated as a single entity.
The dominant undertaking will be able to give binding directions to the public company in the light of the group's overall interest rather than that of the public company alone (so over-riding the present UK approach of treating companies as separate entities even if they are in a group).
Conversely, and as the price for treating the company as its own, the dominant undertaking will be liable for the obligations of the company if the company defaults and this seemingly will apply even to preexisting obligations; however, the dominant undertaking will be able to apply for relief from liability if it did not itself cause the company's default.
The suggested Directive will impose substantial disclosure requirements relating to the exercise of management power by the dominant undertaking, if the public company is its subsidiary.
In its present form, this possible Directive is not significant for the UK; very few public companies in the UK are managed by a dominant undertaking.
It is, however, worth noting that the number of public companies, and their proportion of the total number of companies, is significantly higher in other member states, so that this may in time be of concern to a UK company with a subsidiary in another member state.
In addition, although the suggested Directive is limited to public companies, the accompanying explanatory note shows that consideration is being given to extending its scope to private companies, so that it would effectively apply to private companies which are subsidiaries of a public company (the normal UK group structure).
It must be likely that in due course a parent company in the UK will be legally responsible for the debts of at least its wholly owned subsidiaries unless, perhaps, it files some sort of public disclaimer.
The suggested Directive will also grant important compulsory acquisition rights to the dominant undertaking if it has acquired a 90 per cent holding, whether or not there is a control contract.
The compulsory acquisition procedures used in the UK after a takeover will therefore become available throughout the EC, and this may promote cross-border mergers.
Disclosure
Effectively interlinked with the parent — subsidiary relationship is the Eleventh Company Law Directive, adopted in 1989 and to be implemented by 1 January 1992.
This prohibits any requirement for separate accounts for branches of companies incorporated in other member states and substitutes provisions compelling disclosure, in the member state in which a branch operates, of the affairs of the company (or, where it is a subsidiary, of the group to which it belongs).
Similar disclosure requirements will apply to non-EC companies but in their case these are minima only and other accounts can also be required, seemingly even those relating to the branch.
From a UK standpoint, this may be helpful.
Similar disclosure provisions already operate in the UK in relation to overseas companies which have a place of business here (although the requirement to file group accounts would be new), whereas in other member states additional information may currently be required relating to that branch (e.g. branch accounts which would effectively reveal dealings between the branch and the rest of the company).
If the proposed Directive is adopted, this additional information can no longer be required; this removes potential competitive disadvantages to which UK companies may otherwise be subject and which may constitute barriers to the right of establishment.
The stated intention of the Eleventh Directive is to harmonise the laws relating to subsidiaries and branches.
At the moment, the establishment of a branch tends to require less documentation, formality and cost, while a subsidiary has the advantage of being a separate legal personality, with the result that disclosure requirements may not apply to the parent, and the subsidiary's debts will not necessarily become obligations of its parent in the event of insolvency.
However, with the implementation of the Eleventh Directive, this non-disclosure advantage will disappear; and, if the Ninth Directive is put in place, and in due course extends to all subsidiaries (whether public or private companies), then this non-recourse advantage will also disappear in the circumstances specified in the Ninth Directive.
Insider dealing
In November 1989 the Council approved a Directive to make insider dealing unlawful throughout the Community.
The related domestic legislation was to be enacted before the end of 1990.
For the UK, there is likely to be no significant effect, although the opportunity may be taken to clarify the law and render enforcement easier.
UK company law already incorporates most of the requirements, and indeed the Directive is largely modelled on the Company Securities (Insider Dealing) Act 1985, as amended by the Financial Services Act 1986.
The Directive applies to all transferable securities traded on a stock exchange in a member state but in the case of off-market dealings it will permit a member state to limit the application of its domestic legislation (as the UK does at present) to dealings with or through a professional intermediary such as a stockbroker.
The Directive applies not only to listed securities, but also to those quoted or dealt in with less formality (e.g. on the British Unlisted Securities Market and the French Deuxième Marché) and to traded options related to them; this will be so even if they are issued by non-EC companies.
This is wider than the scope of present UK law.
As already in the UK, it will render unlawful (although not necessarily in terms of criminal law: the penalties may only be civil but must be sufficiently dissuasive) the misuse or improper disclosure of unpublished price-sensitive information, either by insiders or by those who obtain the information from them.
Under English law ‘obtain', in this context, can be passive following a recent House of Lords decision.
Each member state will be the regulatory authority in relation to dealings on its own stock exchange; in the case of an off-market transaction, the member state where the ‘victim’ of the transaction is resident will have jurisdiction.
Importantly, the Directive requires regulatory authority in different member states to co-operate with each other and exchange information.
Free movement of capital
Article 67 of the Treaty of Rome provided for the abolition of restrictions on the movement of capital within the Community during the first twelve years of the Community's existence.
However, after initial strides towards the achievement of this objective, progress faltered — and even reversed, as some member states in the 1970s took advantage of the safeguard provisions of the Treaty of Rome to introduce  restrictions on capital transactions which had already, in principle, been liberated.
The explosive development in the 1980s of the international financial markets made complete liberalisation a necessity, and this was achieved, following the Single European Act, by a 1988 Directive (known as ‘the Article 67 Directive’).
The Article 67 Directive, which requires the abolition of any domestic restrictions on movements of capital between persons resident in member states, was to be implemented before 1 July 1990; Spain, Portugal, the Republic of Ireland and Greece are given transitional relief until the end of 1992, and Belgium and Luxembourg may temporarily continue to operate their present dual exchange market.
The Directive is not significant in terms of inward investment into the UK (exchange control was suspended in 1979 and abolished in 1987, although the Directive will prevent its reintroduction in relation to other member states).
But outward investment from the UK into other member states will be de-restricted in terms of the domestic legislation of those member states.
The Directive permits temporary protective measures, but any such measures cannot continue without the approval of the Council or in any event for longer than six months.
A more sensitive area is that of actual currencies.
The UK is now belatedly within the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System.
The exact form of Economic and Monetary Union was settled at Maastricht with an ‘opt-in’ provision for the UK; whether (and, if so, when) the UK will in fact opt in is an intensively political subject outside the scope of this book, although it should be noted that the CBI favours such a union in principle.
Employee information and consultation
Since 1980 a proposal has been under discussion for a Directive which could require companies to introduce procedures for informing and consulting employees; it became known as the ‘Vredeling Directive’.
Two principal (albeit contradictory) difficulties arose: the belief of the governments of some member states (including the UK) that any such procedure should be voluntary, and the fact that Vredeling was not limited to collective representation of employees through trade unions.
The ‘information’ part of Vredeling, which would apply to employers with 1,000 or more employees, would require that information relating to the business as a whole, and to the employees' own particular subsidiaries or establishments, be supplied annually to employees' representatives.
Such information would include the economic and financial state of the business, its forecast development, the present and anticipated pattern of employment and its investment prospects.
Management would also be obliged to consult employees' representatives on matters likely to have serious consequences for their interests, with a view to attempting to reach agreement.
In the 1983 draft, such matters include major closures and relocations; substantial reductions or alterations in the business; major organisational changes, including those arising from new technologies; joint ventures; and health and safety.
There will be an exception on the grounds of commercial secrecy.
European Works Council
The Commission has not yet produced a revised proposal of general application.
It has, however, produced a specific proposal for a European Works Council (EWC), as a mechanism for informing and consulting employees in ‘Community-scale undertakings’, defined as an undertaking (or group of undertakings) with at least 1,000 employees within the Community, and at least two establishments in different Member States, each with at least 100 employees.
A request for the consideration of the establishment of an EWC could be made by any employee, or by central management.
Such request would trigger a meeting of elected employee representatives who, unless they unanimously agreed otherwise, would request negotiations with central management with a view to concluding an agreement for an EWC.
Such an agreement would embrace the nature, composition, competence and mode of operation of the EWC.
In default of an agreement within a year, the minimum requirements of the domestic legislation of the Member State where central management was situated would apply, subject to additional minimum requirements laid down by the Directive.
These would include:
a tight to an annual meeting with central management, to be informed of the progress and prospects of the undertaking, and in particular:
its structure
its economic and financial situation
the probable development of its business, production and sales
its employment situation and probable trends
its investment prospects
a right to be informed and consulted about any management proposal likely to have serious consequences for the interests of employees.
In the case of the UK, in the absence of any related domestic legislation these minimum requirements would apply.
The only movement in UK law towards this concept is that companies with 250 or more employees are obliged to state in their directors' report what action has been taken during the year on employee consultation and participation.
Stock exchange listings
The 1979 Admissions Directive established minimum requirements in relation to the full listing (not merely quotation or market dealing) of securities on a stock exchange in a member state; the related UK domestic legislation was incorporated in the 1986 Financial Services Act.
The member states have recently agreed on the mutual recognition of listings on different stock exchanges, if the related applications are made to different stock exchanges roughly contemporaneously, and this has been incorporated into UK law.
The Listing Particulars Directive of 1980 sought to harmonise disclosure requirements, with a view to eventual mutual recognition of listing particulars.
The UK disclosure requirements are imposed by the Financial Services Act (which requires all material matters to be disclosed) although the details are set out in the ‘Admission of Securities to Listing’ issued by the Stock Exchange.
Under the Listing Particulars Directive, it is a condition of admission to listing that the issuer publishes listing particulars which contain, in as easily analysable and comprehensive a form as possible, the applicable items listed in the Directive.
The listing particulars may not be published until they have been approved by a competent authority in the member state; the competent authority in the UK is the London Stock Exchange.
Member states may allow the competent authority to provide for partial or complete exemption from the obligation to publish listing particulars in particular circumstances.
The mutual recognition provisions apply where applications are made simultaneously or within a short interval of one another for admission of the same securities to official listing on stock exchanges in two or more member states.
If the securities are to be listed in the member state where the issuer has its registered office, the listing particulars must be drawn up under the laws of, and approved by, the competent authority in that member state.
If the issuer is not incorporated in any of the member states where the securities are to be listed, the issuer must decide which of those member states is to have responsibility for approving the listing particulars; it must then draw up the listing particulars in accordance with the laws of that member  state.
Under these provisions, stock exchanges in one member state will have to accept listing particulars approved by the responsible competent authority in another.
The Financial Services Act has been amended to implement these provisions.
The Directive also provides for the EC to enter into bilateral agreements with non-member states for mutual recognition of listing particulars.
The Disclosure Directive
In December 1988, the EC adopted a Directive which will require the acquisition or disposal of major holdings in listed companies to be publicly notified.
The Disclosure Directive lays down minimum disclosure requirements throughout the EC and is aimed at improving the transparency of the securities markets.
As an important by-product it will also make it difficult for prospective bidders to build up stakes in secret.
The Directive was to be implemented by 1 January 1991.
The Disclosure Directive applies to holdings in a company which is incorporated in a member state and whose shares are officially listed on a stock exchange in that or any other member state (an ‘EC listed company’).
It provides that anyone who acquires a holding (or increases an existing holding) in an EC-listed company above a series of specified thresholds must notify the company accordingly.
Disposals reducing holdings below any of those thresholds also have to be notified.
The notification requirement will apply to any investor, even if the investor is not EC-resident.
However, the Directive does not apply to holdings in open-ended investment companies or other collective investment undertakings; nor does it apply to holdings in companies incorporated outside the EC, although such companies which are listed on a stock exchange in a member state must make a public announcement of changes in major holdings of which they become aware (even though there is no actual notification requirement).
However, there is no provision in the Disclosure Directive for permitting companies who are concerned as to who may be holding their shares (for example, in the case of an anticipated takeover) to require holders of voting rights to disclose their interests; there is therefore no equivalent of a notice under Section 212 of the 1985 Companies Act, and this may prove a deficiency in the new system.
The Disclosure Directive applies to changes in voting rights rather than share capital and this means that the notification requirement is therefore not dependent on having a beneficial interest in the shares.
Indeed, in many EC jurisdictions (for example, the Netherlands) there is no concept of trust or, therefore, of beneficial interests; a person's rights to shares held by another on their behalf rest only in  contract and therefore a notification requirement based on beneficial ownership would not work.
In addition, notifiable holdings may vary significantly from shareholdings if certain classes of shares carry no votes, or where a stock exchange allows listed shares to have weighted voting rights.
Moreover, it is unclear from the Directive whether all classes of voting shares in a listed company are included or only listed shares.
Importantly, the Directive applies to all voting shares, even if they are bearer; it may therefore become impossible to shelter a major holding behind the anonymity of bearer shares.
Notification thresholds
The notification requirement applies at certain threshold levels, namely 10 per cent, 20 per cent , one-third, 50 per cent and two-thirds, although member states are given the option to have different thresholds in certain cases (for example a 25 per cent threshold instead of the 20 per cent and one-third thresholds).
This is a different approach to present UK practice, which requires notification of any percentage increase or decrease at levels at or above the single threshold level of 3 per cent.
The Directive allows more stringent requirements and therefore it would seem that the present UK practice (and its lower initial threshold) can be continued, which may help UK companies fearful of predators.
If it is required, the notification must be made within seven calendar days and must specify the proportion of voting rights actually held and, if required by the member state, the proportion of share capital.
The notification must be made not only to the EC-listed company itself but also to the competent authority (in the case of the UK, probably the London Stock Exchange).
Under London Stock Exchange rules, it is the company which is required to notify the Exchange and accordingly this will be an important change in practice.
The EC-listed company must make a public announcement about the acquisition or disposal in all member states where its shares are listed within ten calendar days, although member states can require disclosure to be made by the competent authority rather than the EC-listed company itself.
The information must be published in at least one newspaper circulating in the member state concerned, or must be made available in specified locations.
Voting rights
There are detailed provisions which, following the precedent set by the 1985 Companies Act in the same context, attribute voting rights  held by one person to another.
This would apply, for example, in the case of nominees and controlled companies and also (as in the case of the 1985 Companies Act) where there is a written agreement relating to the exercise of voting rights in concert; the test of control is, in general terms, a subsidiary test rather than the UK's present one-third voting-power test, which can therefore be continued.
In addition, there are attributed to lenders voting rights on shares charged to them (except where they are controlled by the chargor).
Finally, and significantly, voting rights exercisable by discretionary portfolio managers are attributed to them (although member states are allowed to postpone the notification requirement in this last case so that it is tied to general meetings).
Where the notification is made by a parent company, however, its subsidiaries do not have to make their own notification.
In addition, member states are allowed to exempt from the notification requirement what are termed ‘professional dealers in securities’ if they do not use the securities acquired to interfere in the company's management; the expression ‘professional dealers in securities’may be confined to market makers (as under the 1985 Companies Act) but the expression does seem wide enough to include own account dealers as well and this is supported by the fact that the exemption applies even to professional dealers who are not members of a stock exchange, provided that they are authorised or supervised by a competent authority (an investment bank, for example ).
The Disclosure Directive also allows competent authorities to exempt EC-listed companies from the requirement to notify the public if the disclosure would be contrary to the public interest or seriously detrimental to the company concerned (provided that the public would not be misled); this does not, however, exempt a person acquiring voting rights from having to disclose them to the company if a relevant threshold is reached.
Finally, the Disclosure Directive contains a transitional provision which is intended to inform companies of the up-to-date position when the Directive is implemented.
It provides that existing holdings of 10 per cent or more must be notified to the EC-listed company at the first annual general meeting which takes place more than three months after the Directive has been implemented; they must be notified to the competent authority at the same time and must be made public within one month after the meeting.
The European Economic Interest Grouping
In contrast to the grander scale of the European Company (see pp. 53 — 4), the European Economic Interest Grouping (EEIG) is a  flexible vehicle permitting companies and others to co-operate within the Community on a cross-border basis.
It was originally inspired by a French invention, the Groupement d'Intérét Economique, allowing an association of companies wishing to pool resources such as staff or offices to pursue a particular activity without affecting their individual independence, or creating separate limited liability or a new profit centre.
The essence of an EEIG is a joint venture vehicle which has the mixed characteristics of an unlimited company and a partnership.
It cannot be an enterprise on its own, but enables its members to facilitate or develop their economic activities through a vehicle (which may have a legal personality), while the members remain jointly and severally liable for the debts of the combined enterprise and are taxed directly on their respective proportionate shares of the profits.
GO TO WORK ON AN EEIG
Formation
An EEIG may be formed by persons, firms or companies (or indeed other bodies, whether incorporated or not) in the EC, but not by non-EC bodies; individuals must be carrying on a trading or service activity (including the provision of professional services) and bodies may be public or quasi-public.
As the intention is to promote cross-border co-operation, members of an EEIG must come from at least two member states.
An EEIG may not have more than 500 employees, nor offer participations to the public.
The contract establishing an EEIG must be filed with the designated Registrar in the member state (or part thereof) where the EEIG has its official address; such registration confers full legal capacity on the EEIG throughout the Community.
It is up to each member state to decide whether an EEIG registered by it should have separate legal personality.
The UK has decided that UK-registered EEIGs should be treated as bodies corporate with separate legal personalities like companies and should be registered with the Registrar of Companies.
Constitution
The Regulation governing EEIGs is conceptually similar to the UK Partnership Act of 1890.
A broad constitutional framework is created, with a limited number of mandatory requirements, some optional features and then a range of matters on which the framework operates unless the related contract specifically provides otherwise.
An EEIG has two mandatory constitutional organs: its members acting collectively, and one or more managers.
Any additional constitutional organs are permitted.
The members have one vote each, unless the related contract provides otherwise (but no single member may have a majority of the votes).
Unless the contract otherwise provides (which, in relation to some fundamental matters, it may not), unanimity is required on a number of defined key decisions, e.g. objects, voting rights or the extension of an original agreed life.
Although a member state may limit the number of members of an EEIG to twenty, it is envisaged that, in the UK, professional partnerships which may have over twenty members will be treated as a single member.
Management and financing
The manager(s) must be natural person(s), or, if so permitted in the member state of registration, a company which designates individuals whose details are then filed as if they were the managers and who then have similar obligations.
Any manager will (with certain limited exceptions) have power to bind the EEIG vis-à-vis third parties, unless the related contract provides that only two or more managers may so bind it and is gazetted accordingly.
An EEIG does not have to be formed with a capital, but may be financed in a number of ways (e.g. the provision of assets or services) or even not at all if participants consider that it can operate on the basis of current account facilities from any of the participants and/or a bank.
Key features of an EEIG
The structure of the EEIG is flexible; accordingly, one participant could contribute capital (if indeed any is needed), another know-how and a third services.
Cross-frontier research and development (including data processing), joint manufacturing or purchasing, marketing and professional services (particularly with a joint database) seem obvious candidates in this connection; distribution arrangements particularly, where the manufacturer provides the goods and the agent contributes the legwork, seem naturally suited to an EEIG.
The EEIG can be used either to co-ordinate the activities of its participants, or to extend their range.
These two facets are complementary rather than necessarily exclusive — an EEIG could come together as a multi-disciplinary vehicle to tender for a construction, engineering or hi-tech project, whether within or outside the Community.
If the tender was accepted, the various obligations could be divided amongst its members, while the EEIG itself became effectively the project manager, with a co-ordinating role.
This could, for example, provide a convenient structure for multi-national aircraft or defence projects.
However, it must not be forgotten that EEIGs are not exempt from the EC competition rules on joint ventures.
A joint venture between competitors or potential competitors may infringe Article 85 of the Treaty of Rome if the participants could reasonably have been expected to enter the market individually, and in such cases the creation of an EEIG will not obviate the need to seek an exemption, or at least a comfort letter, from the Commission.
The Commission will need to be satisfied that the economic benefits to the market and the consumer will outweigh any anti-competitive effects (see Chapters 5 and 6).
The EEIG experience
It is, unfortunately, impossible to give definitive information about the EEIGs that have been formed.
Some member states are better than others as regards the accessibility of such information (and not all have yet given domestic effect to the EEIG Regulation!).
However, of the first 100 notified to the Commission (but such notification is haphazard, and may not therefore be representative) as having been  formed in the first 14 months after the EEIG Regulation came into effect on 1 July 1989, a rough pattern emerges.
Firstly, as one would expect, 28 offer professional services and/or provide support to their members in this regard (13 of those are in the field of law).
Secondly, 40 (all formed in the Netherlands) deal with food importing and exporting.
Another eight are involved in marketing and/or purchasing, and four are engaged in finance.
Finally, of the other 20, there is a whole miscellany, of which the most interesting concerns itself with monastic products; however, as these are Trappist, presumably the less said, the better!
Many ventures which begin life as EEIGs will, if successful, need to progress to full integration, earning their own profits, enjoying limited liability and providing a basis on which capital can be raised from institutions or the public.
The new European Company may well prove to be the Eurochicken into which EEIGs will hatch, if the Commission succeeds in its renewed efforts to overcome the various problems currently inhibiting its birth.
The European Company
In October 1989, the Commission formally published its proposals for establishing a European Company (‘Societas Europaea’, or ‘SE’) by way of a Regulation dealing with company law and taxation and a Directive dealing with employee participation.
Following discussions in the European Parliament, the Commission published amended proposals in April/May 1991.
The intended role of the SE is to facilitate cross-border co-operation by means of large-scale mergers and associations, which the Commission regard as imperative for the benefit of the Community, in order to enable European business to compete more efficiently in world markets against, for example, eg US and Japanese megaliths.
For this reason, the draft Regulation provides that, where an SE is superimposed on two or more other companies as a new holding company, there will be an easy mechanism for the resultant merger, with both original companies being automatically dissolved and their former shareholders automatically becoming members of the SE: this is similar to a British Scheme of Arrangement approved by the High Court.
The SE would be a hybrid (and to this extent some of the original purpose of the SE has been lost); it would be incorporated in a particular Member State, whose domestic laws would govern certain aspects of its operations (e.g. insolvency), but its registered office could be transferred to another Member State.
Its share capital would  be denominated in ECUs.
It would be subject to tax in its Member State of incorporation, but with a limited offset for losses of permanent establishments (branches but not subsidiaries) in other Member States.
It would also be mandatory for each SE to have a system of employee participation; this would mirror the Fifth Directive (see pp. 36–9), but with an additional option based on the law of the Member State of incorporation, provided that employees' rights of information and consultation were at least those prescribed by the SE employee Directive.
It is too early to give a confident forecast of the use that will be made of the SE.
It was intended that the Commission's proposals should be agreed by the Council of Ministers in October 1990 and be implemented by January 1992; but the employee participation element in particular is controversial, and animated discussions have taken place, with various Committees of the European Parliament having commented at length and suggested a plethora of amendments.
The proposed date of implementation is now January 1993.
A key amendment proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens' Rights was that the registration of an SE should be dependent upon the prior selection of its model of employee participation; this has been incorporated in the amended proposals.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has urged that the SE Regulation only incorporate domestic laws if they have been harmonised, and that tax harmonisation be accelerated.
In addition, the Legal Affairs and Citizens' Rights Committee has been supported by the Parliament in plenary session in advocating a significant extension of the SE Regulation.
The Regulation originally envisaged that SEs could only be set up by merging or forming a holding company when at least two public companies had their central administration in different Member States.
The Parliament now proposes, and the Council of Ministers has agreed, that an SE may be formed by a public or private company by merging or forming a holding company, or indeed, if it has a presence in more than one Member State, by transforming itself into an SE.
This has been incorporated in the amended proposals.
However, the advantages of an SE in terms of mergers, while real in terms of cross-border merger procedure, are very far from guaranteeing its use (as opposed to, say, a company in a country such as Luxembourg, the Netherlands or some sun-kissed tax haven), particularly if there are perceived concomitant disadvantages, e. g. in terms of board structure and employee representation.
EC competition law
European competition law: the ground rules
The EC competition rules
The competition rules of the Treaty of Rome represent the most effective means available to businesses, both large and small, of ensuring that the Common Market operates effectively and fairly.
In the 1985 White Paper ‘Completing the Internal Market’ this fundamental role for competition policy was recognised by the Commission, when it stated:
As the Community moves to complete the internal market, it will be necessary to ensure that anti-competitive practices do not engender new forms of local protectionism which would only lead to repartitioning the market.
Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty of Rome, the text of which is set out in Appendix 1, define the framework for the operation of the Community competition rules.
Although both Treaty of Rome Articles are expressed in terms of prohibition of certain forms of conduct, they can often be utilised by businesses as positive tools in the development of a Community business strategy.
Article 85 prohibits:
Agreements between undertakings
Decisions by associations of undertakings or concerted practices (which we refer to in this book as ‘arrangements’)
which affect trade between member states and which prevent, restrict or distort competition within the Common Market.
It recognises that competition is not an end in itself by providing a procedure whereby, although certain agreements or arrangements may prevent, restrict or distort competition, they may none the less improve the production or distribution of goods or promote technical or economic progress to the  benefit of consumers.
In those circumstances Article 85(3) provides for an exemption procedure.
There has been a tendency on the part of the Commission to interpret Article 85(1) very widely so that all restrictions fall within it and require exemption.
There may be signs in recent cases of a move towards a more pragmatic approach based on the premise that only restrictions which produce a significant effect in the market fall within Article 85(1).
This approach (often referred to as a ‘rule of reason’ approach) was adopted by the Commission in the Odin case (discussed on page 141) where the Commission held that a joint venture between undertakings which were not potential competitors did not fall within Article 85(1) and neither did any ancillary restrictions inherent in the creation of the joint venture.
Further, in a recent case the Court has held that unless an individual agreement can be shown in concrete terms to produce an effect on trade, it does not fall within Article 85(1).
In theory these developments should allow undertakings to avoid the application of Article 85(1) if they can produce economic evidence to show that there is no effect in the market.
However there is still a need for caution; undertakings cannot rely on the Commission adopting a rule of reason approach in every case and would therefore need to be prepared to appeal to the Court.
Article 86 prohibits the abuse of dominant market positions within the Common Market in so far as it may affect trade between member states: the fact that a business has a dominant or monopoly position is not in itself prohibited.
Although Articles 85 and 86 describe a number of examples of anti-competitive behaviour, these are not exhaustive; any agreement, arrangement or conduct which actually or potentially affects trade in the Community and has an anti-competitive object or effect falls for consideration under Articles 85 and 86.
Impact on UK business
All businesses, whether trading as companies, partnerships, state corporations, agricultural co-operatives, trade associations or sole traders and whether for profit or not, must have regard to the competition rules of the Treaty of Rome.
Agreements between trading parties made within a governmental framework fall within Article 85.
For example, in a Commission decision in 1982 a network of price-fixing agreements within a trade association in the cognac industry established in France by statute was held to infringe Article 85, despite the fact that the association's board operated under government supervision.
The competition rules must be regarded as a double-edged sword by businesses.
On the one hand the UK business entering EC markets is acting as a poacher in what has traditionally been regarded as territory belonging to other EC businesses.
In those markets, EC competition rules can break down private barriers to trade.
The barriers take on a variety of forms including cartel agreements or arrangements, national market organisations (such as co-operatives or trade associations) which discriminate against other EC nationals, and abusive monopolisation of markets.
Conversely, the competition rules can be invoked by businesses as a ‘sword’ to cut away the private barriers to trade.
Here, the same businesses must always remain vigilant that their arrangements, agreements and conduct conform with EC competition rules.
Otherwise there is a risk of coming under attack for not complying with Community competition law requirements.
Whether the business is poacher or gamekeeper, the legal consequences of not complying with the Community competition rules are serious and include:
Finding that any agreement or arrangement in conflict with Article 85 is void
Fines of up to 1,000,000 ecu (£650,000) or 10 per cent of an undertaking's turnover, whichever is the greater (for these purposes, however, where an undertaking is part of a group, ‘turnover’ relates to the group's turnover).
In its recent Tetra-Pak decision, the Commission imposed a fine of 75 million ECU in respect of the serious and long-standing violations of the EC competition rules identified in its decision.
Civil proceedings before the domestic courts of any member state for an injunction and/or damages based on the competition rules of the Treaty of Rome
Surveillance by the Commission of the operation of all future agreements or marketing policies.
Scope of EC competition rules
Businesses should not be misled into thinking that, because Articles 85 and 86 are expressed to apply where there is an effect on inter-state trade, the agreement or abusive conduct has to be concluded within the EC to fall within their scope of application.
The competition rules apply to all cases where the agreement, conduct or practices produce  an effect on the normal patterns of trade or have a ‘repercussion’ on the competitive structure of a market thereby affecting trade between member states.
Article 85 applies to undertakings established outside the EC if their agreement is implemented within the Community.
Selling into the Community from abroad is itself sufficient to establish jurisdiction over anti-competitive behaviour by a supplier.For example, in a recent series of cases concerning cartelisation of the markets for certain polyethylenes, the Commission fined companies which did not produce or have headquarters in the EEC on the basis that the EEC was an important market for them.
The International Air Transport Association has also been held to be subject to the EC competition rules for the same reason.
However, the European Court has held that a trade association which was established outside the Community and had no part in implementing a price agreement which infringed Article 85 was not subject to the EC competition rules.
On occasions the effect on inter-state trade is tenuous, but none the less the competition rules have been applied.
All business activities are encompassed by the competition rules.
In this sense the reference to ‘trade’ in Articles 85 and 86 is misleading and all economic activities including the supply of goods or services (including financial services), broadcasting or communications generally, the exercise of intellectual property rights, or the carrying on of any other trade or profession are encompassed by the competition rules.
On 22 December 1986 the Council of Ministers adopted four Regulations, the effect of which was to implement the application of the competition rules of the Treaty of Rome to the maritime transport sector.
On 14 December 1987 the Council adopted a further Regulation applying the competition rules to international air transport between community airports.
Public undertakings
Undertakings entrusted with the operation of ‘services of general economic interest’ or ‘having the character of a revenue-producing monopoly’have a special status, and under certain circumstances defined in Article 90 of the Treaty of Rome, those special activities may  be exempt from the competition rules.
Unless the Community has enacted legislation to apply the competition rules specifically to the activities of such undertakings, as it has recently done in the telecommunications sector, many public utilities such as water authorities, state postal services or state railways fall outside the competition rules.
However, for this provision to apply, the special functions of the undertaking must have been conferred by virtue of an act of public authority.
Therefore in one case the Commission refused to apply the provision to a Eurocheque clearing system which, although receiving the support of individual member states, was not established by legislation in those member states.
In every case careful scrutiny of the precise structure of a public undertaking is necessary to ascertain whether it falls within the exemption.
Even where an undertaking does fall within the exemption, the competition rules will apply if their application does not obstruct the performance of the specific functions of the undertaking concerned.
The Commission has recently held that a joint organ of the state-owned electricity generators in the Netherlands, although within the exemption, was still subject to the competition rules.
Further, the Court has recently upheld the Commission's tight under Article 90 to curtail the power of member states to grant ‘special or exclusive rights’ to undertakings, which are often public undertakings.
Such rights can only be granted if they are compatible with the Treaty.
The case in question concerned exclusive rights granted by member states for the supply of telecommunications terminal equipment and the Court held that the Commission was justified in requiring member states to withdraw such tights.
In this connection, the Commission has also held that the reservation of express delivery services in Spain and the Netherlands to the state-owned post offices there was illegal.
governments of member states
National Governments may also be found to be in breach of Articles 85 and 86 in combination with their duties under Articles 3 (? and 5 to co-operate with the EEC institutions in achieving the objectives of the Treaty, which include the institution of a system ensuring that competition is not distorted.
Member states could be in breach of these duties where they had enacted legislation requiring or encouraging undertakings to act contrary to Articles 85 or 86 or reinforcing the effects of such conduct.
Agricultural products
It should be remembered that agricultural products may require consideration of special competition rules (in particular, the rules on restrictive agreements and state subsidies may not automatically apply).
Agricultural products for this purpose are only those listed in Annex II of the Treaty of Rome.
Thus, fur skins are not to be regarded as agricultural products, since they do not appear in Annex II, and therefore normal competition rules apply (see the Hudson's Bay case study pp. 208 — 12).
Special competition considerations arise if the products do appear in Annex II, whether they are subject to a common organisation of the market (which most products now are), or a national organisation of the market (which few products now are).
Where products are still subject to a national organisation of the market, and the conditions under which the goods are marketed leads to distortion of the terms of competition under which similar goods are marketed in other member states, the Commission may impose compensatory charges upon exports of the product from the member state of origin.
Ethyl alcohol of agricultural origin produced in France has given rise to such problems in the past, and complaints to the Commission have led to charges being imposed on several occasions, in order to protect alcohol producers in the other member states from unfair competition.
France unsuccessfully challenged the Commission's authority to increase the charges before the European Court.
State aids
One way in which the terms of competition in the single market may be affected is by granting state subsidies which favour certain undertakings or the production of certain goods in such a way as to affect inter-state trade.
The Treaty of Rome does not regard all state subsidies as incompatible with the Common Market; indeed, subsidies to consumers, and aid to seriously underdeveloped areas, are both regarded as being compatible with Community law.
In order to secure compliance with the Treaty of Rome, the national authorities in the member states (including regional and local authorities) are bound to inform the Commission in advance of any plans to grant subsidies or to alter the terms of existing subsidies.
This is to allow the Commission an opportunity to determine whether or not the aid in question is compatible with the Treaty of Rome.
If an aid is granted without informing the Commission or before the Commission  has had sufficient time to examine the aid, the Court has recently held that the Commission has power to take interim measures ordering the member states concerned to suspend the aid and provide the Commission with all relevant information.
The Commission can take a member state to the European Court if it fails to comply with such an interim order.
The Commission adopted interim measures for the first time in June 1991 in respect of aids granted to the French betting monopoly in the case referred to in the case study on pp. 238 — 43.
If the Commission finds, after examining the aid, that it is not compatible with the Treaty, the national authorities may be required by the Commission to recover the money from the beneficiary companies.
It follows from this that some national legal and financial environments are actually too good to last.
Furthermore, it is open to a company to complain that a competitor has received a subsidy from a public authority which is incompatible with the Treaty of Rome.
Proceedings may be instituted before a national court, and such proceedings have been successfully brought in the UK.
A complaint may also be made to the Commission.
As noted above, this may result in an order for recovery of the aid.
Rejection of a complaint by the Commission may lead to proceedings before the European Court by the complainant, where the complainant alleges a direct and adverse effect on its market position as a result of the state subsidy of which complaint is made.
In order to establish the legitimacy of its interest in such a case, a complainant would be well advised to participate fully in the Commission's investigation of its complaint, and produce evidence of injury to its business.
Defences to market dominance and anticompetitive behaviour
Not all agreements or arrangements which have a restrictive effect on competition are prohibited by EC competition rules.
Equally, market dominance is not in itself unlawful under Article 86 of the Treaty of Rome.
The Treaty provisions endeavour to establish a system of workable competition to maintain a choice for consumers, purchasers and suppliers, and to ensure that market entry remains unhindered by anti-competitive practices while at the same time supply and demand are allowed to operate freely, so ensuring that the prices at which goods are sold in the market place are competitive.
In deciding a strategy for the single market, UK businesses must plan and structure their policies to minimise their exposure and maximise the benefits they can draw from EC competition rules.
How to avoid Article 85
The Commission, which (pursuant to Article 87 of the Treaty of Rome and secondary Community legislation) is charged with the primary task of enforcing the competition rules, has defined a number of instances where restrictive agreements or arrangements fall outside the scope of application of Article 85.
First, there has to be an agreement between economically independent undertakings.
Where one party has no commercial autonomy vis-à-vis another, it is treated as part of the same economic grouping and therefore not subject to Article 85, although if it is in a dominant position Article 86 may apply.
Second, as noted above, there has to be an effect on inter-state trade.
Where an agreement does not produce an appreciable effect on inter-state trade, Article 85 does not apply.
Present guidelines are that, if goods or services covered by an agreement or arrangement or other goods and services perceived by consumers as equivalent do not represent more than 5 per cent of the total market in an area of the EC affected by the agreement and the aggregate turnover of the participants in the respective group does not exceed 200 million ecu (£130 million), EC competition rules will not apply.
Businesses should, however, be careful with these guidelines; they have no legal effect and the application of this de minimis rule, and market shares and turnover, can change during the currency of agreements.
Third, certain categories of restrictions on competition may not within their economic context be of such a nature to fall within Article 85.
Even if Article 85 (1) applies to particular agreements or arrangements, if it can be shown that they benefit the production or distribution of goods or services so that the consumer benefits outweigh the restrictions on competition in the agreement, they may be exempt pursuant to Article 85(3).
There are two types of Article 85(3) exemption.
The first type consist of block exemptions, in which the Commission defines the conditions where restrictions in certain categories of agreements are exempt.
In addition to block exemptions which apply to the regulations implementing the competition rules to the air and maritime sectors, block exemptions have been enacted to cover exclusive supply and distribution agreements, patent licensing agreements, know-how licensing agreements, franchising agreements, motor vehicle distribution and servicing agreements, specialisation agreements and research and development agreements.
In addition the Commission has recently been given the power to adopt block exemptions in the insurance sector and to consortia agreements in sea transport and has proposed that it be granted powers to introduce block exemptions relating to air transport between the Community and third countries.
The structure of these exemptions is broadly the same.
They list the specific clauses for which the exemption is granted, and so-called ‘black’ clauses which if present in an agreement result in its losing the benefit of the exemption, and clauses which are not generally restrictive of competition and whose presence will not affect the exemption.
The patent licensing, know-how, franchising, motor vehicle, and research and development block exemptions also provide a special ‘opposition’ procedure whereby if an agreement satisfying the basic requirements of the exemption, and not containing any black clauses, but containing other restrictions on competition is notified to the Commission and not opposed by the Commission within six months of notification, exemption will automatically be conferred.
As we explain further in Chapter 7 in relation to certain marketing arrangements, the careful planning and drafting of the various categories of agreement covered by block exemptions is of pivotal importance in commercial and corporate planning as a defence to those who may wish to attack commercial agreements of their competitors.
Any agreement or arrangement which is not covered by a block exemption can benefit from an individual exemption by notification to  the Commission.
Only the Commission can grant an exemption, and notification generally provides immunity from fines although, in the case of a particularly clear infringement of the Treaty of Rome in notified agreements, the Commission can issue preliminary decisions removing the immunity from fines to prevent misuse of the notification procedure.
Notification does not confer provisional validity.
However, if an exemption is granted, it will generally render the agreement retroactively valid from the date of notification.
Certain types of agreement will seldom if ever qualify for exemption, for example those which restrict competition so as to affect inter-state trade and contain export bans, maintain retail prices or lead to absolute territorial protection of national markets.
There are a number of circumstances in which the Commission may consider that a restriction on competition does not of itself fall within Article 85(1) because of the economic context in which it operates or alternatively where it is appropriate to grant individual exemptions.
Examples of the granting of negative clearances or individual exemptions by the Commission and confirmed by the European Court in recent years include:
Restrictions contained in franchise agreements where the Commission is satisfied that these are indispensable to the preservation of the identity and reputation of the franchise network
Exclusive licence agreements (whether of patented goods, trademarks or other intellectual property interests) which allow new markets to be penetrated or new products to be licensed, which may otherwise not be so exploited, to be exploited or launched
Restrictions by the vendor of a business not to compete with the purchaser provided that the restriction is reasonable in time and scope
Joint ventures and restructuring agreements with capacity reduction for industries in crisis
Defences to monopolisation of markets
Market dominance is in itself not prohibited by the Treaty of Rome.
However the case law of the European Court makes it clear that, irrespective of how undertakings become dominant, such undertakings have a special responsibility not to allow their conduct to impair genuine undistorted competition within the Common Market.
An undertaking may be in a dominant position if in the relevant product market it is in a position where, as a result of its economic strength, it is able to hinder effective competition by behaving to an appreciable extent independently of its competitors without taking into account customer and consumer demands.
In determining the existence of a dominant position, market shares are not in themselves determinant but the structure of competition may be.
In any particular case it is a question of fact, depending on an analysis of the market as a whole and the position of a particular company in the specific market in question, as to whether there is a dominant position.
It may, for example, be a defence to a charge of abusive dominance to establish that a market position is a result of advanced technical know-how or research and development capacity or marketing and advertising advantages which command consumer loyalty, and not the result of foreclosure of the relevant market.
Abusive monopolisation
The European Court has stated that the concept of abuse is to be assessed by determining whether an undertaking in a dominant position ‘has made use of the opportunities arising out of its dominant position in such a way as to reap trading benefits which it would not have reaped if there had been normal and sufficiently effective competition’.
Practices which may not otherwise be restrictive of competition may be abusive in a highly concentrated market since undertakings in  a dominant position have to discharge the burden of proof that their dominance does not have the effect of impeding effective competition in the relevant market.
Article 86 of the Treaty of Rome contains a non-exclusive list of abusive practices.
Examples of abusive behaviour from decided cases include:
A refusal by an undertaking in a dominant position to supply another undertaking which may be economically dependent on the first undertaking.
In the IBM case, IBM was considered by the Commission to hold a dominant position (inter alia ) in the supply of two key products for a particular computer system, and was found to have abused its dominant position by refusing to supply other manufacturers in sufficient time with technical information to permit the interfacing of those other products with IBM equipment, particularly by tying in the supply of IBM software and hardware and by discriminating between users of IBM software.
The Compagnie Luxembourgeoise, which had the exclusive right to operate Luxembourg television, behaved abusively by refusing to allow a particular undertaking broadcasting time for their advertising.
Equally, SABENA behaved abusively by refusing to admit London European to its computer reservation system.
Both cases are examples of abuse of a dominant position in a ‘bottleneck market’ in which there is room for only one major supplier.
A company in a dominant position which charges excessive prices for its products may be acting abusively.
In one case the court confirmed the Commission's finding that there was evidence of abusive conduct where United Brands' prices in certain banana markets within the EC were excessive in relation to the economic value of the product supplied and that they differed considerably from one EC market to another.
Akzo, the Dutch multinational chemical company, was found to have abused its dominant position in a particular chemical market by reducing its prices with the objective of driving out of business a competitor in the market in which Akzo held a dominant position.
The Commission emphasised in its decision that the selective nature of the price cuts, and the circumstances in which they were made, amounted to ‘loss leader’ tactics making it impossible for the much smaller competitor in the market place to stay in business.
The Court upheld the Commission's decision, setting criteria to identify predatory pricing.
It said that where a  dominant enterprise charged prices below the average variable cost, those prices must necessarily be considered predatory, because the enterprise could have no other interest in charging loss-making prices besides the elimination of its competitors.
However, where, as was the case with Akzo's pricing policy, the prices charged were below average total cost (that is, including fixed costs) but above average variable cost, they could only be considered predatory if they were established as part of a plan to eliminate competitors.
Abusive use of copyright
In a recent and important case concerning copyright in weekly television programme listings, the Court held that it is an abuse for a copyrightholder to use its copyright to prevent the introduction of a new product for which there is potential commercial demand, into a market of which the copyrightholder has a monopoly.
In that case Radio Telefis Eireann (the Irish broadcasting monopoly, ‘RTE’) refused to license the copyright in its weekly programme listings so as to allow the publication in Ireland of a comprehensive weekly television guide.
No such guide was available: consumers wanting advance weekly information had to buy the individual guides to their own programmes published by the RTE, the BBC and ITV.
The Court's decision is based on the fact that RTE's refusal to license was arbitrary, in that its sole rationale was to preserve RTE's monopoly in the publication of weekly information about its programmes: the Court said there was no justification in terms of the specific needs of the broadcasting sector or the activity of publishing television magazines.
The Court also referred to the fact that the copyright in question was generated in the course of one activity (broadcasting) but used to control a derivative market (publishing weekly television guides).
The decision marks a significant development because it shows that national copyright law cannot be used to justify conduct which is incompatible with the objectives of Article 86.
For the undertaking m a dominant position, valuable lessons are to be learned from these examples.
It is particularly vulnerable to claims that it is acting abusively in a particular market, and must avoid discriminating between its competitors or using its market dominance in a manner which can be construed as unfair or intended to eliminate a competitor or competition.
Conversely, those under attack from undertakings in dominant positions from other member states have valuable defences to attacking market dominant undertakings.
Price restrictions, market sharing the Articles 85 and 86: Examples of recent decisions
The Commission is vigilant in investigating, and severely punishes ‘naked horizontal cartels’ such as price fixing and market sharing and the abuse by groups with a dominant position in the market in any substantial area of the Community (Article 86).
The following are recent examples of situations considered and action taken by the Commission:
The application of the EC competition rules
Developing a Community law reflex
EC competition rules are applied in two separate but related legal contexts.
The Commission has the primary responsibility for enforcement of Articles 85 and 86.
However, as with many Community rules, Articles 85 and 86 have what is known as ‘direct effect’ in the legal systems of member states; it is therefore open to any individual to invoke these rules and seek appropriate relief before their domestic courts.
As a consequence the business must be conscious of this double perspective, whether it be to minimise exposure to EC competition rules or in order to decide how best to invoke the rules against competitors.
In this sense a business must develop a Community law reflex in deciding in its 1992 strategy how it can best employ the EC competition rules.
EC competition rules and the Commission
Exposure and remedies
The Commission is the administrative authority charged with the primary enforcement of Articles 85 and 86.
In this sense it has a similar role to that of the Office of Fair Trading in relation to UK competition rules such as the Restrictive Trade Practices Act 1976, the Fair Trading Act 1973 and the Competition Act 1980, although in a number of respects and in particular in so far as the Commission has the power to take binding decisions, its powers are more extensive than the Office of Fair Trading.
Community legislation bestows upon the Competition Directorate of the Commission (DG IV) wide powers of investigation, search of premises and seizure, and primary competence in the enforcement of Articles 85 and 86.
UK businesses must therefore know how and when to deal with DG IV, and be aware of their exposure and potential remedies.
How to deal with the Commission
As previously stated, unless an agreement, arrangement or course of conduct which has a restrictive effect on competition does not have a perceptible effect on trade within the Community, it will fall to be considered under the EC competition rules.
Before settling an agreement or starting out on a particular course of conduct, a number of fundamental factors have to be taken into consideration.
If there is any doubt as to whether a proposed course of action is consistent with the EC competition rules, you should, where appropriate with professional advisers, discuss the draft agreement or proposed arrangement with DG IV.
The Commission practises an open door policy and is always prepared to review a draft agreement or arrangement internally with interested parties to determine its compatibility with Article 85.
The Commission will often suggest how an agreement can be modified to bring it within the competition rules.
If there is a possibility of the agreement falling within the prohibition in Article 85(1) and it is not covered by a block exemption, the agreement should be formally notified to the Commission.
Although the process of notification inevitably involves time spent in preparation, the provision of substantial quantities of information, not to mention the incurring of legal fees, the advantages outweigh the disadvantages.
The Commission can grant an exemption retroactively from the date of notification.
The sooner an agreement is notified the longer the period of protection from fines is likely to be, since such protection does not exist for any period of operation of an agreement prior to notification.
The Commission has exclusive competence to provide an exemption pursuant to Article 85(3) and, unless and until such exemption is given, the restrictions in the agreement which infringe Article 85(1) are provisionally void.
The prescribed notification form A/B (other than in the air and maritime transport sectors) requests the Commission either to declare that the agreement does not fall within Article 85(1), which is known as a negative clearance, or to grant an exemption pursuant to Article 85(3).
In granting an exemption the Commission can attach appropriate conditions to the operation of the agreement such as, for example , a requirement that the parties notify the Commission as to the future operation of the agreement and/or review its operation prior to the expiry of the exemption, to limit the operation of the exemption for a specific period of time so as to enable the Commission to review its operation at some future date.
The Commission may also require the parties to notify it of any other events which may be symptomatic of this operating in a restrictive manner: for example, any refusals to meet export orders, the joining of another party to the agreement or the supply of any trade information under an agreement.
In practical terms the main difficulty with individual exemptions is the time it may take the Commission to process a notification and grant exemptions.
Since the object of an application for exemption is to secure the legal validity of an agreement, the exemption procedure is often unsatisfactory.
An alternative procedure which businesses are increasingly using, and which to a certain extent obviates some of the disadvantages of seeking an exemption or negative clearance, is to request the Commission to issue comfort letters.
As the term suggests, these are letters from the Commission to notifying parties stating that the Commission does not believe that there is any need to take action in relation to the agreement or arrangement either because it falls outside Article 85(1) or because it may satisfy the requirements of Article 85(3), although in such a case the issue of a comfort letter does not amount to an exemption pursuant to Article 85(3).
The practical effect of a comfort letter is to stop the Commission from changing its mind as to the status of the agreement unless there has been a material change of circumstances or unless the letter is written on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the parties.
The precise status of comfort letters before national courts is uncertain.
However, the European Court has recently held that national courts should declare that agreements infringe Article 85 only where there is no possibility of the Commission granting an exemption.
The existence of a comfort letter would therefore oblige the national court at least to consult the Commission and ultimately to stay proceedings or take interim measures while the Commission granted an exemption.
The issue of a comfort letter by the Commission ensures continued immunity from fines, since the agreement remains a notified agreement.
How to seek the protection of the Commission
Any company or firm that believes itself to be a victim of behaviour by its competitors which infringes EC competition rules can make a complaint to DG IV against the parties concerned.
A number of factors may make such a course an appropriate means of achieving the most effective remedy.
The complainant may not know the precise details of the agreement or arrangement or conduct which is damaging its competitive interests in the market place.
The Commission, however, has wide power to obtain information from the parties by making a formal request to supply information and/or documents within a specified period of time.
The Commission can also impose penalties upon parties for  failing to provide this information once the Commission has taken a formal decision requesting the information from the parties.
DAWN RAID
Commission's powers of investigation
The Commission can carry out all necessary investigations into undertakings, having regard to any special features of a particular case.
Sometimes this will be done in the form of a dawn raid; on other occasions it will provide the parties with advance warning of its intended visit.
Under its powers of investigation, the Commission can examine books and other business records of parties, take copies or extracts from the books and business records, ask for oral explanations on the spot and enter any premises, land or means of transport within EC territory belonging to the undertakings concerned.
There is no right in Community law to have a lawyer present for such meetings, although normally the Commission will allow a limited time to elapse for the parties to acquire legal representation.
In a series of recent cases the Court has established that, although the Commission must specify the subject-matter and purpose of its investigation, it does not have to identify in advance the information it is seeking.
It can require the undertaking concerned to provide all necessary information and all relevant documentation in its  possession.
The Court has held in a recent case that the Commission cannot ask leading questions which would require the undertaking concerned to admit an infringement of the competition rules, but that otherwise there is no right to silence: the Commission can ask for any information it requires to determine the extent of the infringement.
Where an undertaking refuses to co-operate with the Commission, the Commission cannot force access to the premises, but it can call for the assistance of the relevant national authorities in carrying out an active search for evidence and the national authorities must co-operate in providing such assistance.
Moreover, failure on the part of an undertaking being investigated to produce relevant documents to the Commission can render it liable to fines on a daily basis.
Resolution and adjudication
It is not uncommon that, during the investigation phase of Commission procedures, there will be an amicable settlement of a dispute using the good offices of the Commission.
This can often provide the most effective and speedy means of resolving a dispute.
Settlement will often be accompanied by a Commission press release and a formal exchange of correspondence between the parties and the Commission.
In the event that the Commission considers that there is a strong prima facie case of infringement, and that there is a serious and urgent risk that irreparable harm will be caused to the party seeking relief or to the public interest, it can take an interim decision for the infringement to be brought to an end.
The Commission has shown that it is able to act with relative speed under this procedure and has taken a variety of actions under it, including ordering a party to supply another party, refusing to allow undertakings to acquire further shares in a company in a takeover situation, ordering the cessation of predatory pricing and an order requiring the execution of a detailed supply agreement under which the Commission was to be notified of any price changes by the offending party or any case where it was unable to fulfil orders.
A good example of the practical operation of interim measures was the Akzo case.
In that case Engineering and Chemicals Supplies Limited (ECS), a small producer of organic peroxides, alleged that the UK subsidiary of Akzo, a large Dutch multinational company, had abused its dominant position in the relevant market by implementing a policy of selective and below cost price-cutting designed to damage ECS's business and to exclude it as a competitor from the specialised sub-market in the flour additives sector in the UK and the Republic of Ireland.
According to ECS this oppressive conduct by Akzo originated with threats made at a meeting in 1979 between Akzo and ECS.
In 1979  ECS obtained an injunction from the English High Court (see pp. 82 — 4) and subsequently in 1982, when the conduct complained of appeared to continue, ECS made a complaint to the Commission which carried out an on-the-spot investigation at Akzo's premises in both the Netherlands and the UK.
The Commission subsequently issued an interim measures decision which, amongst other things, required Akzo's UK subsidiary to return to the profit levels that it had been applying before the alleged threats were made and implemented.
The Irish Distillers case is another practical example of the operation of interim measures.
The Commission's proposed interim measures took the form of requiring bidders not to purchase jointly or separately further shares in Irish Distillers unless the purchase was conditional on a favourable Commission decision under Article 85; the bidders were also required to refrain from exercising the votes attached to the shares already acquired.
Professional privilege and confidentiality
There are considerable differences in the laws of member states concerning the privileged status of communications between a client and his lawyer.
It is clearly of the utmost importance to UK businesses to know in competition matters the status of communications with their lawyers, given the Commission's wide powers of investigation.
Community law acknowledges the principle of legal privilege.
In the hotly contested litigation between AM&S Europe Limited and the Commission, the European Court decided that the Commission had the sole power to adjudicate on claims of privilege in relation to advice or other documentation passing between a lawyer and his client which might be examined by the Commission in investigations under the competition rules.
It held that it was open to any aggrieved party to challenge before the European Court a decision by the Commission ordering production of documents which a party considers are privileged, and the Court has power to grant interim measures to prevent disclosure of those documents to the Commission until the dispute on privilege is resolved.
However, all businesses must always bear in mind that in Community law, privilege only attaches to communications with independent legal advisers and not with in-house Counsel.
Therefore they must be vigilant to ensure that any advice or document-passing with legal advisers for which legal professional privilege may be sought at some stage is done with external legal advisers.
Any information or documentation coming into the Commission's possession as a result of the exercise of their powers under the  competition rules are covered by an obligation of professional secrecy.
Moreover, any information the Commission obtains must be used exclusively for the purpose of the investigation for which it was acquired, although the Commission can legitimately initiate an investigation prompted by information acquired incidentally in the course of a previous investigation.
When a complaint is made to the Commission, the Commission may or may not want to send a copy of the complaint to the other party.
A complainant should establish with the Commission in advance whether it objects to disclosure of its complaint and the complainant should always be clear in advance as to any information which it wishes to remain confidential.
It is possible to make a confidential complaint or include confidential annexes in complaints, although it is rare for the Commission to act on a complaint which is not disclosed to the other party.
There are, however, several situations in which the Commission is bound to pass information on to the competition authorities of member states.
In a recent insolvency case before the Court of First Instance, it was claimed by an applicant that disclosing an agreement to a national authority would irreparably damage that party's relations with its own national government.
The Court held that the Commission is under a duty to disclose such documents to national cartel authorities and it has no discretion to choose not to do so.
However, both the Commission and national authorities are bound not to disclose any business secrets and therefore the recipient of any such document could not pass it on to any other national authority or use it otherwise than for the investigation in hand.
The document could not be used for an independent inquiry arising out of other facts.
The Commission's independent powers
Irrespective of whether an agreement or arrangement has been notified to the Commission or a complaint made, it is open to the Commission to launch its own investigation in relation to any agreement, practice or other activity which it may suspect infringes the competition rules.
Thus general supervisory function of the Commission in competition matters by DG IV demonstrates further why the competition rules are all-embracing and cannot be circumvented or ignored by UK businesses in developing their 1992 commercial strategy.
Challenging Commission decisions before the European Court
There may be occasions on which a company feels aggrieved because a complaint to the Commission about the conduct of another company  has been rejected.
For example, a retailer may have been refused access to a selective distribution network on grounds which his lawyers advise the retailer are inadequate.
Again, a company may have complained to the Commission that the conduct of a business competitor amounted to a breach of Article 85 or 86.
In each case the Commission may have rejected the complaint and may also have granted an exemption to the company in respect of the conduct of which complaint has been made.
Such decisions of the Commission may be challenged before the European Court, provided that the complainant company has been directly and adversely affected by the conduct of which complaint has been made.
In order to secure the option of a judicial challenge to the Commission's determinations in such cases, a company would be well advised to complain formally to the Commission at the earliest opportunity, and to participate in the Commission's investigation, making submissions and offering evidence of the adverse effects on its business of the conduct of which complaint has been made.
In these circumstances, the company would be entitled to challenge the Commission's decision to reject a complaint, or to grant an exemption.
A number of cases of this kind have been initiated before the Court.
For example, the proceedings in the Philip Morris case, which is of significance in the context of mergers and takeovers (see pp. 87–134), arose from the rejection by the Commission of a complaint by a cigarette manufacturer that certain agreements between two of its competitors were likely to restrict competition.
Remedies before the UK domestic courts
Since the EC competition rules apply directly in member states, private parties can invoke Articles 85 and 86 before their domestic courts.
This may lead to a party claiming:
That an agreement is void as infringing Article 85
That an injunction should be granted to enforce the competition rules
Damages for breach of the competition rules
Decisions of the domestic courts
Although only the Commission can grant an exemption pursuant to Article 85(3), the domestic courts are empowered to enjoin any party  from infringing Article 85.
It is therefore for the domestic courts to decide whether, in any particular case, the agreement does so clearly infringe Article 85 that an exemption is very unlikely to be granted by the Commission, even if it has been notified to the Commission, or whether there is no infringement of Article 85 and therefore the question of an exemption under Article 85(3) does not come into play.
The Plessey/GEC litigation in 1988, in which Plessey sought an injunction to stop GEC posting its offer document on the basis that the Siemens/GEC bid for Plessey infringed EC competition rules, is a further example of the practical application of Articles 85 and 86 before the English courts.
Two recent attempts to invoke the EEC  competition rules before the English courts were: Shearson Lehman's attempt to prevent the London Metal Exchange fixing a closing-out price for tin contracts in existence as the time of the collapse of the tin market; and Macarthy PLC's attempt to obtain an injunction restraining a share allocation and discount scheme introduced by a pharmaceutical wholesaler, which it alleged distorted competition.
Role of the commission
Invariably an agreement which is the subject of legal proceedings under Articles 85 and 86 before the English Court will also be the subject of consideration before the Commission.
In this situation the domestic court has the option either to adjudicate upon the dispute or to suspend the proceedings pending determination by the Commission.
Equally, where it is clear that Article 85 and/or Article 86 apply, and there is no possibility that the Commission will grant an exemption from Article 85, the national court may proceed to rule on the matter.
However, where the situation is unclear, the European Court has recently held that the national court should not take a final decision, but should stay proceedings or adopt interim measures and seek assistance from the Commission or the Court.
The Commission actively encourages private parties to seek remedies before the national courts and in a recent case the European Court held that the Commission had a duty to assist national courts by making confidential Community documents and witnesses available in national proceedings.
This is an important development, which allows litigants before domestic courts effectively to subpoena the Commission.
Damages
English authorities suggest that damages are recoverable for breaches of the EC competition rules.
The basis upon which damages may be claimed before domestic courts for breach of Articles 85 and 86 must be no less favourable than the damages recoverable for infringement of comparable provisions of domestic law.
The position as regards the recovery of damages in English law was reviewed by the House of Lords in the Garden Cottage Foods case.
A company owned and run by Mr and Mrs Bunch carried on the business of purchase and resale of bulk butter.
Between May 1980 and April 1982 the company purchased 90 per cent of its bulk butter requirements from the Milk Marketing Board and in turn resold the  majority of this butter to a single Dutch customer.
In March 1982 the Board informed the Bunchs' company that following a review of its sales and marketing strategy it had decided to limit the sale of bulk butter to four other distributors in England and Wales and that, in future, the company would have to purchase its bulk butter from other distributors.
The company applied for an injunction against the Milk Marketing Board on the basis that its conduct infringed Article 86 of the Treaty of Rome.
In order to decide whether to grant an injunction, the House of Lords had to decide whether damages were available for breach of Article 86 and whether that would, in the event of an injunction not being granted, be a satisfactory remedy.
It decided that an individual citizen in the UK affected by a breach of Article 86 can bring an action for damages based on breach of statutory duty.
Therefore, in determining whether damages will be a sufficient remedy or whether an injunction should be granted, the normal considerations of balance of convenience must apply.
Takeovers, mergers, acquisitions and joint ventures
Growth by acquisition, takeovers and mergers in the single market
Traditionally, corporate takeover activity has predominantly been a feature of UK and US markets.
However, as EC businesses restructure themselves in preparation for the single market and as previously protected industrial sectors are open to competition for the first time, takeover activity is one means by which new corporate entities can be created and structured on a pan-European basis.
There is a general recognition that there is a need for a Community policy to be formulated for takeovers in order to ensure that equal conditions apply throughout the EC and that all parties to takeovers proceed on an equal footing.
Any such takeover policy must deal in a coherent manner with three essential legal issues, which must be formed into a consistent and effective system to have the necessary business objectives.
These issues are:
competition policy
rules to govern takeovers themselves
barriers to takeovers
It has long been recognised that the Commission has required its own independent powers to review and, if necessary, prohibit those takeovers which may impede or distort competition in the single market.
Since 1973 various proposals have been made to achieve this objective, which was finally accomplished by the adoption of the Merger Regulation.
This is reviewed in pages 101–34 of this chapter.
Quite apart from questions of competition policy, takeovers themselves must be the subject of rules, to ensure that investment decisions can be made on the basis of transparent markets and reliable information.
Safeguards should be available to protect individual investors and ensure that all parties to a takeover are treated equally.
The proposed 13th Company Directive on takeovers is aimed at providing minimum ground rules to establish this regulatory environment and it is discussed below at pages 91 — 100.
TAKEOVERS À L'ÉTRANGER
At the present time there are numerous artificial barriers to takeovers sanctioned by the domestic legislation of member states.
It is generally recognised at Community level that it is both inequitable and contrary to the objectives of a single market for certain firms in the Community to be immune from the commercial benefits and burdens of being taken over or to be able artificially to create methods to defend themselves from takeovers, while firms from other member states remain vulnerable.
The action proposed by the EC in combating artificial barriers to takeovers is discussed below at page 95.
The following section examines in greater detail the barriers to increased takeover activity in the Community.
Takeover activity and barriers to takeovers in the single market
The level of takeover activity in the UK by both UK and other EC companies is unparalleled in the Community.
By the same token, the level of takeover activity where UK companies acquire other EC companies is considerably less.
These latter transactions are usually takeovers of smaller private companies by agreed deals rather than contested public acquisitions, which is often the case in the UK.
In 1988, the average size of transactions where other EC companies took over UK companies was 2.5 times greater than the average value of transactions where UK companies acquired other EC companies.
Concern at the contrast of the openness of the UK market to takeovers with that of the rest of the Community led the UK Government to commission a study by Coopers & Lybrand entitled ‘Barriers to takeovers in the European Community’.
The conclusions of this study, which were delivered at the end of 1989, confirmed the widely held view that takeover activity in the Community was operating on a one-way street: while the UK market was open to takeovers, this was not so for the rest of the Community.
Conversely, arguments may be made that barriers to takeovers should not be reduced, as the threat of takeovers leads to ‘short-term’ corporate behaviour.
Companies, it is claimed, will put their energies into short-term performance and the payment of high dividends in order to maintain the value of their stock exchange listing, at the cost of long term planning and investment that would ultimately be of far greater benefit for the company, its investors and the economy as a whole.
The contrary view is that, in the light of the single market, it is important that all companies have equal opportunities to expand or restructure as much by way of acquisition as by organic growth.
The study found that the majority of takeovers in the EC outside the UK took place between non-listed or private companies and that, once agreement was reached between the parties, the barriers to takeovers were relatively low.
The main obstacles in this area lay in analysing and approaching suitable targets.
In addition, the did not have available, when making an initial offer to shareholders, the facility or legal means of making a contested offer in those countries where national secrecy laws on corporate disclosure requirements make it difficult or impossible for predator companies to ascertain adequate financial information on would-be target companies.
The study pointed to a marked feature of the UK market that facilitated takeovers, namely the accessibility of funds to finance takeovers.
Should it become easier to acquire companies in the  Community by a decrease in barriers to takeovers, UK companies would have a comparative advantage, as UK companies enjoy a relatively accessible source of equity finance through the large amount of stockmarket capitalisation.
On the other hand companies in other EC countries have to rely more on debt finance in order to make any acquisitions, which may be more difficult to obtain.
Acquisition of a company
The Coopers & Lybrand study identified and analysed four stages in acquiring a company:
market and strategic analysis
identification and analysis of target
approach to and acquisition of a target
post-acquisition integration
The first two stages may be successfully carried out only where reliable market information is publicly available.
The lack of this information presents a barrier both to contested and agreed takeover bids.
The third stage presents the most difficulty for contested bids, as they create very real technical and structural barriers.
In the last stage, difficulties arise for both contested and agreed bids alike, as current management may be difficult to remove.
In the UK, financial and commercial information is easily obtainable and relatively inexpensive.
The study found that conditions for obtaining such information in France, Germany and the Netherlands were fairly favourable, but they were appreciably worse in Italy and even more so in Spain.
The Report expresses the hope that the implementation of the Fourth Company Law Directive on accounts [see page 39]will eventually make this task easier.
The extension of the Fourth Company Law Directive, by 1 January 1993, to partnerships which constitute a common means of business organisation in Germany, for example, will further ease the situation.
Additional hurdles are that company filing requirements are not always complied with and powers to enforce such requirements do not always exist in national law.
Where they do, they are not always used.
Moreover, information that is filed is not necessarily reliable, or in a form appropriate for any comparative analysis; for example, the methods of calculating depreciation differ.
The study found that accounting standards in such  countries as Italy, Portugal, Spain and Greece were considerably lower than in the rest of the EC.
Information on the control and ownership of business provided in filed accounts is also less easily available, if at all, in member states other than the UK.
This presents a major obstacle, in so far as the would-be acquirer needs to be able to calculate the attitude of a target company's owners to an offer, given that the management will often be uncooperative.
The common use of bearer shares outside the UK exacerbates the lack of information on ownership and also increases the power of depositories that are often banks, especially in the Netherlands and Germany.
Even where shares are registered, the register will not necessarily be up-to-date.
The study identified a difference in business culture between the UK, where the business community is used to receiving offers for the acquisition of a company, and the rest of the EC.
Some of the other EC countries, including Germany, Belgium and Italy, have an ethos of secrecy about business deals.
Other countries have very close-knit business communities, such as the Netherlands and again Germany and Belgium, so the cultivation of business contacts can be an arduous process; this is particularly so in Italy.
Contested bids are generally viewed in these countries as an unwelcome feature of the UK business environment and, save for France, a contested takeover bid is a rare phenomenon.
This is so for a variety of reasons.
There are few publicly quoted companies where the majority of voting shares are not held by families or institutions closely linked with existing management.
Even where there are a significant number of quoted companies with shareholders that are potentially open to contested offers, there are often major structural and technical obstacles to prevent contested takeovers.
Structural obstacles in the Community arise from the organisation of shareholdings that inhibit the free transfer of securities.
They generally present a greater barrier to takeovers in EC member states than technical barriers, in particular in Spain, Italy and France.
Structural Barriers
non-disclosure of shareholdings
family shareholdings
government shareholdings of hard core securities
few publicly quoted shares
bank and cross shareholdings
Technical barriers are of a regulatory and legislative nature.
They arise from a difference in business culture between the UK and the rest of the Community.
In the UK, a company is viewed as a creature that is answerable to, and for the benefit of, the shareholders.
Management answers to the shareholders and companies are valued in terms of their worth to shareholders.
In the rest of the Community this ethos does not exist; accordingly, the seizure of a company by means of acquiring shareholdings may be seen as unethical and therefore met by strong resistance.
The removal of technical barriers may not be easily achieved by regulation; changes of attitude will be needed to recognise the freedom of investors to receive the best return on their capital.
Although technical barriers mainly arise in Germany and the Netherlands, the fact that they are relatively unapparent in other countries such as Spain and Italy does not mean that they do not present a potential threat, in so far as the removal of structural barriers to takeovers may result in the creation of technical barriers as companies react to defend themselves.
Technical Barriers
entrenched management
issue of priority shares to safeguard a company's articles
preference shares held by a nominally independent foundation
maximum limits to voting rights
no public access to shareholders
bearer shares
proxy shares held and exercised by depository institutions
‘poison pill’ tactics
restrictions on the transfer of shares
government regulation under competition laws
In some countries, particularly Germany where companies have a two-tier board, the corporate structure may give rise to difficulties in changing management, which may obstruct the running of a newly acquired business for the benefit of the whole group.
Difficulty may also be experienced in obtaining reliable accounting information and thus in establishing control over a company's activities.
Again, one of the objectives of the company law harmonisation programme is to  remove such obstructions and create a level playing field in corporate management structures.
Community action against barriers to takeovers
The Commission initially addressed the problem of barriers to takeovers by commissioning an internal report by Booz-Allen and Hamilton.
This, together with the analysis and recommendations of the Coopers & Lybrand Report which was presented by the UK Government to the Commission, has led to:
the Commission proposing an amendment to the Second Company Directive to extend the restrictions contained in the Directive, on the purchase of a company's own shares by the company or by persons acting on its own behalf, to a subsidiary of the company in question; and
a second amendment to the proposed Fifth Company Directive (see pp 36 — 9, relating to shareholder voting rights and the entrenchment of directors).
These proposals are helpful, but not of profound significance.
Quite apart from these specific proposals, the Commission has expressed the view that the development of the single market will in itself create an environment more favourable to takeovers.
It has expressed the view that the increased sophistication of stockmarket capitalisation throughout the Community will lead to growth in takeover activity and that the liberalisation of capital movements throughout the EC will further encourage the inter-action of national capital markets, thus giving companies easier access to finance for takeover activities.
The regulation of takeovers and the takeover directive
The Commission's White Paper on the single market recognised a need for the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States as regards takeover bids.
Accordingly, in December 1988, the Commission issued a proposal for a Directive on takeovers, which it amended in September 1990.
The stated aim of the Commission is to create a homogeneous market in takeovers, with adequate and equal safeguards for individual investors, and to ensure that all players in a takeover act fairly and proceed on an equal basis.
The approach of the Commission as described in the Directive takes into account the fact that, in general, takeovers are considered to be a positive phenomenon.
They allow market forces to identify the more competitive firms and enable a restructuring of business, all of which is vital to ensure the international competitivity of the Community.
By establishing a régime that promotes transparency, takeovers that are purely speculative in financing terms will be disclosed as such and investors will be able to make investment decisions on the best possible information.
A need for harmonisation in this area is apparent from the diversity throughout the Community, varying from no legislation in member states where takeovers are virtually unknown, such as Denmark and Greece, to a host of differing standards or regulations in other Member States.
Spain and Portugal have legally binding rules, and Belgium and Luxembourg follow decisions issued by their competent authorities.
Other Member States, that is, Germany, Italy, France, the Netherlands, the UK and Ireland have a voluntary code of conduct; the UK Code, while theoretically voluntary, is in practical terms binding in the UK.
In contrast to the Merger Regulation, that only subjects to EC scrutiny mergers having what is known as a ‘Community dimension, and exceeding a certain threshold, the proposed Directive will apply to any general bid for the shares of any public company in a member state, regardless of the origin of the bid.
The proposed Directive is only aimed at establishing essential standards and principles and member states will remain free to extend its ambit to unlisted or private companies.
The proposed Directive applies only to bids made for companies registered in a member state and publicly quoted on a stock exchange in the Community.
This is a change from the original proposal, where non-quoted companies were included within its ambit.
The proposed Directive provides that the Commission will report to the Council within five years of the coming into effect of the Directive on its possible extension to those companies.
The Directive applies whether or not the offeror comes from the Community or a third country such as the US or Japan.
Basic principles
In essence, the proposed Takeover Directive contains four basic principles.
equal treatment of all investors in the target company 
compulsory takeover bid
compulsory disclosure of information
the management of a takeover company must remain neutral
The principle of equal treatment of all shareholders is fundamental to most national takeover codes, including the UK City Code on Takeovers, and likewise underlies much of the proposed Directive.
Part of the principle of equal treatment is that a compulsory bid must be made when a certain level of shareholdings is actually exceeded, namely a third of voting stock.
The offeror will then be obliged to bid to acquire all the shares in the target company.
The threshold of one third of shareholdings was decided upon because it gives a minority blocking vote in certain companies, and as such it would be unfair to the other investors in a company to allow a party to acquire a significant interest in a company ‘on the cheap’ in this manner.
A compulsory bid for all the shares prevents partial offers of a speculative nature being made, producing an adverse effect on share prices contrary to the principle of equal treatment to shareholders.
As the proposed Directive establishes essential standards only, Member States are free to provide for a lower threshold to trigger the compulsory bid (the UK rule is 30%).
Where an offer is made to shareholders and shares are sold at a higher price than the original offer, the compulsory bid is deemed to be revised, again ensuring that shareholders are treated equally.
The requirement of a compulsory bid has been criticised as being too prescriptive in nature.
However, there are a number of situations provided for in the Directive where the supervisory authority of the member state in question may allow for an exception to a compulsory bid.
A takeover bid must be accepted within a certain period of time, namely not less than four weeks but not more than ten weeks from the date of when the offer document is made public.
This period balances the interest of the offeror to know as soon as possible the number of shareholders willing to accept its offer together with the amount of finance that it requires; the interest of the target company not to have its business disrupted for too long; and the interests of the shareholders in the target company to weigh up the merits of the bid.
There are a limited number of exceptions that permit the bid to be withdrawn or declared void.
These include situations where there are competing bids, or where the acquisition is prohibited by the merger control authorities, or where a condition of the bid announced in the offer document is not fulfilled or, exceptionally, where the bid may  not be put into effect for reasons beyond the control of the parties to the bid.
That said, the offeror may get around these limited exceptions by revising its initial bid.
If the revised bid is unattractive, it may not be accepted, and since the minimum number of shares stipulated in the offer document will not be acquired, the takeover will not proceed.
The requirement for disclosure of information in the proposed Directive is aimed at protecting the interests of shareholders of the target company.
Before issuing an offer document, the offeror must notify the supervisory authority and the target company of its intention to make a bid.
The offeror must then publicise this intention in a mass circulation newspaper or by some other means approved by the supervisory authority.
The offeror may then issue its offer document, which must disclose all information necessary to enable the addressees to reach a properly informed decision on the bid.
In this, the offeror must be represented by an authorised issuing house or broker or an authorised credit institution; this is a useful step towards enforcing compliance and follows existing UK practice.
The information required in the offer document is more detailed than currently required under most national takeover rules and includes such matters as the maximum and minimum percentages or quantities of securities that the offeror undertakes to acquire, the names of concert parties, details of the offeror's holdings in the target company and those of concert parties.
The offer document must also contain a statement as to the offeror's ability to pay any proposed cash consideration and must indicate the contemplated level of future indebtedness of itself and the target company, the offeror's objective in making the bid and its intention towards the target company if the bid succeeds.
These requirements are important in the case of leveraged buy-outs, which are often effectively financed by the target company.
The offer document and other relevant documents must be given by the target company to the trade union or other representatives of its employees.
Before the offer document is published, it must be submitted to the supervisory authority and the management of the target company.
The supervisory authority may forbid the publication of an offer document that is incomplete or requires additional information.
The supervisory authority is not able to grant an exemption from the information required, but may do so in respect of additional information that it has requested.
Once a bid has been publicly announced, parties with holdings of more than 50% or more of the voting rights of the target company, the offeror or any other company whose securities are offered for consideration must immediately inform the supervisory authority of all  dealings in the securities of these companies.
This is aimed at preventing insider dealing and promoting market transparency.
The board of directors of the target company have to give their opinion on the offer and make it clear whether or not they recommend it.
However, restrictions are placed on the power of management to combat a hostile takeover bid, for fear that they might act only in their own interests rather than for those of the company or its shareholders.
Accordingly, from the date of the notification of the offeror's intention to launch a bid up until the publication of the result of the bid, the target company's board of directors are prohibited from issuing new shares or convertible securities.
They are also prohibited from entering into transactions that would have the effect of altering significantly the assets or liabilities of the company or entering into commitments without consideration.
The general meeting of the shareholders of the target company may be called to decide upon defence measures.
Shareholders will have to give approval to any defence measures taken before the takeover bid, ensuring that they decide on any defence measures only with full knowledge of the conditions of the bid.
Enforcement of the provisions of the Directive, when adopted, will be the responsibility of the relevant supervisory authority, which must be created in the member states where such a body does not already exist.
That authority will have the power only to prohibit the launch of the offer or to require the offeror to publish a corrected offer where the information furnished by the offeror is insufficient.
The proposed Directive sets out a number of principles that the supervisory authorities are to use as guidelines when discharging their functions and especially when granting exemptions to the rules provided in the proposed Directive.
Guidelines for the supervisory authorities
equal treatment of all shareholders in the target company;
sufficient time must be granted to the shareholders to decide on the offer;
the management of the target company must act in the interest of all the shareholders and not frustrate the bid,
false markets may not be made in the shares of the target company, the bidding companies or any other connected companies;
the affairs of the target company are not to be hindered for an unreasonable time
Effect of the proposed directive in the UK
So far as the UK is concerned, the proposed Directive contains little that is new in substance and, indeed, it shows clear signs of actually being based on the City Code on Takeovers and Mergers, the UK rulebook for takeovers.
Its adoption and implementation throughout the Community will go a long way towards ensuring equal conditions for UK investors exploring opportunities in other Member States.
However, the implementation of the Directive, when adopted, may require a fundamental change in the present voluntary system under which takeover bids for UK public companies are regulated by a voluntary body (the Panel on Takeovers and Mergers) under the City Code, which does not have the force of law although its decisions may be reviewed by the courts.
The Code will have to be given the force of law and in some respects detailed adjustments may be necessary to conform with the requirements of the Directive.
There is a concern that the Panel would no longer have the same flexibility to adapt the rules to take account of new market practices, or to waive them in the interests of fairness.
A regulatory body will have to be empowered by law to administer the new rules; however, since the proposed Directive allows the regulatory authority to delegate its powers to a private body, there is no reason why the Panel in its present form should not be given the necessary authority with the result that changes in day-to-day practice may prove to be minimal.
The Panel may, nevertheless, have to be supervised by the regulatory authority (for example, the DTI) and this would be subject to judicial review.
In the case of bids across national borders within the EC, the relevant regulator will be that of the member state where the target has its registered office.
The proposed Directive will not apply to bids for non-EC companies.
Similarly, the Commission does not incorporate in the proposed Directive reciprocity requirements, such as those found in the Second Banking Directive, in relation to bids from offerors in non-EC countries.
Instead, until further co-ordination can take place, the right of a member state to forbid a takeover offer launched by an offeror which is a national of, or a corporate body from, a non-EC country will continue.
This is particularly so when the nationals and corporate bodies of the member states do not benefit from reciprocity in relation to a takeover of a body corporate situated in these third countries.
The Community intends to start discussions on reciprocity with third countries, notably within the OECD.
Competition policy and the control of concentrations
The long-debated Merger Regulation was eventually adopted in 1989 and came into force in September 1990.
As a result of this, multinationals and large companies must reappraise their plans for expansion by cross-border acquisition and merger in the light of EC competition policy.
It is also important that business executives and their financial and legal advisers be aware of the current state of development and the future direction of EC merger policy.
We therefore begin with a survey of the background and history of EC merger control, followed by a summary and critical appraisal of the Merger Regulation.
Finally we outline the present scope of Articles 85 and 86 as applied to mergers.
Background to EC merger policy
Forms of merger
Growth by acquisition may take many forms: the purchase of a publicly held company's shares by a recommended offer or by contested takeover bid, or the acquisition of shares or business assets by private agreement (in either case for cash or by way of share exchange); merger through the medium of a holding company which acquires the merging companies or their assets; and, in France and certain other member states, merger by ‘fusion’ whereby a company loses its identity and is absorbed, with its assets and liabilities, into the new concern.
For convenience, the word ‘merger’ is used in this chapter for all forms of merger, acquisition and takeover, whether they involve acquisition of controlling or of minority interests in shares or assets.
‘Concentration’, the word used in the EC Merger Regulation is used only when discussing the application of that Regulation.
Why EC competition policy needs merger control
Mergers may lead to economies of scale and increasing economic efficiency as well as creating business units of the necessary size and strength to compete on equal terms with the largest companies outside the Community.
However, an effective competition policy needs power to control mergers because of the serious damage they may  inflict on competition.
In the words of the preamble to the Merger Regulation discussed below:
The dismantling of internal frontiers can be expected to result in major corporate reorganisations in the Community, particularly in the form of concentrations…
Such a development must be welcomed as being in line with the requirements of dynamic competition and capable of increasing the competitiveness of European industry, improving the conditions of growth and raising the standard of living in the Community…
It must be ensured that the process of reorganisation does not result in lasting damage to competition [and]Community law must therefore include provisions governing those concentrations which may impede effective competition in the common market or in a substantial part of it.
The economic structure of the market in assessing the competitive effect of a merger is crucial.
Competition in a market with few suppliers, none of them controlling the market but each relatively large (oligopoly) is much more likely to be distorted if one of those suppliers takes over or acquires an interest in another, than in a market characterised by fierce competition among many suppliers.
The sensitivity of a market to changes brought about by acquisitions and mergers is likely to be all the greater where the market itself is stagnant and without perceived prospects of overall growth in consumer demand.
In such cases, growth may have to be achieved by acquisition of established rival brands or companies, with the result that competition suffers without the justification of compensating benefits to the consumer.
As an illustration, the computer market in the EC is characterised by the presence of many, very large companies, but it is still highly competitive.
This may be contrasted with the markets for cigarettes and spirits, where overall consumer demand is unlikely to expand significantly and collaboration between the few major suppliers is likely to have a direct effect on competition and on the flow of inter-state trade.
The tools for EC merger control
A system for the scrutiny and control of mergers should be designed to cause minimum interference with the efficient operation of the capital markets.
It should produce quick and clear decisions before each merger is completed and should not require a reference to more than one authority.
Prior to the introduction of the Merger Regulation and for historical reasons, the control of mergers at Community level fell lamentably short of these objectives.
The development of a system of merger control in the EC suffered from the lack of any specific provision for such powers in the Treaty of Rome; the European Court attempted to make good this shortcoming through case law.
Two judgments of the Court,Continental Can (1973) and Philip Morris (1987), are of cardinal importance.
In Continental Can,the Court ruled that a company which already held a dominant position in the Common Market could be treated as exploiting it abusively so as to infringe Article 86, if it strengthened its dominance by taking over a competitor.
In Philip Morris , the Court established that, contrary to previous thinking, Article 85 could apply to agreements the purpose of which was the acquisition of total or partial ownership of enterprises by merger, acquisition or reorganisation.
(For convenience these are described in this chapter as share transactions, but the same rules apply to the acquisition of assets.)
Articles 85 and 86 were designed to attack anti-competitive agreements and abusive monopolisation and were not drafted with merger control in mind.
Their application to mergers therefore tends to lead to uncertainty and instability, instead of providing the orderly framework and timetable essential for the conduct of public share acquisitions and takeover bids.
A merger regulation was first proposed in 1973 by the Commission.
Unanimity of the Council was required for adoption of the regulation and this was not forthcoming.
The Commission later renewed its efforts and issued a revised proposal in 1989.
This was the subject of lengthy political negotiations and further revisions, until finally the Merger Regulation was adopted on 21 December 1989 and came into force on 2 1 September 1990.
To a certain extent, the final draft betrays the fact that it was the product of compromise between those countries with highly developed regulatory control of mergers (particularly the United Kingdom and West Germany) which were reluctant to see control of mergers transferred to Brussels, and those countries with no or less effective control, which were keen for the Commission to take on that role.
The Merger Regulation
This section refers to Council Regulation 4064/89 on the control of concentrations between undertakings (the Merger Regulation) and to the various Regulations and Notices adopted by the Commission in application of the Merger Regulation, as well as to interpretative  statements published by the Commission and the Council at the time of its adoption.
Is there a concentration with a community dimension?
The Merger Regulation requires ‘concentrations’ which exceed stated size thresholds (Community dimension) to be notified to the Commission before they are put into effect.
Whether or not a concentration is of a ‘Community dimension, is an important question and determines whether or not the concentration will be subject to the scrutiny of Community or domestic authorities.
A concentration will have a ‘Community dimension’ where:
the worldwide turnover of all the undertakings together exceeds 5,000 million ecu (roughly £3500 million); and
the Community-wide turnover of at least two of the undertakings must exceed 250 million ecu (roughly £175 million); and
neither of the undertakings achieves more than two thirds of its Community-wide turnover in the same member state;
this threshold for worldwide turnover is to be reviewed by the Council before 21 December 1993 and the Commission has stated its view that it should be reduced to 2,000 million ecu (roughly £1400 million).
‘Turnover’ means post-tax turnover for all goods and services in the financial year, applied as part of an undertaking's ordinary activities, but excludes turnover from a group's internal operation.
Turnover has to be calculated by adding together the respective turnovers of all parent and subsidiary companies.
The regulation treats parent companies as those having control over another company, such as where a company owns more than half of the share capital, or has the power to appoint more than half of the members of the board.
Thus situations may arise where the acquisition of companies with relatively small turnover may nevertheless have a Community dimension.
In this respect, it is important to point out that the test of control to determine parents and subsidiaries is applied differently by the Commission from the test of decisive influence which is applied in determining the existence of a concentration.
It is argued in the Wiggins Teape/Arjomari case that the turnover of Groupe St. Louis had to be taken into account.
Groupe St. Louis was the largest shareholder in Arjomari, with a shareholding of 45% and the right to appoint up to half  the members of the Supervisory Board or the bodies legally representing the undertaking.
In this case, the Commission concluded that a shareholding of 45% of total voting tights was not sufficient in itself to establish the power of control to determine if there was a parent and a subsidiary.
‘Concentrations’ are widely defined to include not only mergers in the strict sense, but any transaction which results in the acquisition of direct or indirect control of all or part of an undertaking.
Both share and asset purchases are included and it makes no difference whether the merger is agreed or hostile.
The Regulation also applies to the acquisition of joint control by a number of companies acting in concert.
In fact, as of July 1991, only one concentration that was a merger in the traditional sense of the word, which was between two Japanese banks, had been notified to the Commission; the rest were concerned concentrations that came within the wider definition.
Control is widely defined as the ability to exercise a decisive influence over a company by any means.
As more cases are examined by the Commission, the precise meaning and ambit of the term ‘decisive influence’ will be clarified.
In one case, a company was found to have a decisive influence with a 39% shareholding, as none of the other blocks of shareholdings exceeded 4%, and so the company was in a relative position of strength.
In another case, a 38% shareholding combined with an obligation to make a public bid under the UK Takeover Code was sufficient to give the company a decisive influence.
Control of a company may be exercised jointly; where this is the case, the concentration will be in the nature of a joint venture.
Joint control is found where the parent companies must agree on decisions concerning the joint venture company.
It does not exist where one of the parent companies may alone decide upon a joint venture company's commercial activities.
For example, shareholdings divided in the proportion of 66% and 34% were found to constitute joint control, as a 34% shareholding represented a minority blocking vote and so important decisions had to be taken with the consent of this minority shareholder.
Moreover, the Commission has taken the view that a 20% shareholding could lead to joint control in certain circumstances.
In the case in question, the 20% shareholding conferred 26% of the voting rights and the right to appoint a certain number of directors.
Furthermore, a shareholders' agreement required a majority of 75% for many important matters which allowed the 20% shareholder (with its 26% of voting rights) a veto over most major decisions.
Consequently, a transaction must be analysed with respect to both the importance of the respective shareholdings of the participating undertakings and also its contractual aspects.
If ‘joint control’ is established, a further analysis must be made to distinguish whether or not the joint venture is of a cooperative or  concentrative nature.
There will be no concentration if the joint venture is cooperative, that is, if it is an operation that has ‘the object or effect of co-ordinating the competitive behaviour of undertakings which remain independent’.
This exclusion is designed to focus the Merger Regulation on operations bringing about a lasting change in the structure of the undertakings concerned.
This distinction is important, as cooperative joint ventures aimed at or resulting in co-ordination of the competitive behaviour of the parent companies are outside the Merger Regulation and are governed by Article 85 or 86 (see Chapters 5 and 6).
They may also be subject to domestic merger control.
However, concentrative joint ventures that are permanent and independent without such anti-competitive implications do come within the Regulation.
It may often be difficult for the parties to assess whether the transaction they are contemplating is a concentration or cooperative in nature.
The Commission has given some guidance on how to distinguish between cooperative and concentrative operations in a published notice.
This notice sets out a positive and negative condition that must be satisfied:
positive condition:
joint venture must perform on a lasting basis all the functions of an autonomous economic entity;
negative condition:
no coordination of competitive behaviour between the parties.
Ancillary restrictions
A concentration may involve the parties entering into undertakings that are restrictive of competition in themselves.
A common example  is the obligation that the parties to the concentration will not compete with one another.
Such ancillary restrictions will be treated as part and parcel of a concentration where they are ‘directly related and necessary to the implementation of the concentration’.
Those ancillary restrictions that do not meet this criterion will fail to be considered under Articles 85 and 86 of the EEC Treaty.
Some guidance on the extent to which ancillary restrictions are acceptable under the Merger Regulation is found in a notice issued by the Commission.
Is the merger compatible with the Common Market?
Every concentration which comes within the scope of the Merger Regulation, as described above, will be appraised by the Commission to determine whether it is compatible with the Common Market.
It will be incompatible if it creates or strengthens a dominant position as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded in the Common Market or in a substantial part of it.
The Commission is directed to take into account the structure of all markets concerned.
Its appraisal must be made by reference to the market position and the economic and financial power of the parties; to alternatives available to suppliers and users; to access to suppliers or markets; to the structure of the markets affected, to take account of international competition; to consider legal and factual barriers to entry; and the interests of consumers and the development of  technical and economic progress (provided that the latter is to the consumers' advantage and does not form an obstacle to competition).
The Regulation provides that a market share of 25% or less is presumed to be compatible with the Common Market.
Three points should be emphasised about the nature and extent of the appraisal that the Commission is obliged to make of a proposed concentration under the Merger Regulation:
The Commission must have regard to the future development of competition (including competition from undertakings located outside the Community), not merely to the position as it exists among the companies competing in the market at the date of the merger.
To do this the Commission must have regard to barriers to entry likely to deter new market entrants and to whether a result of the merger is likely to be a significant raising of those barriers.
In a number of decisions, involving the Spanish oil refinery industry, the Commission took account of the fact that Spain was in the process of liberalising what was currently a highly regulated market.
It is the result of the creation or strengthening of a dominant market position which is all important.
It is not enough for the Commission merely to show that the merger will create or strengthen such a market position if the maintenance or development of effective competition would not be likely to be impaired.
The Commission has to base its legal assessment on the aspects of competition in a substantial part of the Common Market.
Thus the Commission has to determine the relevant geographic market.
It cannot arbitrarily select the member state in which the parties to the merger have their highest market share.
However, the Commission may focus on regional markets and even on local markets, where these are the relevant geographical markets.
In the Promodes/DIRSA case concerning a merger between two supermarket chains, the Commission took the view that the relevant geographic market was local, primarily because there was insufficient evidence of the substitutability of demands, in that consumers would not travel long distances to purchase their weekly shopping.
But the Commission takes into account not only the behaviour of customers, but also the importance of regulatory factors of transport costs or national buying preferences.
However, in the Alcatel/AEG Kabel case, the Commission considered that the communication cables market had to be analysed as a Community-wide market.
With respect to the relevant product market, the practice of the Commission shows a preference for relatively narrow market definitions; for example, in the VIAG/Continental Can case, the Commission undertook a detailed analysis of substitutability of both supply and demand, in order to determine the interchangeability of the various forms of packaging in the world.
The Commission considered that there was not only one beverage packaging market comprising glass, plastic and cans, but that packaging products may belong to separate markets which only compete to a limited extent.
In the cases it has dealt with to date, the Commission has shown itself willing to clear horizontal mergers which produce high market shares, where there is strong competition from actual or potential competitors.
This was the basis for clearance of the Renault/Volvo bus and truck joint venture discussed earlier.
The Commission emphasised that the merged companies would have no ability to affect price, because of the competitiveness of the markets involved.
The Commission has also looked closely at the potential anticompetitive effects of vertical integration.
In one of the five proceedings it has brought to date, the take-over bid for Alfa-Laval, vertical integration was the only issue under investigation.
As of November 1991, the Commission had found only one merger that it considered would not be compatible with the Common Market, which resulted in the merger being prohibited, namely, the proposed acquisition of De Havilland by ATR, a joint venture between Aerospatiale (France) and Alenia and Selenia (Italy).
The Commission's decision that the merger would create or strengthen a dominant position in the common market caused considerable controversy and was based on the following reasoning:
The relevant market was the turbo-prop aircraft (‘commuters’) market.
Furthermore, the Commission considered that the commuter market had to be divided into three distinct market segments in accordance with passenger seating (20 — 39, 40–59 and 60 seats and over).
This division of the commuter market was justified by the Commission as consistent with the views of the overwhelming majority of customers and competitors.
The geographic market taken into account by the Commission was the world market, excluding China and Eastern Europe.
The Commission took the view that the proposed merger, resulting in the purchase of the ‘number one’ manufacturer (De Havilland) in the commuter market by the ‘number two’manufacturer (ATR), would lead to the new entity, ATR/De Havilland, holding 50% of the world market and 65% of the Community market.
The Commission pointed out that these percentages would have been even higher for certain types of plane.
The proposed concentration would not only have significantly strengthened ATR's position in the commuter markets, but also have eliminated De Havilland from the relevant market, where there are only few competitors, namely British Aerospace, Saab, Fokker, and some minor firms.
Moreover, the merged company would have been the only commuter manufacturer covering the whole range of commuter aircraft.
Accordingly, the Commission considered that there was a great likelihood that customers, who had already acquired ATR or De Havilland commuters, would stay with them in placing future orders.
The Commission rejected all arguments of the concerned undertakings with respect to European industrial policy.
The Commission concluded that the new entity could act independently of its competitors and customers and would thus have a dominant position on the commuter markets.
Consequently, the choice of the airlines faced with the dominant position which combined the most popular aircraft families on the market, would be significantly reduced.
Finally, the Commission assessed that there was a high probability that, in the near future, the dominant position of ATR/De Havilland would be transformed into a monopoly.
The De Havilland decision demonstrates in stark form the fact that EC merger control is not part of the Community's industrial policy, but is competition driven.
It seems that the legal and economic objective of the merger regulation is not to foster the creation of European champions, but to ensure that mergers within the Community do not create or strengthen dominant market positions in the Common Market.
The political consequence of the decision is that the EC Industry Commissioner and the EC Transport Commissioner have suggested to the Commission President that, in future, the Competition Directorate should obtain the approval of the relevant industrial policy department of the Commission before submitting a merger to the full five months' scrutiny allowed under the Regulation.
What is the timetable for investigating a merger?
The duty to notify an acquisition or takeover bid falls on the acquiring company or companies and, in the case of mergers in the strict sense, on the parties jointly.
Notification of a concentration must be made not more than one week after whichever is the first of the conclusion of the agreement, the announcement bid of the public bid or the acquisition of a controlling interest.
The date of notification which triggers the procedural timetable will be deemed to occur only when complete details are provided to the Commission.
In one case, it took an additional 21 days before notification was deemed complete by the Commission.
As the amount and detail of material required in a notification is complex, it is advisable that a notification be commenced well in advance.
The Commission must copy a notification to the relevant authorities in the member states and provided that it is complete, immediately publish brief details of it in the Official Journal.
These details include the names of the parties, nature of the merger and economic sectors involved.
Business secrets, which may include the offer price, where documents have not yet been sent out, are protected.
Notification
Concentrations must be notified to the Commission on Form CO, in one of the official languages of the Community.
Twenty copies of the form must be supplied along with between copies of supporting documentation.
Supporting documentation should include:
copies of the final or more recent revisions of all documents bringing about the concentration;
copies of the most recent annual reports and accounts;
copies of reports prepared for the purposes of the concentration and from which information has been taken for the purposes of the Form CO;
a list and short description of the contents of all other documents prepared for the purpose of assessing the concentration with respect to competitive conditions, competitors and market conditions.
Form CO requires information on:
turnovers of the parties concerned and their group structure;
personal and financial links in companies active in the affected markets;
details of the concentration, including economic and financial details;
the relevant product market;
the relevant geographic market;
the relevant conditions in affected markets; record of market entry; factors influencing market entry; vertical integration; research and development; distribution and service systems; competitive environment; cooperative agreements; trade associations; worldwide context;
general matters — eg effect of concentration on consumers and the development of technical progress.
Within one month after the date of notification, the Commission must decide whether the proposed merger falls within the scope of the Merger Regulation and if so, whether it is compatible with the Common Market.
If the Commission decides that the Regulation does not apply, it must take a decision to that effect (which is capable of challenge).
If the Commission considers the Regulation does apply, it must nevertheless clear the merger unless it has ‘serious doubts’ about the merger's compatibility with the Common Market.
In this case, it must commence formal proceedings.
If it does not do so within the one month time limit, compatibility is presumed.
Having begun proceedings, the Commission must, within four months, either give clearance on the basis that the merger is compatible with the Common Market according to the criteria described above, or else declare the merger incompatible with the Common Market.
The Commission may make its approval of a merger subject to specified conditions and obligations designed to safeguard effective competition, and it is able to clear a merger if the parties modify their proposals to its satisfaction.
This opens up the possibility of negotiations between the Commission and the parties concerned and the Commission has shown itself willing to resolve cases on the basis of undertakings in [two]of the [five]proceedings it has brought to date.
One case involved the acquisition by Fiat of a French battery manufacturer which gave Fiat a high share of the French market.
The Commission was able to resolve the case by persuading Fiat to reduce its existing shareholding in a competing French battery manufacturer, thus lowering Fiat's market share.
All action to carry out the merger must be suspended for a period of three weeks from the date of its complete notification.
The Commission may extend the period of suspension until a final decision is taken on the merger's compatibility with the Common Market.
This option was exercised in the context of a public takeover bid in the Alfa-Laval/Tetrapak case, but the Commission lifted the suspension as soon as its serious doubts were satisfied.
The suspension during the first three weeks and the possible extended period does not apply to a public takeover or exchange bid, provided this has been notified to the Commission at the same time as it is publicly announced.
Such a bid may go ahead immediately, provided the voting rights attached to the shares are not exercised.
All the suspension requirements and conditions may be waived by the Commission to prevent ‘serious damage’, with or without conditions.
The Commission may also otherwise provide for a derogation from suspension at any time, even before notification or after the transaction.
The Procedures and Timings of the Regulation are summarised in Table A overleaf.
How wide are the Commission's powers?
For those who comply with it, the Regulation is an improvement of the Article 86 régime.
It provides criteria for notification, a workable timetable (which could, however, be improved by shortening the time limits) and a system for authorising mergers if the parties modify their plans or give undertakings.
Conversely, the Commission is given wide powers to deal with those who fail to notify mergers or to provide the information demanded of them or who implement mergers in contravention of an obligation to suspend.
Further, those who implement mergers after the suspension period but prior to the Commission's final decision take the risk that the merger will not ultimately be cleared.
The Commission has powers to order divestiture of unauthorised mergers.
It also has powers to carry out investigations and impose very large fines of up to 10% of turnover.
The Commission's substantive decisions and the level of fines it imposes are subject to review by the European Court of First Instance, which is given power to increase fines as well as to cancel or reduce them.
As at the end of February 1992, the Commission had received 95 notifications under the Merger Regulation.
Details of these notifications are summarised in Table B. The Commission found that five of the transactions notified did not fall within the jurisdiction of the Merger Regulation, and 52 notifications were cleared after a one month preliminary review.
The Commission cleared 15 matters after having instigated formal proceedings and a further 17 were still outstanding.
Does the Merger Regulation prevent double jeopardy?
The intention of the Merger Regulation was to introduce a ‘one-stop, merger control, described by Commissioner Sir Leon Brittan as a ‘system whereby, in the case of smaller mergers, they would be subject only to national regulation…while in the case of the really large mergers which have implications for the whole Community, the European Commission would have the power to intervene, and companies would not normally need to be concerned about the national regulatory authorities’.
The aim of one-stop shopping is lost and is not fulfilled where the parties are exposed to double jeopardy, that is, where a merger may be investigated both by the Commission under Community law and by national authorities under domestic law.
The possibilities where this may occur are outlined below.
Under this principle, the Regulation gives the Commission sole competence to make decisions on mergers within the scope of the Regulation, whether or not the merger is adjudged to be compatible with the Common Market.
National legislation on competition is excluded save that the Commission can, when approving a merger, attach conditions and authorise the member state concerned to apply national legislation to provide for effective competition in the local market.
There are however, three exceptions to the principle of ‘one-stop shopping’.
First is the main exception to the principle of one-stop shopping.
It was inserted at the insistence of Germany, for whom merger control has important constitutional implications, and the clause in the Regulation is known as the ‘German’ clause.
When invoked, the Commission may, at any time within three months of notification and provided it has not taken steps to apply the Merger Regulation, refer a notified merger to the competition authorities of a member state to deal with under national legislation.
Such a reference is possible only if that member state claims (within three weeks of receiving a copy of the notification) that the merger may create or strengthen a dominant position in a distinct market within its territory.
If such a claim is made, the Commission may decide that there is no such distinct market (in which case the member state concerned can appeal to the Court of First Instance) or it may continue to deal with the merger itself, with particular reference to competition in the market concerned.
It is anticipated that this claim will be invoked only rarely — Germany and the United Kingdom have already requested that it be used in relation to the Varta/Bosch and the Alcatel/AEG Kabel cases (Germany) and to the Steetley/Tarmac case (UK).
This request was turned down in Varta/Bosch and in Alcatel/AEG Kabel.
In this latter  case, the German cartel office (Bundeskartellamt) has stated its intention to file a suit with the European Court of Justice, pursuant to Article 175 of the Treaty of Rome, in order to obtain the annulment of the Commission Decision.
In the Steetley-Tarmac case, Thames Plc and Steetley Plc intended to merge all of their interests in building materials by way of a joint venture called Allied.
The United Kingdom government requested that the Commission refer the case, as far as the bricks and clay tiles markets are concerned, on the grounds that the case raised significant competition issues in relation to these two product markets.
After investigation, the Commission identified a distinct geographic reference market, limited to Great Britain, in which the concentration threatened to create or strengthen a dominant position.
The Commission considered that, in this case, the market for neither of the products was significantly affected in any other part of the European Community.
Therefore, the Commission agreed to the request of the United Kingdom and decided to refer the aspect of the case regarding the product markets of bricks and clay tiles to the United Kingdom authorities to be dealt with under United Kingdom competition law.
With respect to the other products covered by the agreement, the Commission considered that no competition issues have arisen and the Commission adopted a decision allowing the proposed concentration with respect to these aspects of the transactions.
There is also a saving clause to allow member states to apply measures, compatible with Community law, to protect their legitimate interests outside the sphere of competition.
Public security, plurality of the media and prudential rules are recognised as legitimate interests, but the Commission's approval must be obtained before measures are taken to protect other heads of public interest.
Companies will no doubt play safe and notify their agreements to the national authorities where a merger raises any public interest issue of potential concern to those authorities.
It is expected that this exemption will also be invoked only rarely.
Lastly, under the so-called ‘Dutch’ clause, member states may request the Commission to review the effect of any concentration, even if it does not meet the thresholds of the Merger Regulation.
In this case, provided that the merger affects inter-state trade, the Commission may act under the Merger Regulation.
This clause was requested by the smaller member states, notably the Netherlands, that do not have a sophisticated form of merger control and wished to be able to invoke Community powers where necessary.
The position where the Merger Regulation does not apply
Where the Merger Regulation does not apply because there is no concentration, the Commission and the national courts will be free to apply Articles 85 and 86 in the usual way.
When Brau and Brunner AG and Cadbury Schweppes plc notified the creation of a joint venture that would prepare and sell mineral water, the Commission found that this joint venture was not a concentration but a cooperative agreement, because the parent companies would stay active on the soft drinks market and so the structure of competition would not be permanently altered, as it would with a concentration.
Consequently, the Commission went on to examine the joint venture under Articles
Where there is a concentration, but the Regulation does not apply because the thresholds are not met, the Commission will still have limited powers to intervene and national courts will be able to apply Article 86.
In both cases national competition laws will have to be complied with.
Exclusion from the Regulation will, therefore, expose the parties to a merger to fines; attack of the legal validity of the merger in the national courts; and parallel national competition investigations.
It is also likely to result in a spate of protective notifications.
It is also unfortunate that Article 86 will continue to apply, under the Continental Can principle, to mergers which do not fall within the scope of the Regulation.
Interface of the Merger Regulation with Articles 85 and 86
Unfortunately, the introduction of the Merger Regulation does not entirely preclude the application of Articles 85 and 86 in merger situations under the doctrines developed in Continental Can and Philip Morris .
It is therefore still necessary for businessmen to have some understanding of the extent to which Articles 85 and 86 are capable of applying to mergers.
We summarise below the scope and development of those doctrines, before examining the extent to which they remain applicable in the context of the Merger Regulation.
Restraining dominance: Article 86 and Continental Can
In the Continental Can decision in 1973 the European Court held that a company which already held a dominant position in the Common Market or a substantial part of it could be treated as exploiting it abusively so as to infringe Article 86, if it moved significantly towards monopoly by taking over a competitor.
The Court said that the effect of the acquisition must be to make any serious chance of competition practically impossible: the degree of dominance reached must be shown to have substantially fettered competition.
Since 1973 the threshold of what amounts to dominance has been widened by a series of European Court decisions and the Court has also interpreted abuse less strictly.
Instead of having to prove substantial fettering of competition, it may now be enough for the Commission to show that competition has already been weakened by the presence of the dominant undertaking and that some further action on its part would impede the maintenance or development of effective competition in (or in a substantial part of the Common Market.
Restraining Cartels: Article 85 and Philip Morris
In its Philip Morris decision in November 1987, the Court held that all agreements for a merger where a cartel situation already existed, or might be created by the merger, were exposed to Article 85.
The Philip Morris doctrine means that a merger may be caught by Article 85 if at least two competitors or potential competitors are involved and if the market behaviour of one or more of those concerned in the merger is likely to be influenced so as to distort competition and have an appreciable effect on trade between the Member States.
When considering agreements between multinationals with  worldwide interests, account can be taken of their relationships outside the EC so that an economically as well as legally correct assessment can be made.
To what extent does the Merger Regulation supersede Articles 85 and 86?
The Merger Regulation removes the Commission's power to enforce Articles 85 and 86 (leaving it with only residual powers to apply those articles) in respect of all ‘concentrations’ whether or not they fall within the turnover thresholds.
It prevents national courts applying Article 85 (but not Article 86) to concentrations.
However, Articles 85 and 86 remain of potential relevance in the following situations:
Subject to the Commission's exclusive competence to grant exemptions under Article 85(3), both the Commission and national courts will have full powers to apply Article 85 under the Philip Morris doctrine to any acquisition of an interest in a competitor, whatever the combined turnover of the companies involved, which does not constitute a ‘concentration’ as defined in the Merger Regulation.
This will be the case where the acquiring and target companies remain independent and the acquisition leads, or may lead, to a co-ordination of their competitive behaviour.
National courts will have full powers to apply Article 86, under the Continental Can doctrine, to any merger, whatever the turnover involved.
The Commission will have limited powers, although it lacks the full enforcement machinery, to apply Articles 85 and 86 to any merger which does constitute a concentration within the Merger Regulation, but does not meet the turnover thresholds.
The Commission has stated that it will not use these powers in respect of mergers with a worldwide turnover of less than 2,000 million ecu and a Community turnover of less than 100 million ecu (that is between approximately £1400 million and £700 million).
National merger policies
On pp. 215 — 37 we examine the interaction of EC and domestic competition laws in relation to an acquisition of a minority interest or  majority stake in a local company in France, Germany, Spain and Italy.
Reference is also made to the table at pages 276 — 82 extracted from a CBI Working Paper, summarising general prohibitions, sectoral prohibitions and corporate shareholding and cultural factors affecting cross-border acquisitions of companies in the above member states and also in Belgium, the Netherlands and the UK.
The CBI table highlights the fact that local laws may apply to merger proposals, not only on competition grounds but also on other grounds, for example where it is deemed to be in the national interest to prevent foreign control in certain sectors such as maritime and air transport, banking and insurance.
In the UK, a merger referred to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission (MMC) for investigation is appraised according to whether it may be expected to operate against the ‘public interest’.
In making such an appraisal, the MMC is not limited to competition questions, but is supposed to consider all factors which appear relevant: the balanced distribution of industry and employment in the UK is listed as relevant and, in the past, the MMC has also examined the effect on the balance of payments and on imports.
The present Government's policy is to base its decision solely on competition considerations unless there are very exceptional reasons to do otherwise.
Co-operation, joint ventures and information exchange
Co-operation and competition
The Commission has repeatedly stated its desire to encourage cross-frontier co-operation and joint ventures, with benefits such as promotion of innovation, speedier transfer of new technology, development of new markets and an increase in the number of businesses competing within the Community.
On the other hand, it is determined not to allow such arrangements to be Trojan horses for anti-competitive cartels ‘leading to market sharing, raising of barriers to entry and the intensification of market power’.
A co-operation agreement or joint venture infringes Article 85 if it may appreciably affect inter-state trade and its object or effect is to prevent, restrict or distort competition.
It may be exempted under Article 85(3) if it contributes to improving production or distribution of goods or promoting technical or economic progress while allowing consumers a fair share of the resulting benefit.
Such exemptions are particularly likely to be forthcoming if the participating businesses are small or medium-sized enterprises, although joint ventures between companies with very substantial market shares are also frequently approved.
Permitted co-operation agreements
The Commission's policy
In 1968 the Commission responded to requests from industry to indicate its view of the application of the competition rules to cooperation between enterprises by issuing a formal Notice.
This Notice had no legal effect, but gave practical advice on the view the Commission was likely to take of certain types of agreement.
The Notice welcomed co-operation between small and medium-sized enterprises where such co-operation enabled them to work together more  rationally and increase their competitiveness on a larger market.
The Commission added that co-operation among large enterprises could also be economically justifiable without presenting difficulties from the point of view of competition.
Arrangements such as joint market research, and the joint execution of research work up to the stage of industrial application, were stated to be compatible with Article 85(1), provided that participating companies did not restrict their freedom of action.
However, the Commission took a practical view of the effect of such restrictions in assessing their compatibility with the competition rules.
If the effect of a joint research and development (R&D) agreement was that the parties no longer conducted independent research and development, this would be enough to attract the application of Article 85 (1) and the agreement would be to that extent prohibited unless Article 85(3) applied.
Also, the Commission has taken the view that pure R&D agreements involving no restrictions on the behaviour of the parties may nevertheless be caught by Article 85(1) where the R&D is central to developing the market in question and the market is oligopolistic in structure.
However, if the relevant project could not take place at all without cooperation, then Article 85(1) will not be infringed.
This was the basis of the Commission's clearance of the Eurotunnel Consortium Agreement.
R&D
In 1985 the Commission issued a block exemption on the application of Article 85(3) to R&D agreements.
The Commission noted that, in certain circumstances, such as where the parties agree not to carry out other research and development in the same field, these agreements might infringe Article 85(1).
Such agreements might however be exempted under Article 85(3), since co-operation in R&D work and in the exploitation of the results generally promotes technical and economic progress, which in turn benefits consumers through the introduction of new and improved products.
This would be the case where an R&D programme and its objective are clearly defined and each of the parties is given the opportunity of exploiting any of the results that are of interest to it, or where the results are used solely for the purposes of further research.
An agreement between two or more competing manufacturers whose combined market share exceeds 20 per cent of the market for the appropriate products in the EC or a substantial part of it would not however be exempted under the 1985 block exemption (though it might benefit from an individual exemption).
Specialisation agreements
Manufacturing companies with a large output enjoy the advantages of economies of scale.
Indeed those who drew up the blue-print for the Common Market in the 1956 Spaak Report sought to make available to Europeans those advantages so long enjoyed by US manufacturers in the USA's single market.
One way in which companies can simultaneously achieve economies of scale and concentrate upon a shorter product range is through a specialisation agreement.
For example, two companies each manufacturing a number of different components might each agree to stop manufacturing certain lines and purchase all their requirements in that range from the other party to the agreement.
To the extent that the companies are actual or potential competitors, the agreement will restrict competition and, if there is an effect on inter-state trade (which there is likely to be unless production is insignificant), there will be a breach of Article 85(1).
The agreement will also restrict competition by limiting the selling opportunities of other producers of the components subject to the exclusive purchasing commitment.
However, specialisation agreements are regarded by the Commission as improving the production and distribution of goods, because participating enterprises can concentrate on the manufacture of certain products and thus operate more efficiently, and supply their products more cheaply.
As long as competition prevails on the relevant market, consumers will receive a fair share of the resulting benefit.
The currently applicable block exemption Regulation, issued by the Commission in 1985, exempts specialisation agreements coupled with exclusive purchasing conditions subject to certain conditions.
In particular, the block exemption will not apply automatically to agreements between parties whose relevant aggregated market share exceeds 20 per cent of the relevant product market in the EC or a substantial part of it, and whose aggregate annual turnover exceeds 500 million ecu.
Companies with a larger turnover but with less than a 20 per cent market share may, however, benefit from an opposition procedure (see p. 66).
Joint ventures
A joint venture goes further than co-operation, in that generally a new business entity is created, but falls short of a full merger of the parents, who remain independent.
It is difficult to formulate a standard definition of a joint venture.
However, the Commission has recently issued a notice which goes some way towards defining the elements of  them.
The Commission defines joint ventures as undertakings jointly controlled by their parent companies and further specifies that undertakings are organisations intended to pursue a defined economic purpose on a long term basis.
Joint control means that both parents have the ability to exercise decisive influence over, and must agree on, the activities of the joint venture.
A joint venture which is not a disguised cartel will create significant new enterprise capability such as new production capacity, new technology, a new product or entry into a new market.
The most usual form of joint venture is a jointly owned company whose activities and sphere of operations are defined by a series of agreements and industrial property licences, but a company is not essential if the agreements between the parties result in a separate, jointly controlled business entity.