

WELCOME TO SOMERSET
SO EASY TO GET TO
BY CAR from the North and Midlands down the M5 motorway —Somerset exits 21 to 26 — from London along the M4 to join the M5 (or leave the M4 earlier to come through Bath or Bristol).
Motorists from the South-East can also reach Somerset on the M3 and A303.
BY TRAIN there are main line services between London (Paddington) and Taunton ; London (Waterloo) and Yeovil , and from the North there are services calling at Highbridge and Taunton (via Bristol).
BY COACH, Taunton, Yeovil and other towns are served by regular long distance services,(details from your nearest bus and coach station or travel agent).
BY AIR , both Bristol and Exeter airports are very convenient for Somerset.
SO COME!
PRICES:All prices quoted are per night during 1992, unless otherwise stated.
The prices given are a guide line for the reader and are normally based on the cost of one person sharing a double or twin bedded room with breakfast included (a single guest should expect to pay more).
We recommend that you check prices with the establishment before booking.
CANCELLATION:When you book your accommodation, you will be entering into a legally binding contract which can only be broken by mutual consent.
If you have to cancel or change your plans, you may be charged a cancellation fee.
Insurance is available quite cheaply which would safeguard you in such an event.
Your travel agent or insurance broker can advise you further on this.
COMPLAINTS:We naturally hope that you will not have any cause for complaint.
If a problem does arise and you are dissatisfied, make your complaint to the manager at the time of the incident.
This gives an opportunity for action to be taken at once and for things to be put right without delay.
It is usually more difficult to deal more effectively with a complaint if it is reported at a later date.
We will find it very helpful to receive comments from the public about establishments listed in this publication and suggestions on how to improve the brochure.
ACCOMMODATION CLASSIFICATION AND GRADING : One to five crowns and L (Listed)— English Tourist Board's classification of facilities and services for Caravan, Camping Sites and Self Catering accommodation.
As well as being classified, many establishments have applied for grading which is indicated as e.g. Approved, Commended etc.
N.B. A higher classification does not necessarily mean that the quality of what is provided is higher than that available in an establishment with a lower classification.
An explanatory leaflet is available from the Somerset Visitor Centres at Sedgemoor Services (M5) and Podimore (A303) and most Tourist Information Centres .
DESCRIPTIONS : This brochure has been published by Somerset Tourism, a service maintained by Somerset County Council.
All descriptions about each establishment have been supplied by the individual entrants and have not been verified by Somerset Tourism as publishers.
Although the details contained in this brochure have been published in good faith, Somerset Tourism cannot accept any liability for inaccuracies or omissions or for any loss or damage in any way connected with or arising out of the publication of this information.
SOMERSET FOR ALL
Our disabled visitors may find these District lists of parking and toilet facilities helpful.
WEST SOMERSET DISTRICT —Minehead town centre has lowered kerbs suitable for wheelchairs.
Free car parking to people in receipt of mobility allowance and claiming exemption from road fund duty.
Reserved spaces at Minehead (Summerland Rd);Watchet (Swain St);Williton (behind council offices).
Toilets for the Disabled at Allerford (village); Blue Anchor (seafront);Bossington (village);Doniford (Beach access)[not Nov to Feb]; Dulverton (Lion car park);Dunster Steep (car park);Horner (village);Kilve Beach ;[not Nov to Feb](Carousel Quay West, Summerland Rd, Blenheim Gdns);Porlock (Central car park, Doverhay);Porlock Weir; Simonsbath (Exmoor National Park car park);Tarr Steps [not Nov to Feb];Williton (car park);Winsford (village);Withypool (village).
All toilets in West Somerset are normally unlocked.
SEDGEMOOR DISTRICT — Free car parking with current orange badge.
Limited number of reserved spaces available.
Toilets for the Disabled at Brean (opp.
Weston-s-Mare turning);Bridgwater (Watsons Lane);Burnham-on-Sea (Pier St car park and Sea View Rd);Cheddar (Cliff St car park);Highbridge (Bank St car park);Nether Stowey (Castle St);North Petherton (High St).
Majority of toilets are locked and require a RADAR key — available from Social Service departments or may be purchased from Burnham-on-Sea or Cheddar Tourist Information Centres.
TAUNTON DEANE — Free car parking allowed only to people in receipt of mobility allowance and claiming exemption from road fund duty.
Reserved spaces at Taunton (multi storey Paul St, High St, Crescent North behind Crown Walk, Belvedere Rd — also ASDA, Great Mills, Queensway/MFI, Texas superstores).
Toilets for the Disabled at Bishops Lydeard (Mount St);Taunton (Hamilton Rd, Kingston Rd, Mendip House car park, Paul St, Eastwick Rd, Priory Bridge Rd, Goodland Gdns, Wilton Lands, Flook Hse, Canal Rd, Canon St, French Weir, Vivary Park, Castle Green [male only]— also Taunton Railway Station [Platform 2], ASDA, Queensway/MFI, Texas super-stores;Wellington (Longforth Rd, North Street);Wiveliscombe .
MENDIP — Free car parking with current orange badge.
Limited reserved spaces available.
Toilets for the Disabled at Glastonbury (Magdalene St, Northload St West);Frome (Cork St, Merchants Barton, Marston Layby and Picnic Area [A361 between Shepton Mallet and Frome];Shepton Mallet (Commercial Rd car park and Collett Park);Street (Northside car park);Wells (Union St, Town Hall Bldgs Market Place).
All toilets accessible by RADAR keys only — available on loan from Tourist Information Centres at Frome, Glastonbury, Shepton Mallet and Wells, and for purchase at Mendip District Council Offices, Cannards Grave Road, Shepton Mallet.
SOUTH SOMERSET — Free car parking with current orange badge.
Reserved spaces at Yeovil (disabled only between Tesco and Gateway);Crewkerne; Chard .
Toilets for the Disabled at Bruton (Grove Alley);Castle Cary (Milbrook Gdns);Chard (Bath St, Boden St);Crewkerne (South St, West St);Ilchester (Free St);Ilminster (Orchard Vale, West St);Langport (Whatley car park);Martock (The Pinnacle);Milborne Port (London Rd);Somerton (Cox's Yard car park);South Petherton (Prigg Lane);Stoke-Sub-Hamdon (High St, Ham Hill);Wincanton (Carrington Way);Yeovil (Bus Station, Old Town Station [attendant service], Petters Hse, Yeovil Recreation Ground South, Milford Adventure Playground, Quedam shopping centre).
SPECIAL OPPORTUNITIES
The following establishments have indicated that they are wholly or partially suitable for disabled visitors.
Page numbers refer to this brochure.
PLEASE NOTE — The information on this page has been supplied by District Councils and individual establishments and has not been verified by Somerset Tourism.
Please check with establishments to ensure suitability before making further arrangements.
DO YOUR OWN THING…
Whatever it may be!
These are a few suggestions for the active.
OR SIMPLY RELAX and enjoy the quiet Somerset life with fresh air among green hills.
CAVING .
Easy guided tours in the wonderful showcaves at Cheddar and Wookey.
Try adventure caving if you're really energetic!
COURSES .
Sports, hobbies, activities…
Residential centres and holiday packages for just about any interest.
CYCLING .
Cycle hire available and lots of routes.
FISHING .
River and reservoir trout — coarse on the Levels — some pike-sea fishing.
GOLF .
Seaside links to par three parkland.
Course list available.
RIDING .
More than fifty Centres in Somerset — many can offer instruction and accommodation, some stabling.
SEA AND SAND .
Forty miles of coastline includes Exmoor's rocky coves, Sedgemoor's seven miles of sand.
Attractive harbours and major resorts at Minehead and Burnham, Berrow and Brean.
SPORT FOR EVERYONE .
Spectator events, eight family sports centres, ten swimming pools.
WALKING .
Town trails, forest trails, nature trails, guided walks, waymarked routes, long distance walks and walking holidays.
A huge choice and plenty of Information Centres for casual strollers or energetic backpackers.
Check with any Somerset Information Centre for more details and other opportunities in their area.
WEST SOMERSET
FROM EXMOOR TO THE SEA
West Somerset has activities and attractions for everyone and visitors will find a wealth of interest and enjoyment.
MINEHEAD
The principal resort is characterful Minehead.
Protected by wooded North Hill, its climate is particularly mild.
For centuries a seaport — today the harbour is still a haven for yachtsmen, fishing boats and pleasure cruisers.
Thatched cottages cluster round the harbour while at the other end of the wide sandy beach Somerwest World offers a complete range of entertainment to holidaymakers and day visitors.
A tree lined avenue leads to Minehead's shopping centre and the district's main tourist information centre.
Aquasplash is Minehead's new indoor leisure pool opening in May 1992 with all weather fun for everyone.
EXMOOR NATIONAL PARK
The varied scenery of Exmoor is well worth exploring.
Its status as a National Park means that its beauty and wildlife will be protected for generations to come.
This is ideal country for walking, bird watching, horse riding and fishing, and where red deer can also be seen by the patient watcher.
Exmoor offers unrivalled opportunities to unwind — its dramatic scenery, quiet village centres and small towns have been welcoming visitors for centuries.
One of the most photographed is mediaeval Dunster with its yarn market, castle and working mill.
Porlock is not only famous for its steep hill but is also a superb centre for touring Exmoor.
To the west is Lorna Doone country made famous by R.D. Blackmore's Victorian novel.
Exmoor's southern gateway is the pretty town of Dulverton.
Porlock Weir
Minehead
Selworthy
Allerford
Selworthy
Farm Parks are fun!
Exmoor tours…
…or walks
Dunster
Minehead harbour
WEST SOMERSET
A WEALTH OF PLACES TO VISIT
Blue Anchor has its own unspoilt charm and is a good spot for beach fishing.
Steam trains stop at the restored station on the West Somerset Railway which runs past the beach from Minehead inland to Bishops Lydeard near Taunton.
At Washford can be found the ruins of 13th century Cleeve Abbey, the Tropiquaria tropical house and aquarium and a museum of railway relics.
The harbour town of Watchet has a history going back over a thousand years and is still an active trading port.
Bee World — a new attraction — opens next to Stogumber Station in 1992.
BETWEEN THE QUANTOCKS AND THE BRENDONS
The valley between the Quantocks and the Brendon Hills is well worth exploring.
Williton is the main centre with plenty of villages to explore like Stogumber, Crowcombe and Bicknoller.
Combe Sydenham country park has beautiful walks and tasty trout for sale whilst Stogursey boasts a moated ruined castle and Norman church.
West Somerset Railway
Somerset's cream teas are famous
Tarr Steps
Hurlestone Point
Dunster
Packages and Breaks
TWO NIGHTS BREAK CHANNEL HOUSE HOTEL
Perfectly positioned within two acres of secluded gardens, the hotel is a haven of peace and tranquility.
The luxury bedrooms and superb cooking have encouraged Ashley Courtney to give Channel House his highest recommendation.
The hotel is the perfect choice for those who enjoy their comfort and appreciate quality and good food.
SOMERSET BREAKS COMBE HOUSE HOTEL
Family run 17th century country house of great charm in the heart of the Quantock Hills with 23 tastefully furnished bedrooms.
Hard tennis court, indoor swimming pool and sauna also available.
Break available any time but must quote ‘Somerset Break’ on booking.
Two nights (from) £68.
Additional nights pro rata less 5%.
Price includes accommodation, private bathroom, TV, tea maker, telephone, breakfast and four course dinner including coffee.
Free accommodation for one child sharing parents room (food as taken).
FERN COTTAGE
Exhilarating Exmoor, sweeping coastal and hill scenery, abundant wildlife.
Walks start on doorstep of large 17th century cottage in a tiny National Trust village in a wood fringed vale.
A traditional country home, log fires, fine classic cooking, comprehensive wine list, peace, glorious riding (arranged nearby), enchanting villages, crystal rivers, the scent of heather.
Non-smoking.
SHORT BREAK REMUERA HOTEL
Commanding superb views across the bay to the Quantock Hills, with its own lovely foregarden.
The Remuera offers the chance to really relax and enjoy a lovely country home.
Full English breakfast, splendid dinner and delightful ensuite bedrooms.
Extra night £36.
Reduced rates in August and 7 plus nights from £32.
Christmas available.
SHORT BREAK THE WYNDCOTT HOTEL
This small beautiful country house hotel is situated in lovely gardens with magnificent panoramic views of the coastline and Exmoor National Park.
Exquisite dried flowers, pretty china, superb cuisine.
Dinner, bed and breakfast.
Extra night £32.
Weekly from £210.
Special winter breaks available on request.
BENARES HOTEL
Standing in 1.5 acres of beautiful grounds, the hotel commands superb views of the bay and the hills.
Renowned for its good food, comfort and hospitality, The Benares makes an ideal centre for touring Exmoor.
Bargain breaks available from March to November.
Ring or write to Ann Slade for further details.
BLUE ANCHOR PARK
Positioned at the water's edge, this is an ideal location from which to explore Exmoor and the surrounding area.
Holiday homes for sale and to let.
Touring pitches with hard standing, electric hook-ups and hot showers.
Indoor leisure pool, adventure playground, shop and launderette.
A Rose Award Park and member of the Hoburne Group.
WEST BAY CARAVAN PARK
A peaceful Rose Award park on the coast with panoramic views of Somerset and Welsh coasts.
400 yards from old harbour town of Watchet.
Ideally situated for a quiet relaxing holiday or touring Exmoor and the Quantocks.
Only 700 yards from West Somerset Railway Station.
Short breaks on request.
Self Catering MEADOW BUNGALOWS
Holiday bungalows in a lovely level garden setting.
Two bedrooms, lounge/diner, kitchen, bathroom, all-electric, colour TV, fridge.
A quiet country site between Exmoor and the Quantock Hills, less than ¼ mile from sea and an ideal centre for exploring the glorious surrounding countryside.
Special OAP rates..
Somerset is more than just pretty scenery
SEDGEMOOR
SEDGEMOOR
Just 30 miles or so south west of Bristol, Sedgemoor stretches from the Mendip Hills in the north to the Quantock Hills in the south.
Situated across the line of the M5, Sedgemoor is easy to reach and well placed for touring Somerset.
THE COAST
Burnham-on-Sea's period charm has attracted families for more than a century and offers modern and traditional facilities.
Seven miles of sandy beach stretch from Burnham-on-Sea to Brean Down headland.
The ancient town of Bridgwater, astride the River Parrett, is an ideal touring centre.
Thousands visit the town in late September for St Matthews Fair — one of England's largest, dating back to 1379.
On the Thursday nearest November 5 the Carnival comes to town when Guy Fawkes is celebrated in a riot of colour and music as more than 80 huge illuminated floats process through the town.
Squibbing displays provide a grand finale.
Burnham lighthouse
Brean Leisure Park
Burnham
SEDGEMOOR
THE HILLS
The Mendip Hills mark Sedgemoor's northern boundary.
At their heart is the Cheddar Gorge and the famous show caves penetrating deep into the hills.
Nearby Axbridge is an attractive little town hardly changed over the centuries.
Mediaeval houses crowd the market square including King John's Hunting Lodge, a merchant's town house now open to the public as a museum.
In the south of the District the Quantock Hills offer a softer and more varied landscape beloved by poets Coleridge and Wordsworth.
Coleridge's cottage in the pretty village of Nether Stowey is open to the public.
There are many attractive villages to explore and high points from which to enjoy the panoramic views.
THE LEVELS
Between the Quantocks and the Mendips lie the Somerset Levels.
The land is rich in wildlife and many plants still survive from the time when the area was marsh.
Everywhere the willow grows and dragonflies hover over the wide ditches or rhymes.
In 1685 the bloody Battle of Sedgemoor marked the end of the Duke of Monmouth's attempt to take the throne from James II.
Hundreds of Somerset men died in the battle and in the executions ordered by Judge Jeffreys at the famous Bloody Assizes following the Royalist victory.
The Admiral Blake museum in Bridgwater has relics, models, displays and maps of the Battle.
Easy to reach by road and rail, Sedgemoor is nearer than you think and whatever your needs — a family holiday by the sea — a weekend break in unspoilt countryside — or just a day out, a warm West Country welcome awaits you in Sedgemoor.
Attractions
CHEDDAR SHOWCAVES
Britain's most spectacular caves, Gough's and Cox's, set beneath the dramatic limestone cliffs of Cheddar Gorge.
Exhibition of ‘Cheddar Man’.
NEW —‘The Crystal Quest’, challenge Mordon, Lord of Darkness in this fantasy adventure playground.
For the more daring, pre-book an exciting Adventure Caving Expedition.
It's hard, it's dirty, it's fun.
HINKLEY POINT POWER STATION NEW ROAD OPEN FARM & LEVELS VISITOR CENTRE
Discover the many wildlife displays in the surroundings of a traditional farm.
The observation sett, where you can see badger family life.
Watch playful mink swim and foxes sunbathing, and much, much more.
Over 60 different breeds of farm and wildlife animals, many unique to New Road Farm.
A full days enjoyment for all.
Dogs welcome on leads.
Shopping, Eating & Drinking
CHEDDAR VALLEY VINEYARDS
CRICKET MALHERBIE FARMS LTD
Local Produce & Home Cooking — Home-Made Cream Teas & Lunches
MOORLYNCH VINEYARD
— Shop & Wine Bar selling Award-Winning Wines —
Visitor Centre — find out about English wine from grape to glass.
Beautiful vineyard with panoramic views.
Picturesque and tranquil setting for wine bar, and shop.
Farm walks and children's play area.
Axbridge
Cheddar
PACKAGES AND BREAKS
SHORT BREAK WEBBINGTON HOTEL
Edwardian Manor House with extensive leisure and conference facilities.
Weekend and midweek breaks available as well as a summer special during August; Just £203 per person for seven nights.
Under 12 stay free and pay for meals as taken.
Two nights £84; additional nights £30.
Breaks available at all times.
Hotels, Guesthouses & Farms
BLACK SMOCK INN
TOR FARM
Cheddar 3 miles.
Tor Farm is situated on the Somerset Levels where wildlife are in abundance.
Open views from every window.
Central heating, tea/coffee in bedrooms.
Evening meals.
Ensuite and Four Poster bedrooms.
Ideal base for Cheddar Gorge and Caves, Bath, Wookey Hole, Wells, Glastonbury and the coast.
TUDOR COURT FARM
SHRUB FARM COUNTRY HOTEL
500 year old Country Hotel set in 4 acres.
Close to Wells, Cheddar, Wookey, Bath, Glastonbury, Bristol and to M5 Junction 22. 10 bedrooms, all ensuite with hairdryer, telephone, trouser press, satellite TV and tea/coffee.
Four Poster available.
Restaurant offers an A la Carte menu nightly.
Open for Morning Coffee, Bar Snacks, Lunches and Cream Teas everyday.
Golf and horseriding nearby.
Pets and children welcome.
AA RAC.
EDITHMEAD LEISURE & PARK HOMES
SANDYGLADE HOLIDAY PARK
Spacious, fully fitted holiday homes with a choice of one, two or three bedrooms; prices fully inclusive.
Facilities on park include free entertainment in licensed club house featuring top artists, childrens shows and club, adventure playground, shop and launderette; right opposite beach.
Boating, fishing, horseriding and golf available locally.
UNITY FARM HOLIDAY CENTRE
Situated in 200 acres of level meadowland with views over open countryside towards Cheddar Gorge.
Facilities include an 18-hole golf course, pond and sea fishing, fun park, evening entertainment, indoor pool with water slide complex.
12 luxury holiday homes, hook-ups for tents and tourers.
Free pitches June and Sept mid-week for over 50's, special theme weekends.
Children will love our ‘Piglet Club’.
Dial a Colour Brochure — Tel: 0278 751235.
WARREN FARM CARAVAN & CAMPING PARK
Flat, grassy park with panoramic views of the Mendips.
100 metres from five miles of sandy beach.
Family park with excellent facilities.
Free colour brochure.
Self Catering
DULHORN FARM
PROSPECT FARM
17th Century picturesque country cottages set  amidst flower gardens and surrounded by countryside.
We have a variety of small farm animals, poultry and pets, and children are very welcome at Prospect Farm to participate.
We are situated midway between Weston-super-Mare and Burnham-on-Sea — 3 miles seaside.
WILLOW BARNS
Cheddar Gorge
THIS IS SOMERSET
COAST AND COUNTRYSIDE
Somerset is what you want it to be — there's something for just about everybody.
Seaside holidays are always popular and whether you want a family caravan or friendly small guesthouse or hotel you'll find it on Somerset's forty miles of varied coast.
Inland, you can get close to the countryside with a few days on a farm or perhaps pamper yourself with a luxury hotel.
And there are many comfortable, usually family run hotels to choose from as well.
IDEAL FOR A BREAK
If your idea of getting away from it all is relaxation, the best of English countryside and the good things of life, then Somerset's the place for you.
If you like exploring and uncovering history then our heritage will delight you.
Legends and mystery too — Somerset is where Alfred burnt the cakes and the country of Arthurian romance and speculation.
There are modern and traditional attractions for all tastes, from seaside pier to wildlife park — aircraft museum to showcaves — stately houses, gardens, arts, crafts, shopping, theatre, sports…
Above all, Somerset is easy to reach but so hard to leave.
SEE YOU SOON!
Start your holiday or day out planning with this quick guide.
The pages that follow will take you from Somerset's coastal areas into the richly varied countryside with holiday offers and accommodation details.
WEST SOMERSET
Exmoor National Park — land of wild red deer and legendary home of Lorna Doone — 265 square miles of moorland drama reaching to over 1700 feet at Dunkery Beacon.
Minehead is West Somerset's busy seaside gateway to this magnificent countryside with its many outdoor pursuits.
Exmoor meets the sea in rocky coves and, further east, there are historic ports and holiday resorts.
Inland, picturesque villages nestle in the wooded Brendon Hills.
TAUNTON DEANE
In the heart of the District is Taunton, Somerset's country town with shopping, entertainment and a famous castle.
In the south, the Blackdown Hills are dominated by the town of Wellington's monument to the Iron Duke.
This is a landscape of church towers, thatch roofs and cider orchards with welcoming country pubs.
To the east of Taunton are the ‘withy’ beds from which hard-wearing and attractive willow baskets and furniture are made in the traditional manner.
SOUTH SOMERSET
Throughout South Somerset is the warm honey colour of the Hamstone used in generations of buildings in picturesque towns and villages as well as the grand and stately homes of the aristocracy.
Many of these, with their fine gardens, are open to view.
In the gentle, rolling countryside near Yeovil is Cadbury Hill, King Arthur's legendary Camelot.
South Somerset is a countryside of lovely buildings and churches with many fine walks and cycling opportunities from which to enjoy them.
SEDGEMOOR
Seven miles of sandy beach and thousands of family holidays around Burnham, Berrow and Brean.
Inland is the great lowland plain of the Levels — once a marshy sea but now drained by the ruler — straight ‘rhynes’.
It was here, in 1685, that the Duke of Monmouth marched out from Bridgwater and lost the bloody Battle of Sedgemoor.
In the north, Cheddar Gorge cuts through the Mendip Hills — to the south are the gentler slopes of the Quantocks.
MENDIP
The limestone Mendip Hills dominate this countryside.
Superb walking country with magnificent views towards historic settlements proud of their heritage — Wells, England's smallest city, dominated by a magnificent Cathedral — Glastonbury, the cradle of Christianity, with its Abbey and the Tor, once an island refuge.
Below the Mendips are the underground wonders of spectacular showcaves.
Above is where you'll find the real Cheddar Cheese, strawberries and wine.
Wellington Monument
Brympton D'Evercy
Ashton
Porlock Weir
Burnham
Bishops Palace Wells
TAUNTON DEANE
COUNTRY SEAT AND TAUNTON VALE
The Vale of Taunton Deane, surrounded by the Quantock, Blackdown and Brendon Hills, is in a key position for South West visitors.
Excellent road and rail links make access easy from all parts of the country.
Taunton, Somerset's county town, was founded during the time of King Ine, astride the peaceful, picturesque River Tone.
Judge Jeffrey's ‘Bloody Assize’ was conducted in the imposing Castle after the Monmouth Rebellion — today you will find the County Museum.
A town walk reveals the past amongst today's parks, riverside walks and excellent shopping, in small, exclusive shopping areas or attractive pedestrianised areas.
SPORT AND FAMILY INTERESTS
Choose from golf, riding, polo, bowls, swimming and, of course, cricket at the County Ground.
Nearby, the Cricket Museum will interest enthusiasts.
The Brewhouse Theatre offers year-round entertainment and a wide choice of restaurants make your mouth water.
Steam enthusiasts may ride Britain's longest private railway and Hestercombe House will delight lovers of formal gardens.
Autumn is Carnival and Wassail time.
Carnival's huge, brightly lit floats will dazzle Wellington on September 26 and Taunton on October 17.
On Wassail night, evil spirits are banished from the orchards and offerings ensure next year's apple crop.
Burrow Mump
Taunton
Cider making
Wellington
Withy craftwork
Vivary Park
TAUNTON DEANE
HISTORY AND TRADITIONAL CRAFTS
Taunton Deane's heritage of castle, country houses, historic churches and villages reaches into the Somerset Levels and Moors and Athelney where King Alfred burnt the good wife's cakes.
The Willow Craft Trail reveals how willows, or ‘withies’ are grown and make into a variety of baskets, furniture and other long lasting items.
You will find a Neolithic woven willow trackway at the County Museum.
Many other traditional crafts and skills can also be found in Taunton Deane's attractive countryside.
WORTH A VISIT
Much of the unique Levels and Moors is a site of Special Scientific Interest with a thriving diversity of rare birds and plant life.
Wordsworth enjoyed the Quantock Hills — now an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, abundant with wildlife and popular for walking, riding, bird watching or just relaxing.
The Blackdown Hills, above the Tone valley, offer walking and riding among superb beech woods.
The Monument to the Iron Duke overlooks the busy town of Wellington at the western end of the ridge, and there are small country houses and bird gardens to visit.
Further west, the rolling Brendon Hills with their pretty villages, farmland and wooded valleys gradually merge into the wilder expanse of Exmoor.
YOU'RE WELCOME!
This lovely and interesting area with it's friendly people will make a welcoming break — at any time of year.
Attractions
ENGLISH BASKET CENTRE
A Working Willow Farm on the edge of the Somerset Levels where you can see the willow crop being processed.
Craftsmen can be seen working the willows into traditional Baskets, Hurdles, Rose Arches, Bowers, Garden Seats and Summerhouses.
The showroom is open daily.
SHEPPY'S CIDER
Visit the fascinating museum of cider and rural life and see the video on cider making.
Enjoy your visit to the cider works.
Walk the farm and orchards trails and have a picnic under the apple trees.
Visit the farm shop and sample the excellent ciders before you buy.
A warm and friendly Somerset welcome awaits you.
WILLOWS & WETLANDS VISITOR CENTRE
All aspects of the willow industry can be seen from the preparation of the willow to the finished basket.
A large range of genuine Somerset baskets made here on the premises are on sale.
Other items related to the willow industry, both past and present, are also displayed.
Wiveliscombe
Taunton-Bridgwater canal
PACKAGES & BREAKS
THREE NIGHTS BREAK GREENHAM HALL
Turreted Victorian family house.
Plant lovers garden, peaceful surroundings, beautiful walks.
Excellent pubs nearby.
Send for details of study weekends; subjects to include Homeopathy, Alexander technique painting, etc.
To include full English breakfast.
Any 3 nights (excluding Fri and Sat).
Additional nights at £17.50 per night.
GAMLINS FARM
Relax by the heated covered pool (seasonal), visit Exmoor, The Quantocks and Devon.
Coarse fishing on farm.
TV and tea making facilities in all rooms.
Just ten minutes from M5.
Also cottages available.
PROCKTERS FARM
Large 17th century farmhouse only 10 mins from M5.
Ideal centre for walking and visiting the coast.
Welcome tea and cake on arrival.
All rooms have tea/coffee facilities and TV.
Ground floor ensuite bedroom suitable for the disabled.
Brochures available on request.
THE OLD RECTORY
The Old Rectory is a lovely old family house set in 3 acres of well maintained gardens with large well-appointed rooms offering every comfort.
Lovely views overlooking Somerset Levels towards Glastonbury.
Ideal base for touring or relaxing.
Traditional home cooking; evening meals available.
THE ROCK INN
Just 14 miles from Taunton, The Rock Inn, situated on the B3227 (Ex A361), offers comfortable rooms with private facilities.
Full restaurant meals and bar snacks available.
Fully central heated.
Bed and Breakfast — from £20 per person per night.
Breaks available.
TWO NIGHTS BREAK THE JAYS NEST
This small country hotel nestles in an acre of pure peace and tranquility, surrounded by the unique beauty of the Somerset Levels.
A secluded and intimate hideaway providing every comfort for the discerning countrylover — with log fires, cosy bedrooms, superb home-cooking specialising in fresh vegetables and wholefoods complemented by a well-stocked licensed Bar.
Price includes: Ensuite accommodation and 3 course evening meal.
Alternatively: Midweek breaks — 4 nights for the price of 3.
ST QUINTIN CARAVAN & CAMPING PARK
Set in an orchard and meadowland adjacent to the beautiful Bridgwater — Taunton Canal, St Quintin has good facilities and is an excellent touring centre for Somerset, Devon and Dorset.
AA three penants.
RAC appointed.
On the A38 North-East of Taunton.
Brochure available.
You will be sure of a warm welcome.
A SELECTION OF EVENTS IN 1992
TOURIST INFORMATION
To help you get the best from your visit, there is a variety of information available — a network of roadside and pedestrian information boards — a series of Tourist Information Centres — specialist information and interpretation centres in areas such as Exmoor.
(NB * indicates only open summer months).
Start your visit at one of the SOMERSET VISITOR CENTRES — on the A303 at the THF Services, Podimore (between Sparkford and Ilchester) or the M5 at Sedgemoor Services (between exits 21 and 22).
There are Tourist Information Centres at:
MENDIP
MENDIP
Mendip is Somerset's northern gateway — steeped in history and the legendary land of King Arthur and his kingdom of Avalon.
This area is home to the traditional ‘fruits of the land’— Cheddar cheese, cider, strawberries and wine.
HILLS AND LEVELS
Mendip's remarkable scenery includes the dramatic beauty of the limestone Mendip Hills and broad expanses of the Somerset Levels.
The folds of the Mendips have created a wealth of picturesque combes and valleys in which mellow, stone-walled villages nestle.
Underground, hidden rivers have carved out an amazing system of caverns, like those of the famous Wookey Hole Caves.
MUCH TO SEE AND DO
Mendip offers a wide range of places to visit and heritage attractions include remains of Roman and Iron Age settlements, as well as mediaeval castles at Nunney and Farleigh Hungerford.
Lovers of the countryside will enjoy an extensive network of footpaths and attractive facilities like the National Trust Nature Reserve at Ebbor Gorge, near Wells.
Other outdoor pursuits — particularly golf and horseriding — are well provided for.
Glastonbury Tor
Cheap St, Frome
Bishops Palace Wells
Wookey Hole
Carnival time
TOWNS IN THE COUNTRY
Each of Mendip's five towns is compact, distinctive in character and offers a wide range of facilities.
WELLS has an exceptionally rich heritage of historic buildings, crowned by the Cathedral, perhaps the finest example of Gothic architecture in England.
Vicars' Close is most complete mediaeval street in Europe, and the beautiful, moated Bishop's Place is still the residence of the Bishop of Bath and Wells.
The Palace Garden contains the wells from which the city gets its name.
GLASTONBURY is dominated by the dramatic and mysterious Glastonbury Tor, which towers above the flat landscape of the Somerset Levels, where peat digging and withy growing for basketmaking have been traditional occupations for generations.
Here are the magnificent ruins of Glastonbury Abbey — the Tribunal (a 15th century former court house)— the Chalice Well (where, legend has it, the Holy Grail was hidden by Joseph of Arimathea) and the 15th century St John's Church.
STREET is the home of Clarks, the famous shoemakers.
There is an interesting Shoe Museum on the premises.
FROME is to the east and the largest town.
The famous Cheap Street is one of numerous picturesque streets, and many impressive buildings date from Frome's importance as a centre for the silk and woollen industries.
SHEPTON MALLET is Mendip's geographical and administrative heart and an ideal touring centre.
The woollen industry was important here in the Middle Ages but, in more recent years, Shepton Mallet has become well-known for the production of cider and perry.
Collett Park is a particularly attractive feature of the town.
Mendip's many attractive villages are full of charm and character — most have quaint churches and other features of interest.
Vicars' Close, Wells
Glastonbury Abbey
Hotels, Guesthouses & Farms
COURT LODGE
Attractive modernised lodge house built around 1850's, comprising dining room, reception room and comfortable bedroom.
Hot water always available and central heating in winter months.
Picturesque garden.
Situated on the edge of a Somerset village.
Approximately three miles from the very interesting town of Glastonbury.
STONELEIGH HOUSE
A delightful 18th Century farmhouse with lovely views over open countryside to Glastonbury Tor.
It also has its own country life museum and old Black Smiths shop.
Excellent accommodation is offered, rooms having ensuite bathrooms.
TV and tea/coffee making facilities.
Full English breakfast is provided.
Non smokers only please.
GLENCOT HOUSE
Idyllically set in 18 acres of garden and parkland with river frontage, Glencot House is an elegantly furnished Victorian Mansion which offers high class accommodation, excellent cuisine and friendly service.
Ideally situated for visiting the many places of interest and outstanding natural beauty in Somerset.
Open all year.
FENNY CASTLE HOUSE
Country House Hotel and Restaurant.
Ensuite bedrooms, superb restaurants serving homemade soups, bread, pudding, etc.
Locally grown produce.
Horse-drawn carriage tours of the levels.
Three day bargain breaks to include three course evening dinner, bed and breakfast — £105 per person.
Caravan, Camping & Holiday Parks BUCKLEGROVE CARAVAN & CAMPING PARK
Family run Park, nestling at the foot of the Mendip Hills.
Midway between Wells and Cheddar.
Luxury holiday caravans.
Free indoor heated swimming pool with small bar.
Excellent shower block; launderette; fully stocked shop; public telephone and childrens play area.
GETTING OUT & ABOUT
The County Council produces eight free comprehensive timetable booklets which cover the areas shown above.
They are available in Libraries, Tourist Information Centres and sub Post Offices throughout Somerset, or by post from the public transport section, County Hall, Taunton, Somerset TA1 4DY (please enclose a 7″ × 10″ SAE).
Many bus companies provide advantageous fare tickets especially for tourists.
ON YOUR BIKE
Cycling is a great way of getting around Somerset and exploring the countryside.
Bicycles can be hired from a variety of outlets and there are many excellent routes, including a 100 mile route around South Somerset.
Somerset Tourism is also creating cycling itineraries which will be available from Spring 1992.
Please ask at any Somerset Tourist Information Centre for details of these and other routes and for information on bicycle hire.
SOUTH SOMERSET
HONEY-COLOURED HILLS AND VILLAGES
Exquisite honey coloured stone villages, small market towns, a varied and beautiful landscape, and a fresh soothing Somerset air await you in South Somerset.
HOME OF THE ENGLISH COUNTRY GARDEN
From the famous Elizabethan Montacute House to Brympton D'Evercy there is a wealth of National Trust and privately owned country houses and gardens open to the public.
From Spring to Autumn, South Somerset is the place to enjoy the English country garden at its best.
ENJOY THE COUNTRYSIDE
Every bend in the road opens up new and varied landscapes.
Contrasts abound, from the undulating patchwork quilt of hills and vales of the south, east and west to the flat moors of the Somerset Levels in the north.
WALKING AND CYCLING
These beautiful landscapes can be enjoyed from an unrivalled footpath network from short walks to the popular 28 mile Leland Trail — all described in excellent walking guides.
The South Somerset Tourism and Marketing Unit has also created a 100 mile cycle route which encircles the District and makes an ideal two day excursion.
Bruton (inset Burton Pynsent)
Kingsbury Episopi
Ham Hill
SOUTH SOMERSET
HAMSTONE VILLAGES
Throughout South Somerset villages are built from a golden limestone called ‘Hamstone’ and, in the north, Blue Lias stone.
Memorable village scenes are created by these traditional building materials, often capped with a thatched roof.
The churches in the area are renowned for their lofty spires on the Levels and Moors and spectacularly rich carvings in some of the small market towns such as Crewkerne and Ilminster.
A carefully described church tour takes you around the most spectacular church architecture.
(Available from South Somerset Tourism and Marketing Unit.)
OUT AND ABOUT
There are so many things to see and do in a short stay.
A rich variety of attractions exist throughout the area; from the internationally famous Fleet Air Arm Museum at Yeovilton to the renowned Cricket St Thomas Wildlife Park near Chard.
The magnificent Montacute House and one of Europe's major motor museums at Sparkford complement a whole host of smaller, more rural and home-spun attractions, particularly in the fields of art and crafts.
SHORT BREAKS
South Somerset is the ideal short break destination with easy accessibility from the north via the M5 and from London and the Home Counties via the A303 and M3.
A range of accommodation is available — from five star hotels through to working farms as well as bed and breakfast accommodation — all of which offer a traditional Somerset welcome and excellent value.
Attractions
Shopping, Eating & Drinking
THE RED HOUSE INN
Detached fully licensed eating house with carvery.
Ample Car Park.
Skittle Alley.
Beer Garden and Play Area.
Room available for all types of functions.
Rural Setting.
Langport
Bow Bridge, Langport
Sparkford
Castle Cary
PACKAGES AND BREAKS
EDUCATIONAL BREAK DILLINGTON HOUSE
Surrounded by beautiful parkland Dillington offers a wide range of subjects and many training courses and conferences.
It is particularly noted for its excellent food and tranquil friendly atmosphere.
For a detailed course programme please contact the Booking Secretary.
Hotels, Guesthouses & Farms HILLARDS FARM
A delightful Grade 2 listed building of architectural and historical interest with a wealth of oak and elm panelled walls, beamed ceilings and large open fireplaces creating an intimate and homely atmosphere.
Furnished to a very high standard with the benefit of central heating.
Bedrooms with washbasin or ensuite facilities.
Brochure on request £17.50–£25 per person per night.
AA Selected.
Please mention the brochure when booking your holiday.
(And look out for the Somerset Companion Map Leaflet with vouchers to the value of £20 and over).
TWO NIGHTS BREAK SHRUBBERY HOTEL
Any two days to include full English breakfast, a gourmet dinner and executive accommodation.
The heart of South Somerset, ideal touring centre.
Additional night £40.
In the Short Break package children sharing accommodation free.
Swimming pool and terraced gardens.
Dogs welcome.
THE GEORGE HOTEL
15th Century thatched Inn.
2 bars, Inglenook fireplace.
Excellent Table d'Hote restaurant and bar food.
Centrally locally in rich touring area.
All rooms ensuite, TV, tea/coffee facilities, telephone.
Rates include full English breakfast, newspaper and VAT.
Special breaks all year.
Please send for our brochure.
SHRUBBERY HOTEL
A recently refurbished Victorian gentlemans residence.
Ashley Courtenay recommended.
Ideal for touring South Somerset.
Well recommended food.
2.5 acres of terraced lawns with 25 metre heated outdoor pool.
Ample car parking.
A ‘Consort’ hotel.
Special small group terms.
Also conference facilities.