

They might have been lovers.
In a small French restaurant off Sloane Square, the couple sat at a corner table, their faces lit by candlelight.
They talked in low voices, pausing when the waiter put food before them, as if whatever they had to say could not be shared, even by a discreet French boy with an imperfect grasp of English.
The understated beauty of her face was framed by the dark curls of her shoulder-length hair — looks which attracted covert glances from other men in the restaurant.
But there was something tense about the girl, almost haunted.
She smiled little and listened intently whenever the man, sober-suited and authoritative, spoke.
He seemed to be a reassuring, comforting presence.
An observer would guess that their conversation was troubled, intimate.
Maybe he was married.
Maybe she was pregnant.
Maybe they were just lovers.
But the conversation between Kelly Connor and  Nick Morley was not of matters of the heart, but of life, death and horses.
The call from Nick that afternoon had been well timed.
Kelly was still upset and dazed by the events of her first day back at work.
He had news of the investigation, he said.
They needed to talk.
Portman Square? she had asked, and he had laughed almost boyishly.
He thought she deserved better than that after all her troubles.
How about Au Pèdre de Nico at eight thirty?
‘Where on earth is that?’ she inquired.
He gave her directions and she agreed to meet him there.
Maybe it would do her good.
All her troubles.
What did Nick Morley know of her troubles?
A race lost, a father murdered, a career on the skids — they were no more than the opening scenes of a nightmare which was engulfing her.
Alone in the fiat, she had shuddered with something approaching fear.
What would her father have done under these circumstances?
With heaving stomach, Kelly had gone to the kitchen, tipped the burnt remains of her cat into a plastic bag and took it downstairs to bury it in the garden.
She was a Connor.
They — whoever they were — had underestimated her if they thought she could be cowed into submission by threats and violence.
It was at that moment that she had resolved to tell Nick Morley everything that had happened to her.
‘Who knows about this?’ he asked when Kelly haltingly told him of the latest threat to her.
‘I've taken the tape to the police, of course, and told them about my cat, but that's all.
I just thought that the Jockey Club should know too.
The  Templemans have had a few anonymous calls as well.’
‘Will you tell them?’
Kelly shook her head.
‘No, I've got hardly anything to ride as it is.
If they knew I was under that sort of pressure, they'd stop giving me rides altogether.
I have to sort it out myself.’
‘You're tougher than you look.’
Nick smiled.
‘I can see why you were less overjoyed by my news than I had anticipated.’
‘Of course I'm glad that the investigation has come up with nothing incriminating against me, but it's no surprise.
In a way I wish you had pursued it.’
‘What?’
Nick was used to the tunnel-visioned stubbornness of jockeys but it was difficult to square this cast-iron inner confidence with the slight features of the young girl sitting across the table from him.
‘You actually wanted to be hauled up in front of the stewards in Portman Square?’
‘Yes, I did,’ said Kelly, surprised that he hadn't grasped what she'd been saying.
She spoke with a new intensity.
‘Someone needed to stop Pendero winning at all costs.
Gould tried it on during the race.
Then there was the lead missing from a perfectly sound weight cloth.
Then my father was killed, there were threats against me, the Templemans.
The last thing I want is for the case to be closed.
An accident.
A misunderstanding.
What's that going to do to my reputation if Harry Short's accusing me of everything short of genocide?’
‘Everyone knows that Short's a loud mouth.
Ride a couple of winners.’
Nick sipped at his glass of white wine.
‘Ascot will soon be forgotten, believe me.’
‘Either that or I'll be dead.’
Nick shook his head and tried to lighten the conversation.
‘You're only in danger if you go around screaming ‘Murder!’ every time your father's name is mentioned.’
Kelly looked away.
Don't show it, she was thinking.
Don't show the pain, the loss, the anger.
Why was it everyone seemed to go for the easy way out?
If there was a boat to rock, she'd bloody well rock it.
In spite of herself, tears welled in her eyes.
‘I'm sorry,’ Nick muttered.
‘That was insensitive.
I just…’
He hesitated.
‘I suppose I just don't want to see you hurt.’
Kelly looked at him.
‘You're very kind,’ she said, and then added,’for a steward.’
‘I wasn't talking as a steward,’ he said softly.
There was silence at the table.
Not for the first time, Kelly felt an unmistakable tug of attraction towards him.
She had always sworn that her private life would take second place to her career until she had established herself, that she would never become involved with anyone remotely connected with racing, and fortunately temptation had rarely come her way.
But despite her preoccuptionwith everything else, something about the man sitting opposite made her resolutions waver.
‘Isn't this a touch irregular?’ she said.
‘Steward enjoying candlelit dinner with apprentice?
What would Harry Short say?’
‘Somehow,’ Nick smiled, ‘I can't see Harry spending a night out at Au Père de Nico.
Maybe it is a little unusual.’
He paused.
‘But then so are you.’
Kelly looked away quickly.
The thing she needed  least in the world at this moment was to fall in love with a steward.
In a deliberately uncouth way, she drank back the rest of her wine.
‘I bet you say that to all the jockeys.’
The next morning, Kelly heard from her father.
There, among the junk mail and bills delivered while she had been riding out first lot, was an envelope written in a careful, neat hand.
It contained a note from Dermot Kinane, an ex-jockey who had been a close friend of the family in Ireland.
Puzzled, for Dermot had never been a great correspondent, Kelly read:
Dear Kelly,
I hope you are well, and that you had a good journey home.
There was something I didn't tell you at your father's funeral because it seemed the wrong time, but two days after he died, I received a letter from him.
It said that he had a big problem he didn't want to bother me with, but that if anything happened to him, I was to pass on this envelope to you.
He said it was very important.
My thoughts are with you at this painful time, Kelly.
Please remember that, if you ever need any help, your old friend Dermot is always here.
The Lord be with you.
Your loving Dermot
Attached to the letter was a small blue envelope, marked ‘KELLY CONNOR’.
In the corner, as if added as an afterthought, were the words ‘Very  Confidential’.
Sitting alone at her kitchen table, Kelly read the last words ever written by her father.
My Darling Girl,
I only hope that you will never have to read this letter — not because my life is worth anything to me but because it breaks my heart to think of you alone in a world which I have found to be so harsh and unforgiving.
I'm writing this on the morning of your ride at Ascot on Pendero.
I hope and pray that you will win — God willing, you will because you have all the ability in the world — but I have discovered over the last few days that there are people prepared to go to great lengths to stop you.
I'm told it's nothing personal (it's never anything personal in racing — a fellow who had just put me through the wing at Naas visited me in hospital to tell me it was nothing personal), but the end result is the same.
A horse which should win, doesn't.
During the week there had been a number of calls to the flat.
If it was you who answered the telephone, they hung up but when you were away riding they spoke to me.
They told me that, if Pendero won at Ascot, you were finished as a jockey.
Come second, third, last and things would go your way from then on.
We have friends in high places, they said.
There were also threats to me personally — which didn't worry me.
I've been threatened before and doubtless will be again!
Kelly felt the tears fill her eyes as she heard her father's voice speaking through the words on the page.
So why didn't I tell you?
God forgive me, I nearly did.
The first time's always easy.
It's just a race, after all — if you're any good, you can wave your arms about while pulling a horse's back teeth out and keep yourself out of the stewards' room.
Why not keep in with the people who really run racing, the villains?
I know the argument well because I was once convinced by it.
But then they come back.
It's another race, the stakes are higher and this time you're being watched more closely by the authorities.
Too late you realize that there's no going back.
They've got you.
In this war, there's no neutral territory.
You're either with the enemy or you're not.
I went over to the enemy and destroyed my life and that of your dear mother, God rest her soul.
On the day she died, I vowed that whatever happened, I would keep you away from them.
I hoped you would stay away from racing but it was in your blood.
As soon as I saw you riding, I knew you'd make it — so long as they didn't get to you.
So I lied to them.
I told them I'd squared it with you.
They wanted to talk to you direct, but I said that would frighten you off.
Trust me, I said and they did.
This morning I heard from them again.
They were double-checking everything was still in  order.
They threatened me once more, only this time they sounded much more serious.
It occurred to me that this was not some two-bit gambling ring.
This was big.
They have powerful contacts, I know.
I feared for you, my darling girl.
I began to have doubts as to whether I had been right not to tell you what was going on.
The coward in me hopes that Pendero gets beaten in an honest race this afternoon.
But if he wins, it's possible that something may happen to me.
If it does, I hope and pray that they will stop there and leave you alone, at least for the time being.
The purpose of this letter is to explain what happened.
I did what I thought was right for the most precious thing in the world to me.
Remember, always do your best, don't let them hook you, however tempting the bait.
Remember what happened to me because I was weak.
Do it for your future, for the Connor name, for me.
I love you,
Dad
When Kelly had finished reading, she just sat and cried, a horrible empty feeling inside her.
She didn't know if the tears were for herself or her father.
After a while she got up and walked slowly from the kitchen into the bedroom.
She pulled from under the bed a box containing photographs and cuttings from happier days.
Frank Connor jumping the last on his way to a win in the Gold Cup.
Frank Connor grinning, mudspattered, in the winners' enclosure.
frank Connor, profiled in the Irish Times , relaxing at home with his wife Mary and his five-year-old daughter Kelly.
The Connor name.
There was a new coldness in Kelly's heart.
Deep in thought, she put her fathers letter at the bottom of the box and pushed it back under the bed.
It was time for second lot.
‘Change of plan,’ Peter, the head lad, shouted out to Kelly as she crossed the yard with her tack.
‘You're to ride Shine On for a spot of work.’
‘Work?’
Kelly expressed surprise.
‘I thought he was having an easy day, today.’
Peter nodded in the direction of the Templemans' house, where a silver Lamborghini was parked.
‘Apparently we have someone to impress.’
Kelly shrugged.
It was unlike Bill to change his training plans for anyone.
Ten minutes later, the question in her mind was answered.
As she brought Shine On out of his box, Bill and Winnie approached from across the yard.
With them was a tall, dark-skinned man in an expensive suit that looked oddly out of place among the wheelbarrows and pitchforks of a small stable.
‘Hold him there for a second, Kelly,’ said Bill.
Kelly noticed that, while the trainer and his wife were looking proudly at their horse, the stranger appeared to be more interested in her.
‘Please introduce me,’ he said quietly.
‘Of course.’
Bill concealed his disappointment that the man had failed to comment on the appearance of  the pride of the yard.
‘Kelly Connor.
This is Fayoud al Hassan.’
The man walked forward and fixed Kelly with his dark eyes.
His handshake was like a caress.
Kelly nodded with a brisk, businesslike ‘How do you do, sir.’
‘Mr Hassan is Shine On's new owner,’ said Bill.
Kelly's eyes widened.
She felt like swearing but instead said, ‘You're a very lucky man, Mr Hassan, he's a lovely horse.’
He was also the one good horse Kelly had been certain to ride — while Bill owned him.
But not even the news that the most promising horse in the yard had been sold to Ibn Fayoud, nor the rumour that the rest of the young Arab's horses would also be coming to the yard, could distract Kelly from thoughts of her father's letter.
In the string, taking Shine On for a showpiece half-speed over five furlongs, riding home, her mind was on the implications of his message.
Racecourse rumour, as reported by Annie, had it that there had been a big gamble on Pendero, that a professional gambler stood to gain a fortune if he won.
It was now obvious that the horse was a stayer and yet Harry Short's stable jockey had recently ridden him as if his best distance was six furlongs, holding him up for a late run.
Although Pendero had finished strongly at Ascot, that was because it had been a truly run race and the leaders had finished tired.
Over a mile, the only sensible way to ride Pendero was to use his stamina, not hold him up.
Short had been saving him for the Ascot race.
Kelly was sure of it.
Then why did he put her up at Ascot rather than one of the top jockeys?
Her seven-pound claim was one possible reason; another was that, with an apprentice riding him, Pendero's odds in the market would lengthen.
Then Kelly remembered Short's behaviour after the race.
He had fastened on to the fact that she was a Connor, played on memories of her father's reputation for throwing races.
It was a cheap shot but an effective one.
Racing people believed in blood-lines.
Even if she were finally cleared by Nick Morley's investigation, she would remain guilty by association in the eyes of many racecourse insiders.
In other words, when the race was lost in the weighing room, she was an obvious scapegoat.
Was it possible that Short was part of the conspiracy, that he stood to gain from his own horse being beaten?
It seemed unlikely.
Before the race he had been tense, after it his fury had seemed spontaneous and genuine.
A crook and a bastard Short might be, but it would be surprising if he were that good an actor.
His deviousness and dishonesty were in the front window for all to see.
Yet whatever went on in that race, Kelly was certain that Short was a part of it.
She would have to speak to him.
She didn't relish the prospect.
Assuming that Short had been playing it straight, then there remained the question of who stood to lose if Pendero won.
That there was a conspiracy Kelly had no doubt.
Unfortunately she only knew two bit-part players in the plot.
The chance of Damien Gould helping her seemed unlikely in the extreme, unless she could apply pressure on him.
Someone somewhere must know what skeletons he had hidden in his  locker.
The idea of employing a spot of judicious blackmail did not appeal to her but what was the alternative?
There was little point in appealing to his better nature when he clearly didn't have one.
A more likely lead was Giles Williams, the journalist.
It had been no coincidence that she had been called to the phone in the weighing room.
She doubted if Williams were a major player — even on the telephone, he sounded a loser — but at least he might tell her who had put him up to it.
That would be a start.
Trust no one, her father had said.
But there was little chance of discovering who had killed him without help.
Kelly decided that she had to talk to Annie, even if there was a risk that she would tell her husband.
Bill would have a fit if he knew his apprentice was turning supersleuth.
She also had to tell Nick.
He had made her promise to keep him in touch with developments.
Being part of the racing establishment, he could be helpful to her, and he had seemed to understand why she needed to pursue this, and it wouldn't be that painful to see him again.
Far from it.
Kelly smiled.
‘Thinking of your next winner?’ one of the lads interrupted her reverie as the string turned back to the stable.
‘Something like that,’ said Kelly, and then returned to her thoughts.
Her first job would be to show the letter to the police.
Success as a jockey is not just a question of riding winners.
Sometimes you have to be able to handle the phone as well as you handle horses.
No one in racing is above ringing round for spare rides; one great jump  jockey was nicknamed ‘Ting-a-Ling’ because of his speed and skill in contacting trainers whose jockeys were injured or couldn't do the weight or were simply out of favour.
Kelly understood this and played the game as well as anyone.
When it really mattered, Kelly could give great phone.
But this afternoon she wasn't looking for spare rides.
She had been to see the inspector in charge of her father's murder case.
He hadn't held out much hope, although he had agreed that the letter seemed to disprove the theory about a break-in that had gone wrong.
Kelly had driven straight home and embarked on her own investigation.
First of all, she rang round her contacts in journalism.
Unsurprisingly, none of them had heard of Giles Williams, which was clearly a false name, and Kelly's description of his telephone manner — a slurred, gin-sodden voice with a wheedling insincere tone to it — covered half of what used to be known as Fleet Street.
It was finally Bob Morrow, one of the older racing correspondents on the Daily Telegraph , who came up with a lead.
‘That's not his name,’ he said.
‘And he's not really a journo, more a jumped-up PR man.
Now —’ There was a noisy inhalation of smoke, followed by a hacking cough ‘— what the hell was his name?’
‘How d'you know it's ‘Giles Williams’?'
‘There used to be a Giles Williams column in the Lifemany years ago.
Gossip, jokes, social titbits.
This man goes racing every day.
He gambles, swears a lot, drinks too much, falls over.’
‘So he is a journalist.’
Morrow laughed, bringing on another attack of smoker's cough.
‘Now, now,’ he said, when he had recovered.
‘We're not all like that.
No, the man gave up writing years ago.
There was some sort of scandal.’
‘What does he do now?’
‘Professional hanger-on.
Part-time stringer.
Full-time piss-artist.
He sells the odd bonk ‘n’ tell story to the tabloids — Page Three Girl in Raunchy Romps with Royal Romeo, that sort of thing.
He's just your basic, traditional smut-peddler really.
Tell you what, I'll ask around and ring you back.’
Kelly thanked him.
‘Any tips?’
‘Yes, Bob,’ she said.
‘Cut down to twenty a day.’
‘Where's that running then?’
With a wheezy laugh, the journalist hung up.
Harry Short, Damien Gould.
Kelly was tapping the pad in front of her, considering which of these unlikely leads to follow up, when the phone rang.
It was Bill.
‘Tomorrow evening, at Kempton.
Boardwalk runs in the seller.
All right?’
‘You mean I'm riding him?’
Kelly was unable to conceal her surprise.
Ascot was barely a week past and all the indications had been that her rehabilitation as a jockey would be a matter of weeks not days.
‘Why, did you have other plans?’
Bill snapped.
‘You'll just have to cancel him, won't you?’
‘No, it's just, after last week, I thought that…’
‘Don't be bloody stupid.
I do have one or two owners who do what they're told.
You've got eight  stone three with the claim.
I think he'll win.
I'll see you in the morning.’
He hung up.
It hadn't been difficult for Bill to accede to his wife's nagging to give the girl a break.
Maybe he was biased, but as far as he was concerned, she was the best claimer in the country.
Kelly put the phone down and skipped around the room.
It was the best she'd felt since Ascot.
Bill had come up trumps.
Abrupt, unsmiling, laconic, he'd kept faith.
She grabbed the copy of Racing Post that was on the table.
Boardwalk was no flying machine, a big clumsy four-year-old who had yet to win a race, but none of the opposition had any form.
Best of all, one of them — a horse with a line of duck's eggs beside its inappropriate name of Dead Lucky — was being ridden by Damien Gould.
She' d get a chance to talk to him about Ascot.
The sound of the telephone crashed into her thoughts.
A wheezing cough at the other end of the line told Kelly that it was Bob Morrow.
‘Quentin St John Broom-Parker.
A man as phony as his name.
That's your Giles Williams.’
‘Have you got a number?’
‘No, but you'll find him in the bar at the nearest race meeting to London.
Big fellow with a Jimmy Edwards tash and a red face, swaying slightly as he bores all around him with a pack of lies about his past.
When there's no racing nearby, you'll find him in the Garrick Club.’
Kelly glanced at the racing paper she was holding.
‘It's only Pontefract today,’ she said.
‘If I come down to London now, do you reckon he'll be at the Garrick?’
‘He'll have been there since lunchtime like as not.
Phone and see.
If he is there, by the time you arrive he'll be nice and mellow.’
‘Bob, you're a brick,’ said Kelly.
‘I owe you one.’
Another attack of coughing forced Kelly to hold the receiver away from her ear.
‘I'm too old for it now, but thanks for the thought,’ Morrow eventually managed.
‘By the way, you have to be a member to get in the Garrick.
Kelly grinned to herself.
‘Crap,’ she said.
The gentleman who answered the phone at the Garrick confirmed that Broom-Parker was indeed there.
So Kelly changed to go, but before leaving for London, she wrote a brief letter to Dermot Kinane.
My dear Dermot,
I've just got your letter and Dad's note to me.
It meant a lot and I'm very grateful you sent it on to me.
Thanks for your kind offer of help.
I'm beginning to put my life together again now and I'm concentrating on my riding to help me get through.
I hope to come to Ireland at the end of the season and I will, of course, come and see you.
I miss you and all my friends there.
All my love,
Kelly
Dear Dermot.
Always the thoughtful, worried one.
There was no need to get him involved in this.
With her thoughts on another, simpler life back in  the old country, Kelly put the letter in an envelope, picked up her coat and left for London.
Bennett had been doorman at the Garrick Club for twenty-three years and had developed a way with unpleasantness.
Sometimes tourists wandered in off Longacre and looked about the hall of this famous British institution before he ushered them out.
Or members imbibed a little too enthusiastically and had to be helped into a taxi.
More often, they simply died; the after-dinner heart attack while slumbering in one of the club's deep leather chairs was a popular way of moving on to the great gentleman's club in the sky.
There were low points, of course.
first they let journalists in, then literary agents; it would be women members next.
Bennett was thankful that retirement was only two years away.
These days, everything was changing, even the Garrick Club.
Then a young woman — dark, quite a looker if you liked that sort of thing but a bit too full of herself for Bennett's liking — walked into the club and announced that she was the dinner guest of Sir Robin Day, he could only treat her to his coldly disapproving smile and direct her to the ladies' bar.
It was the sort of thing that happened these days.
How was he to know that she was up to some sort of mischief?
Kelly walked up the steps into the hall of the Garrick towards the wide staircase which led up to the bar, then hesitated.
In front of an open fireplace in the hall, a couple of large leather armchairs were occupied by two men in dark suits.
One was reading a newspaper, the other was fast asleep, a rumbling  snore like a low-flying aircraft emanating from him.
He had a prominent handlebar moustache and a high colour to his cheeks.
Choosing a chair with its back to the front door and Bennett's look-out post, Kelly sat herself down.
It took a moment for the full enormity of what was happening to filter through to the brandy-drenched consciousness of the member reading The Times .
Then he lowered his paper with the look of man whose most precious shrine is being desecrated before his eyes.
‘This part of the club is for members only, he said in a voice of strangulated distaste.
‘It's not open to —’
‘Women?’
Kelly smiled.
‘Don't worry, I won't be here long.’
At the sound of a female voice, the eyes of the other man snapped open.
‘Good God,’ he said.
‘No, Kelly Connor.
Giles Williams, I believe.
Or do you prefer the name Quentin St John Broom-Parker?’
Kelly stood up, walked slowly towards Broom-Parker and knelt before his chair like a child about to be told a fireside story.
As Broom-Parker attempted to struggle to his feet, she leant forward and tweaked both ends of his moustache.
‘I say ,’ the Times reader stood up and dithered while Kelly took a firmer hold of Broom-Parker's bristling moustache.
‘Be quiet,’ she said over her shoulder.
Muttering, ‘Where's Bennett, for God's sake?’ the man hurried off.
Kelly pulled Broom-Parker's face towards hers and  looked deeply into his loser's eyes.
His breath stank of drink.
‘Listen,’ she said.
‘We've spoken on the telephone, remember?’
The colour had now left Quentin Broom-Parker's face.
To nod would have been too painful, but he closed his eyes in confirmation.
‘I lost the race because of you.’
Kelly tugged at the moustache.
‘That doesn't matter now.
But someone was murdered the same day and that does matter.
I think the same people were involved.
Follow me?’
A knot of dark-suited Garrick members had gathered in the hall and were muttering anxiously.
Who was this madwoman?
Broom-Parker's mistress?
He always was a game old dog.
Doesn't look so clever now, though.
Broom-Parker's eyes swivelled beseechingly towards his friends.
Kelly tugged again.
‘Follow me?’
A blink of the eyes.
‘Now I need to know who paid you or blackmailed you to call me in the weighing room.’
‘Right, young lady.’
Bennett stood behind her.
‘Leave go of this gentleman or I will have no alternative but to use force on you.’
‘Throw me out,’ said Kelly without taking her eyes off Broom-Parker, ‘and the whiskers come too.
This won't take more than a moment.’
Bennett hesitated.
Nothing in his many years' service had prepared him for this sort of situation.
‘I need to know,’ repeated Kelly.
‘I can't tell you,’ squirmed Broom-Parker painfully.
‘It's more than my life's worth.’
Kelly stared at the pathetic figure for a moment and then let him go.
‘OK, I'm going straight to the police.’
With that, Kelly got up, brushed past Bennett and walked calmly out.
The fact that she'd already told the police didn't matter.
She'd just have to think of something else.
Margaret Stanhope worshipped her employer, Jack Butler.
She knew that there were murky corners to his business affairs, that for a suave good-looking man, he had one or two unfortunate characteristics, like a ferocious temper.
And, of course, she knew that Jack's private life was something of a carnival.
She knew all that because, as Jack's private assistant, she organized him: his TV appearances, his meetings with London's shadier characters, his payments for some mucky chore or other, his alibis to the wife (who could blame him, married to that bimbo?), his hotel rooms.
Not that she minded Jack playing around because she knew that one day he would be hers.
She may have been three years older than he was, pushing forty and not quite as pert as the sort of girl he favoured at this precise moment, but one day Jack would grow up, look for a real woman to take care of him, and there she'd be, waiting and ready.
Telephone cupped under his left ear, Jack leant back in his chair, put his feet on the desk, almost kicking his assistant as he did it, and said, ‘Well, that's veryinconvenient.’
He winked at Margaret as the person at the other end of the line spluttered some apology or other.
Yes, she was ready.
Sometimes a wink kept her in  fantasies for weeks.
Once or twice, Jack had casually goosed her as she reached for a file.
She had nearly melted away on the spot.
He hung up and stared out of the window, over the roofs of Victoria.
‘Right,’ he said finally.
‘I need to see Ibn Fayoud again.
Tell Johnny and Den I have another job for them.
And it looks like I'm going to have to attend to that jockey girl.’
‘Attend, Jack?’
Margaret Stanhope smiled.
‘D'you mean —’
‘I mean attend,’ Jack snapped.
‘I want you to do some research on her.
Maybe she's not so perfect.
Talk to the usual contacts.
Find out if she's ever thrown a race.
Past boy friends who could use a bit of spare cash.
Any relevant details from her private life.
You know the sort of thing.’
‘Filth.’
‘Too right, darling.’
Jack was dialling another number.
He glanced up, as if surprised she was still there.
‘Well, get on with it then.’
Margaret stood up, blushing.
‘Yes, Jack,’ she said.
An evening meeting on a Tuesday at Kempton is not one of racing's most glamorous occasions.
There are horses, trainers, lads, jockeys, bookmakers and gamblers but the good-hearted enthusiast, the average racegoer, is hardly in evidence.
Sometimes it's like a West End performance with all the regulars in place, but no audience.
Kelly Connor didn't care.
She was back in the weighing room again after the nightmare of Ascot.
She had much on her mind.
To her surprise Broom-Parker had phoned shortly after she'd returned home, pleading with her not to mention his name to the police.
He had arranged to meet her after racing in the White Lion at Feltham.
But her first, most immediate priority was to win again, to show racing's sceptics that she was not a loser, nor bent, but simply a good, strong apprentice on her way to the top.
A week had passed without the offer of one single outside ride; she badly needed a winner.
The one and a half mile John Sturgeon Selling Plate, the second to last race of the evening, was hardly the stuff of headlines.
Between them the eight runners had won three races; they were racing's cannon fodder.
Some of them would be put over hurdles next season, perhaps one might be sold to Barbados or Abu Dhabi in the forlorn hope that they could win something there, but most of them were racing in the shadow of the knacker's yard.
Boardwalk was not a joy to ride, Kelly reflected as the horse made its lumbering way down to the start.
Genuine enough, he pulled your arms out for half the race until you asked him to quicken, when you found there was nothing in the tank.
It was only because he belonged to a good-hearted owner, Mrs Prentice, the wife of a local solicitor, that Bill had persevered with him.
Maybe one day, Boardwalk would pick up a bad race — like the John Sturgeon Selling Plate at Kempton.
Even if he did win, the owner would buy him in after the race, so that Boardwalk would have paid back a small fraction of his training costs.
And Mrs Prentice's idea of a gamble was £10 each way.
Tonight was not about money, but about winning, fun, maybe a passing mention in the morning's racing press.
The market, if the desultory interest shown in the Silver Ring could be described as such, had made Boardwalk second favourite to a horse called Bite the Bullet.
Also in the betting was Dead Lucky, whose jockey was Damien Gould.
‘All right, sexy?’
Kelly had shouted out to Gould as she cantered past him, almost brushing his boot, on  the way to post.
Gould, his face expressionless as a mask, had pretended not to hear.
He hadn't expected to see the girl on a racecourse so soon after Ascot.
She was riding with a score to settle.
That was good.
Bill's instructions to her had been simple.
Keep in touch with the leaders, aim to hit the front a furlong out, stay out of trouble.
It was that last remark that echoed in Kelly's mind as Boardwalk was loaded into the stalls.
The last thing she needed was to be up in front of the stewards again.
Forget Ascot, she told herself, ride your race, but stay out of trouble.
Although Boardwalk was drawn on the inside, Kelly hoped to get a good enough break to be able to settle third or fourth.
Within seconds of the stalls going up, she realized that this would be a problem.
Boardwalk bounded along with more enthusiasm than grace at the head of the second group while two horses, including the favourite, made the running some three lengths clear of her.
Two and a half furlongs from home, Kelly couldn't believe it, she was still riding with a double handful.
But she knew Boardwalk well enough not to be fooled.
He was one-paced and, even at this lowly level, there were likely to be one or two horses behind her with a touch of finishing speed.
Ahead of her, Bite the Bullet's jockey was hard at work while the horse on his outside was clearly beaten.
Someone was half a length behind her on her outside but Kelly sensed that she had more in hand than he did.
She glanced back to see Damien Gould.
This time he wasn't smiling.
In any other race, at any other time, Kelly would have acted instinctively.
and eased Boardwalk  away from the rails so as to take the leader in the final furlong.
But seeing Damien made her lose concentration and before she knew what was happening she found herself boxed in yet again.
Dead Lucky was struggling to stay in touch, but he was still there nonetheless, and if she just pushed her way out, Damien could easily make a show of snatching up.
For vital seconds, Kelly hesitated.
Then she saw that Bite the Bullet, now under heavy pressure, was drifting away from the rails.
The gap had barely begun to appear before Kelly was driving Boardwalk through, but he seemed to take for ever to pick up speed.
Bite the Bullet continued to drift left-handed as the winning post raced towards them.
Kelly was pushing and kicking for all she was worth, with her stick working in her left hand.
She'd already hit Boardwalk twice and in desperation gave him a couple more, but it was like living one of those nightmares where you can never quite reach what you're trying to catch.
The two of them flashed by the post.
There would be a photograph, but she knew that she had failed to get up.
With despair in her heart, she pulled up, cursing herself.
She knew that she should have won and so would everyone else.
She glanced across at Damien who shook his head with eloquent disgust, as if to say, ‘Women jockeys!’
Of course, they all knew.
The lad who led her in, the irate punter who looked up at her with contempt and muttered, ‘You're useless’, Bill, who made little effort to conceal his anger as she unsaddled Boardwalk.
Only the owner was excluded from the common  knowledge at Kempton that day: that her horse had been wrestled into second place by an apprentice who couldn't anticipate the obvious.
Mrs Prentice fussed about Boardwalk and congratulated its jockey.
Kelly smiled politely and went to weigh in.
The last hour of the meeting passed in a haze of disappointment.
Kelly had no more rides on whom she could expunge the memory of that first race.
She hated losing at the best of times but this was the worst.
A misjudged race, a wrong decision, a bad run — they happened to everyone.
Kelly tried to put the self-doubt from her mind.
There was nobody more certain to lose a race than a jockey with no self-confidence.
Gloomily, she remembered the smirk on Gould's face, the surprise and disappointment on Annie's.
It was almost more painful than being labelled a cheat.
She could imagine the gossip in the bar.
Sad about that Kelly Connor.
Nice little rider, but no good when the chips are down.
‘Hey, come on, it's only a seller at Kempton.’
Fayoud's
Cy McCray was a tough little American jockey who had settled in Britain and was now retained by the Ian Gardem stable.
Unlike many of the top jockeys, he found time to talk to Kelly without giving her the immediate impression that he wanted to sleep with her, although if his reputation was only half true then he did.
As Kelly walked thoughtfully towards the car park after the last race, Cy joined her.
‘A race is a race, Cy,’ she said.
‘I blew it.’
‘Hey, bollocks, y'hear?’
There was something endearing about the way McCray adapted English slang into his American accent.
‘Happens to us all.
You'll show 'em on your next ride.’
‘Yes, I suppose so,’ Kelly muttered, wondering when that next ride would be.
Bill's loyalty to his apprentice had been ill rewarded this evening and no trainer could afford to be sentimental.
She glanced up to see a familiar trim figure strolling languidly out of the entrance to the Members' Enclosure.
It was Ibn Fayoud.
With a shudder, Kelly remembered their last meeting, his handshake.
‘Cy, do me favour,’ she said quietly.
‘Keep walking with me to my car.
I have an owner to avoid.’
‘I know the feeling.’
McCray smiled, looking in Ibn direction.
‘Old Ib, eh?
You don't fancy joining his harem.’
‘Nope.’
‘It's the first time I've seen him without all his hangers-on,’ Cy commented.
‘I guess he must be here just to see his favourite apprentice.’
Ibn Fayoud had stopped by a Jaguar XJS.
The window on the driver's side was lowered to reveal the unmistakable face of Jack Butler.
‘On the other hand, maybe not,’ said Kelly, watching as the two men conversed.
She had never met Jack Butler but she had seen him racing, and on television of course.
In spite of herself, she had to admit that he had a sort of rough charm.
‘Talk about the odd couple,’ Cy McCray was saying.
‘I thought those two were enemies.’
‘Really?’
Kelly half listened as Ibn Fayoud climbed into the passenger seat.
The Jaguar pulled out towards where she was standing with Cy McCray.
‘Someone was saying Ib owes Butler a million-odd quid.
I wouldn't fancy owing him two bob.’
The car approached them and Kelly could see the two men talking animatedly.
‘They seem quite friendly now,’ she said.
At that moment, Ibn Fayoud looked across at her.
As she nodded politely, he looked away.
It was as if she didn't exist.
‘Looks like you're off the hook there,’ said Cy McCray.
Kelly got in her car and headed east towards Feltham.
She'd arranged to meet Broom-Parker at nine thirty.
As she reached the outskirts of the town she stopped to ask the way, and then discovered that the traffic on the road past the White Lion was being diverted because of an accident.
Kelly parked in a side street and walked.
It must have been quite a crash.
As she approached, she could see three blue lights flashing in the gathering gloom.
A group of spectators had gathered like vultures on the pavement.
Kelly made her way through the crowd, vaguely aware of the chatter of people whose dull lives had briefly been made more exciting by another's misfortune.
It was when she heard the phrase ‘hit-and-run job’ that she glanced into the road.
Behind a police car, which was parked across the road to stop the traffic, an ambulance man was crouching over a body.
There was something familiar about the checked suit, lit up by the flashing blue light.
She walked into the road.
‘Back, please.’
A policeman held out his arms as if heading off a loose horse.
‘There's nothing you can do for him, dear.
He's had it.’
For a moment, she caught a glimpse of the victim's face.
It had been bloodied and battered by the impact of the car but, curiously, its handlebar moustache looked as trim and correct in death as it had in life.
Turning away, Kelly saw some loose change in the gutter where the car had made contact with its target.
There was also a piece of paper.
Kelly picked it up.
It was a betting-slip, marked ‘REG BUTLER, Turf Accountants’.
Her instinct was to drive — to get in the car, go home, and be safe — resume the life of an apprentice who wanted to be champion jockey.
But, with a growing sense of foreboding, she knew she couldn't do that.
Broom-Parker had played no more than a small part in the plot to make sure Pendero was beaten, she was certain of that.
He was too much of a loser to have been anything more than a hired hand.
For reasons of guilt, greed or fear, he had agreed to talk to her.
And now he was dead.
Pawn, stool pigeon, nobody — it made no difference to these people.
To be worth two murders in eight days, Ascot had to be more than a mere gambling scam.
Turning away would be playing the game their way.
She remembered the words in her father's letter:Don't let them hook you, however tempting the bait .
Right now the bait was not money or easy winners, just the chance to earn a living by riding horses in races without fearing for her life.
But the information she already had marked her out as a target.
The men who had killed her father and now Broom-Parker could presumably have something similar planned for her.
She'd better tell the police in  Newmarket and also Nick Morley and his Jockey Club security people.
Kelly asked the policeman what had happened.
Apparently the man, whose body was now on its way to the city mortuary, was drunk.
According to the barman in the White Lion, he had been putting away double scotches when he received a telephone call at the bar.
Unsteadily, he had made his way out of the door, on to the street — and under the speeding wheels of a hit-and-run driver.
The sports car had hardly braked.
It had seemed to slow down briefly after the impact, as if the driver was considering whether to stop or not, and then had accelerated off into the night.
Kids, probably — joy-riding was a popular pastime among the city's bored teenagers.
Our redfaced friend, said the policeman, chose the wrong time in the wrong town to go for a drunken walkabout in the road.
Wearily, Kelly made her way back to her car, drove to the nearest hotel and booked a room.
She would not be going home tonight.
She rang the Templemans' number.
They would still be driving home, so she could leave a message on the answering machine.
That would make it easier.
‘This is Kelly here,’ she said, trying to make her voice sound as calm and normal as possible.
‘I'm still in London.
I have to go up north tomorrow on a family matter.
It's a bit too complicated to explain right now but it's really unavoidable so I won't be able to ride out tomorrow.
I'll be back for Thursday, though.
Hope that's all right.
‘Bye.’
She hung up.
If there was one person she hated  lying to, it was Bill.
He was one of the few genuinely honest men in racing.
He would curse when he heard the message, even though tomorrow the string would be doing road work and she was not needed.
Annie would be suspicious about that ‘family matter’.
She would worry that Kelly was becoming involved in the sleazy aftermath of her father's death.
Kelly switched on the television and stared blankly at the screen as some mindless cops and robbers show unfolded.
At the back of her mind, it occurred to her how different real crime was from the glamorous violence portrayed on the screen.
Reality wasn't the wailing siren, the squealing tyres of the cop car, the cry of ‘Police, freeze!’ in the night; reality was the quiet desperation and nauseous fear of ordinary lives caught up, often unwillingly, in a web of deception, greed and violence.
Pointless and destructive.
She sighed and turned the television off.
Going up north tomorrow.
At least that part was true.
Visitors to Harry Short's yard in Blaworth, which was situated some five miles from the maisonette in Doncaster where he was born, were often taken aback, shocked even, by what they found.
Despite the size of the stables and the fact that he belonged to the world of flat-racing where appearances count for something, Short had made no compromises.
The yard was squalid and run down, the lads slouched about the place resentfully, the tack was old and dirty with repair patches showing on almost every item of leather.
The only things that looked good were the horses, whose coats shone under their shabby exercise  sheets.
At the end of the day, Kelly thought to herself, I suppose it's them that matter.
It was said that Harry Short's great strength was that he had never tried to imitate smarter trainers, that he played by his rules, was his own man, but even this was flattering him.
The idea of smartening up had simply never occurred to him; the appearance of his training establishment was how all yards should look.
In fact, for all he knew — which wasn't much, since he never visited other trainers — this was how they did took.
The only difference was that he trained more winners than most of them did.
First lot was making its way lazily along a path some fifty yards from the road where Kelly had parked her car.
She was not the first person to wonder about the secret of Harry Short's success.
If anyone else ran a yard of sixty flat-race horses like he did, they would have been out of business years ago.
Yet he just went from strength to strength.
It was true that his horses tended to have brief careers.
The idea of giving a backward horse time, of not over-racing his less tough charges, of giving the vet the benefit of the doubt when he said a leg was liable to break down on hard ground — these were alien concepts to Harry Short.
Horses were there to earn their living, or rather his living.
If they didn't run fast enough, or weren't tough enough, then there were always others.
They were the means of producing cash, no more and no less.
As Kelly stood watching the string, her hands sunk deep into her windcheater pockets, Harry Short's Mercedes made its way along the gallops between the  path and the road.
Be glanced towards Kelly and slowed down for a moment before speeding onwards.
He didn't like people watching his horses work from the road but this was only a woman, probably some jumped-up point-to-point type looking for training tips.
Kelly glanced at her car clock.
It was time to make her entrance.
‘That's very strange.’
A woman in her fifties, with a scarf holding a shock of grey hair, stood on the doorstep of Harry Short's house.
‘He never mentioned visitors.’
‘Well, isn't that odd?’
Kelly shook her head.
‘It was definitely today.
Come up to ride Pendero second lot, he said.
I hope he hasn't forgotten — I've driven all the way from Newmarket.
Never mind, I'll wait for him in the car.’
‘By, you will not,’ said the woman, opening the front door.
‘You'll come in here and have a cup of tea till his lordship gets back.
It's typical of him to forget to tell me he's entertaining.
Follow me, love, don't mind the mess in the hall.’
Kelly picked her way through saddles, blankets, old copies of Sporting Life , reflecting that Short's domestic arrangements made his yard looked positively pristine.
She was on her second cup of tea when Harry blundered into the house like some evil giant out of a fairy story.
He had actually slumped down at the breakfast table before he became aware of Kelly's presence.
When he did, his eyes narrowed and for a moment Kelly thought he was going to bound across the room and hit her.
‘What the bloody hell are you doing here?’ he said in a dangerous, quiet voice.
No one entered Harry Short's house without an invitation and to find Kelly Connor of all people sitting across the breakfast table was like a practical joke in very poor taste.
Kelly sat in silence and smiled.
An odd rumbling sound emanated from Short before, looking towards the door, he snapped, ‘Betty!’
‘It's not your wife's fault,’ said Kelly quickly.
‘I lied to her to get in because I needed to talk to you about your big gamble at Ascot.’
Harry got up as if to throw her out.
Kelly went on, ‘I've discovered some things which might interest you.’
In spite of himself, Harry was curious and he sat down again.
It must be important for her to have driven all the way up north and bluff her way into his house.
He glanced up at her almost respectfully as he poured himself some tea.
If she had the nerve, the sheer bloody brass neck, to do that, then maybe he'd give her a few minutes.
Betty put a plate of fried eggs and bacon in front of the trainer.
‘Was there something else?’
‘Yes.’
He shot a warning glance at Kelly, but then said mildly, ‘Any chance of another pot of tea, love?’
After the woman had left, he muttered, ‘She isn't my wife.
She just comes mornings.’
Angrily, as if he blamed them for his loneliness, he set about his fri ed eggs and bacon.
Then he looked up sharply and, revealing more of the contents of his mouth than Kelly wished to see, said, ‘Well, get on with it then.’
‘Here's what we both know.’
Kelly sipped at her tea.
She had been right about Short; the way to get  him to listen was to treat him as if he were a human being, which he clearly wasn't.
But she had to be careful.
With this man, an earthquake was never far away.
‘Pendero was a stone-cold certainty for the race at Ascot,’ she said.
‘You had run him over races short of his best distance.
Maybe you hadn't tried too hard in them.’
‘Say that to anyone else,’ Short muttered without looking up from his fried egg, ‘and I'll see you in court.’
‘What you did with him before Ascot is your business.
Pendero was off the day I was riding him, that's what matters.
Why did you book me, by the way?’
‘Fuck knows.’
Kelly waited.
‘I'd seen you ride.
We needed the seven-pound claim.’
Short looked up angrily as he remembered the events of that day.
‘We all make mistakes,’ he snapped, ‘What's done's done.
If you're here because I said certain things about you after the race, you can sod off back south right now.’
‘I'm not here for an apology,’ Kelly said quietly.
Ignoring a dismissive grunt from Short, she continued, ‘Since that race, two people have died violent, nasty deaths.
I believe those murders had something to do with the race I rode for you.’
Harry Short shrugged.
Life, death, it happened, even in racing.
‘One of them was my father.’
‘Aye, well.’
Short was about to say something about Frank Connor, but thought better of it.
‘Aye, well, sorry,’ he said.
‘The reason I put you  up was I heard you were good and…straight.’
‘I am,’ said Kelly.
‘I didn't lose you that race.’
‘So what happened to the weight?’
‘You tell me.’
There was a clatter of cutlery as Short reacted.
‘What the fuck are you talking about?’ he exploded, spraying small bits of bacon across the table.
‘You took the saddle.
It would have been easy for you to lose five pounds’ worth of lead as you saddled up.
Then blame me after the race.’
Kelly was unable to keep the bitterness out of her voice.
‘After all, I'm just another crooked Connor.’
‘You're mad.
That's not my way.
I wanted to win that race.
I was done.’
‘There's another possibility.’
Kelly told him about the call to the weighing room, her father's letter, the death of Broom-Parker.
By the time she had finished, Short was sitting back, the greasy remains of his breakfast in front of him.
He lit up a cigarette and looked at Kelly thoughtfully.
‘If it wasn't me who wanted Pendero to lose that race,’ she concluded, ‘and it wasn't you, who was it?’
Short shrugged.
‘There was a bet.
Quite a big bet.’
‘Yours?’
‘Look, Connor.’
The trainer sat up in his chair and looked about the table as if searching for something to throw at her.
‘I'm not used to some bloody apprentice waltzing into my house and asking me about my private affairs —’
‘So who else was involved?’
‘You should know.’
A sulky bitterness had entered Short's voice.
‘He's just moved all his horses to Bill  Templeman, hasn't he?
Bloody Arab bastard.’
Short stabbed out his cigarette in the bacon fat on his plate.
‘Ibn Fayoud?’
Kelly was unable to conceal her surprise.
‘What does —’
‘Work it out for yourself.’
Harry Short stood up.
‘I've told you too much already.’
He looked at her appraisingly as if , for the first time, it had occurred to him that Kelly Connor was not just another apprentice, but a woman.
‘Can't think why,’ he added with a telltale catch in his voice.
‘I'd better be going,’ said Kelly warily, standing up herself and backing away from the trainer.
‘Maybe I can tell you more a bit later.
Second lot won't take long.’
‘Got to get back, Mr Short.’
‘Perhaps you'd like to ride a bit of work for me.’
The leer was now unmistakable.
‘I thought you were never going to let me near any of your horses again.’
Kelly made her way through the hall towards the front door.
Short chuckled randily.
‘Who's talking about horses?’ he called out as she walked quickly towards her car.
Kelly waved as she pulled away in her car, and gave a little sigh of relief.
Harry Short moving into seductive mode was not an attractive sight.
‘Nothing, Jack.’
Margaret Stanhope hated to disappoint her boss.
It almost broke her heart when she saw that darting look of imitation cross his face as she brought him bad news.
It didn't happen often — when it came to personally assisting, she had few equals — but, when it  did, she felt ridiculously guilty.
Her point in life was to solve Jack Butler's problems; when they persisted, she felt worse than he did about it.
‘What d'you mean nothing?’
Margaret shrugged miserably.
‘What is she, some kind of nun or something?’
Jack Butler was almost ugly when he was angry; it was a side of him that the many thousands of women who watched racing only to catch a glimpse of him never saw.
‘She's Irish, isn't she?
She's a jockey, she's a looker.
There must be something from her past.’
‘I've asked around.
She had a relationship with a local solicitor a couple of years ago.
He's straight as a die.
Since then, she's kept herself to herself.’
Jack thought back to Ascot.
‘Seems a bit of a waste,’ he said.
‘What about on the racetrack?
Anything there?’
‘Just Pendero, nothing else.’
The bookmaker looked at her pityingly.
‘I know about that,’ he said.
‘Maybe,’ Margaret faltered.
‘Maybe we could…fix something up.’
Jack laughed and shook his head.
‘You're a wicked old cow sometimes, you really are.’
Uncertain whether to be flattered or insulted, Margaret smiled primly.
‘Let me know what you want me to do,’ she said.
Bill Templeman was a man of few words.
He could talk horses, he could give instructions to a jockey but the confidential fireside chat was not his style.
Kelly liked the man but dreaded those rare occasions when  their conversations lasted for more than a couple of sentences.
When he asked to see her in his study, a few days after her return from Blaworth, she feared the worst.
‘Family all right?’ he asked, riffling through the papers on his desk.
Kelly remembered the lie that she had had to tell to take a day off work.
‘Not too bad,’ she said.
‘Under the circumstances.’
‘Nothing new on your father's death?’
‘No, not yet.
But I think that —’
‘It's not your job to think.’
Bill's voice betrayed genuine anger.
‘We're still getting calls here about you, anonymous calls.
Whoever it is says you're still nosing about in business which doesn't concern you.’
‘My father's death concerns —’
‘Listen, Kelly, I know you're still upset about your father's death, but if you want to play detective, you'd better give up riding and join the police.
You've already lost me one race because you're still hung up on that business at Ascot.
If it were up to me, I'd jock you off for the rest of the season.
Maybe next year, you'll be a jockey again.’
‘I'm sorry.’
Kelly hung her head at this unusually long speech.
He was right.
None of this had anything to do with the Templeman yard.
It was run on a shoestring at the best of times and Kelly was merely adding to his problems.
But something nagged at her about what he had just said.
‘How do you mean ‘if it were up to me’?’
‘You seem to have an admirer in Ibn Fayoud al Hassan.
He's instructed me to give you the ride on  Shine On at York next week.
In fact, he wants you to ride all his horses.’
Kelly smiled and sighed with relief.
‘Thank you,’ she said.
‘Don't thank me, thank him.
He likes the way you ride them.
Bloody fool.’
Kelly knew Bill well enough to be certain that no one, least of all a new owner, would dictate to him which jockey to put up.
In spite of this show of gruff disapproval, he was giving her one last chance.
‘Don't screw it up this time,’ he said, turning back to his correspondence and entry forms.
‘Remember you're a jockey.’
Kelly was down to ride a two-year-old called Billy Liar for second lot.
He was one of Ibn Fayoud's colts and apparently bone idle.
This morning was the first time he was to be given a serious piece of work before running later in the week.
Within moments of climbing on board, Kelly could see why Billy Liar had won few friends at the yard.
He was oddly sluggish and lazy, more like a leery veteran than a horse that had never seen a racecourse.
Dennis, who was down to ride work with her on another twoyear-old smiled with open hostility as they made their way up to the gallops.
‘You've met your match there, darling,’ he said as Kelly pushed and shoved the colt along, tying to keep him from stopping altogether.
‘Really?’
Kelly was used to Dennis's sarcasm and had come to pity his jealousy of her.
‘What makes you think that?’
‘He's a lazy bastard, that's why.
He needs a strong pair of legs on him.’
He winked across at her.
‘Not that I've personally got anything against your legs.’
Kelly laughed and muttered an expletive which Dennis pretended not to hear.
She'd show him.
And she'd show Bill.
To people in racing, there was nothing more suspect than a professional who allowed outside concerns to impinge on the real world — the world of racing.
Outside was dangerous, complicated; outside contaminated the already difficult business of getting horses to win races.
To be a true professional, you had to live in a closed world.
It's not your job to think.
Remember you're a jockey.
From the moment the two horses jumped off to work, Kelly knew she was in trouble.
While Dennis was well on the bridle, she was having to work hard to keep Billy Liar up to the pace.
After a couple of furlongs, If Dennis let out a notch on his reins and moved half a length up on her.
Kelly gave her horse a slap down the shoulder; it grunted but failed to quicken.
‘This horse is wrong,’ she called out.
‘I'm going to pull up.’
Dennis turned round and shook his head.
‘Legs,’ he shouted.
‘Told you.’
For a moment, Kelly felt a flare of anger within her.
They were out of sight of the guv'nor, so she yelled at Billy Liar and cracked him one behind the saddle.
The horse made another noise, more a groan than a grunt this time, and, as his stride faltered, Kelly knew that she had made a serious mistake.
A split second later, the earth was hurtling towards her.
Sheikh al Hassan had a lot on his mind.
The price of oil was tumbling again, one of his most reliable brokers on Wall Street had just been arrested for insider dealing, the acquisition of a highly prestigious London hotel had been held up by a query as to who actually owned it and, back home, one of his sisters had just committed suicide, causing a tremor of scandal throughout the country.
The death under somewhat dubious circumstances of a racehorse belonging to his son was frankly the least of his problems.
He looked through the smoked window of his Rolls-Royce and sighed.
The traffic on Piccadilly was a great leveller.
Salesman making deliveries, out-oftowners visiting a show, executives on their way to a board meeting which would decide the fate of thousands of employees: they all moved at West End speed — that is, not at all .
Sheikh al Hassan smiled wearily.
In this benighted country, simple solutions — banning traffic, arresting illegal parkers, giving the  wealthy and powerful a police escort through the streets — were apparently too complex for its befuddled government.
‘There is, I believe, a serious risk of a scandal, sir.’
The Sheikh turned back to Simon Brompton-Smiley.
It was bad enough sitting in the London traffic without having to listen to the mumblings of his international racing manager.
Mistakenly, he had agreed to let Brompton-Smiley travel with him in the Rolls and discuss the matter of some urgency he had been whining about for the last two days.
Now the meeting, which should have taken ten minutes, was being dragged out to three-quarters of an hour.
The temptation to open the door and to apply a dark shiny shoe to the seat of the man's pinstriped suit was almost irresistible.
If he had been born in Australia or Lithuania or even Manchester, Sheikh al Hassan could have ejected his minion on to the street in the sure knowledge that it would be put down to robust good humour.
As it was, he was obliged to behave with decorum.
‘I'm so sorry, Simon,’ he said, smiling.
‘I think I lost the drift of what you were saying.’
‘It's your son, sir,’ said Brompton-Smiley.
‘He has now moved his horses to a small yard in Newmarket run by Bill Templeman.
As you know, they were with Ian Gardem.’
‘I fall to see a problem there.
Maybe he was trying to save some money at last.’
‘He then invested in another horse.’
‘Ah.’
The Sheikh rubbed his eyes.
The last thing he needed right now was more bad news about his son.
‘A rather expensive horse called Shine On.’
‘How much?’
Sheikh al Hassan asked the unfamiliar question with some distaste.
‘I don't know,’ said Brompton-Smiley.
‘It was a private sale from Templeman himself but it's got to be six figures.’
‘I thought he was broke.’
‘Precisely, sir.
Then, two days ago, one of his twoyear-olds collapsed during a gallop.
I've heard, unofficially,’ Brompton-Smiley was proud of his network of contacts and could never resist reminding his employer of them, ‘very unofficially, that the postmortem shows that he was got at.’
‘Was anyone hurt?’
‘Not really.
The girl who lost that race at Ascot was riding him.
Broken collarbone, that's all.’
At last, the Rolls had broken free of Piccadilly's logjam and was making its way at something approaching normal speed towards Knightsbridge.
‘What exactly are you saying?’
Sheikh al Hassan's mind had returned to the important meeting before him.
‘Something's going on, sir, and I'm very much afraid that your son is involved.
The sooner you make the announcement that you're moving your horses away from Britain the better.’
‘I'll need to speak to Morley.’
‘I'll arrange that, sir,’ said Brompton-Smiley.
The Sheikh's car pulled up outside the hotel where his meeting was to take place.
For a moment, he considered letting Brompton-Smiley use the Rolls to get home, but then he thought better of it.
There were taxis.
A deputation of dark-suited, middle-aged men appeared at the hotel entrance, smiling like grannies at a railway station.
The Sheikh spoke quietly to his chauffeur, then stepped forward to acknowledge them with a courteous inclination of the head.
Standing by the Rolls, Simon Brompton-Smiley turned towards the chauffeur and said something clipped and military.
When the man shook his head, he looked at his watch as if yet another important appointment awaited him, and strutted off.
There were taxis.
It took a fall at thirty-five miles an hour, a night in Addenbrooke's Hospital in Cambridge, and a broken collarbone to remind Kelly of the life she was missing as a professional jockey.
The doctors had told her to take it easy.
According to their records, she had not lost consciousness, but she had been badly shaken up.
She wouldn't be fit enough to ride for at least a week, but she was able to organize the move to a new flat which Annie had found for her, situated just behind the saddler's shop.
R wasn't as nice as the one she'd shared with her father but at least it was cheap.
Annie and one of the lads in the yard helped to move what furniture she had.
After that she settled down to rest properly.
Three days after the accident she agreed to let Nick take her out to dinner.
‘Ouch.’
Morley winced as Kelly appeared at her front door, her shoulder strapped up, a graze down the side of her face and two blackened eyes.
She still managed to look wonderful.
Kelly smiled.
‘You should see the other feller,’ she  said, easing herself gently into the passenger seat of his Aston Martin.
‘And you're telling me you weren't concussed?’
Morley looked at her with genuine concern.
‘No, I'm telling the doctor I wasn't concussed.
I have an important ride next Saturday.’
Nick nodded.
Under safety regulations, no jockey was allowed to ride in a race within one week of being concussed.
If Kelly's fall had happened on a racecourse, she would have been sidelined as a matter of course.
It had been fortunate that, by the time a doctor saw her, she showed no signs of having lost consciousness.
‘I suppose I'm meant to turn a deaf ear to that.’
He grinned and looked across to her as he changed gear.
‘It was only a small knock.
I'll be fine.’
Nick was frowning.
‘All right?’
He shrugged.
‘Just don't go about saying you had a bang on the head.
You're not short of enemies already.
You want to be careful what you say.’
Kelly half laughed.
‘Funny, that,’ she said.
‘How I seem to trust you.’
Nick smiled grimly.
‘I mean it about the enemies.
You'll have heard from your boss that the two-yearold you were riding had been got at.’
‘No.’
Kelly couldn't help sounding shocked.
She stared straight ahead.
‘No, he didn't tell me that.’
‘A post-mortem showed that the horse had traces of Imobolin in its blood.
It's what they call Elephant Juice.
It's basically a very powerful anaesthetic.
The tiniest amount will knock out an elephant.
Hence the name.
There was a case some time ago where a vet  accidentally injected himself with some.
He was dead before he could get back to his car for the antidote.’
‘How do you know all this?’
Kelly's mind was racing.
If the horse had been doped, it could only mean that someone in Bill's yard had been involved.
If that was the case, who was the target, the horse or her?
‘I heard from the equine laboratory in Newmarket.
Officially Templeman should tell me himself, but he hasn't.
At least, not yet.’
They took a left turn and picked up speed.
‘Imobolin doesn't even need to be injected,’ Nick went on.
‘If you mix the stuff with an absorption agent like DMSO and rub it into the skin it would get into the system within half an hour.
Wetting the underneath of the saddle with it would have been more than enough to kill the horse.
It was due to run in a couple of days, wasn't it?’
Kelly nodded.
‘Nottingham.’
‘Were you going to ride him?’
‘I'm meant to be riding all Ibn Fayoud's horses.’
‘Well, it's a good thing it happened at home and not at the racecourse.
Otherwise you might have been much more badly hurt.’
‘Tell you what.’
Kelly made an unconvincing attempt at cheerfulness.
‘Why don't we talk about something other than racing?’
It was an uneasy evening.
Nick took her to a small restaurant a few miles outside Cambridge, where they both tried to behave as if nothing untoward had happened.
He joked that the other diners were looking at him like a wife-batterer.
She found herself talking about her father — the way he had brought her up alone, how he had tried to dissuade her from a racing  career.
And, of course, he had been right.
If she had done as he had suggested, become a doctor maybe, or a teacher, he would be alive today and she would be living a normal life.
Nick listened intently.
Kelly no longer thought of him as a steward, a central player in the racing game, but as someone who seemed to understand her better than anyone ever had, apart from her father.
It was good to talk to a man with whom she felt comfortable.
Nick looked surprised when she told him this.
‘So there's no…’
For a moment he looked embarrassed‘You haven't got a boyfriend, then?’
‘No, thank goodness.
Life's tricky enough without that.
And you?’
Nick looked away, trying to attract the waiter's attention.
‘I married young,’ he said.
‘It was a mistake.
She was a lovely girl and we're still good friends, but we just couldn't live together.
These days I value my freelance status.
The eligible bachelor.’
Kelly thought she detected a trace of bitterness in his voice.
‘Playing the field?’
‘Hardly.
Concentrating on my career.
Looking after Sheikh al Hassan's bloodstock interests.
The Jockey Club.
It keeps me busy.’
‘D'you know his son?’
Kelly asked suddenly.
‘I've met him.
He's not exactly on my circuit.’
‘Is he bent?’
‘What, gay, you mean?’
Nick raised his eyebrows.
‘No, not that way.
I mean corrupt.’
‘No.
I'd say he was weak rather than corrupt.’
‘I believe he was involved in the Pendero business,’
Kelly told him and then went on to fill in the details — Broom-Parker, seeing Ibn Fayoud with Jack Butler in the car park at Kempton racecourse, her conversation with Harry Short.
She told him exactly what she had told the police.
‘Ibn Fayoud and Butler,’ he said eventually.
‘They're an unlikely pair.’
There was something subdued about the evening after that, as if the full significance of the events of the past few days was oppressing both of them.
They drove back to Newmarket in virtual silence.
Nick spoke quietly as he pulled up outside her flat.
‘Call me if you hear anything else.’
Troubled, distracted, he looked into Kelly's eyes.
Her bruised face gave her a new look of vulnerability.
In an almost fatherly way, he placed a hand on her good shoulder and kissed her gently on the lips, like a promise.
‘And, for God's sake, take care.’
For a moment, he held her more closely.
‘Ouch,’ said Kelly.
Nick quickly apologized.
‘Look, I know that one shouldn't mix business with pleasure, but if I asked you again, would you come out with me?’
Kelly returned his kiss and held it for a fraction longer than she should have.
‘Of course.’
The next morning the post brought a letter that was as brief and to the point as it was surprising.
Dear Miss Connor,
I was most distressed to hear of your fall.
I hope that you are now well enough to accept the  attached invitation to a charity bail on the first evening of the York meeting.
I am taking a party of racing people, some of whom you will surely know.
Please confirm that you are able to make it to my personal assistant.
Yours,
Ibn Fayoud
Attached to the note was an ornate invitation to the Marquess of Flaxton's Charity Black and White Bail and a ticket of entry.
Kelly shook her head incredulously; Ibn Fayoud had taken her acceptance for granted.
Presumably few people said ‘No’ to him, Well, Kelly reflected as she dialled the Templemans' number angrily, there was a first time for everything.
‘You're going to what?’
Annie's voice all but went off the chromatic scale when Kelly told her that she was turning down Ibn Fayoud's invitation.
‘I'm not at my best at parties.
My mind will be on the big race.
Anyway, I'm not certain that I like him.
He's far too smooth for me.’
‘Kelly, you don't seem to understand.
One of the reasons Shine On is running at York is to give Ibn Fayoud the chance to take a table at the bail.
He wants to show you off.
He wants to show usoff, for Christ sake.’
‘You mean you're in his party too?’
‘Of course.
Although I must admit we were obliged to fork out for the tickets — a mere hundred quid each.
What we do for our owners.’
‘I don't know.’
Suddenly Kelly's objections seemed  priggish and defensive.
‘I look a sight at the moment, what with my eyes.’
‘It's a black and white party.
You'll be a wow.
Anyway you needn't stay long.
Treat it as an education.
How often d'you get the chance to watch the mindlessly rich eat and drink themselves into a stupor on behalf of Ethiopia?’
Kelly laughed.
‘This is your boss's wife speaking,’ Annie continued.
‘Accept Ibn Fayoud's invitation.
That's an order.’
Margaret Stanhope put down the telephone, stood up, smoothed her tight skirt down and knocked on the door next to her desk.
A voice from within muttered, ‘Yeah’.
‘Newsflash, Jack,’ she said, putting her head round the door.
‘Our little fish has nibbled the bait.’
Jack Butler puffed on his cigar.
‘Brilliant,’ he said.
‘Maybe she'll get a nibble herself — from the big fish.’
‘Maybe.’
Margaret smiled at her boss.
‘If she's lucky.’
Henry, the Marquess of Flaxton had known hard times.
At Eton, he had been fag to a charmless older boy who had wasted no time in introducing Henry to the joys of homosexuality.
Today his seducer was a respected Tory backbencher while Henry — in this as in all other matters of pleasure, a broad-minded man — had retained a part-time interest in members of his own sex.
But Eton, in those first terms, was tough, frightening.
Maybe Henry would have ended  up warped and perverse but his unofficial education among the elite certainly helped him along the way.
Then there was the Isle of Wight.
For an ordinary Joe, two years spent in the open prison at Parkhurst was no big deal but for Henry, to be starved of decent food, a regular intake of recreational drugs and all but the most basic of sexual activity was deprivation on a grand scale.
He was not often given to anger, which required more energy than he had to spare, but two years without life's bounty, all for a small matter of dealing drugs to his friends, seemed little short of scandalous.
Of course, since his release, he had made up for lost time, becoming quite a wheel in the charity game, but those two years had stayed with him.
The people, the routine, the boredom: frankly, he had been to hell and back.
Balls.
That was how he became rehabilitated.
Charity parties.
Society auctions.
It seemed that these days his friends needed an excuse to blow the family money on their own pleasure; it had to be in a good cause.
Thanks to his efforts — or rather the efforts of a couple of socially mobile former PR girls who worked for him — several fortunes were directed, with maximum publicity, into the coffers of the needy.
It was brilliant.
World starvation was halted in its tracks, Henry became a hero of the gossip columns, and everybody had one hell of a good time.
These days, nobody cared what high-grade powder he put up his nose, whom he spent the night with.
Henry was all right, a good sort.
His heart was in the right place.
The Black and White Bail was going to be a winner.
There would be a thousand people there, dressed with  varying degrees of elegance in black and white.
Some would come in racing silks, or T-shirts with amusing messages, or in clown outfits.
Henry had decided on the black-and-white minstrel look — rather apt, he thought, since most of the money would be going to Africa.
He had heard that Camilla Welmsley would be all in white, something fluffy and revealing, but with black lipstick.
Never was there a less likely vestal virgin.
Henry thought that he would probably have Camilla tonight, or maybe Tavic, the black society sculptor everyone was talking about or, hey, maybe both.
It was going to be that sort of party.
Ibn Fayoud entered the great black and white marquee.
It was decorated with thousands of black balloons, white roses, black bottles of champagne on white tablecloths.
He accepted a glass from a black waiter and a kiss from a white puff-ball who turned out to be Camilla Welmsley.
A glance at the assembled guests told him what he already knew — that no one looked quite as good as he did.
In the dark mourning robes left to him by his grandfather, he was as exotic as Valentino, as dangerous as a black prince of the desert.
One of Henry's PR girls, almost wearing a cutaway schoolgirl outfit, showed him his table.
Ibn Fayoud looked at the place settings, noting that the few racing contacts he had been obliged to invite had sensibly been distributed among the more amusing people who had come up from London.
God knows what Tavic would find to say to dear, homely Annie Templeman, or what his favourite ex-girl friend, Mina Beresford, had done to deserve the lugubrious Bill Templeman as  a neighbour.
Ibn Fayoud sipped his champagne thoughtfully.
Doubtless Jack Butler and Kelly Connor would discover subjects of common interest.
Annie Templeman had been at the black and white ball for five minutes, and it was five minutes too long.
Although she caught sight of a few racing friends, she felt ill at ease among the social butterflies that trilled and chattered all around her.
Above all, she felt guilty that she had persuaded Bill, who looked as happy as a man with a toothache, to make an appearance.
He had never been a party-goer and it had been against his better judgement that they agreed to join Ibn Fayoud's party.
Good owner relations, Annie had argued.
The party had seemed like fun to her then.
Bill now shot a baleful glance in her direction.
‘Two hundred sodding pounds,’ he mouthed.
Kelly was late.
She'd managed to flood the carburettor on her car.
For a moment she stood uncertainly at the entrance to the marquee, the simplicity of her dark long dress in elegant contrast to the exotic fancydress all around her.
She smiled at the black and white minstrel who approached her.
‘Well,’ said the Marquess of Flaxton with an appreciative leer made grotesque by his make-up.
‘Who's the lucky man you're with?’
Kelly decided to ignore the implication that she could only be someone's girl friend.
‘I'm here by myself,’ she said.
‘I'm with the Ibn Fayoud party.’
‘Ah yes.’
Henry looked at her more closely, mistaking the dark rings round her eyes for signs of late nights and fast living.
‘You would be.’
He took Kelly by the arm to where a man in dark  robes was in earnest conversation with a girl in a skimpy black T-shirt with ‘BIMBO POWER’ scrawled in white across her chest.
‘Kelly!’
Ibn Fayoud turned away from the girl, smiled warmly and held out his arms as if greeting an old friend.
Kelly managed to turn her head in time for his kiss to miss its target on her lips.
‘I'm so happy you could make it, my favouritejockey.’
Leaning away slightly as Ibn Fayoud enveloped her in his gowns and aftershave, Kelly found herself looking at a smiling Annie.
She crossed her eyes and made a face.
There was something different about Kelly that night.
She could see it in the covert glances of the London girls, some of whom had been planning how to look at the Belvoir dance for the past month.
She could sense it in the way men talked to her, the sideways glances of strangers.
as if , by wearing the simplest of dresses, pale make-up and no jewellery, she had trumped them all.
It was a pity, she thought, that her mind was on Shine On's big test tomorrow afternoon.
It was a shame, too, that, because she had unstrapped it for the evening, her shoulder was already aching.
Then she looked around at the men on offer, braying nightclub fools mostly, and decided that, even without racing commitments and pain, she would be planning to leave early.
This was not her sort of party.
She was nodding politely on the fringes of a group listening to their host talking about himself when she heard a familiar voice behind her.
‘So it's true what they say about you and Ibn Fayoud.’
Cy McCray pecked her on the cheek.
‘Don't worry,’ he said.
‘Your secret's safe with me.’
‘Duty,’ she said with a smile, and lowered her voice.
‘Personally, I'd be happier watching television back in the hotel.’
‘Hey, tell me about it.
Can I give you a lift back there?’
‘Cy, you're a gentleman,’ said Kelly.
‘But I'll be going back with the Templemans.
Just as soon as I can.’
‘Not before I have a slow dance with you, I hope.’
‘Do you think you're tall enough for that?’
‘No, but your cleavage looks a great place to rest my head,’ he grinned.
‘Then you can tell me the truth about Ibn and Butler.’
‘I plan to avoid them tonight.’
Cy looked surprised.
‘You haven't seen the seating plan then?
You've been drawn next to Jack Butler.’
Kelly winced.
‘Oh great.
That's all I need.
Dinner with a bookmaker.’
She should never have come.
She would be stuck with a man who, she was now convinced, was in some way involved in the Pendero case.
The last thing she wanted, the day before she rode Shine On, was to be drawn back into the past.
There were questions she needed to ask Butler, but not yet, not now and not here.
‘You look after yourself, y' hear,’ McCray was saying.
‘You know what Jack's like with the ladies.’
That was the worst of it.
In spite of herself, Kelly felt a quickening of the heart, that she was going to sit  next to Jack Butler — bookmaker, bastard, crook — and she couldn't wait.
‘Thanks, Cy,’ she said quietly.
Kelly had expected that Jack Butler would live up to the image she had painted of him in her mind.
A wide boy on the make, a rake of the Silver Ring — vulgar, randy, pleased with himself.
But he wasn't like that at all, in fact.
He appeared almost shy among the other party-goers, a little boy let loose in the big playground, nervously looking about him.
As Ibn Fayoud's guests took their seats for dinner, he introduced himself to Kelly with edgy formality.
This was not the Romeo she had expected.
‘Kelly Connor?’
It was almost a mutter.
‘I'm your dinner partner.
Jack Butler.’
Kelly shook Jack's hand and felt a shiver of excitement run through her body as they touched.
His manner was polite but his handshake held an unmistakable invitation.
He was taller than she expected and wore a wall-cut dinner jacket that contrasted with the eccentric fancy-dress of some of the other diners.
She was about to say something when he turned away to introduce himself to the girl on his right.
A goofy individual in a Batman cape distracted her attention by falling into the seat to her left, spilling some champagne in the process.
‘I'm Johnny Prescott.’
Kelly smiled politely as the man tried to focus his eyes on her.
Prescott shook his head slowly.
‘God, you're lovely,’ he said.
‘Haven't we met at Tokyo Joe's?’
‘I don't think so.’
Kelly was annoyed with herself for feeling a pang of jealousy that Jack Butler was now deep in conversation with the girl on his right.
A waiter brought smoked salmon.
Kelly turned back to the partner on her left.
‘Tell me all about yourself, Johnny,’ she said with an interested, dinner-party smile.
It took Prescott a good ten minutes to describe the full pointlessness of his life as a stockbroker and man-about-town before the combined effects of drink and sustaining a conversation took their toll and he declined into a glazed, sullen silence.
Jack Butler's conversation with the girl on his right seemed to have dried up too.
‘Dear, oh dear,’ he said, almost to himself.
‘I think I've enjoyed myself more after the housewife's choice has just won the Grand National.’
Kelly laughed.
‘So why did you come?’
‘I like to do a bit for charity now and then.’
When Kelly raised a sceptical eyebrow, he added, ‘Even bookmakers have hearts, you know.’
‘It's hardly your image.’
Jack shrugged.
‘Journos,’ he said.
‘What do they know?’
‘And presumably you didn't want to disappoint Ibn Fayoud.’
Jack Butler glanced across the table to their host who was listening with rapt attention to a woman dressed as a schoolgirl.
‘He bets with me now and then, nothing special.
Tell me, why are you here?
You don't look the charity ball type.’
He was looking at her now, not with the leer of a  natural lecher, nor with the beady eye of a professional digging for information, but with polite, sympathetic curiosity.
Jack Butler was not at all what she'd expected.
‘Ibn Fayoud is an owner,’ she explained.
‘But he doesn't own you.’
Kelly smiled.
‘These days jockeys have to be diplomats.’
As she spoke, Jack moved his hand gently on to hers and asked for the salt.
Again she felt the same shiver down her back like an electric current.
Eating smoked salmon while talking to Johnny Prescott had seemed to last a lifetime.
The two subsequent courses, passed in conversation with Jack Butler, took no time at all.
He kept Kelly amused with a string of stories about his life as a bookmaker, and then surprised her with his knowledge concerning the world's fifteen million refugees.
Kelly found herself fascinated by him.
‘You'll be doing a runner on me in a minute, won't you?’ he said.
‘You're not here at all.
You're at York racecourse already.
I doubt you'll even stay for the dancing.’
‘I'm here all right.’
Kelly smiled.
‘Just one dance.’
‘Great,’ Butler seemed genuinely pleased.
‘I'm getting myself a cognac from the bar.
What d'you fancy?’
He stood up.
‘A port please,’ she said.
Across the room, amid a throng of guests, Jack Butler was given two drinks by a nun.
‘Half will be enough,’ she said quietly.
‘All of it and we'll be laughing.’
Jack looked uneasy.
‘I don't know,’ he said.
‘I'm  not sure about this.
She's not like I expected.’
‘I'm sure we could find another volunteer.’
The nun's eyes were cold, glittering.
‘Our little friend appears to have plenty of admirers.’
Jack thought of the job in hand.
‘Leave it to me,’ he said reluctantly, and made his way back to Kelly.
Across the table from Kelly, Annie and Bill were engaged in a silent battle of wills.
Chin set in a parody of male stubbornness, Bill was attempting to convey to his wife his urgent need to get away from this madness aid return to the house where they were staying.
With equal determination, Annie was making it clear by chatting away happily to Ibn Fayoud and his schoolgirl friend that it would be rude to leave before the dancing had been under way for half an hour or so.
To Kelly, watching them as she sipped her port, it was clear who was going to win.
On training matters, Annie deferred to her husband; on everything else, she had the last word.
‘We'd better have that dance,’ she said to Jack Butler.
‘I get the feeling that my boss and his wife will be out of here before long.
They're driving me home.’
‘You don't have to go with them.’
‘Yes, I do.
I'm riding tomorrow.’
‘The dedicated professional.’
Jack made the remark without a hint of sarcasm, taking the glass out of Kelly's hand and getting to his feet.
‘Maybe we could meet when you're not riding the next day.’
He held out his arm in a surprisingly old-fashioned gesture.
‘Not a chance, thought Kelly, and then found herself saying, ‘That would be lovely.’
Normally, at charity functions run by Henry, the Marquess of Flaxton, the music was loud and contemporary.
Tonight, in a rare moment of good judgement, he had hired a big band whose music would not drive his older guests out into the night.
When Jack and Kelly joined the dancers, they were playing a waltz.
‘How are you feeling?’
Jack said quietly as they danced.
‘Good,’ said Kelly.
And she did feel good.
Was it because the man who held her in his arms was a confident and easy dancer?
Or that she had drunk one glass too many?
Her anxieties, her tension, her thoughts about racing tomorrow had never seemed so distant.
She felt light-headed, idiotically, illogically happy.
The music stopped, but she stayed in Jack's arms.
The next dance was a foxtrot, but they continued to dance slowly.
It must have been several dances later that she noticed Annie standing on the edge of the dance floor.
It seemed to Kelly that she was trying to catch her eye for some reason.
Eventually, between dances, she came over.
‘We're off,’ she said in a voice which seemed oddly distant.
‘Are you coming?’
Kelly found it hilariously difficult to concentrate.
‘I think…’ she said.
‘I think I'll get a lift with Cy McCray, if you don't mind.
He's staying in the same hotel.’
Annie looked concerned.
There was something about the way Kelly was speaking that seemed unlike her.
And she was normally keen to get an early right before a race.
‘Are you sure?’ she asked.
‘Absolutely.
I'll be home soon.
Drive carefully.’
After Annie had left, Kelly realized that she hadn't asked Cy for a lift home.
She certainly wasn't going to drive herself home.
For all she knew, he might have gone already.
‘Got to find Cy,’ she murmured.
Suddenly the idea of tearing herself away from Jack's warm, firm body, even for a minute, seemed heartbreaking.
She looked across the dance floor and for a moment lost her balance.
The band, dressed all in white, seemed miles away.
The dancers were no longer people but there was something hostile, dangerous about them.
Kelly swallowed hard, and closed her eyes.
She felt cold and slightly sick.
Behind her, she heard a voice.
Snapping open her eyes, she realized that everyone was staring at her, everyone was talking about her, everyone knew that she was about to —
‘You all right, Kelly?’
With staring, dilated eyes, Kelly looked up at the man who held her.
His gentleness was fake, she knew that now, his face distorted as she looked at him.
Jack Butler, the wolf; there was no escaping him.
‘Let me go, let me go,’ she whispered, discovering her helplessness too late.
‘What have you done to me?
What have you given me?’
‘Is something the matter with her?’
It was a nun, who now stood beside Jack.
Both of them looked at her with apparent concern but Kelly  knew with utter certainty that they were together in this.
‘I think she's had a spot too much to drink,’ said the nun.
‘I'll just take her to the ladies’.'
She took Kelly by the arm; terrified, Kelly allowed herself to be led away like a little girl.
The world was staring at her.
She looked back at Jack in wordless supplication.
As the nun passed Kelly's table, she knocked the remains of a glass of port on to the ground.
Kelly's scream echoed silently within her as, like something out of a distant dream, the band played on.
She must have lost consciousness.
For a moment Kelly thought that she had been buried alive.
Afraid to move, she became aware that she was in a strange room, in a bed.
Her black dress, her underclothes were hung over a chair.
Was it morning?
Where was she?
Had she had a fall?
Was she meant to be racing somewhere?
She tried to sit up but a wave of nausea engulfed her and, with a sob, she fell back on her pillow.
The door opened, slowly at first.
She could see the figure of a man in the shadows.
Jack Butler.
He looked down at her, like a surgeon before an operation.
She could see his mouth moving but the words were strange, alien.
‘Worry…don't worry…all right…all right ?’
He took off his jacket.
Was he going to cover her up?
She was so cold now.
Her shoulder ached.
Slowly, he undid his bow tie, pulled it off.
He was unbuttoning his shirt.
Kelly looked away and drifted off once more into a hallucinogenic nightmare.
Behind the mirror was a nun with a camera.
Breathing heavily, she occasionally brushed the sweat from her eyes as she photographed the scene in the next room.
‘Oh, Jack,’ whispered Margaret Stanhope to the whirr and the click of the camera.
‘Oh Jack, you bastard.’
An early morning mist hung over York racecourse, gift-wrapping it for the fine autumn day's racing that lay ahead.
In the stables, the horses on whom thousands of pounds would be won and lost that afternoon stirred as their lads unlocked their boxes, brought them their feed.
Kevin Briley, whose favourite horse Shine On was to run in the big handicap, talked to his charge as he mucked him out.
He told him how much of his pay he had saved up for today, how he would personally kick him all the way back to Newmarket if he didn't win, how he was a big beautiful bastard that couldn't fucking lose, could he?
Shine On, who knew Kevin well, concentrated on his breakfast.
Damien Gould walked briskly from his BMW towards the stables.
Three rides he had today, for three different trainers, and not one of them had a squeak.
To make it worse, the Connor bitch was on a fancied runner in the big race.
The idea of her  succeeding annoyed him.
She was everything he wasn't.
Young, charming, talented; she was also more resilient than he had anticipated.
She must be screwing either Bill Templeman or that Arab bastard.
Probably both.
That would be a good rumour to start.
He could maybe wind her up a bit if he had the chance.
A thin smile, like a scar, spread across his face.
Perhaps today was going to be all right after all.
At the York Hotel, a phone rang in Room 3012.
It was Kelly Connor's early morning call.
After two minutes, it stopped ringing.
Roddy Chalmers lifted his head from a table at Flaxton Hall, tried unsuccessfully to focus on his surroundings, and belched.
His brain, never an overactive organ even on those rare moments when it wasn't pickled in alcohol, grappled with the fact that he appeared to be in some sort of tent before triumphantly reaching the conclusion that he was at a party.
That was it, Henry's charity ball.
Christ, it had been one hell of a thrash, an absolute bloody classic.
Roddy shifted his eighteen-stone frame and looked about him.
Although it was light outside the tent, music was still blaring from a disco in the comer and Henry was dancing about the floor, ashen-faced and wide-eyed.
When Roddy had last been conscious — about an hour ago, maybe two — he had seen Henry playing hunt the little white worm with a straw and a hand mirror.
Snort, dance, bonk, snort some more — bloody good value, old Henry.
Right now he was groping Joanna who had taken her top off, as she always did on these occasions.
You could tell how a party was going by the number of items of  Jo-Jo's clothing scattered about the dance floor.
There was a glass in front of Roddy which he drained.
It was time for kip.
Thank God he was staying with Henry.
He thought he could just about make it up the stairs.
At the third attempt, he managed to stand up.
He staggered out of the marquee in search of his bedroom.
It was a dream.
Kelly was in a large room she had never seen before, lying alone, naked under a sheet.
She felt heavy-lidded and drowsy, as if she had been asleep for a week.
Through the heavy curtains, a shaft of sunlight cut through the gloom.
It revealed, at the foot of the bed, a fat man taking off his trousers and mumbling to himself.
As she stirred, the man seemed to become aware of her presence.
‘Well,’ he said, trying to focus on her.
‘Well, well.’
A drunken grin spread across his flushed, porcine features.
Kelly pulled the sheet to her.
As she moved, her body ached as if she had been in a fight.
It wasn't a dream.
‘Girl in my bed,’ the man was muttering incredulously.
‘Got a girl in my bed.’
Kelly could see her clothes in the corner across the room, but she needed to get to them without being jumped by this barrel of lard.
She said nervously,
‘Would you mind…’
The man held up a finger, as if he had remembered something very important.
‘Better freshen up,’ he said, wheeling round and staggering into a bathroom next door.
Kelly heard a tap running.
She leapt out of bed, shut the bathroom door, ramming a chair under the door handle.
Trying to ignore the buzzing in her head, which was like a badly-tuned radio, she scrambled into her clothes.
Seconds later, there was an elephantine thud from the bathroom as the man tried the door.
‘Cheeky,’ he was chuckling drunkenly.
‘Saucy little minx.’
There was another thud.
Kelly made her escape.
What the hell had happened?
As she hurried down a long corridor, her mind groped backwards over the events of the previous night.
She remembered dinner, then dancing with Jack Butler, Annie saying something to her, a nun taking her by the arm.
After that, there was a series of horrific, shaming cameos that could only have come from the unconscious.
Downstairs, it was like a battlefield in which the only victors were excess and decadence.
Champagne bottles were strewn about the floor.
In the hall, a woman gloomily collecting dirty plates and ashtrays looked up as Kelly appeared.
She had seen it all before — last night's high spirits turned to this morning's hangover, last night's gay blades to green-faced ghosts, last night's belles of the ball to tousled tarts with smudged lipstick and laddered tights.
Kelly paused and looked about her.
‘Where are the coats?’ she asked the woman.
The maid smiled.
By the look of this young girl in black, she'd have some explaining to do to someone.
Serve her right.
‘Cloakroom's over there,’ she said, pointing.
Kelly found her coat without too much difficulty.
‘What's the time?’
Kelly asked.
Time you knew better, young lady.
That was what she wanted to say.
‘Ten past seven,’ she muttered.
Thank God.
Kelly walked quickly through the marquee where her host Henry was dancing with a girl dressed only in black knickers.
Shivering in the morning chill, Kelly got into her car and started the engine.
Bill expected her to be at York racecourse to ride out at eight — if she put her foot down, she could just about make it.
Her head was clearing now but she still felt strange, drowsy.
If it hadn't been for her fat friend, she would have overslept.
Something odd had happened to her last night.
She must have passed out, but then she had drunk so little.
It was just possible that the painkillers she had taken for her shoulder had reacted with the alcohol, but it seemed unlikely.
She was back at the hotel by 7.45.
As the man at reception gave her the key to her room with a knowing look, Kelly reflected that she hadn't felt so guilty since her teenage party days.
Her head pounding, she took the stairs to the second floor two at a time.
The phone was ringing as she entered the room.
It was Annie.
‘Thank God,’ she said, when Kelly picked up the phone.
‘I thought something had happened to you.
Where have you been?
Or shouldn't I ask?’
Briefly it occurred to Kelly that it would be sensible to lie.
Apprentices do not wake up in strange beds the night before an important ride and then tell all to the boss's wife.
But Annie was a friend.
‘I'll explain later,’ she said.
‘Why didn't you bring me home like you promised?’
‘Bloody hell,’ Annie said loudly.
‘You must have been in a bad way.
I tried to drag you away but you were too engrossed in the Butler man to pay any attention.’
‘What ?
I can't remember —’
‘I'm sure you can't,’ Annie said sarcastically.
‘If I were you I'd get down to the racecourse pronto.’
‘Annie.
I must speak to you about this.’
Kelly thought fast.
‘Could we meet downstairs later, after I come back from the course?’
‘Come on, Kelly, for God's sake.
You're meant to be thinking about your big ride not a married man.’
Annie sighed.
‘All right,’ she said reluctantly.
‘Can't have our star apprentice worried on the day of a race, can we?
I'll see you at ten.’
She hung up.
A married man?
Kelly held her head.
Right now she needed about a million cups of coffee.
If she had any doubts that Shine On was good enough to win that afternoon, they were dispelled by the way he felt during his early-morning pipe-opener.
The way he worked upsides her other ride, Spooked, showed that Bill had trained him to perfection.
Today was Shine On's day, given a bit of luck and a decent run.
And a jockey who felt more alive than dead.
The exertion and fresh air had done nothing to ease the pain Kelly felt in her head, the weakness in her muscles.
Shine On took no hold at all, yet she had difficulty in pulling him up.
After the gallop, Bill was his usual communicative self.
He looked the two horses over, then glanced up at Kelly.
‘What's the matter with you?
You looked like a wet rag coming up there.’
Kelly felt her face turn red with embarrassment.
Bill missed nothing.
‘I feel fine,’ she bluffed.
She always said she felt fine when asked, no matter what state she was in.
Bill looked as if he had something else to say.
‘Just pretend he's Jack Butler or something,’ he muttered loudly.
Kelly felt sick.
It must have looked bad last night for Bill to say anything.
Worse, his remark had been heard by Dennis, who was riding Spooked.
By this afternoon, the events of last night, or Dennis's lurid version of them, would be common knowledge on the racing gossip circuit.
‘Jack Butler, eh?’
Dennis winked unpleasantly as they walked back to the stables.
‘You little raver, you.’
The low murmur of conversation in the hotel's sun lounge was like the crashing of waves to Kelly as she entered to see Annie at a corner table.
It was true, as Annie had said, that now was hardly the time to talk about dances, drugs and Jack Butler but it was important for Kelly to talk to her.
Something strange had happened last night, she was sure of that.
As far as Annie was concerned, Kelly had drunk too much, slept with Jack Butler and put her rides on Shine On and Spooked at risk.
Trainer's wife, best friend — either way, she had to be told the truth.
‘This had better be convincing,’ she said frostily after they had ordered coffees.
‘If our friendship means anything,’ Kelly said, ‘you're going to have to believe me.’
She described the events of the evening slowly, as if afraid that one word out of place would make Annie more sceptical than ever.
Yes, she had spent a lot of time with Jack Butler and, yes, she had found him interesting, attractive even.
She would have danced with him anyway.
But it was the events after dinner that defied explanation.
‘I can't remember anything clearly after that first dance,’ she said.
‘Maybe I heard you when you told me you were going home, but I was miles away.
It was as if I couldn't act on my own behalf.
I was suddenly…’
The memory of how she felt made Kelly feel sick once more.
‘Helpless.’
‘Or legless.’
‘I swear I had had one bucks fizz and half a glass of port.
It wasn't like drunkenness anyway.’
‘So it was the painkillers.
You should have known better.’
Kelly shook her head and winced.
It was like running razors through the brain.
‘I don't think so,’ she said.
‘I took two pills that evening — they've never affected me like that before.’
‘So what are you saying?’
Annie sipped her coffee thoughtfully.
‘That you were drugged?
Who by?
And why?’
‘I think I'd better tell you about what happened after you left,’ Kelly said quietly.
Haltingly, she spoke about her sudden irrational terror on the dance floor, the nun leading her away, how she found herself in a bedroom with Jack Butler.
Tears filled her eyes as she described seeing him looking down on her.
‘Did anything happen?’
Kelly shook her head.
‘I'm not sure,’ she said.
‘It was all hazy.
I remember him getting into bed with me.
Then I must have lost consciousness.’
Annie smiled humourlessly.
‘Something happened,’ she said.
‘I rather doubt if Jack Butler would climb into bed with you to keep warm.’
The two women sat in silence for a moment.
‘D'you believe me?’
Kelly asked.
‘Even if it's true and not some sort of dream, what can you do about it?’
‘But why?’
Kelly's question came out as a loud protest.
A couple of middle-aged women at a nearby table turned to look at her disapprovingly.
‘Why should he do that?’
Annie shrugged.
‘The usual reason.
What else?’
‘Pendero.’
Annie struck her forehead in exasperation.
‘For God's sake, Kelly.
You're becoming obsessed by —’
‘Listen.’
Kelly lowered her voice.
‘The big gamble on Pendero was by Ibn Fayoud — Harry Short told me that.
The person who stood to gain most from Pendero losing the race was Jack Butler.
After the race, Ibn Fayoud moves all his horses to Bill and suddenly he's big buddies with Butler.
Why?’
‘Racing's a small world.’
‘And was it just coincidence that I get invited to the Flaxton dance, that I'm seated next to him?
There's something going on, I'm sure of it.’
Annie sighed wearily.
‘It sounds a little elaborate as an excuse for getting yourself laid,’ she said half-jokingly.
‘And at the moment, one of your villains, Ibn Fayoud, is your best owner.
Bill's been told to  enter his horses in several races abroad, with you riding.’
‘Why abroad?’
‘I suppose he has ambitions to be a great international racing owner like his dad.
Or more likely it's a good excuse for a party abroad.’
Kelly shook her head gloomily.
‘Everything seems to be going wrong at the moment.’
Annie drained her coffee and stood up.
‘Here's what you do,’ she said briskly.
‘You ride horses.
You mind your own business.
You stay clear of Jack Butler — that's for certain.
And you don't drink port.’
‘You're right.’
‘And you can do something for me.’
For the first time Annie smiled with genuine warmth.
‘What's that?’
‘Win on Shine On.’
Kelly nodded.
The razors leapt in her brain.
‘Piece of cake,’ she said weakly.
Later, much later, Kelly was to reflect on how lucky she had been that day.
There was the fat man who had woken her up, Annie who had at least made her feel slightly better, and then Cy McCray and his diet pills.
She had just walked the course and was making her way to the weighing room before the first race when she heard the familiar Bronx accent behind her.
‘How ya doin', sweetheart?’
Kelly turned and gave McCray a wan smile.
‘OK,’ she said.
Cy looked at her more closely.
‘Jeez,’ he said.
‘You look like shit.’
‘Thanks, Cy.
I feel better already.’
‘What's the problem?’
For a moment, Kelly considered telling him about the dance, but then she thought better of it.
‘I had a hard night,’ she said.
‘I think something disagreed with my painkillers.
I feel terrible.’
‘You mean I might win this afternoon?
With Shine On being ridden by a hospital case, my home could have a chance.’
Kelly didn't laugh.
‘Hey.’
Cy reached inside his jacket pocket and took out a phial of pills.
‘I wouldn't do this for anybody else, but take these,’ he shook out three yellow capsules, ‘and you'll be OK.
They're great for tiredness, flu, hangovers.’
‘What are they?’
‘Diet pills.’
He winked.
‘On three of those, you'll be flying.
Trust no one.
Kelly remembered her father's words.
Cy was riding against her this afternoon.
It was a risk, and she'd already made one monumental error of character judgement.
She decided she couldn't be so wrong twice in as many days.
‘Thanks.
I'll take them.’
‘Their only disadvantage is that you can't take the painkillers with them.
You'll be in agony but you'll feel so good you won't care.’
‘As long as they get me past the post.’
‘In second place.’
‘First,’ said Kelly.
She glanced at her watch.
Spooked was running in the second race.
It was time to get changed.
As she walked to the weighing room, she gulped down the three pills.
Two hours later, Kelly sat on the scales, reflecting that Cy had been right.
Her collarbone felt as if it were about to burst through her skin but her head had cleared and she felt strong.
‘Thank you.’
She alighted from the scales.
She'd just ridden Spooked like her old self and the horse had run above himself, finishing third in a field of twenty.
In the enclosure afterwards, Bill Templeman had grunted in a way that suggested satisfaction with her.
Standing behind him, Annie had shaken her head as if disbelieving the race Kelly had ridden after the excesses of the previous night.
Thank God for Cy and his pills.
If she'd cocked up a second race, Bill would have jocked her off Shine On, whatever Ibn Fayoud said.
Cy emerged carrying a saddle, ready to weigh out for the next race.
He winked conspiratorially at Kelly.
‘They say they're dope-testing jockeys of the first three,’ he muttered out of the side of his mouth.
Kelly laughed.
‘They're not addictive are they, those things?’
‘Not if you keep taking them,’ said McCray.
‘Catch ya later.’
Bob Collins didn't like it when the past came knocking at his door.
It was ten years since he came north, married a young Indian model called Raksha and went straight.
Now he lived in a neat semi-detached on the outskirts of Bradford with his wife  and three lovely kids, earning a comfortable, respectable living doing weddings, portraits, the odd news pic for the local paper.
It was a long way from Brewer Street.
Not that he had regrets.
If it weren't for his days at the mucky end of the trade, he would never have earned enough to buy a house and he wouldn't have met Raksha who had been doing a bit of topless work to supplement her salary as a nurse.
He had learnt his craft the hard way; after you had shot an Ibizan beach orgy sequence in a studio in Soho on a cold January morning with a load of complaining bimbos and a gay black man coked out of his brains, any other gig was a breeze.
The only time that he wished he hadn't been quite so deeply involved in the skin trade was when the past came to visit.
Like two days ago.
Margaret Stanhope.
A posh secretarial voice on the phone.
‘Who?’
‘Margaret Stanhope.’
A pause, a sigh.
‘Maggie.’
Oh my Gawd.
Maggie.
Mad Maggie.
Do-anything-if-the-cash-is-right Maggie.
Quite a little cracker in her day, she must have been in her late thirties now.
God knows what kind of seedy cinematic productions she was involved in these days.
‘Hullo, Maggie.’
Bob had dropped his voice so that Raksha in the next room wouldn't hear.
She didn't like the past any more than he did.
‘What are you up to then?’
‘I'm a bit like you, Bob,’ she said.
‘I've gone legit.’
She gave him a brief, sanitized account of her life as Margaret.
‘And now you want something from me.’
Bob knew that, whether she called herself Mad Maggie or Margaret Stanhope, friendship came at a price.
‘Just a little favour,’ she said.
She gave him the details, sparing him time, place, names.
Bob leant against the wall and rubbed his eyes wearily.
‘And that's what you call legit, is it?’ he said.
‘Bob.’
He knew that tone of voice.
This was one dangerous bitch if you crossed her.
So he agreed to give her the camera, show her how to use it; he'd make sure the family were out the afternoon she came round to get the film developed.
At least, looking on the bright side, he didn't have to take the shots himself.
‘No, I want to do that,’ she had said.
Mad Maggie.
She always was a weird one.
Now she was here and it was just like old times: in the darkroom with Maggie, working on filthy pictures.
With the other girls, it had been simple: morning, darling, a quick strip, a bit of pout, grunt and groan under the studio lights, then off they went to the next job.
Mad Maggie was different.
She liked to stick around, see the results, maybe enjoy some off-camera larks in the back office.
Not that there was the slightest danger of Bob getting into that these days, thank you very much.
At least not on his home ground.
‘Not bad.’
Bob took the first contact sheet from the developing fluid and hung it up.
‘You did a good job here, Maggie.
Apart from a spot of camera shake.’
‘It's Margaret,’ she said, pushing him aside.
‘Never  mind the photographic quality.
Can you see the faces?’
Bob Collins looked at the contact sheet through a magnifying glass.
‘Hope you're not going to try and sell these,’ he said.
‘She looks as if she's asleep and he doesn't seem to be having much fun either.’
The second contact sheet was ready.
Margaret inspected it and asked for a number of prints to be made.
As he worked, Harry muttered, ‘If I didn't know better, I'd say that was your Mr Butler on the bed there.’
Margaret was examining the prints, absorbed.
Now as she looked up at Bob Collins, the smile left her face.
‘One word of this and I tell your local rags where you learnt your craft.’
Harry shrugged.
‘My mistake,’ he said.
‘Must be a Jack Butler lookalike.’
‘Let me have an extra copy of these ones.’
Margaret gave the photographer three prints in which her boss's face was clearly visible.
The show had been set up for the little jockey but maybe, at some time in the future, Mrs Butler would be interested.
Two birds with one stone.
Margaret Stanhope smiled.
Driving back to Leeds, Margaret timed her ear radio to the commentary from the York races.
Personally, she couldn't stand homes but these days Jack's interests were her interests.
After all, she was his personal assistant.
‘Shine On has drifted slightly in the betting ,’ the  commentator was saying.
‘He's now 4–1 third favourite behind the Irish challenger Breakdancer and The Guppy.’
Drifted.
Margaret laughed softly.
The punters had probably caught a glimpse of Shine On's jockey.
You wouldn't want to lay the family heirloom on a horse ridden by a zombie, would you?
In fact, it was amazing the Connor girl could even find her way to the racecourse the way she must be feeling today.
‘…while there's a slight question mark over Shine On's ability to stay this distance and of course it's a big test for his rider Kitty Connor, who's having her first ride in a listed race.
Kelly, of course, is the daughter of the great Irish jockey Frank Connor who died so tragically last month.
They're all in now…’
Frankly Margaret couldn't give a toss.
She'd feel a little sorry for the little girl if she blacked out in the race and fell under all those hooves.
After all, it hadn't really been her fault that she became mixed up in Jack's business affairs.
A bit nosey, that was all, and Margaret understood what it was like to be nosey.
The commentator was reeling off horses' names like an auctioneer, mentioning Shine On only occasionally.
Bringing up the rear.
Backmarker.
Making no impression…
Silly sport it was.
Making horses run faster than they wanted to.
And they always let you down when you least expected it.
The things she had heard Jack say after a favourite that he had carefully arranged to get well stuffed, as he put it, promptly went and won.
Secretly Margaret thought he'd be better out of the racing business.
Show business, boxing, snooker — that was where the money  was.
She'd tell him that when they were together at last.
Maybe over dinner one night.
‘…as they pass the three-furlong marker, it's still the Guppy, who's made every yard of the running, behind him a group of horses led by the grey Prince Charming, Cy McCray has yet to move on Breakdancer, Shine On has an awful lot still to do…’
Jack would be going all pale and intense now.
Margaret smiled affectionately.
She had seen him surrounded by people shouting and screaming, ‘Go on, my son’, not one of them down to lose or win as much as Jack, and he'd just stand there like a beautiful, pale statue.
Involuntarily, Margaret thought of Jack's muscular body last night.
She hardly heard the growing excitement in the commentator's voice.
‘…into the last furlong, and the Guppy looks beaten, Breakdancer takes up the running with Prince Charming on the stand side — it looks to be between these two — but now Shine On's absolutely flying on the outside, a terrific challenge, the three locked together, Breakdancer and Shine On stride for stride, at the line it's very close but I think it's shine On who gets it on the nod.
There'll be a photograph but there's not much doubt about the winner.
shine On ridden with breathtaking confidence by the young apprentice Kelly Connor who got up in the last stride to —’
‘She didn't look so breathtakingly confident last night, darling,’ Margaret Stanhope said to the radio set.
‘She was more like something out of The Night of the Living Dead .’
Switching to a music channel, Margaret wondered how Jack would be feeling right now.
Pleased that his little doll had won?
Surprised that she had the energy?
Pissed off?
Personally, she thought it was fair enough if Connor had a small moment of glory before Jack, armed with the material in the briefcase beside her, hauled her in and finished her little investigation for good and all.
‘Yeah,’ Margaret muttered.
‘Good for Kelly, that's what I say.’
After all, the higher she was riding, the further she had to fall.
Within Kelly's body there was a war going on.
Her collarbone was ambushing her with surprise guerrilla raids of searing pain while her head was screaming revenge for the ordeals it had undergone during the past twelve hours.
Don't do drugs, Kelly.
Nix those narcotics.
She felt like a government health warning, but the sheer pleasure of having won her first big race made up for it all.
If only her father had been there to see it.
Wincing, she eased on her coat, picked up her bag and saddle and walked slowly out of the weighing room.
Ibn Fayoud would be celebrating in the bar and Annie had urged her to join them, but there was only one place Kelly wanted to be — home, in her bed, lying there reliving today's race.
It was the last time she was going to take diet pills before a race, that was for sure.
They had made her feel so confident that, from the moment Shine On had jumped off, she had been utterly convinced that she  would win.
Even when she passed the two-furlong pole, some five lengths off the leaders, she knew she had them; but if the post had come ten yards earlier, she would never have got up.
Those pills were lethal.
‘How d'you ride on these things?’ she had asked Cy as, pulling up, he shook her hand in congratulation.
‘Doesn't your judgement go?’
‘Sure.’
He smiled across at her.
‘I wouldn't dream of taking them before a race.’
Kelly's head was swimming as she left the racecourse.
She hardly had the energy to acknowledge the odd ‘Well done, Kelly’ she heard as she walked slowly towards the car park.
She would be mad to drive home tonight, she decided.
She would book in for another night at the hotel and leave in the early morning.
She glanced at the winners' enclosure.
It had been a great moment.
A tremendous reception.
Ibn Fayoud and his blonde of the day; Annie, hardly able to conceal her astonishment at the way Kelly had been able to ride after the events of the previous night; Bill himself, flushed and more inarticulate than ever.
‘Never do that to me again, Kelly,’ he had muttered.
‘My heart couldn't stand the strain.’
It was as near to a compliment as he could manage.
‘Two winners in twenty-four hours, eh sexy?’
The unmistakable tones of Damien Gould interrupted her thoughts as Kelly was putting her bag and saddle into the boot of her car.
She turned to see him standing ten yards away.
‘Just the one, Damien,’ she said quietly.
‘One more than you, I think.’
‘No, surely.’
Damien scratched his head, frowning.
‘There was that Shine On this afternoon then…what was it?’
Kelly knew what was coming.
All afternoon she had been waiting for evidence of the racing rumour-machine at work.
Even a loser like Dennis would know how to get word around.
There was an angry throbbing in her head as she walked slowly towards him.
‘Or maybe…’
Damien assumed a smug little smile.
‘Maybe it wasn't you who rode the winner but — yes, that's it, the winner rode you.’
Kelly found her breath was coming thick and fast.
There was a tight knot of anger in her stomach.
Damien paused to savour the moment as fully as possible.
‘Go on, Damien.’
Kelly's voice was almost a whisper.
At another time and in another place, it could have been almost seductive.
‘Say it.’
‘You know , sexy.’
Damien was truculent now, leering.
‘Your boyfriend Jack —’
The blow from Kelly's right fist brought blood spurting from his nose and sent a searing pain up her arm which she refused to show on her face.
‘Bitch,’ he hissed, trying to staunch the blood which flowed from his left nostril.
‘Yes, and you're just a chippy little has-been.’
Booking into the hotel for another night, Kelly was told that someone had been trying to call her.
Nick Morley — it must have been.
Although he had declined to leave a name, he must have hoped to catch her  before she returned south.
She smiled.
After the madness of the last twenty-four hours, he'd be a welcome relief.
‘Oh, and Miss Connor,’ the receptionist called out as she made for the stairs, ‘there was a delivery for you this afternoon.’
The woman disappeared into a back office and returned with a bunch of ten red roses.
She looked surprised when Kelly seemed reluctant to take them.
With a sense of foreboding, she read the note attached to one of the stems.
It read, ‘We'll be paying out a fortune on Shine On but you were brilliant.
Congratulations.
Thinking of you.
Love, Jack.’
Kelly groaned.
She tore the note off and gave the roses back to the receptionist.
‘Keep them,’ she said with a grim smile.
‘I'm allergic to roses.
They make me sick.’
After last night, she never wanted to see him again.
Maybe, briefly, he had awakened in her a craving for the wild, the dangerous, the forbidden, but whatever had happened later had cured her of that.
More than ever she needed to talk to Nick.
Anyway who needed danger if you were a jockey?
Jack Butler stared morosely at the large white television in his modern penthouse fiat in the centre of Leeds.
Nothing could lift his mood — not the fact that his supplier had managed to get his hands on a pirate video of the new Schwarzenegger, nor the really quite healthy profit he had made on the afternoon's racing at York, nor even the fat Havana cigar to which he had treated himself.
It wasn't despair.
Jack had no time for the dark night of the soul.
It wasn't the sort of long-term depression that had settled on him when his wife persuaded him to take her on holiday to Marbella.
But it was bad all the same.
At this particular moment, Jack didn't like himself, and popularity among people that mattered — and who mattered more than himself?— was very important to him.
‘Shit,’ he said, pressing the remote control, plunging Arnold into darkness mid-massacre.
He stood up, wandered over to the cocktail bar in the comer and poured himself another cognac.
He stood by the large window, looking down on the lights of Leeds.
Normally he enjoyed staying over at the firm's northern hospitality suite which was situated above their offices — bloody hell, he had treated a few girls to his own style of hospitality there enough times — but tonight it was all wrong.
He didn't feel like company, however blonde, young or willing.
For a moment, he almost wished he were at home, but then he shook his head as if to rid himself of the thought.
Home, with Charmaine and her hurt, resentful eyes, her domestic conversation, her irritating attempts to keep their marriage alive.
‘Jesus.’
Jack shuddered.
He felt bad, but not that bad.
Kelly Connor had probably received the flowers by now.
He had spent ages trying to get the words right on his note but somehow it all came out wrong.
He was genuinely delighted that, in spite of last night, she had won the big race.
But what exactly do you say to that special someone whom you drugged to get into  bed?
It wasn't the sort of situation the etiquette books catered for.
He picked up the phone.
He'd call her.
Not to apologize — that would be asking for explanations he wasn't able to give right now — but to see that she was all right.
Frankly, it had amazed him that she had been able to ride at all that afternoon, given how wasted she was the previous night, but then she was quite a determined little thing.
Too determined for her own good really, which was why he had had to agree to last night in the first place.
Her line was engaged.
Jack put down the receiver.
Perhaps that was a good thing.
He didn't know what was the matter with him.
The phone rang.
He picked it up with a quiet ‘Yeah?’
‘I have something to show you.’
It was the last person in the world he wanted to talk to, apart from Charmaine.
‘Not now, Margaret.’
‘I really think you should see these.
After all the trouble we've taken.’
Jack sighed.
He couldn't stand Margaret when she was in one of her perky moods.
Normally, he'd slap her down but, right now, he didn't have the energy.
‘I'll give you five minutes,’ he said wearily.
There was something unfamiliar about Margaret Stanhope as, moments later, she entered her employer's hospitality suite, brushing past him, a triumphant smile on her face.
She threw the black leather briefcase on to the sofa and said briskly, ‘Gin and It for me, please, Jack.’
it was almost as if she were in charge.
Setting it all up so beautifully, manipulating Jack and the girl into the most compromising of positions had done her self-confidence a power of good.
She looked at Jack now as, sulkily, he fetched her a drink.
A fine figure of a man, even finer without his clothes — Margaret had no complaints there — but not quite as strong as he made out.
It was like a trick, a game she had played.
Strip Jack Naked.
Now that she had stripped Jack naked, she felt stronger.
This was one game she was going to win.
‘About last night.’
Jack handed her a drink.
Margaret held up a hand, her eyes twinkling with amusement.
‘About last night, you need have no worries.’
She picked up the briefcase.
‘No one need know about your first-night nerves.’
Butler looked at her coldly.
He hadn't anticipated this change in Margaret.
It made him feel even worse than before.
‘Cut the crap and show me the pics,’ he said.
‘I'm not in the mood.’
Margaret laughed lightly.
‘When are you in the mood, Jack?’
She pulled out two contact sheets from the briefcase.
‘Only kidding, love,’ she added with unwelcome intimacy.
Sighing, Jack glanced at the first sheet.
He and Kelly had only been together five minutes but the photographs brought back the full nightmarish shame of it all.
She had stared at him wide-eyed, unseeing, and any desire that he might have felt had died in that instant.
He may have the morals of an alley cat but raping a semi-comatose girl was beyond him.
She was so out of it that it would have been like making it with a corpse.
Butler threw the sheet on the sofa.
He was paler than Margaret had ever seen him.
‘They make me feel sick,’ he murmured.
‘Of course, we need to get rid of the shots that look obviously posed.’
Margaret pored over the sheet as if they were wedding photographs.
‘But these two here look very natural.
Almost as if you were —’
‘Keep a couple, destroy the rest.
And all the negatives, OK?’
‘Anything you say, Jack.’
Margaret closed the briefcase with a click, like someone who has just completed a sale.
She sighed thoughtfully.
‘If only you'd let her finish her drink before dancing with her.
That was Ecstasy crossed with smack.
Good stuff, too.
The whole glass and she'd have been climbing the walls — just how you like —’
Jack walked quickly over to the door.
He held it open.
‘Get the fuck out of here,’ he muttered.
Margaret shrugged and sauntered through the door.
She smiled at Jack.
He would be better in the morning.
Then he would realize what a good girl she had been, how she had helped him.
It had been difficult, of course, but the experience would bring them closer together.
After all, what other personal assistant would have done what she had?
Jack Butler closed the door, turned and leant against it, as if afraid that she might suddenly return with more horrors.
He covered his face with his hands and groaned.
A vixen barked in the woods behind Dermot Kinane's cottage, breaking the early evening silence with its plaintive cry of love and need.
Kelly Connor sat on an old garden bench in Dermot's orchard thinking of her father and the past.
They had always spent a few weeks every year in Ireland, relaxing and visiting old friends.
When she had been a child, those holidays had seemed magical, a time when everyday concerns were put in perspective by the rhythm of village life.
At church, at the pub, or sitting by Dermot's roaring peat fire, she would catch a glimpse of her father as he once was, before his life turned sour — expansive, smiling, good-humoured.
Now, without him, she was back, taking stock of her life.
She had loved both her parents.
Her mother had filled her early childhood with wonderful memories of picnics and riding ponies and of a stream of smiling schoolfriends who were always made welcome, but it  was her father to whom she'd felt closest.
Somehow he'd always been much more sensitive to her feelings.
He could judge her mood almost before she was aware of it herself.
After her mother had died, and despite his own grief, he'd done everything possible to help her forget.
They had little money to spend once he'd given up riding altogether but they shared love in abundance.
Kelly smiled as she thought of his early attempts at cooking and the hours he'd spent coaching and encouraging her while she'd practised riding a finish on the back of the sofa.
The racing world was more fickle than any other she knew of.
After Shine On had won at York, the papers had sung her praises.
Kelly, our most promising apprentice.
Connor turns tragedy into triumph.
Will Kelly Connor be the first woman champion Jockey?
The phone at the flat rang constantly.
Spare rides.
Requests for interviews.
Old friends who had forgotten her during the hard times.
During the subsequent week, she had ridden three winners, only one of which was for Bill Templeman.
There was talk in the racing press of her being retained by one of the country's top trainers for next season, but that was the first she'd heard about it.
At York, she had ridden no better than she had ever ridden before.
It was a bigger race, she was on a better horse, maybe she had ridden with more coolness than usual thanks to the emergency prescription of Dr Cy McCray.
But what racing could give after one good day, it could take away after a bad one.
Nothing had changed.
Now, there were two days on which the only race meeting were in the north; Kelly  had asked Bill for time off and he had agreed.
It was as if events had conspired to make her forget Ascot, Pendero, the fact that the most important person in her world had been clubbed to death because he wanted to save her from the fate that he had suffered.
Kelly was ambitious: there was almost nothing she wanted more than to ride winners, to be next year's champion apprentice, to make it.
She had the ability and now she had had the break.
Her moment had come.
Almost nothing.
She knew what the sensible course of action was.
Make racing the reason for your existence, your religion, forget the outside world.
All that happened out there — love, life, death, murder even — they could wait until the day you hung up your saddle and retired rich, successful, envied.
Almost.
Her father would have had words with her about that.
The idea that she should risk her future by dwelling in the past, raking over the cooling embers of his life in order to discover who killed him and why would have enraged him.
Even now, she felt his silent reproval from the grave.
Don't let them hook you.
Don't get involved in corruption even if it's on the side of the angels.
Do your best at the work you've chosen.
Ride winners.
‘Just listen to her, will you?’
Dermot Kinane appeared out of the gloom and sat beside Kelly.
She had been so caught up in her memories that she hadn't heard him approaching.
He nodded in the direction of the woods from where, every few seconds, the thin cry of the vixen could be heard.
‘It's like she's laughing at us.’
Kelly smiled.
‘She's calling for her mate.’
Dermot Kinane took a tin of tobacco from the pocket of his old tweed coat and rolled a cigarette.
‘Last week that little bitch broke into my hen house.
Ten bantams she killed.’
The flare of the match lit up his thin, craggy face.
‘She's reminding us who's boss.’
‘She won't be so noisy when the hounds come.
The hunting season starts soon, doesn't it?’
Kinane nodded.
Now in his sixties, he still rode out with the Black and Tans, as wild and fearless as ever.
He had broken more bones in his body riding horses that anyone she knew, yet he lived for his hunting.
He'd probably die for it in the end.
‘Makes no difference,’ he said.
‘She'll be back.
Or if they get her, one of her cubs will be back.
We can chase her across fields, lock away our birds every night, protect them with wire and all sorts of nonsense but, when we're dead and gone, a fox will still be coming back.
She'll have the last word because she has nature on her side.’
Kelly laughed softly.
‘You make it sound like a war,’ she said.
‘Not at all, not at all .
It's a game.
The day after she came I put up another roll of chicken wire.’
For a moment, they sat in silence, Kinane puffing at his cigarette, the pungent smell of cheap, strong tobacco wafting across to Kelly.
‘What should I do, Dermot?’ she said eventually.
‘What should I do about Dad?’
Kinane looked at her tenderly.
‘It wasn't thieves, was it, that killed him?’ he said.
‘No.’
Kelly shook her head.
‘He had been told to stop me winning at Ascot.
He didn't.’
‘Poor old Frank.
Always was the pig-headed one.’
‘I've found out who wanted Pendero not to win.
There was a big gamble on him.
A bookmaker paid Damien Gould to take some lead from my weight cloth while a journalist distracted me.’
‘You know this, or are you guessing?’
‘I found the journalist but the day he was going to talk to me he was killed by a hit-and-run driver.
Gould virtually admitted it the other day.’
‘So someone tried to stop you.
It happens all the time.
How d'you know it had anything to do with Frank's death?’
‘The letter.
Then, as soon as I started asking questions, they tried to stop me.
There were threatening calls to the Templemans and —’ Kelly decided to spare Kinane details of the death of her cat ‘— to me.
They were prepared to kill the journalist Broom-Parker rather than let him talk to me.
And I think they tried to drug me the night before I rode Shine On at York.’
‘Why?
What do they care if you ride winners?’
Kelly stared out into the darkness.
‘That's what I don't understand.
Shine On's owner was the man who had the big gamble on Pendero, and Jack Butler, the bookie, was the one who slipped me the drug.
They're up to something, but I don't know what.
It doesn't make sense.’
Kinane stared at Kelly in the evening gloom.
He had known her since she was a baby.
Even then, she had been wilful, determined.
Today her soft, dark features concealed a tough obstinacy.
That was why she  was making the grade as a jockey.
And that was why she was allowing herself to become sucked into a whirlpool of corruption which could destroy her career, or worse.
‘Does the term ‘conspiracy theory’ mean anything to you?’he asked softly.
Kelly looked surprised.
‘You mean, as in ‘it wasn't a lone lunatic who killed Kennedy but the Mafia working in collusion with the Russians who had a deal with the FBI’— that kind of conspiracy?’
‘Precisely.
Look at a crime closely enough and everything becomes significant.
Accidents, coincidences, ordinary everyday events are all part of a great plot and —’
‘Thanks, Dermot,’ Kelly interrupted.
‘You don't have to explain.
You think I'm inventing all this, seeing shadows behind every door, right?’
The fox was barking more closely now.
Kinane stood up.
‘Let's go and look at that henhouse.
I can do without losing any more bantams.’
They walked in silence to a gate at the end of the orchard and into a farmyard.
Beyond some stables, there was a chicken run.
Kinane opened the door.
‘Eejits,’ he said quietly, as he looked at the bantams roosting on a low perch.
‘Mrs Charlie's at their front door and they still don't get out of her reach.’
One by one, he put the drowsy birds on to the top perch.
‘Sure, you're as bad as your father,’ he said, as he worked.
‘You can't leave well alone.’
A black bantam squawked in surprise as he picked her up.
‘As it happens, I believe you.
I'm sure the people who murdered your father are up to something.’
He turned to Kelly.
‘But so what?
People are always up to something.
They're like that vixen.
There's nothing you can do about it.’
‘Listen, Dermot, there's a reason for everything.
The reason that vixen killed your bantams is because it's nature.
Maybe she wasn't even hungry but it's in her to kill.
I want to know the reason why someone killed Dad.’
‘That's what the authorities are there to find out.
The best way you can repay your debt to your father is to be a success as a jockey.’
Gently, he lifted the last bantam to the top perch.
‘So you won't help me?’
‘Me?’
Kinane looked round as he closed the henhouse door behind him, bolting it twice.
‘What could I do?’
‘You know everyone in racing.
You could ask around about Jack Butler, Ibn Fayoud, Dad's dodgy contacts from his riding days.
No one would be suspicious of you.’
Dermot Kinane took Kelly's arm as they walked back towards his cottage.
‘D'you know what I think?
It's not racing at all.
I'll bet you it goes outside the business.’
They walked on in silence.
‘Here's what I'll do,’ Kinane said eventually.
‘I'll talk to some friends of mine if you promise to tell what you know to the Jockey Club.
Officially.’
‘I've already done that.
I've told them everything that I've told the police, but nothing's happening.’
Kinane stopped and looked at her, a deep seriousness in his eyes.
‘Well, give them time.
‘And promise me it's no more Kelly Connor, private detective, all right?’
Kelly nodded.
‘Promise,’ she said.
Reg Butler sat beside a roaring gas log fire, smoking a fat cigar and wondering when he was going to be able to retire, relax, play golf, take in the odd West End show like other successful men of seventy-two.
The dreams of his youth, when he was a tough, small-time bookie around the dog tracks of London, had long since come true.
He had his luxury mock-Tudor mansion in Purley, his holiday home in Tenerife.
He had a young wife who, although she was thirty years his junior, loved him dearly or, at any rate, behaved as if she did.
He had a bank balance that a senior merchant banker would not be ashamed of.
He had a son, running the family business for him.
He sucked greedily on the cigar, like a heart patient needing oxygen.
Ah, that Jack.
What a problem he was.
A chip off the old block he was not.
Bright, yes.
Motivated, yes.
But tough?
Dream on.
Young Jack thought he was hard, thought that having a few blondes and getting a few legs broken made you a man, but underneath it all he was soft, a little boy.
If Jack had had to protect his pitch at Dagenham and White City in the days when men were men, he wouldn't have survived until the third race.
Not for the first time, Reg Butler tried to analyse what was wrong with his son and the way he ran the business.
First of all, he appeared on television like he was some kind of game-show berk, not a businessman.
Reg didn't like that.
Bookmakers had no place  in front of the cameras.
Then he wanted to stay with the horses.
He just would not diversify, that boy.
And what was the point of ambition if it was limited?
If Reg Butler hadn't looked beyond the horizon, he'd still be a one-pitch loser down the dogs.
He'd had it too easy, Jack.
That's what Reg had told his mother, God rest her soul, and he'd been right.
Soft.
That was Jack.
Soft-centred.
He had two fundamental weak spots.
One was situated behind his fly-buttons; greed was good in Reg's book, but sexual greed was dangerous when it interfered with business.
The other was in his heart.
That was the problem, Reg smiled grimly.
His son had a heart, the stupid, randy little bastard, and what good were brains and charm if you had a heart?
Butler stubbed out his cigar in an ashtray and reached for a telephone on the table beside him.
‘Jack?’
‘Hello, Dad.’
The voice was weary, as if this was the fourth time he'd been called by his father that evening.
Which it was.
‘You set it up yet?’
‘I told you.
I'm just putting the finishing touches on.
The Arab's cutting up rough.’
‘Pull him in then.
He owes us a fucking million quid, don't he?
Squeeze the bastard.’
‘Leave it to me, Dad.’
Leave it to him.
Reg Butler felt a tightening in his chest.
Leave it to Jacko.
That would be the day.
‘What about the girl?’
A pause.
‘She's a problem.
I think we'll send  someone else to Tokyo.
Someone like McCray.
She's trouble, that one.’
See?
Heart.
And probably fly-buttons too.
‘Send her, Jack.
She's better in than out.’
‘Dad, I've told you.
Don't worry about Kelly Connor.
She's in.’
‘You've spoken to her?
She agreed?’
‘Not exactly.
But she'll do what she's told.
We've got her.’
Reg Butler hung up.
The boy was talking riddles.
In?
Got her?
What half-arsed plot was that berk hatching now?
Don't worry, he'd said.
Some fucking chance.
It wasn't meant to happen.
Kelly had called Nick Morley from Ireland and had arranged to visit Jockey Club headquarters in Portman Square when she returned.
It was to be a formal, confidential statement, she had said.
Nick had seemed concerned and had agreed at once to convene the security subcommittee.
After the meeting, she would drive back to Newmarket.
It was never meant to become complicated.
Kelly felt quite calm as she entered the large committee room.
Before her, across a large mahogany table, were three stewards, two of whom she knew.
To Nick's left sat Colonel Beamish who was looking as sceptical and impatient as he had in the stewards' room at Ascot, and Lord Chester, a wealthy landowner who had ridden as an amateur until recently.
At the end of the table, a middle-aged woman stenographer sat impassively with her notebook in front of her.
It was a more sympathetic hearing than Ascot.
Nick introduced her to the panel and explained the background  to her visit.
He was so candid that, for a moment, Kelly expected him to reveal that they had had dinner together, but with the slightest hint of a cautionary glance in her direction, he merely referred to ‘a follow-up meeting away from the office’.
Carefully, soberly, Kelly told them everything she knew.
It was like a confession, a purging, except that her only sin had been an over-zealous curiosity, a need to discover who killed her father.
It was easier than she had anticipated.
The three men listened to her without interrupting.
Every name she mentioned was noted down, not only by the stenographer, but by Beamish.
Short.
Ibn Fayoud.
Broom-Parker.
Gould.
Butler.
Kelly held only one detail back.
Although convinced that she had been drugged before the race at York, she had little chance of persuading three Jockey Club stewards that she had not been drunk, out of her depth, hysterical, and she didn't want Nick to know either.
The rest of her story was too important to take the risk.
When she finished, Nick had a few muttered words with his colleagues before asking her one or two questions, mostly concerning times, places and names.
If the events outlined by Kelly came as a shock or a surprise, he concealed it in his calm measured tones.
He might have been asking her about the traffic on the way in from the airport.
It was almost as if he and his committee dealt with murder and corruption every day of the week.
‘We shall, of course, look into these allegations,’ Nick concluded, winding up the hearing.
‘It would be helpful to know if you wish to be kept in touch with developments.’
‘Yes, of course I do,’ Kelly said quietly.
Colonel Beamish gave a wintry smile.
‘Naturally, if there are legal proceeds, you may be required to testify as a witness here, or even in a court of law.’
‘I understand.’
‘Thank you for bringing this to our attention, Miss Connor,’ Nick said, standing up.
‘I'll show you out.’
It was as he escorted her through the hall that he quietly suggested a drink after work.
Kelly agreed.
She had made up her mind to put the past behind her.
Now would be a good time to start.
She wanted to talk about something other than death and danger.
Racing perhaps, or even life.
Nick didn't send any shivers through her the way Jack Butler had but after he'd kissed her softly goodbye and she was walking through Portman Square, she found herself looking forward to seeing him later.
He took her to a club in Camden Town, a dark cellar where a jazz quintet played hypnotic Chicago blues and where the pale faces of London's night people were lit by candles as they drank, smoked and laughed.
Some of them looked as if they had only just risen from their beds, as if this was breakfast time to them; others had the look of people who hadn't slept for a week.
Kelly was glad of the anonymous atmosphere.
She was still in the dark coat and dress she had selected for the Jockey Club hearing and Nick was in pinstripes.
A spotlight on them in this company and they would feel like tax inspectors.
But it was a good place to unwind; the chance of either of them being recognized was remote.
Kelly smiled at him.
His hair was tousled, his tie at half-mast.
‘How d'you know this place?’ she asked.
‘It hardly seems your style.’
‘I love this music.
Sometimes I come here by myself, just to relax, think things over.
They know me here.’
‘By yourself?’
Kelly narrowed her eyes with mock suspicion.
‘The eligible bachelor on the pull?’
Nick didn't smile.
‘I rather think my pulling days are done.
And anyway,’ he nodded in the direction of the dance floor where a young girl in a T-shirt and torn jeans was entwined in the arms of a dreadlocked Rastafarian, ‘I'm not quite the type for the regulars here.’
There was something sad about him, Kelly realized.
It was as if there were no place where he quite belonged.
On the racecourse, in Portman Square, he was treated with the wary politeness reserved for outsiders.
Here he was a punter, a champagne Charlie, dossing with the underclass.
Briefly, he reminded Kelly of her father.
Once Frank Connor had left the certainties of life in County Limerick, he always seemed like an actor who had wandered into the wrong play.
Frank Connor and Nick Morley, they were both uneasy with their surroundings, out of context.
‘I brought my wife here once,’ Nick said suddenly.
‘We lasted half an hour.
She said a black man had made an obscene suggestion to her outside the ladies’ loo.’
He smiled as Kelly burst out laughing.
‘She was easily shocked, my wife.’
‘Bet she loved it really.’
‘No.’
Nick frowned and looked at his glass.
‘Her  niceness wasn't just on the surface.
She was nice all through.
One hundred per cent nice.
That was probably why I married her.
Everybody liked Sarah.
My parents thought my marriage was the first sensible thing I'd ever done.
But she turned out to be too nice for me.’
He raised a glass to Kelly.
‘Down with niceness,’ he said.
A waitress brought them a bottle of champagne.
‘With the manager's compliments,’ she said.
Nick looked across the room to where a fat man in jeans stood by the bar and ticked the side of his forehead like a taxi driver acknowledging a tip.
The man gave a portly little bow and smiled.
‘I knew him in the army,’ he said simply.
‘We've kept in touch.
Kelly sensed a strange vulnerability in this man.
She asked him about his parents, how he became involved in racing.
‘My father's a lawyer,’ he began, sipping at his champagne, adding quietly, ‘In fact, he's a judge.
Very successful.
My mother,’ he smiled wryly, ‘is a successful lawyer's wife.’
‘They must be proud of you.’
Nick shook his head.
‘They expected me to be a lawyer too.
Join Daddy's chambers.
So I went into the army.
Looking back on it, I realize it was some sort of act of rebellion.
Then, just to make it worse, I went into the SAS.
Ireland.
Anti-terrorist stuff.
Intelligence.’
He smiled distantly.
‘Father hated it.’
‘Why did you leave?’
‘I got married.
Sarah disliked the idea of being an army wife.
The only other thing I knew about was racing so I went into bloodstock.’
‘And the rest is history.’
Kelly smiled.
It was reassuring to hear of another life that had gone wrong, to be reminded that, however successful a person might seem, things weren't always easy.
Nick reached across the table, took her hand and held it for a moment.
He looked into her eyes, and she knew she was lost.
It wasn't exactly love, but it was close enough to love not to matter.
‘Stay with me tonight,’ he said.
‘I've got to work in the morning.’
Kelly cursed her job, thinking how nice it would be to have someone she trusted holding her.
‘Leave early.’
‘I'll see,’ she said.
But she'd already made up her mind.
The flat in Pimlico was much as Kelly had expected.
Spacious, tidy, decorated with old-fashioned, bachelor good taste.
‘Night cap?’
Nick asked as they walked into the drawing room.
He fetched some chilled white wine from the fridge.
They stood in the middle of the room, chinked glasses and kissed.
‘Shall we take our drinks to the bedroom?’ she said softly.
Nick smiled and took her hand.
It surprised Kelly how much she wanted him.
She wasn't drunk.
She wasn't like some of her friends who needed sex like they needed food and drink.
It had been almost a year since she had found herself alone with a man in a bedroom, voluntarily, at least.
It had been a tearful last time with Jonathan, her boyfriend  of the time — but casual sex had never been among her hobbies.
She watched him as he switched on the light by the bed and drew the curtains.
No, It wasn't love.
Reassurance, warmth, sanity after the craziness and sadness of the past few weeks.
Nick stood by the bed, smiling, sipping his wine.
‘This is mad,’ she smiled.
She reached behind her neck and undid the clasp.
Her dress fell obediently to the floor around her ankles.
Standing semi-naked in the bedroom of a Jockey Club steward.
Yes, it was mad.
‘More,’ said Nick with some difficulty.
Kelly hooked her thumbs in the tops of her pants.
‘Turn the light off,’ she said.
He was a good lover, slow, gentle, aware of Kelly's needs almost before she was aware of them herself.
Once, feeling herself slipping away dangerously into another land, a land of sweet warmth, desire and sensation, she opened her eyes to see him watching her and, for a moment, Kelly felt uneasy, almost manipulated.
But then he whispered, ‘All right?’ and touched her again.
She closed her eyes, bit her lip and nodded.
Yes, she was all right.
Afterwards, they slept.
At three or four in the morning the telephone beside the bed rang shrilly.
Nick picked up the receiver and listened for a moment, before muttering ‘Wrong number’ and hanging up.
He turned to Kelly, smiled and kissed her softly, and then with renewed desire.
Kelly laughed softly.
‘Thank you, wrong number,’ she whispered.
It should have been a new beginning, a clean slate but, as she rode out the following morning, her head clouded from lack of sleep, Kelly knew that life was never that easy.
A rest in Ireland, a confession before the Jockey Club, possibly a new relationship — it all should have signified a break with the past, particularly the recent, unhappy past, but history can't be discarded like an old coat.
As soon as first lot pulled out that morning, she sensed that something had changed.
The lads were as cheerful as ever but guarded, like the possessors of unwelcome news.
Then there were the riding arrangements: she was on a four-year-old called Captive Audience.
Dennis was riding Shine On.
Today was to be his last serious gallop before Tokyo.
‘He's a lovely little ride, that one,’ Dennis called out to her as they rode along in the string.
‘Doesn't pull too hard.
You can place him just where you want him.’
Kelly looked at him.
Now she knew she was in for an unpleasant surprise.
It was never good news when Dennis was happy.
‘I know,’ she said.
‘I've ridden him before.’
‘By heck,’ Dennis slapped Shine On's neck.
‘This one's been going well.
I reckon he'll win in Tokyo.’
It was true that Shine On looked magnificent.
He had lost a bit of weight after the race at York but now seemed stronger, harder.
‘Are you riding him work?’
Kelly was unable to resist asking the question.
Dennis frowned, as if he weren't sure quite what was happening that morning.
‘No,’ he said.
‘I don't think I am.’
The string was walking round in a circle at the end of the gallops when Bill's Audi drew up.
A small figure was seated beside the trainer and it was only when the two men got out of the car and walked briskly towards them that Kelly saw that it was Cy McCray.
‘Oh yes,’ said Dennis, enjoying every moment.
‘Now I remember who's riding Shine On.
It's Cy.
D'you know him?
Good jockey.’
Bill and Cy were now standing a few yards from the string.
The trainer called Dennis over.
Jauntily, he slipped off Shine On's back and gave Cy a leg up.
‘Let's have Captive Audience over here then.’
Bill's voice gave nothing away but Kelly noticed that he avoided looking at her as he gave them their orders.
‘Thanks, Cy.’
Kelly looked straight ahead as they cantered down to the start of the gallop.
‘Hey, Kelly, I'm sorry, all right?’
The American sounded sincere.
‘Bill called me a couple of days ago.
What could I say?’
They pulled up at the end of the gallop.
‘Are you riding him in Tokyo?’
Cy shrugged.
‘Guess so.’
He busied himself adjusting his leathers.
He glanced up.
‘It's a tough break, Kelly.
I'm sorry it had to be me.
If I'd said no, he'd have booked somebody else.’
Kelly tried to smile gamely.
‘That's racing,’ she said.
‘Ready when you are.’
Cy nodded.
Bill's orders had been for Captive Audience to lead Shine On at racing speed over six furlongs, then for them both to stride out for home over the last two furlongs.
That's racing.
Kelly jumped Captive Audience off  smartly, glancing back to check that Shine On was with her.
Cy had him handily tucked in a couple of lengths behind her.
How many times had she heard the phrase that she had just used so easily.
Get robbed of a race in the weighing room, smash your shoulder up in a gallop — that's racing.
The wind whistled in her face bringing tears to her eyes.
Captive Audience was going easily but Kelly knew that behind her, Cy would be swinging off Shine On, who was in a different class to her horse.
Ride a big winner, hit the headlines — that's racing.
The six-furlong pole approached and Kelly heard Shine On moving closer to her.
His head was nodding beside her left boot.
Lose a ride to one of your best friends, on the horse people had said you rode better than anyone else — that too was racing.
Shine On was upsides her now.
She saw Cy change his grip on the reins; Shine On effortlessly moved into overdrive and, in a matter of yards, was well clear of her.
Captive Audience was tiring.
She rode him out over the last furlong and finished some six lengths behind Shine On.
Yes, that was racing.
‘Nice horse, isn't he?’ she said to Cy as they pulled up.
‘Sure is.’
Cy nodded.
‘He's a fucking flying machine.’
Bill was not one for lengthy explanations.
Standing in the middle of the yard, he called Kelly over after first lot had returned.
‘Captive Audience runs at Sandown on Saturday in the lads’ race,’he said.
‘Right,’ said Kelly.
She could see Dennis watching  them from one of the stables behind Bill.
‘And Cy rides Shine On in Tokyo,’ she said as casually as she could manage.
Bill looked embarrassed.
‘Sorry, I've been meaning to tell you.
Owner's orders.’
‘I thought Ibn Fayoud liked the way I rode.’
‘He did.’
Bill looked down.
‘It appears that he's changed his mind.’
‘And you?’
‘You know what I'd prefer but the man's got nine homes with me now.’
Behind him, Dennis smirked.
He might not ride winners these days, but just now and then all the disappointment of his life in racing was forgotten for one sweet moment.
She had it coming to her, that girl.
‘Come and have breakfast.’
Bill felt like a weight had been taken from him now that he'd told her.
‘Cy's in the house.’
Kelly smiled politely.
Just this once, she would risk being considered a bad loser.
‘No thanks,’ she said.
‘I have a couple of things to do.’
It was nine thirty when Kelly rang Nick's number.
As she had anticipated, he was out.
She left a message on his answering machine:
Nick, I wanted to thank you for last night.
For everything you said and for listening and for -’ She paused.
‘For everything.
I have a busy schedule for the next few days, so I may not be in touch.
Perhaps I'll see you racing.
Hope so anyway.
'Bye.’
It wasn't perfect, she reflected after she had put down the telephone, but it wasn't bad.
Friendly, open, but containing an unspoken message that Nick would hear.
Last night was last night; today's different.
Let's take this one day at a time.
Kelly sighed and looked at her watch.
It was time for second lot.
When in doubt, keep going.
That was what her father used to say.
Don't look to the right, to the left, or over your shoulder, but concentrate on where you're going.
Kelly sat in the jockeys' stand at Sandown and gave a quiet laugh.
Where the hell was she going?
She was no longer sure, but at least she had a job and was offered rides.
That was something.
Keep going.
Half an hour previously, Captive Audience had run to the best of his ability in the lads' race, plugging on one-paced up the Sandown hill to take second place.
It had been a rough race and Kelly had been glad that she had elected to be among the leaders throughout.
By the sound of it, World War III was breaking out behind her and after the race there had been a stewards' inquiry.
The last thing she needed right now was another confrontation with the bowler-hat brigade.
She was offered a spare ride in the last race, a two-year-old trained by Ian Gardem, for whom she had never ridden before.
She had time to kill before then.
As she looked down from the stand, the horses for the third race, a handicap over six furlongs, were filing out on to the racecourse.
Cy McCray was riding one of the joint favourites and, somewhat to her surprise, Harry Short had retained Damien Gould to ride Heraldic, a three-year-old with negligible form.
‘What's Harry doing bringing that yoke down to  Sandown?’ one of the jockeys sitting behind Kelly asked.
‘Spare place in the box, I suppose,’ his companion muttered.
‘He's got a horse running in the big race, hasn't he?’
‘It's a right camel, that horse.
Pulls like a train.
I saw it pissing off with an apprentice on the way down to the start at Chester.
He'd done a couple of circuits before they stopped.
That's probably why Damien's riding it and not his retained jockey.
That's the only type of animal he gets to ride these days.’
The two jockeys laughed.
Yes, Kelly reflected, there was something odd about it.
Harry Short rarely brought his horses south when they had no chance of winning and, on all known form, Heraldic was outclassed in this race.
And why put Gould up?
After Pendero's race, the trainer would hardly speak to him.
What was Short up to?
In spite of her determination to leave the past to look after itself, Kelly found herself speculating as to where the fat trainer fitted in with Jack Butler and Ibn Fayoud.
‘There he goes,’ one of the jockeys laughed.
Even by the standards of Harry's yard, Heraldic was no looker, a great, gangling colt with a head and neck that seemed to have been added to his body as an afterthought.
As his lad let him go, he set off towards the start flat out with his mouth open and his nose in the air.
For a brief moment, Kelly felt almost sorry for Damien Gould.
‘Christ!’
Both jockeys were staring horror-struck out on to the course.
Kelly looked up to see Heraldic bolting towards the  start with Damien clinging vainly upside down round his neck.
There was a gasp from spectators and a solitary scream as Damien fell towards the fast-moving ground, but instead of lying there he was yanked mercilessly forward as it because obvious that his foot had slipped through the iron and he was hung up.
Panicked, the horse dragged Damien along under its flailing legs towards the steeplechase fence, bumping his body like a yo-yo as it went.
‘Oh my God.’
Kelly covered her face with her hands.
It was a jockey's nightmare, being dragged under a horse's feet, held by a leather that won't break.
Damien's body appeared to be twisting and writhing like a fish on a line but there was no escape for him.
A groundsman ran on to the course waving his arms in a vain attempt to head the horse off but Heraldic was panicking even more now.
Maddened by the limp rag doll banging against his legs, he veered to the left.
Kelly could feel her stomach turning.
‘Why doesn't the leather break?’ she muttered as the home continued its terrifying charge downhill.
And then suddenly it was all over as Damien's body smashed with a sickening thud into the solid frame of the fence.
A stunned silence fell over the racecourse as he lay motionless in the grass while Heraldic galloped on.
Kelly's eyes flicked from the body on the ground to the horse, trampling the saddle beneath its unfeeling hoofs.
Then she strained her eyes.
There was something else.
As she realized what it was, she turned and threw up.
Damien's left leg was still in the iron.
A sense that what had just happened involved her in  some way made her pull herself together and run down on to the course where racecourse attendants were already putting up a screen.
It was no accident, she thought as she ran.
It was too much of a coincidence.
She hurried across the course and pushed through a knot of ghoulish spectators who were standing gloomily by the area which had been cordoned off.
She walked round the ambulance.
The stretcher holding Damien's inert body was just being lifted into it.
An ambulanceman held out an arm.
‘Sorry, love,’ he said.
‘We've got to get him to hospital.’
The man pulled himself in after the stretcher, the doors were closed and the ambulance began to move off, its siren wailing mournfully.
Kelly headed back towards the stand.
Heraldic had finally pulled himself up at the start.
He was being led back by his lad who held the saddle under one arm.
Kelly stared at it and the lad hurried on.
Someone touched her arm.
‘Cup of tea?’
‘No,’ she muttered.
‘That was no accident.’
She turned to walk to the weighing room.
She had a horse to ride in the last.
‘So it's another winner for the girl wonder?’
Dermot Kinane liked to bring a ray of sunshine wherever he went.
If someone had told him a nuclear bomb was targeted on County Limerick, he'd he delighted that his heating bills would be reduced.
But that Sunday morning, Kelly was in no mood for optimism.
‘Yes,’ she said unenthusiastically.
‘It was a nice little horse.
Gardem says he'll be offering me more rides.’
She held the phone to her ear with her shoulder and sat up in bed, pushing the newspapers on to the floor.
Normally, Sunday breakfast time spent reading the papers in bed was one of Kelly's favourite moments, but not today.
The news on the radio had seen to that.
Damien Gould had died during the night.
‘Sure, you'll be first jockey to a big stable within the next couple of seasons,’ Kinane was saying.
‘What did I always —?’
‘You heard about Damien Gould?’
Kelly interrupted.
There was a pause.
‘Yes,’ Dermot said quietly.
‘Poor bastard.
Horrible thing to happen.’
‘It didn't just happen, Dermot.
I think it was murder.’
‘Ah, Kelly,’ he sighed.
‘What did we agree when you were over here?
No more conspiracy theories, wasn't it?’
‘Dermot, I saw the saddle when the lad brought the horse back.
At the time I thought something must have been tampered with.
It wasn't until later that I realised what it was.
I'd seen it but it hadn't sunk in.
The irons were much too big.
More like hunting irons.
But when I went back to have another look they'd been changed.
The lad must have done it.
It's a terrible thing to say, but I think the lad may have pulled the iron over Damien's foot as he let him go.’
‘Jesus.’
‘If I'd only realized sooner —’
‘Kelly, I know it doesn't look good but for God's sake, leave it be.’
Dermot's voice took on a new urgency.
‘Tell your friends at the Jockey Club.
Leave it to the experts.’
A vision of Colonel Beamish, listening to her with undisguised scepticism, loomed before her.
‘Experts?’
She laughed bitterly.
‘Two days after I tell them about Damien Gould, he's dead.
That's where their discreet inquiries have led.’
A thought occurred to Kelly.
‘Anyway, what about your part of the deal?
Did you find out anything about Ibn Fayoud or Butler?’
‘I think Jack Butler's the most likely of the two.
They say he's a hard bastard, like his dad.
There's rumours that he's involved in some sort of organized crime caper outside racing, but it's difficult to find out more.
He doesn't like gossip, our Jack.
Those who gossip about him tend to meet with nasty accidents.’
‘Like Damien Gould.’
‘Could be.
There was one other thing.
Before your time, during the sixties, there were finance restrictions in the UK.
It was made very difficult for businessmen to ship money abroad.’
‘You think Butler was involved?’
‘Not so far as I know.
It was the method used for smuggling that interested me.
Bloodstock, mares, stallions, used to travel abroad loaded up with notes.
For some reason, the Customs inspectors never suspected homes as smugglers.’
‘You mean Ibn Fayoud might be entering his horses abroad as part of some sort of smuggling operation?’
‘It's a thought.
He needs the money.
The word is that Ibn Fayoud's in Jack Butler's pocket.
So you watch yourself in Tokyo.’
Kelly smiled wryly.
‘That's one thing I don't have to worry about,’ she said.
‘I've been jocked off.
Cy McCray's riding Shine On.’
‘Why's that?’
Dermot sounded almost as angry as Kelly had felt when she'd heard the news.
‘It's the owner's decision.’
‘Bastard.’
Then his voice lifted.
‘Oh well, maybe it's for the best.’
After she had put down the phone, Kelly sat deep in  thought.
It was almost as if someone were keeping her away from trouble.
There was no other explanation for Ibn Fayoud's insisting that she shouldn't ride Shine On.
Maybe Dermot was right.
She should leave it to the Jockey Club, suggest to Nick that he take a closer look at Harry's yard for a start.
He seemed to be up to his fat neck in this.
There were some aspects of her job that Margaret Stanhope really did not like, and spending every other Sunday in bed with Reg Butler was one of them.
All right, it was at the Sheraton Park and there was champagne and chocolates and the odd item of expensive jewellery, but then there was also Reg Butler.
Margaret looked across at him as he checked his pools in the News of the World .
He was not one for the romantic niceties, was Reg.
Do it, read the papers.
Maybe do it again, order up a bit of nosh and champagne.
Talk a bit of business.
Then it was ‘Fuckin' ‘ell, is that the time?’, back into the vulgar check suit and home to his little wife, who had been told that he had a business meeting in the City.
Not that she believed him.
She knew her Reg.
She was probably delighted that someone else had to submit to his unsavoury needs now and then.
Seventy-two, and getting filthier by the minute, Reg Butler had sex like other men of his age spent Sundays digging their vegetable patch down at the allotment.
It got him out of the house, gave him a bit of exercise, kept him young.
The only difference between them was that the bloke on the allotment was  probably more careful when he prepared the soil, gentler when he started digging.
‘Reg?’
Margaret Stanhope saw by the watch that never left his wrist that their unromantic interlude would soon be drawing to a close.
‘In a minute.’
Reg Butler frowned as he read the newspaper.
He was on the racing page now.
His reading routine was always the same.
Pools.
Racing.
Bonk stories.
‘Shame about the Gould feller,’ he muttered.
‘Nasty accident, that.’
‘Reg, it's about Jack.’
‘I said,’ Reg Butler looked up from his newspaper, ‘in a minute.’
Margaret sighed.
What she put up with.
She couldn't nag because Reg said he got enough of that at home.
And she knew she was expendable; one word out of place and he would find another Sunday partner.
In fact, it was only because he was chronically mean that she had lasted this long.
‘Reg Butler was newer a fuckin' punter,’ he had once said.
‘Never will be.’
And, frankly, who else would do this for free?
Since the age of seventeen, Margaret had regarded her body as a tradeable commodity; she saw a fortnightly meeting between the sheets with an elderly bookmaker as an investment, a means to an end.
It helped, albeit in an unpleasant way, in her campaign to become the next Mrs Jack Butler.
‘It's just that he looks like bottling the Tokyo job,’ she said quietly.
Reg Butler took a long drag on his cigar and glanced up from his newspaper.
‘You what?’ he  said, expelling a cloud of smoke in her direction.
Margaret stifled a cough.
‘He's pulled that little girl jockey off the job.
Says he doesn't trust her.
She's too nosey.’
‘He told me.
All the more reason to send her out there, I said.
If It goes wrong, she's in the shit with Ibn Fayoud.
We can't lose either way.’
‘That's what I said to Jack.’
‘And?’
Margaret was pleased to see that she now had Reg's full attention.
‘And he still got Ibn Fayoud to jock her off.
Some Yank's riding now.’
‘Fuckin' useless, that boy,’ Reg said, as if none of this came as a surprise to him.
‘I think he likes her.’
‘Jesus.’
‘But I've got an idea, Reg.
A little plan.’
Reg Butler swept the News of the World off the bed.
This was one evil woman, no doubt about it, but she knew how to do it.
These days he liked a woman who knew how to do it.
‘Later,’ he said, resting his cigar carefully in an ashtray.
He stroked Margaret's hair.
‘What is the problem with that son of mine?’
‘He's soft, isn't he?’
Reg Butler took her hand, kissed the palm and pushed it downwards.
‘Not like his old dad, eh?’
Margaret smiled professionally.
‘No, Reg,’ she said.
‘Not at all like his old dad.’
Nick Morley had said he'd be visiting the Whetstone Park Stud that Sunday afternoon.
There had been  talk of meeting for a drink in the evening, but the talk had taken place at five in the morning as Kelly was hurriedly slipping into her clothes and now Nick seemed to have forgotten.
There was no answer from his London flat or from his car.
The Damien Gould business couldn't wait.
On an impulse, Kelly decided to drive to the stud and catch him there.
Charles Caldecott, who owned the Whetstone Park Stud, was an odd character whom Kelly had met a couple of times and had never really taken to.
He had been an unsuccessful amateur jockey some fifteen years ago and had then been assistant to a leading jump trainer in Lambourn.
He had been a flop there too because, after a couple of years, he had left amidst rumours of misconduct.
Some said Charles had been having an affair with an owner's wife, others that he was involved in some gambling scam.
Whatever the reason, no other reputable yard would touch him and for a while Charles drifted about on the fringe of racing.
He ran a transport company, sold insurance schemes to jockeys, worked for a dodgy outfit that specialized in horse tonics.
Among racing people, Charles Caldecott was something of a joke.
Then he got lucky.
His father died.
The family money, acquired from mining interests in South Africa.
was divided between his brother, a rather dim stockbroker, and Charles.
He invested in a stud.
To everyone's astonishment — after all, Caldecott's knowledge of bloodstock could be summarized on the back of postage stamp — it prospered.
There were still rumours that the Caldecott business methods were not above suspicion, but he became part of the  establishment.
His yearlings sold for astonishing sums.
The Arabs liked him.
Charles had made it.
All the same, it was surprising that Nick dealt with him, Kelly thought to herself as she drove her car down the drive of the Stud.
They seemed so different; Caldecott was the epitome of the public school chump that Nick detested.
They were sitting together in the garden, their backs to the gate through which Kelly appeared.
For a moment, she hesitated.
She hated arriving at places unannounced and, although Charles Caldecott had always been at his most ingratiating when he met her, that had been on social occasions.
The two men sat with catalogues in front of them, deep in conversation.
Then she remembered Damien.
The stirrup.
Nick had always said that his Jockey Club duties came before his business.
She would take him at his word.
Caldecott saw her first.
‘Why, er, Kelly,’ he said, standing up.
‘What a lovely surprise.’
‘I'm sorry to turn up without warning like this,’ Kelly said.
‘I was told that Mr Morley was here and I just needed a brief word.’
Nick was standing too, smiling, holding the catalogue under his arm.
He was pleased to see her.
‘Kelly, I'm sorry, I meant to phone you.
Whatever are you doing here?’
‘There's something you ought to know and it couldn't wait.’
‘Of course it couldn't,’ Charles Caldecott said heartily.
‘I'll get you a cup and saucer and you can join us  for tea.’
He walked off briskly towards the house.
‘Nick, I'm sorry, just turning up unannounced.
But I had to talk to you today.’
‘That's OK.
Charles is the biggest gossip in racing but I don't mind people talking about us,’ said Nick, grinning slightly.
‘It's not about us.
It's about Damien Gould.’
She told him what she had seen at Sandown.
He appeared to be only half listening.
‘Kelly, it sounds implausible,’ he said finally.
‘And anyway, what am I meant to do on a Sunday?’
Kelly glanced towards the house.
Charles Caldecott was returning, a cup and saucer in his hand.
‘You could go and see Harry Short and ask him why Damien was riding his horse,’ she said sharply.
‘Of course.’
Nick looked contrite.
‘You're right.
I'll ring you later.’
‘Now,’ said Caldecott.
‘Shall I be mother and pour or d'you want me to disappear while you two talk Jockey Club business.’
‘That's fine, Charles,’ Nick smiled.
The colour had returned to his cheeks.
‘We've sorted it all out.’
‘A steward's work is never done, eh?’
Caldecott laughed with hearty insincerity.
He turned to Kelly.
‘By jove, that was a nice winner you rode for Gardem yesterday.
Are you going to be first jockey for him next year?’
Kelly smiled.
‘Hardly,’ she said.
The three of them talked politely about horses and racing for a few minutes, before Kelly decided it was time to leave.
She had done what she could.
‘Thank you for the tea,’ she said, rising to her  feet.
The two men stood up and said goodbye.
‘Goodness,’ she heard Caldecott say as she walked across the lawn towards her car.
‘What a little popsy that girl is.’
‘I'm sorry I was a bit short with you this afternoon,’ Nick said when he rang Kelly later that night.
‘It was just that I had other things on my mind.
Anyway, I got one of my lads to go up and see Harry Short.’
‘And?’
‘He's just phoned from the car to say that as far as he could tell Harry had nothing to do with it.
He seemed genuinely upset that the boy had been killed.
Apparently he'd rung up for the ride.
It wasn't Harry who'd booked him.
He said he'd been please because his own jockey hated the horse.’
‘And what about the lad who led the horse up?’
Kelly asked.
‘He's only been working for Harry for a few weeks.
Came from a yard in the south.
My lad said he was still suffering from the shock of seeing Gould's leg in the iron.’
‘Maybe he never meant Damien to end up dead, but I'm certain he had something to do with it.’
‘Well, let's hope we find out.
The investigation is still going on.’
‘A steward's work is never done,’ Kelly quipped.
‘Precisely,’ said Nick seriously.
‘Precisely.’
It was just like old times.
Annie and Kelly sat drinking sweet tea in a noisy café in the centre of Newmarket.
It had been an uneventful morning, apart from the  trainer behaving with more surliness than usual, and Kelly needed to talk to Annie.
Catch up on the gossip, she said.
Girl talk.
She managed to guide the conversation round to Ibn Fayoud.
Lightly, she asked Annie why Bill Templeman had booked Cy McCray for Shine On in the Japan Cup.
Annie sighed.
‘It's like Bill told you,’ she said quietly.
‘Ibn Fayoud wanted experience.’
‘Listen, Annie, you can't tell lies to old liars.’
Kelly sipped her tea.
She had been friends with Annie long enough to know when she was holding back on her.
‘What really happened?’
‘All right.’
Annie gave up.
‘Ibn Fayoud rang late at night.
Eleven thirty.
You can imagine Bill's reaction.’
‘I'm amazed he answered it even!’
‘There was something about Ibn Fayoud's voice, he told me.
Something…’
‘Wired?’
Annie laughed.
‘Yes, he was probably on something.
But Bill said he seemed frightened.
Like a little boy.
Almost pleading.’
‘So he listened.’
‘Right.
Ibn Fayoud talked and talked.
He seemed to think that the Tokyo race was particularly important.
He said that his future plans as an owner were very uncertain at the moment.’
‘Meaning?’
‘Bill took it to mean that he might have to pull out of the yard or even out of racing altogether.’
‘Which still doesn't explain why he dumped the one person who knows how to ride Shine On.’
Kelly pushed her cup of tea away from her.
None of it made any sense.
‘That part of what Bill told you was true.
Ibn Fayoud said that the stakes were too high to risk using an apprentice.’
‘D'you think McCray had got at him?’
Annie shook her head.
‘No,’ she said.
‘It was Bill who suggested Cy when it was clear that Ibn Fayoud would take his horses away from the yard rather than use you.’
‘Nice, isn't it?
After the winner I rode for him at York.’
‘There's something odd about it.’
Kelly thought for a moment.
‘I was really looking forward to the trip, too.
Maybe —’ She didn't like play-acting for her friend, pretending that the thought had just occurred to her, but this was important.
‘Maybe I could go anyway.
As a lad.’
‘You'd do that?’
Annie looked surprised.
‘Of course.
It's all experience.
And I'd like to see how Shine On goes.
Would Bill agree?’
‘Why not?’
Annie smiled.
‘You could keep your old friend Dennis in line.
And we've got to pick up a mare that Ibn Fayoud's bought out there.
I'll talk to him.’
‘Promise?’
‘Trust me.’
It was as they left the café that Kelly noticed a Lamborghini, bearing the number plate FAY 1, badly parked outside a chemist's shop on the High Street.
She told Annie that she had to do some shopping, then doubled back and waited.
It was too good an opportunity to miss.
Ibn Fayoud didn't like mornings and he didn't like country air.
Right now, he was overdosing on both.
That was why he needed a hit of Valium before he headed back to London, to his bed.
Sometimes being a racehorse owner was tough on the nerves.
Ibn Fayoud wasn't a normal user.
He needed to come down from a greater height than most.
Last night, he must have done about three grams of the white stuff, plus cognac to stop the shakes, plus not going to bed all night, plus having to behave like a serious grown-up with his trainer and make sure his homes were going to the right races in the right countries at the right time, plus a screaming anxiety attack about his father and Butler and the mess his life was in, plus the horrific combined effects of the morning and the country air.
Now that was stress.
‘Are you sure this is right?’
The small grey-haired chemist returned from the back of the shop, still bearing Ibn Fayoud's prescription.
‘The quantity seems —’
‘It's correct,’ Ibn Fayoud interrupted through clenched teeth.
He fixed the man with his cold black eyes.
‘And it's urgent.’
The man went off, muttering to himself.
Ibn Fayoud clenched his fists to stop himself trembling.
Country bumpkin.
Racist.
They didn't know what it was like, these people.
‘Looks more like a home prescription to me,’ the man said gloomily when he returned with a phial of pills.
Ibn Fayoud, holding out his hand, flashed him a gleaming, insincere smile.
‘They're for my wife.
And she's not a horse.’
Emerging from the chemist, he winced as the morning sun danced around his brain.
He walked quickly towards his car, got in, and fumbled with the bottle of pills.
He was just cursing the child lock which his sweating, trembling hands were unable to work when he noticed the girl jockey walking towards his car.
Shit.
There was no way to avoid her.
She was smiling at him.
It was instinct — the natural reaction of a predatory male — that made Ibn Fayoud smile back and press down the automatic window beside him.
‘Hello there,’ he said.
His mouth felt dry.
His body was screaming for relief.
‘Morning, sir.’
Kelly Connor gave a polite little bow, glancing at the phial of pills in his hand.
‘Everything sorted out with Mr Templeman?’
‘Absolutely fine.’
The girl was leaning on the car door, her face unnervingly close to his.
Within Ibn Fayoud's racked, confused person, there was a moment of conflict.
His body, out of sheer force of sexual habit, wanted her; his brain, despite the ravages of the previous night, was sending out warning signals.
‘Cy riding the horses everywhere, is he?’
Ibn Fayoud looked uneasy.
‘Not at all,’ he said.
‘I hope you'll be riding for me again soon.
Now I must —’
‘Me too,’ Kelly interrupted with a sweet smile.
It was true what they said about Ibn Fayoud.
The sweat was pouring down his forehead.
The man was a serious user.
‘Especially after York,’ she added conversationally.
‘York?’
Ibn Fayoud managed to say.
‘That was a social thing.
This is business.’
‘Oh, I didn't mean the Flaxton dance with Jack  Butler.’
Kelly was amused to see the Arab flinch at the name.
‘I meant York races.’
Ibn Fayoud smiled and glanced at his watch.
The pills rattled in his hand.
‘Better be going,’ he said almost imploringly.
‘Are you all right, sir?’
Kelly looked at him more closely.
‘You don't seem quite yourself.’
‘Fine.
I'm fine.’
Kelly made no move.
‘If you happen to see Mr Butler, you can tell him I'll be going to Tokyo anyway.’
Ibn Fayoud half closed his eyes as if someone had turned a knife in his guts.
‘I just want to see how things go.’
‘Things?’
Ibn Fayoud fiddled with the car keys and eventually managed to start the engine.
Kelly stood back.
‘Goodbye, sir,’ she said, smiling as the Lamborghini drew away.
Ibn Fayoud was in control of nothing, least of all himself.
The user used.
But if he was the puppet, who was pulling the strings and to what dance?
Jack Butler really didn't like the idea that he had been nobbled and worse than that, nobbled by a girl.
On the surface, his routine had changed little: travelling around the country, shaking hands, keeping his staff in order, checking his contacts were behaving themselves, sleeping with his girlfriends.
But he was more withdrawn, tetchy.
His father was on his back night and day.
Do this, do that.
However bent, however evil Jack was, it was never bad enough for his father.
One spark of decency and Jack was going soft.
A hint of humanity and he  was a disgrace to the family name.
Deep down Jack Butler was a simple man — give him a couple of Jaguars, a regular income pushing the half mill, a half-dozen talented sack-artists, preferably blond, and he'd be happy.
But Reg wanted more.
For Reg, bookmaking was a mere step along the road to riches and power on the grand scale.
In a rare moment of fatherly frankness, he had once told Jack of his dreams of floating the company on the stock market, of the Reg Butler (Entertainments) Corporation being a name in the City, of maybe even being Lord Reg one day.
For services to industry.
Moodily, Jack stabbed the intercom on his desk.
‘Get me General Winstanley,’ he said.
Services to industry?
Services to brutality and corruption, more like.
Services to keeping the National Health supplied with patients.
Services to giving his only son more grief than any mortal should have to bear.
There was a polite ‘beep’ from the intercom.
‘He's out for a walk at present, Jack.
He'll call you when he gets in.
Should be a few minutes.’
That was another one.
Margaret Stanhope.
Jesus, that woman had turned out to be the biggest mistake of his life.
All right, so she was an adequate fixer, she helped him cut corners, smoothed out the rougher edges of his life.
But these days she was stepping way out of line, coming on like she had something on him, like she was something more than a two-bit secretary.
Ever since York.
She knew too much to be fired and she refused to be bought out with money or offers of promotion.
All she wanted was to be by his side.
What had happened?
How come Jack Butler was no longer in charge?
How come, all of a sudden, everything was out of control?
Ever since York.
That was the worst.
Wanting someone, like he wanted Kelly Connor, was no novelty to Jack — hardly a day passed when it didn't happen to him — but a quick telephone call and a Suzi or a Debra, one of his sexual Samaritans, would be there to make it feel better.
This was different.
Thanks to Margaret, her box of drugs and her camera, Kelly was beyond his reach probably for ever.
Jack leant back in his chair, put his feet on the desk and stared out of the window.
Was that all?
The fact that she was unavailable?
That she was virtually unique in that she would say no to Jack Butler?
He sighed.
Hardly.
He found that he wanted the sort of things girls, his wife even, demanded from him — chat, company, sharing.
Not just need, but affection.
It was like discovering an old trick, something he hadn't done for years and had thought was dead — unnerving but not entirely unpleasurable.
Jack Butler had discovered he could still love.
Shit.
That was all he needed.
The intercom sounded once more.
‘General Winstanley for you,’ said Margaret.
Jack picked up the phone.
‘Put him on.’
He rubbed his eyes as if to rid himself of thoughts of Kelly Connor.
‘David,’ he said with a dangerous, false heartiness.
‘How ya doin'?
Good.’
He interrupted the small talk.
‘Then you can do something for me.’
The truth was that General Winstanley did quite  a lot for Jack.
He told him which of his fellow owners were open to a spot of friendly blackmail.
when they had a horse running that stood to lose the firm a lot of money.
He put in a good word for him at meetings of the Jockey Club.
He landed him invitations to society dances where Jack would normally have been lucky to be collecting coats at the door.
Poor old General David Winstanley.
His weakness for girls from an escort agency run by an old friend of Jack's had cost him dear over the years.
Mind you, he was never Mr Co-Operative.
Even before Jack had given him his instructions he was moaning, silly old bastard.
‘Shut up, General,’ said Jack, suddenly losing patience.
‘It's a simple job.
Any of your horses running next week?
Well, they are now.
I want Marking Time and that three-year-old filly of yours to run at Kempton on Saturday.
Of course they're ready to fucking run.
Otherwise your trainer wouldn't have entered them.
And get him to book Kelly Connor.’
There were sounds of protest from the other end of the telephone.
‘Bollocks to the stable jockey.
Bollocks to what your poxy trainer wants.
You tell them.
You're a general, right.
Give them their marching orders.
Otherwise I'll give you yours.
If I don't see their names in the overnight declarations on Friday afternoon, I'll be on the blower to the News of the World before you can say ‘flagellation’, right?
Right.’
He slammed the phone down and allowed himself a small smile.
He liked dealing with army types.
They understood orders.
Predictably, Margaret Stanhope found an excuse to interrupt his thoughts within moments of his conversation with the general.
‘Just a couple of letters to sign, Jack,’ she said lightly.
As he glanced over his correspondence, she muttered, ‘You'll do anything to help that little jockey, won't you?’
Jack looked up sharply.
‘I've told you about listening to my calls.
What I do about Tokyo is my business.’
‘Your business is my —’
‘Close the fucking door behind you.’
The look of hurt astonishment which crossed Margaret's face pleased Jack.
He hadn't talked to her like that for ages.
It felt good.
Maybe everything was going to be all right.
This time he would do it himself, without Margaret, without any of her pet goons who could be guaranteed to get it wrong — to maim when they were meant to frighten, to kill when they were meant to maim.
Jack sighed.
If you wanted something done, you just had to do it yourself.
You couldn't get the staff these days.
For Kelly, it was just like it used to be.
The early-morning call, then down to the yard to get the horses ready for their big day.
She hadn't been a lad for a couple of years now, but she knew the routine.
Shine On had to be at the airport by ten.
The four o'clock call would give her enough time to make it with ease.
She smiled as she sipped her coffee.
It was the one part of the job her father had hated.
Getting up early, making time, punctuality.
He would doubtless  disapprove of what Kelly was doing.
Turning down two good, last-minute rides at Kempton in order to be a lad.
But she needed to know.
She had gone too far towards discovering who killed her father to turn back now.
She set the answering machine, grabbed her bag and locked up the flat.
Travelling with Dennis was hardly going to be a delight, but it would be worth it.
Tokyo was not just about Shine On winning a big international race and collecting a top breeding mare, she was sure of it.
Minutes later, she was down in the yard, unlocking the feed shed in the morning darkness.
She'd agreed with the head lad that there was no need for him to get up extra early, but he'd insisted on leaving Shine On's feed already made up.
She walked across the yard to check Shine On.
As soon as Dennis arrived, she would bandage him up and they would be on their way by five thirty.
She glanced at her watch.
It was unusual for Dennis to be late.
It was as she approached Shine On's box that she noticed a torch light in the tack room.
‘Dennis?’ she said quietly.
The light was snuffed out.
Kelly walked over quickly to Shine On's box to check that he was unharmed.
Switching on the light, she saw that he was fine.
She turned out the light and reaching for a pitchfork crept towards the tack room.
It was unlocked and in darkness.
When Kelly turned the light on, there was no one to be seen and nothing seemed to have been moved.
From beyond the other end of the yard, she heard  the distant whistling of Dennis, getting closer.
She turned.
Perhaps he would have an explanation.
She was just about to call out when she felt the iron grip of an arm clasped round her throat.
Before she could scream a damp rag had been clamped over her mouth, and suddenly there was pain behind her eyes and all was darkness.
The man carried the limp body to where the Saab was parked.
Expertly, he tied her hands behind her back, felt inside her pockets and took out a key.
He unlocked the boot and, almost tenderly, lifted the body into it.
He looked at her for a moment.
She would be out for an hour.
He would have to lock the boot but he would leave the key in the ignition.
By the time she was discovered, it would be too late for her to catch the plane.
The man paused before closing the boot.
Her face looked calm and beautiful as it slept its enforced slumber, the lips slightly parted, the dark curls spilling over a pale cheek.
Please God, she'd never discover who had done this to her.
She hated him enough already.
First drugs and now chloroform.
It was no way to start a relationship.
The man closed the boot quietly and put the key into the ignition of the Saab.
He was whispering something, repeating it, like a chant, a mantra, a magic spell to make everything better.
‘You always,’ he said, swaying slightly in the darkness.
‘You always hurt the one you love.’