

Bus Ticket
Zoë Fairbairns
This is a very short story about being in the women's movement every day of your life.
I used to travel by bus a lot, so I had a season ticket.
You had to sign your name on the front, and you had to delete whichever does not apply to you of ‘Mr, Mrs or Miss’.
None of them applied to me, so I deleted them all and put ‘Ms’.
Now ‘Ms’ was by then accepted — well, tolerated — by such prestigious and indispensable bodies in Britain as the Inland Revenue, the Guardian , the Passport Office, the Post Office, the Co-op Bank and Hackney public library.
I also had high hopes of the Electricity Board, particularly as I had taken to cutting ‘Miss’ off my meter reading cards with scissors and it was one of those cards you aren't allowed to cut or mutilate as it upsets the computer.
All this notwithstanding, ‘Ms, was not acceptable to the conductor of the No. 14 bus that Monday.
He snatched my ticket, demanded to know if I was Miss or Mrs. glanced at my ringless left hand when I refused to answer, crossed out ‘Ms’ and wrote ‘Miss’.
I'm not what you'd call the retiring type, and I rarely flinch from a fight when I'm sure of my own righteousness; but there is one thing I cannot cope with, and that is unprovoked aggression.
I am prepared to accept that anyone who knows me may dislike me, but when someone who cannot dislike me because they don't know me, attacks me, I collapse inside, I lose eloquence, I get frightened, sometimes I cry.
So I said nothing to this conductor, just wrote down his staff number.
When it was time to get off the bus, he gave me what I thought was a friendly smile, and said, ‘It's all right, dear, I agree with you.’
I was encouraged.
‘I don't know what you are,’ he went on, ‘I don't know if you're a boy or a girl.’
He then invited my fellow passengers to speculate on the subject.
I left the bus, went to an inspector, reported the incident.
He promised to look into my complaint and ceremoniously restored my defaced  season ticket with a rubber.
He suggested I confirm my complaint in writing.
I spent the day between anger and guilt.
So what if I report him.
So he gets disciplined or yelled at or fired.
He's an oppressed worker doing a horrible job.
Perhaps he heard today that he's going to be evicted, his mother's sick, his kid's been thrown out of school.
Hasn't he got enough to worry about without being clobbered over the head by the injured pride of a woman fortunate enough to have the time and the brain to worry about the title on her season ticket?
Wouldn't the right thing be to write to London Transport withdrawing the complaint, and send a friendly letter to the conductor himself explaining the meaning of ‘Ms’ and asking his tolerance for opinions differing from his own?
Such thoughts soothed me, and then the reality of what had happened would come shooting through my consciousness like a speedboat churning up a calm sea: how dare he decree that I must wear a badge indicating, for men's convenience, whether I was available or already had an owner?
How dare he speculate on the subject, then write his conclusions on a document I must carry round with me and display for a month?
How dare he whip up strangers to hostility because I didn't wear clothes clearly indicating my sex — what was it to them whether I was a woman or a man?
Then I was showered with the realisation that I had spent half a working day thinking these thoughts, during which time, if I had put a foot wrong, I would have immediately proved, to some people's satisfaction, the innate unsuitability of women for this kind of work; and that clinched it; and I wrote the letter and confirmed the complaint.
Wouldn't you?
There is now a space for ‘Ms’ on a London Transport bus season ticket.
The story is true.
Every word.
Well, not quite every word.
You see, the conductor wasn't a he but a she.
Which somehow makes it different and somehow doesn't.
And I still don't know if what I did was right, or even worth the bother; and I still resent every minute I spend wondering.
Womb With a View
Michele Roberts
From the kitchen window you can see the whole of King's Cross station spread out underneath you: the massive iron and stone curve of the station building itself, the tatty warehouses and sheds.
And then the railway lines themselves, snaking out secretly and backwards and then suddenly fanning out into a thousand arteries of shining black steel leaping through London and beyond to the places you can only imagine, the lines pulsing her brain with the excitement of where they're going.
Maggie's relation to them in space doesn't change that much; you can see them from the kitchen; you can't from the bedsitting room.
When you're five flights down on the ground again you re only really conscious of the high brick wall opposite, and the noise.
The railway lines define the neighbourhood all right: Railway Hotel on the corner that the Council's started using for temporary accommodation for other single mothers not so lucky as she, as the social worker kept telling her; Railway Cafe opposite the launderette with coloured transfers on the window and a goldfish tank next to the curry puffs and ketchup bottles.
Railway Tavern where Ted sometimes drops in to meet her on Friday nights.
The trains time her life, crashing through fitful dreams at night, slackening off in the early hours.
roaring her out of bed in the mornings faster than any alarm clock.
If she's in a good mood she'll time Ted's egg by the 8.05 to Edinburgh; on the other hand, on a bad day she'll shout at Ted to make his own bloody breakfast and curse at Frieda for wasting good food on her plate.
Maggie awaken from the damp heavy warmth of Ted's body dead in sleep and the blankets piled on the single bed with a dip in the middle brushes her hair and clutches back at the ribbon of dreams from the night before.
Maggie awoken from dreams of flying, from dreams of women with long hair building houses of hair, sits on the lavatory calculating whether she can afford a new pair of tights this week.
A crash on the stairs and a thumping on the door opposite jerks her attention back to the lavatory door which badly needs repainting.
You're never alone in this  world, away from other people's demands, except in the lavatory.
And this one doesn't really count, considering it's shared with four other tenants.
That'll be Jo, with her kid Lucy.
Never late Jo is, half-past eight sharp like a bloody train steaming up and come on Maggie for Christ's sake they close the nursery doors at nine you should know that by now.
OK, OK, I'm coming, put the milkbottles out, powder her nose, don't let the neighbours see you leave, Ted, can't trust them not to tell the welfare and get my money stopped, find Frieda's windcheater and out they go.
Out on the street the fog sears the back of your nostrils and the cold sticks a needle up every pore.
You wouldn't know it was autumn except for the odd dry leaf blowing down the road from the cemetery.
Kick in the gut from the air though, somehow.
Twenty years ago she was Lucy and Frieda's age, putting on school uniform for the first day of the winter term, long serge skirt suddenly covering the scratched knees used to shorts, thick woolly stockings sliding strangely up the white smooth skin, nylon suspender belt holding in her stomach making her think of the opening under the dark bush below.
Wonder if things will change for these two, twenty years on, poor little buggers.
No fathers, and the nursery staff working devotedly to wipe out the evil influence of their feckless mothers.
What with the wind and the trains and the traffic and her woollen hat pressed tightly over her ears it's hard to hear what Jo's saying.
She yells back.
‘What?’
‘I said, are you coming to the meeting tonight?’
‘What meeting?’
‘The women's meeting, you dummy, that lot from the Charter, the Working Women's Charter or whatever they call it —’
‘Oh, them —’
They'd met them in the pub a couple of weeks back.
Long skirts, talking about unions and equal pay.
Jo and Maggie and some of the others from work had gone back last week and met them again.
They wanted to get them into a union, lots of ideas about what they could do for you.
She hadn't really forgotten, hadn't wanted to think about it really.
Anger of a kind; what could those girls, students most likely, know about her life, bloody cheek to come wading in and try and organise your life like that.
They'd listened to what Jo had said though.
Jo always had had the gift of the gab, she could make a stone laugh doing her imitation of Mr Silver trying to get her up behind the cloakroom door.
Maggie had stayed quiet, gone home thinking if you think you're oppressed mate then listen to this.
And then back home with Ted and Frieda both asleep and Jo gone, it had all burst up in tears Maggie had  squashed down with cigarettes.
What right did they have, that lot, getting you to think about how bloody life was, sitting in this poky flat with Ted always so tired he never played with Frieda or talked to herself and fell asleep straight after having it off.
And now here's Jo dancing around saying come to another meeting.
‘I don't know —’ Maggie yells back as they cross the main road at a run.
‘Ted's got his union meeting tonight,’ she lies, ‘I'll have to be in with Frieda.
And anyway, there's a programme I wanted to watch —’
They're at the nursery.
Quick kiss on the cheek for Lucy and Frieda, watch their skinny legs scuttle across the yard and in through the corrugated iron hut's battered doors.
Quarter to nine.
Time for a cup of tea before they're due in down the road.
Silvex Modes, do pop in, ladies, convenient hours to suit you and the kiddies, and we'll lovingly screw you over for fifty pence an hour.
At least there's no awkward questions asked, no needing to bother with insurance, does mean there's a bit to add to her measly SS giro every week.
Jo and Maggie, both early twenties but looking thirty, dressed by jumble sales as they can't afford Silvex Modes prices, gaze at each other over the plastic pots of mustard on the formica table top.
‘What's this programme then, lovey?’
‘The Amazons, it's called.
This woman says there's still some of them around.
You know, women with only one tit, they cut the other off so they could shoot better with a bow and arrow, they live together, all women and no men, this woman's written a play about them —’
Lovely face, Jo has, despite the lines and paleness, dark hair and blue eyes, says she got them from her wild Irish grandmother.
Not like her, Maggie, she has to put a lot of effort into looking nice.
Ted laughs at her, putting on her warpaint he calls it, but he's pleased enough when all his mates ogle her down the pub.
‘Sounds pretty daft to me.
Tell us about it if it's so important.’
Maggie sucks on a No.6.
‘I don’ t know, just caught my imagination somehow, I suppose, thought it might be a bit of a laugh.
Reminded me of us, I suppose, girls without men.
And of those girls in the pub, it was one of them told me about it —’
‘So you have been thinking about them.
Well, come on then, Maggie, let's go then, shall we.
They might be OK after all, hell, it's an evening out at least—’
‘I've told you, there's no-one to look after Frieda.
All right for you with Mrs Ash next door, you don't have to worry.
Down the pub as often as you want with all the fellers —’
‘Bloody hell — I don't neglect that kid, I'm a good mother to her, I've a perfect right to go out of an evening.
Stuck at work all day with no-one to come home to at night — all very well for you sitting holding hands with Ted with little Frieda watching, you don't know what it's like, being on your own, not really —’
Maggie's never told Jo how bad it's been recently with Ted.
There are some things you just keep your mouth shut about and one of those is when sex isn't much good.
Especially when you've always let on that it was great before.
‘Don't I, hell — oh, go to hell —’
Jo's voice follows her heels clicking fast over the cafe's tiled floor.
‘Maggie, you fucking idiot, come back, I'm sorry —’
Go anywhere, out of this whole mess.
Except that she's got to clock in in five minutes time.
All right for some on their autumn inter-city breaks.
Get away from it all, he coos over the radio every morning, you ladies are so wonderful, you deserve a little luxury —
Silvex Modes is on the top floor of a decaying terrace house opposite the cafe.
The council has it marked down for demolition, part of their plan for new accommodation for existing council tenants on either side.
There's no hurry for that now that the money's been cut back, Mr Silver can go on economising on space and heat and lighting for his twelve women workers for a good few years yet, and in any case, no-one's been round to check up on him for a long time now.
Jo and Maggie are lucky, they've managed to swing it so that they work side by side.
Hard to talk though; the machines are as noisy as the trains back at the flats and there's pop music screaming out all day long from the radio wedged on top of the mantelpiece.
Dave Whatsit introducing all the records, voice like malted chocolate choking you with sweetness.
You're so special ladies, just because you're you.
As a mere male, what can I do but worship, you're all woman every bit of you, the funny silly things you say and do.
Maggie's mum taught her how to sew, years ago, they had an old Singer from her aunt who died, and ran up the clothes for all the family.
Maggie remembers one dress: it was plum velvet with lace all round the neck and cuffs, clutch bag to match.
It took her a week to make, that dress, she'd made it specially for the dance at the police cadets’ college, and then she'd been so shy she'd spent most of the evening in the Ladies.
That was when she met Jo.
Jo borrowed her lipstick and said she liked her dress, it had all started from there.
Their shift is from half-nine to half-two.
Part-time work, so you can't expect the same rates as fulltimers would get.
No point making a fuss; plenty more women with young kinds anxious for work, as Mr Silver will  explain to silence the muttering that occasionally drowns even the machines.
Teabreak: Jo's fooling about as usual, pretending to be Princess Anne choosing a wedding dress from Silvex Modes.
Queer how it gets us, all women and no men, the way we let off steam, like being back at school again, lifting up people's skirts in the cloakroom.
Half-past two at last.
Maggie's eyes and back are aching like hell.
Good excuse to be grumpy and quiet while the others talk about the meeting and to avoid Jo's eyes, pretending not to hear her abrupt conversational openings.
Maggie grabs her bag from the wire cage under her seat, throws on her coat and is down the stairs and out in the street before any of the others.
First time in a year she hasn't waited for Jo so they can do their shopping together.
Maggie's gone the opposite way from Tesco's; her heels are sinking into grass.
The park's empty at this time of day before the kids are let out of school.
There's a big house at the end of an avenue of chestnuts.
They store deckchairs in it now and in summer they have art exhibitions there.
She hates parks; it takes half an hour to get there from the flats and then the kids are put inside one lot of railings like some kind of animals and you walk up and down inside another lot and watch them.
The trees poise to eject leaves and hurl them at the wind, there is nobody in the big house to see the park's invasion by the people, the iron benches under the elms are empty, each foot curling into a clutch of leaves.
Ladies, you're so wonderful, so smiling and serene.
Except when I bleeding am then no-one knows anything's up, not even Jo.
All this mud's going to ruin my shoes.
Funny that Jo wanted me to come with her so much.
Always thought I was the shy one of us two.
But then she always thinks that I manage.
Wind's colder now, you've got to be a kid to enjoy it, go shooting down the hill flailing your arms pretending to be an aeroplane.
Maggie's sitting hunched up on the bench, its iron legs striking chilly through her tights, conker cases under her feet, cigarette between her lips.
Wonder where Jo is.
Christ — look at the time — I'll be late collecting Frieda.
High heels stumbling over gravel, coat flying open.
Three men, unemployed they must be, on the bench near the gate, smoking pitifully thin rollies, brighten up as she rushes past.
‘Hey, love, what's the hurry?
Lost your boy-friend, have you?
Slow down, girl, he's not worth it —’
The nursery's doors and windows are shut, a sweet paper lurching in the wind the only movement in the yard.
Then as her stomach jumps in panic, Maggie sees them in the far corner, Lucy and Frieda, with Jo beside them.
Squatting to hug the two kids, fussing with Frieda's collar, unable to stop holding her in relief.
Jo's voice comes down to her, gentle.
‘It's OK, Maggie, I got here a bit late as well, but they were waiting, you didn't run away did you, loves?
I was going to take them both back with me if you didn't turn up, I was going to get us fish and chips as a treat —’
Jo's talking even faster than usual, shows she's still feeling a bit down.
‘Thanks, Jo.’
Maggie finishes tying Frieda's shoelace, stands up, meets Jo's eyes.
They both know it'll be all right between them in a bit.
Arm-in-arm back down the hill, kids hanging on one at each side.
Funny that the kids are so quiet, usually after a day cooped up in there they're jumping around all over the place.
‘Mum —’
It's Frieda, tugging at her hand.
‘Yes, love?’
‘Want some Smarties, like the man said —’
‘What man, love?’
‘The funny man, Uncle Funny —’
‘What man?
There aren't any men in the nursery — Frieda — what've you been doing?
Who're you talking about?’
Maggie's shaking Frieda, who starts howling.
Jo's clutching Maggie's arm.
‘It's all right, Maggie, I was going to tell you when we got home, shut up will you, the kids are all right I tell you —’
Jo's organising them all, down the hill at a brisk pace, impossible to talk while you time a dash across the road scooping the kids up with you as lorries thunder in both directions farting diesel fumes into your face.
Out into the street again from the chippie, warm smelly parcel telling your hands and nose you're still alive, feet remembering as they do every day to avoid the broken-up pavement in front of the pub.
Steam on the kitchen window cuts off the railway lines, making the tiny kitchen for once a friendly place.
Jo and Maggie sitting cradling cups of tea, chip papers stuffed into the waste bucket, the kids eating theirs next door in the bedsit, watching television.
‘They're OK, Maggie, honest.
He can't have talked to them for long, as soon as he saw me coming he cleared off quick.
Probably they didn't see a thing, and if they did, well, they've both seen blokes in the bath before now —’
‘Balls.
They should bloody well have stuck around till we turned up.
How were they to know we weren't kept late at work?
They're the ones supposed to be looking after the kids in the day-time, they should bloody well make sure there aren't any funny characters hanging around outside
Jo sounds more aggressive than usual, which means she is worried.
Maggie calms down straight away, pats her arm and pours her another cup of tea.
‘Ok, you’ re right, they don't really care that much.
Got to get home to their old man, I daresay.
That means we'll have to bloody well do something ourselves —’
‘What, stop perverts hanging around?
How —’
‘No, you silly bugger, it's not just that.
Well, I mean, it's the whole bloody mess.
I don't know, maybe we ought to give up work.
Or what we could do, well, what I mean is, maybe wouldn't do any harm going down to the pub tonight to see if the others are there, only a quick drink mind, we can't be sure what they're like yet —’
‘But they want to talk about work, Maggie, get us into a union and all that.
They haven't got kids, I don't think, they don't know what it's like
‘Well, they bloody should then, What's the use of going on about unions and higher pay and all that — we're still stuck with the nursery closing at half-past three.
You tell me where there's a union'll get me a job that pays me any more to go off at half-past three —’
‘I don't know, do I, course there bleeding isn't.
And anyway, even if we ask them, I mean, even if they think we can do something about it, though Christ knows what, I don't want a lot of knowalls who haven't got any kids and don't know the first thing about them telling us what to do with ours —’
‘Well, we won't let them, that's all,’ Maggie says lamely.
‘Anyway, no harm just going, you were going to go, you said so, it was you wanted a night out.
Let's go and just have a drink, Ted'll look after the kids, your Lucy can sleep in Frieda's bed, be a bit of company for her.’
Jo and Maggie arm-in-arm down the street to the Railway Tavern, high heels clicking on the paving behind the packing sheds.
The sun like a peach at seven, furring the railway lines with light.
Shivering pleasantly in her new blouse trimmed with lace nicked from Silvex Modes the week before, two quid borrowed from Ted means they can afford a few halves, jumping over the gutter full of leaves.
Jo's feeling OK now, going out with Maggie, she's back to teasing.
‘What about your programme, then, those Amazons?’
‘Piss off, Ted'll watch it for me.
Oh, no he won't, there's football on, the other side.
Well, I don't know, probably wouldn't have been much good anyway —’
‘What's made you change your mind?’
Joe isn't really interested, she's busy lighting her cigarette.
Standing in the pub doorway out of the wind striking her third match, the goddess of beer depicted in glowing-coloured tiles on either side of her, massive  arms holding up sheaves of grain.
Pushing open the door of the pub.
Gust of warmth, beer and music rushing out to meet them and suck them in towards the bar.
On your own, darling?
Come and join us then, patting her thigh.
Fuck off, Steve, will you, I'm with my friend tonight.
Two halves of bitter please, thanks, love.
Sitting at a table in the corner so that they can see the door, catch the others' eyes when they come in.
Maggie drawing pictures with her fingertips in the spilt beer on the marble tabletop.
‘Those Amazons?
Bit of a fairy tale really, isn't it, so what if there's still some around.
See me with one of my tits cut off, can't you, just the excuse for Ted to be off after Betty Ash again.’
While they're still laughing the others arrive all at once.
Shifting round the table, squashing up against Jo to make room for them all.
The two women from the Charter are in jeans this time, a bit scruffy.
None of us exactly Dave Whatsit's ideal woman, you could say.
Maggie takes a sip of beer to remind the others that that's all she's there for, and looks defiantly around.
No flies on us, we'll soon see what you're like.
Just Lie Back and Think of the Empire
Michele Roberts
The airport at Singapore is like any other except that it is filled with white men wearing long shorts.
The East starts here.
The air hostesses on the flight to Bangkok wear pink and purple sarongs with gold borders, western eye-makeup, smiles.
They bow gracefully to all the passengers, catching the men's eyes with a practised coquetry that yet seems charmingly fresh, then vanish backwards with tiny steps to reappear with hot towels and orchid sprays.
As the plane hangs in darkness over a net of lights far below, Kate looks in amazement at her new sandals and the label on her hand luggage.
Her stomach lurching in sympathy with the plane dropping down fast towards Bangkok convinces her dully that it's she who's done it: left England, friends, comrades, ways of seeing, the easy labels of self-definition.
Miss Bourgeois Individualist of the 1970s, vital statistics a BA in Eng.
Lit. and a diploma in librarianship, and a deep interest in people and travel.
Kate's local women's group gives her a farewell party of disapproval veiled by loyalty.
A basement room in a north London squat, wild and bright with plants, hangings covering the crumbled plaster falling off the damp walls, furnished with wit and ingenuity by dint of jumble sales and the skips outside the richer homes further down the street.
Her friends' comments are on the level of rhetoric; no-one can speak on the personal level of hurt.
‘I don't see why you're going,’ Annie says, sprawled out on the bed on the floor, ‘when there's so much beginning to happen here.’
Swinging her boots up on to the Indian bedspread to indicate her lack of concern.
Pat, who is always totally  committed to every idea and action she enters, underlines the certainty of her words with a hand stabbing a cigarette into a saucer serving as ashtray.
‘You don't need to go and work as a librarian abroad, for God's sake.
Dishing out British Government aid, what a cop-out.
There's all those women talking about setting up a feminist information centre, they need people to help, you're trained for it, and here you are going away —’
Ex-Catholic Jean states flatly, ‘You ought to stay.’
‘You, re so moral about it,’ Kate complains, uneasy at the unspoken attack beneath the supposedly supportive criticism,’correct, incorrect
‘Come on,’ Annie drawls, glinting over her glass of beer, ‘stop avoiding the issue, will you?
We're asking you — why the British Committee?
Why Thailand?’
In preparation for this moment and its resulting confusion in her head Kate has a speech ready which she repeats self consciously, aware of how pompous she sounds but not why.
‘I want to test one set of certainties by opposing them to another.
I don't know, I want to find out if I do really believe what I say I do and if I want the kind of life I say I do, and the only way to do that seems to be to get right away and try a straight career for a bit, just to see how I react.’
‘Sounds as though you're the one being moral now,’ Jean says drily.
‘You make feminism sound like a set of philosophical opinions.
And what's all this purist stuff about straight careers?,
‘It's so bloody elitist,’ complains Annie through a mouthful of salami.
‘You take off to the other side of the world to get a clearer perspective on what's happening here, right?
You put yourself into cold storage for two years as far as any kind of political practice goes and just sit and think — and don't forget you'll get paid £5000 a year to sit and think about the purity of the struggle we're all fighting back here.’
‘I think you're being unfair,’ Kate says, unable to respond directly to the criticism and so simply feeling hurt.
‘I'm only trying to work things out for myself and take a bit of responsibility for what I do.’
‘For God's sake,’ Pat interposes, ‘do you suppose that that isn't what we're all trying to do?
Work out the relation between feminism and our own personal practice and our wider political practice?
I think you're just running away from the difficulties that that entails.
Isn't that the real reason?
That you see the struggle as demanding too much from you personally and so you want to get right away from it for a while?’
‘Well,’ Annie says calmly, ‘if that is the real reason, Kate, why can't you admit it?,
‘Because all I can ever do is bloody leave — one group after another.
I don't know what's wrong with me —’ Kate mutters, nearly in tears.
Mary, who has said nothing up until now, stirs in her seat in the corner of the room.
‘Kate, lots of us are in that confusion, honestly.
And if different women are at different places to start working from, that's a fact, not a put-down, you don't have to feel guilty about it.’
‘I’ m not going to Thailand just to escape from the group,’Kate says, still unable to move away from guilt.
‘There are other things involved —’
Jean interrupts her before she has a chance to fumble into what those things are.
‘Yes.
Like you said.
Self-discovery and all that.
Much pleasanter when you can get a suntan while you're doing it.’
‘What I don't see,’ Pat says, interposing kindly from her belief that Kate is incapable of replying, ‘is why you have to go so far.
Why go to the extreme of joining the British Committee for Christ's sake?’
‘I haven't got the money just to go as a traveller, and there aren't that many jobs abroad.
I applied for several and this one came up, that's all, I didn't choose it particularly.’
‘Why not?’ says Annie, flicking an olive pip into Kate's lap, ‘why the hell not choose and make decisions if you're in a position where you can?
It doesn't necessarily mean being totally idealistic — there are some situations where you can take control —’
Kate's stomach feels out of control.
She has felt sick ever since the final board interview: four middleaged middle-class men rub their hands at her qualifications, her feminine ability to spot what they want her to say and to say it, her freaky clothes that suggest her safe token Marxism and her fashionably feminist views.
She knows from the start she will get the job and participates with passive fascination in the necessary motions; the selection board chivalrously closes the door on the trap she has set herself.
She signs a contract, is given a generous clothes and household goods allowance.
Till death do us part.
The one promise that Ben can't exact from her now.
Two years of silence, of splits between her life with him and her commitment to politics desperately ended by leaving both.
No way, she felt, of changing things with him, she was just there with him, he told her he loved her so there she was, identified and placed by the words he spoke of her.
She'd come into the women's group after the others had spent some time talking about their individual relations to femaleness; feminism for her was a safe place, a rhetoric spoken to her by other women, a description they made of her, a set of ideas they had worked out and which she acquired to wear as a badge.
As a result, for her the only way to struggle with men was to run, as far away as possible.
She had no words of her own; independence, selfhood, meant travelling on her own.
As Kate steps off the plane the heat passes in fierce waves across her face, gagging her like another wet towel.
She is expecting to be met by a local member of Committee staff and so is not surprised when a young Thai dressed formally in dark trousers and white short-sleeved shirt and carrying a dark peaked cap comes up to her and says, ‘Excuse me, you are waiting for some-one?’
‘Yes,’ she replies eagerly, ‘someone from the British Committee is supposed to be meeting me.’
‘Fine, fine,’ he says, ‘please come with me.’
He picks up her suitcases and heads for the exit.
The night is black and  humid; sweat crawls under her armpits, between her thighs on the plastic-covered seat, courses between her breasts.
They are bumping along a wide highway, stalls stacked with water melons separating the two streams of traffic, the outlines of corrugated-iron roofs defining a shantytown on either side.
Her escort lounges in the driving seat, one hand laid casually on the wheel, the other engaged in smoothing back his hair in a relaxed manner belied by the slightly puzzled looks he flicks sideways at her.
He fires questions at her.
‘You had a good trip?
You are hot?
You like it here?
My name is Sadat.
You want some Coke?
There is a crate in the back.’
She reaches over into the back and grabs a couple of cans from the crate lying on the back seat next to his peaked cap.
Noticing that her hands are shaking and knowing that he has noticed she forces herself to act cool, not daring for the moment to analyse her disquiet lest she is incapable of handling the reason.
Carry on the way you're going, pretend it, s not happening, lie back and relax, just keep quiet and it'll be all right in the end, urges the female chorus in her stomach.
She smiles brightly at her companion and enquires:
‘How long have you been in this job?’
He frowns and stares straight ahead, blows a furious klaxon on the horn.
The car leaps forward, tears between two lorries and lurches back into the middle lane.
‘This job?
Several years now.
I hope for promotion soon to Chief Steward.
And you?
What's your name?
What do you do here?’
Panic kickstarts her stomach.
She fumbles for defusing words.
‘But I thought — surely you know my name?
Didn't they tell you that when they sent you to collect me?’
‘Sanay tell me how you look.
But he no tell me your name.’
She forces it out.
‘I don't understand.
Where are we going?
Which hotel did they tell you to drive me to?’
Sadat turns a face of smooth surprise to her, hands still controlling expertly wheels and gears.
‘I no know which hotel you go to.
Maybe the Asia, maybe the Atlanta.
Sanay just ask me to drive you into town, baby.’
‘You mean you're not from the British Committee?
I thought —’
Sadat gazes at her coolly.
‘But why you no say so before, baby?
You mean you not Sanay's girlfriend?
But we drive fourteen kilometres now and you not say —’
She clutches her can of Coke and pinpoints her collusion in what her insides scream is her kidnapping.
The cap on the back seat beside the crate of Coke bears a badge plainly reading Siam Intercontinental.
How long has she known Sadat could not possibly be a British Committee  driver?
Once more she tries to force herself out of passively accepting an alienating situation out of terror.
‘There's been a mistake.
You must drive me back to the airport.
Perhaps the people who came to meet me will still be there —’ She smiles desperately at him, her insides shaking with fantasies of what will happen if he refuses.
Obediently, resignedly, he swings the car round in a dangerous U-turn at the next intersection and they flash back towards the airport, the jewel factories and towerblocks of the Bangkok suburbs thinning out again to the dim outlines of swampy fields pierced by palmtree plantations.
She is unable to gauge his mood, her feminine antennae have folded for the night.
One act or speech is as arbitrary as another, being in the wrong car with the wrong man is in no way stranger than being in the wrong country in the wrong job.
The sudden perception of the latter fact shatters her tenuous control; she concentrates for the moment on the former, blurting:
‘I'm terribly sorry, I thought you were from the British Committee.
At the airport you said —’
‘British Committee?
What is British Committee?’
She suppresses a hysterical giggle.
‘You must know who they are.
You know, a bit like the British Embassy, or-er-like USAID —’
‘Ah; like USAID.
You will stay here long time?’
Back to polite introductions.
He blocks any attempt she makes to discover his role or intentions in all this.
For the moment he is playing man about town to her confused tourist.
She replies with suitable inanity.
‘I'm here on a two-year contract.
You speak very good English.’
A chink is temporarily exposed.
He smiles to himself in the mirror.
‘It's for the job,’ he says proudly, ‘I get promotion if I speak good English.’
They swing in at the airport gates.
Not a light in any of the lounges or offices, not a soul, certainly not a British Committee one, who looks like a welcoming committee.
The one security guard patrolling Arrivals does not speak English.
Kate drags back to the carpark.
Sadat is suddenly redefined as her only friend.
’ Could we try the British Embassy, d'you think?
They'd have the Committee's address, at least.
Or perhaps I should just wait here — perhaps someone's gone into town to look for me and will come back eventually —’
Sadat shakes his head.
‘You can't stay here, baby.
They want to lock up now.
No more planes.
Besides, foreign girl can't stay here alone.’
She hesitates, gives in to his apparent grasp of possibilities.
‘All right, let's go back into town.
Would you drive me to the British Embassy?’
He acknowledges her humiliation by jumping out of his side of the car, coming round to hers, opening the door for her and waiting ostentatiously for her awkwardly to tuck her legs inside before closing it with a little bow.
The comforting knowledge that at least she will get as far as the British Embassy tonight gives her the strength for attack.
Whom did you say you were supposed to be meeting at the airport?
Where d'you think she's got to?
Shouldn't you go and look for her —?’
He turns his head and smiles.
‘I think you her, baby.
No difference
She sits in silence for the rest of the drive.
She begins to realise that he is bound to win, he is playing her in with an eternity of patience, amused and confident, indulging her now increases later enjoyment.
I can't help it, Annie, I didn't choose to have this happen to me.
Ben sighing in bed and talking to the pillow.
Sorry, Kate.
What can I do to give you an orgasm?
The Embassy is locked, shuttered, barred.
Sadat lights a cigarette, with the engine still running, and watches the earnest set of Kate’ s back as she talks through the gates to the guard just inside.
The tone of her voice has risen, she pushes the hair off her face with one worried hand while gesticulating with the other.
Even from the kerb in the gloom the guard's shrugs and humorously uplifted eyes are visible as he declines to telephone the duty officer, ring a British Committee office empty at this time of night, break the sacred sleep of anyone else on the telephone list.
Sadat pitches his cigarette end through the window, gets out of the car and strolls to the gate.
He speaks a few sentences of rapid Thai to the guard, who stares at the two of them, breaks into a comprehending smile and turns away back to his hut at the foot of the drive.
‘Come on, baby,’ says Sadat, managing to convey a weary but still kindly patience, ‘he cannot help.
I take you to hotel.’
‘What did you say to him?’
Kate demands, and then, as he refuses to hear, meekly amends this to ‘Which hotel are you taking me to?’
‘We try the Asia,’ he says, ‘though probably full, this time of night.’
With an increase of bland courtesy he insists that she stay in the car while he talks to the girl behind the Reception desk.
The Asia is full up.
Six hotels later she gives in.
‘Look, couldn't you just lend me some Thai money?
I could just walk around till morning and then go to the Committee office first thing —’
He turns a reproachful face on her for admitting what kind of a girl she is.
‘You can't do that.
You get into trouble.
Only bad women on streets at night.
No.
We go to friend of mine who has motel.’
Giving her little time to question this version of the truth, he swings the car off the main road all concrete and glass buildings and turns down  a tiny side street.
Immediately the tarmac is soft and muddy, brown water gutters between the road and the wood and corrugated iron houses on each side, there are far fewer lights, open shop fronts are also cheap eating places and tiny spaces for sleeping.
The car noses confidently down alley after alley.
Now canals slap on either side, brimming with garbage and dead wood, an old man sleeps in an oilcan next to a garishly decorated lorry, men in vests and wide trousers, grouped playing cards by the light of oil lamps, raise their heads as the car's headlights sweep into their precarious privacy, and stare at her.
Those eyes, sombre and steady yet lacking in curiosity, comfort her; they seem to know her, who she is, where she is going.
This definition is clarified when Sadat turns off the road through an entrance discreet enough to admit the car with only a centimetre on either side.
They are in a smallish courtyard with parking space for perhaps half a dozen cars.
All the lots are unoccupied, or so she thinks until a pair of green plastic curtains suddenly swishes around the car, enfolding them in a cave of green plastic gloom and she becomes aware of other cars and bodies breathing behind green silences.
‘OK, here we are,’ Sadat says unnecessarily, and pulls his bag off the back seat and gets out of the car.
Just behind the car a small gap in the curtains reveals a door which leads into the motel apartment.
Kate puts her suitcase down on a green plastic-covered pouffe and gapes.
Green plastic quilting pads the walls, an enormous mirror on the ceiling reflects a similarly-sized double bed.
One wall is see-through glass to the lavatory with more green furnishings.
A bible by the bed is the gift of the Gideon Missionary Society.
Sadat opens his airline holdall and produces a bottle of Moet-Chandon, deftly flips off the cork and pours a golden stream into two plastic toothmugs.
‘I thought maybe I go to a party,’ he explains, ‘so I bring bottle from aeroplane.
My friends wait for me now but never mind.’
He hands her a beaker of champagne.
She sits on the edge of the bed, takes a sip, catches sight of her knees in the mirror overhead and remembers her prepared speech.
‘Look, it's terribly kind of you to find me a place to stay, but you must let me give you the money.
I mean, you needn't really have bothered with looking after me.’
He disagrees with the version of events contained in this last sentence by ignoring it and saying smilingly, ‘You no pay here, baby.
Manager is friend of mine.
I have key.’
Forced on to what she really meant to say, Kate fumbles for words, absurdly feeling she has to simplify, patronise in order for him to understand her in a language foreign to him, that she must not hurt his  feelings, he is part of the oppressed majority, colonised daily by the people she has come to work for.
‘Look, you've been really kind to me.
I mean, we're friends now, aren't we?
But you've got to understand — I'm not going to sleep with you.
I'm terribly grateful to you for all your help, but we'll just be friends tonight, OK?’
From what depths of unease and powerlessness emerges all this gratitude desperately proffered as pay for services not rendered?
He has picked her up, lied to her, manipulated her insecurity and ignorance, and she is asking forgiveness for her lack of appreciation.
He finishes the last of the champagne, stands up, smiles kindly at her.
‘Sure, baby.
Come on, we go to bed now.’
His body is slender, lean, brown, his prick a mere button at the top of his thighs.
By contrast her body feels to her viewing it through his eyes overwhite, overlarge, overfloppy.
She climbs onto the bed and lies six feet away from him.
He turns onto his side, looks her up and down and says politely, ‘What a beautiful shape.’
Visions of white blancmange released from a mould and failing to stand up invade her brain.
She smiles awkwardly, suddenly hating herself yet wanting to placate him.
‘Goodnight,’ she says firmly and turns over on her side.
He moves in fast from behind, his prick starting lightning between her buttocks like a fork into sausage.
‘Baby, I can make you very happy,’ his voice pleads into her shoulder blades.
She is now cockteasing bitch, he sensitive, easily hurt suitor.
She inches to the edge of the bed, he follows; she lies on her back, his hand attempts to part her furiously dry lips; she wraps herself in the sheet, the tense warmth of his body suffocates her doubly; she leaps up and goes to the lavatory, he watches her through the glass wall.
Better get it over with, her mind urges her exhausted body, then at least you'll get a couple of hours sleep before dawn.
I offered no violence, officer, she didn't struggle, there are no marks on her body.
She wasn't a virgin anyway, she must have wanted it really.
Confronted with his certainty so much stronger than her own, disorientation and alienation defusing lack of desire, she gives in as she has done before.
She lies on her back, her feeling of deadness and detachment increased by watching the reflection in the overhead mirror like a television screen.
She sees his narrow back move up and down, there is a vague irritation in her vagina, she watches his mouth move across her shoulders and face.
Eventually he falls asleep, one arm outflung across her breasts so that she does not dare move it for fear of waking him, and, constricted, cannot sleep herself.
In the morning he is brisk, satisfied, picks up the room telephone and  orders coffee for her.
He collects it from the door when it arrives to spare her the embarrassment of being seen by the boy.
He sits on the edge of the bed where Kate lies fenced in by bolsters and proffers it smilingly.
The coffee is strong and sweet with a glass of tea accompanying it to drown the sweetness.
‘You know any Thai?’ he asks.
‘No,’ Kate says apologetically, ‘they said I didn't need to bother to learn any before I came.’
‘I teach you,’ he says, ‘say after me.’
Kate learns to say, ‘I hate the Vietcong, I love the King and Queen’ and ‘One, two, three’by the time breakfast is over.
She glances at her watch.
Unease returns to shatter her friendly complicity and she jumps up.
‘It's half past eight.
I ought to go — the office must open around nine.’
She stands beyond the see-through wall and grimaces to herself.
‘So I hailed a taxi outside the motel and just said British Committee and he knew immediately where it was and drove me straight there.’
‘And there I was waiting for you, in such a state ever since Kukrit came back late from the airport and said he'd missed you,’ Jeremy replies, suggesting with automatic but irrelevant chivalry that they are lovers separated from their tryst with one another.
And here I am, Kate thinks, sitting opposite you and thinking there's more distance between us in terms of class and sex awareness than a million years of chat over drinks at six dollars a go on the Oriental Hotel terrace could ever hope to bridge.
She sees herself, a young woman with white limbs and a neat haircut, sitting in a short linen dress, toying with a tall glass of frosted beer, while opposite her lounges an attentive and deferential male.
Talking over a drink; the most natural of interactions.
Thousands of people do it every day; what's wrong with me that my inside's screaming that it's not real?
Cool capable Kate the British Committee librarian confronts Kate the embryonic hysteric, catches her eye for a moment and grimaces with a bitter self-directed humour.
If Annie or Jean could see you now, says one Kate to the other, they wouldn't know you.
Self-preservation, replies Kate the British Committee librarian feebly, I can't afford a breakdown, this is me for the moment, there's nothing I can do about it.
Jeremy's voice summons her uncomfortably to a mesh of past and present.
‘Kidnapped, and by a Thai man at that….
It must have been terribly upsetting for you,’ says Jeremy's mouth, while his eyes say Go on, admit it, didn't you enjoy it, some of it?
‘It was,’ says Kate firmly.
But you'll never know all the reasons why.
Unwilling to confront a self she hates, she switches subjects awkwardly.
‘Didn't you say you knew of some Lao restaurants near here?
Let's go and eat — I’ m starving.’
I don't want to feel, let me push down thinking by eating.
Food for thoughts, puns the hysterical Kate as they depart.
Outside after their meal they crouch in the small low car, knees touching chins, Jeremy braced for maximum impact on the controls as he carves a jerky aggressive path through the sluggish traffic.
They swoop and scream to a halt in a narrow street alive and garish with neon signs over narrow dark doorways.
‘You really must see this,’ Jeremy explains as he pockets the ignition key, ‘it's the heart of the nightlife area.
Sure: local colour, interesting ethnic mores, I am a cool intelligent person ready to sample the strange, the colourful, the offbeat, appreciate approaches and lifestyles so different to my own.
They pick a path through the crowded gloom inside to a low table in a corner at the far end.
A hostess in tight teeshirt and jeans lingers only long enough to assure Kate discreetly with her eyes that she is not poaching on her territory, smiles velvetly at Jeremy, brings them their drinks.
A line of girls sits at the bar, ready at the jerk of a head or the flick of a finger to minister to the solitary Somerset Maughams at every table with drinks, smiles and conversation in carefully-broken Americanisms.
‘This is my favourite place,’ Jeremy shouts to her above the music, ‘fantastic girls here, really alive and witty.
They have a girl here on Saturdays, Suzy SevenUp, she can smoke seven cigarettes in her cunt at once.’
‘Oh for Christ's sake —’ Kate begins, ‘then I'm not going to stay —’but she is drowned by a particularly raucous burst from the band.
A dazzle of green and red spotlights explodes onto the dais in front of them, revealing a bamboo cage containing a girl naked except for tassels and a G-string.
An exquisite bored mobile of gyrating flesh, her arms, legs and stomach caress the music and the customers, eyes.
Jeremy is leaning forward, his face rapt, his body taut; other men, more sophisticated, sit back, toying absently with their drinks and their girlfriend's knees as they watch.
Kate feels sick.
The spectacle is intended for her too as part of the audience, but she cannot become a pair of eyes to view her own humiliation.
That body up there is a female body, not a sexless abstract sculpture; if another woman is being stripped, exposed, graded and sold as an object, then she herself is too.
All around her men's eyes are avidly forsaking their embarrassed girlfriends for the fantasy they have paid the go-go dancer to concoct of herself; the room contains a crowd of men united in desire and fear of possession of women who are separated from each other by bars.
Kate wrenches at Jeremy's arm and his attention.
Courteously he swings back towards her, his sleepwalker's expression cracking into irritation as she whispers furiously, ‘I'm going, I'm not going to stay in here —’
Outside, she plunges across the pavement away from the car, but is stopped by Jeremy's grip on her arm.
‘What the hell was all that about?’ he demands.
‘What's wrong with you, for God's sake?’
‘What d'you mean, what's wrong?
How on earth d'you expect me to sit there watching that woman being forced to humiliate herself like that?’
Taken aback by her anger and foreseeing the likelihood of her leaving him on the strength of it, Jeremy switches tactics to conciliation.
‘Oh, come on, don't be so disapproving.
She wasn't being humiliated, she was just doing her job.
She's got a lovely body, why should you criticise her for showing it off?’
Just because yours isn't as good, her mind fills in the blank space.
She turns to face him.
‘I'm not criticising her — it's all those men in there, paying her to do it.
He struggles uneasily.
‘That's not the point.
She's not being forced to do it.
You're just being puritanical.’
‘Oh, for God's sake —’ Kate exclaims, and tries to wrench her arm away.
A crowd of amused onlookers, attracted by the sight of two flushed angry whites arguing with each other in the street, has collected.
Any moment now they will press forward, take sides, and, worst of all, possibly even scratch the car's polished paintwork.
Realising too that he is about to lose Kate to her anger and the night, Jeremy forces a pleasanter expression to his face.
‘Look, Kate, we can't talk here.
I'm sorry, I'm not trying to upset you.’
He allows himself a carefully selected smile, humorous, equal to equal, and goes on, the ease of his words belied by the hurry of his delivery and the force of his grip on her arm.
‘Don't you think you owe me an explanation of all this?
It; s all a bit sudden, you know.
I'd like to talk to you about it, somewhere quieter.
Why not come back to my place for coffee?
I'd really like to understand, you know —’
The first edge of her anger gone, Kate hesitates, trapped by the apparent sincerity of his voice more than by the real force of his hand.
Unsure of whether she does owe him an explanation, of how much of her perspective she can get across in a conversation, and unwilling to let go of the London Kate who has broken through to the surface, she is ashamed of her suspicions of his reasons for asking her back to his place and agrees.
Jeremy's flat is in the same expensive suburb for whites as her own, part of a concrete block overlooking orchidhouse and swimming-pool.
Inside, the polished teak floor is strewn with hilltribe rugs, while a couple of antique carved teak cabinets house an extensive collection of Meo silver jewellery and Sukhothai pots, and the walls are hung with more rugs interspersed with modern paintings.
Jeremy settles Kate on a rattan sofa with a whisky, flicks on the stereo and then sits down himself at the other end of the sofa, making sure that she notices his careful maintenance of physical space between them.
He fixes her with his eyes, all eager deferential intelligence, while his hands busy themselves rolling a joint.
‘What I don't understand is why you didn't say all this before.
I had no idea you didn't approve of go-go dancing or I'd never have taken you there.’
She sighs.
‘I don't disapprove of go-go dancers.
I hate the system that forces them to do it for a living and then screws them afterwards.’
He winces.
‘But they're so lovely, they enjoy it.
And what's wrong if they do?
It's a better way of making a living than digging the roads.’
‘Look — first, who are you to decide which women are lovely and which aren't?
The whole nightclub scene runs on women trying to approximate to impossible male standards of beauty.
And second —’
He passes her the joint.
‘Buddha grass,’ he murmurs, ‘the main reason for staying in this god-awful country —’
She inhales deeply and goes on.
‘And second, what makes you think they enjoy it?
They're paid to smile, don't you realise that?
It just makes you feel good because you kid yourself they'd do it for free anyway.’
She takes a second hit, hauls a bullet of dope down into her lungs and continues.
‘And the women who dig the roads have to go home and be screwed by their husbands afterwards as part of the job.
The point is that the one exploitation is part of the other, either way women are treated as shit.’
Kate passes the joint back to Jeremy.
He inhales deeply, blows a series of perfectly matched smokerings at the ceiling.
Could Suzy SevenUp blow them as well?
‘OK, fine, I take your point.
But why didn't you tell me before that you believed in women's lib?
Sorry —’ Catching sight of her irritated expression.
‘That you were a feminist?
You walk around in a skirt and wear a bra, how was I to know?’
‘Look, I came out here in a muddle.
I already hate myself for having taken the job, I know it was a mistake.
I can't even criticise the setup objectively, I just know that I'm unhappy.
Because I've compromised so  much on who I thought I was.
But can't you see how you're defined by the situation you're in?
If I didn't wear a skirt none of the Thais I work with in the library would respect me.
They'd freak totally, if their boss went around in jeans.
And because I feel unhappy and insecure here I cover up on what I really think because I'm scared to let it out and confront people.
She stops, surprised at her willingness to expose herself to him.
Her only friend, is that it?
Like Sadat on another occasion?
Jeremy murmurs sympathetically and hands her back the joint.
She takes a deep drag and goes on.
’ And fuck it, it's not just about the clothes that people wear.
I mean, I don't see how I can be involved here politically, it's not my place.
I've just got a set of opinions, that's all, to hand out when the occasion arises.
Dinner table radical chick, that's all I am.’
She stops, before her bitterness turns into more self-hatred.
The room lurches.
She goes on slowly and naively: ‘I'm really glad, in a way, that you took me to that place.
It really pushed things out.
Yet —’
Her mouth goes soft and woolly, expands rapidly to become a cave; her tongue is a red seal lolling there, a sea anemone blurring in a flower of shadow.
She is a body in a room; she is the room; her head takes off to become a camera snapping and exposing the million thoughts flashing through her brain every second.
She booms and whispers, shrinks and expands.
She gropes with her hands in the air.
Two arms seize her, Jeremy's voice shouts to her and whispers, ‘It's OK, keep cool, I'm here.’
He is stroking her back, kissing her face.
She struggles, irritated that he hasn't realised what she'd wanted.
He pushes her on to the floor and lies on top of her, nearly smothering her.
‘Don't,’ she manages feebly to say from wherever she is, ‘I'm all right, leave me alone.’
Her fault, obviously, to have felt for his hand.
His hands and his body are everywhere, suffocating her.
She is so slowed down by the dope slamming fifty visions of hell at her a second that she finds it hard to fight, hard to believe in her own anger, hard to believe in what she's doing.
So why bother to struggle?
This can't be happening to me, Kate would never get herself into this sort of situation.
They roll clumsily on the floor for about half an hour, his tongue making constant assaults on her mouth until her face is wet with saliva.
and tears, her neck aches from turning her head from side to side to avoid his mouth and her jaw from clamping itself shut.
She is a stiff bundle of rags, arching this way and that, legs clamped together against his knees' efforts to prise them apart, arms straining him back up off her body.
Eventually she manages to deliver a particularly nasty jab and he goes up.
They roll apart and she looks at him with sullen exhaustion, her head  still pumping in and out.
He gazes at her with puzzled concern.
‘Look, it had to come some time, you know.
There's always that barrier to be got over, when you are going to sleep with someone for the first time, and I just thought it would be a good time to get it over with.
Don't get so upset, it's part of every relationship.’
‘With a woman,’ she mutters through bruised lips.
He sighs.
‘I'm sorry, Kate, I really am.
I had no idea you'd react that way.
You took my hand, after all.’
She slumps back on the floor, still finding it nearly impossible to speak as every word that emerges takes on new lives and dimensions of its own.
Only her anger gives her the energy to lift her arm to look at her watch.
3 a.m.
‘You'd better sleep here,’ Jeremy replies cheerfully to her unspoken statement.
‘I'm too tired to run you home and you won't get a taxi at this time of night.
You'll have to share my bed though, there's nowhere else.
He jumps to his feet, smooths back his hair, goes briskly into the bedroom, crashes around in the bathroom.
She stumbles after him, and lies down on the bed.
As soon as she closes her eyes, the kaleidoscope takes over again.
Lek, the thirty-year-old maid installed for her along with the furniture by the Committee, telling her about the nine children and the mother up-country she supports and whom she rarely sees.
Lek sleeps in a concrete cell downstairs where husbands are forbidden by the landlord to visit.
Lek's husband has taken another woman.
The other maids in the block all angry when guilty Kate gives Lek a rise.
The woman official from USAID living in the flat above purring over Campari about the servant problem.
She British ladies withdrawing, after their dinner from the frozen stores of English food flown into the Embassy shop, to powder their noses before flowing eagerly back to their men sipping brandy on the terrace under trees prodigal with flame-of-the-forest blossoms.
The heavy makeup melting even in the air-conditioning, the legless beggar who sleeps under the office porch and cleans their shoes in gratitude, the slums you cannot observe because no roads go through the swamps and whose inhabitants do not exist for the State because the census officials cannot reach them, the bomb-carriers serving as flower-pots, the boys selling themselves to the rich English ex-public schoolboys, the girls selling themselves to the fat German tourists, the police raping the boys and the girls they are protecting in the police-stations, the Committee officers boasting to Kate about the elegant jerk-offs in the massage parlours, their ever-decorative ever-bored wives boasting to Kate about their jewellery, the Thai girls saving up for eye and breast jobs, the luxury hotels where the high-class white whores hang out, the students shot by  the military during a demonstration against the army regime, the girl students daring for the first time to stay out at night on the streets to picket, the crushing of strikes with bullets and beatings, the barring of political books in the Committee library, the anti-Communist adverts punctuating the Western films on TV.
The office drivers buying her fierce Singha beer and teaching her to dance the Ramwong, and her library assistants taking her to markets and on river trips, bringing her sticky cakes and jasmine garlands and inviting her to their homes.
The scent of jasmine in her flat at night, shouting her loneliness.
The Committee Representative will describe Kate's anger as culture shock, in his report on her work to HQ.
She's very young, only a girl really, and it takes time to get used to this funny little country.
Jeremy switches off the light, lies down beside her.
At his exploring touch she jerks upright.
‘Fuck off, we've been through all that.
Just leave me alone, OK?’
‘You're unreasonable,’ he snarls, and turns away from her.
She lies with her eyes open, listening to his noisy jerking-off and then his snores.
He drives her to work next day, humming unconcernedly into her silence.
She sits in the Representative's office, smoking too many cigarettes.
He has placed them both on the sofa under the magnificent painting of a Ramayana demon by his Thai protegé, not facing one another across his huge desk, to indicate that this is an intimate and informal interview, not to be taken too seriously whatever she says.
Laugh, Kate, and I'll take you out to supper at this amusing little noodle shop I've discovered in Chinatown.
Be a pal, Kate, and slip me the copy of Gay News you hide under your desk because I don't allow it in the library, talk about work, Kate, discuss how we spend £5000 on economics books for the university libraries, tell me about how you're stopping the students thieving my favourite art books, but please for God's sake, Kate, don't be difficult, don't talk about imperialism and marxism and feminism, I've heard it all before and said it all myself, twenty years ago before I had a wife and children to support.
She yields to his pressure and obscures her political statements by bursting into tears.
Relieved, Andrew pats her shoulder.
‘Never mind,’ he says kindly, ‘the heat gets on top of all of us, you know.
Why not take a couple of days off work?
The library staff can manage on their own for a little while, I'm sure.’
Although his head and body are bent towards her in paternal concern, their tension indicates that he wants to be elsewhere; away from hysterical females, generally, and, in particular, at his lunchdate with the Chinese antique dealer who has hinted over the telephone that he has some particularly fine pieces of Ban Chieng that the National Museum will  never see hidden away in his back room.
Humiliated, Kate blows her nose ungracefully and almost apologises for nor knowing what has come over her.
‘I'm leaving,’ she says firmly, ‘I want to hand in my notice.’
With amazement and with pleasure she hears her own voice saying No.
Acts of Violence
Zoë Fairbairns
Although it was Dorothy who had come to interview the officials at PopCon (’ an Intergovernmental Agency for Fundamental Research into the Worldwide Problems of Population Stabilisation'), she kept getting the impression that it was they who were interrogating her.
‘What are you after?’
‘Who do you work for — really?’
‘Whose side are you on?’
‘Aren't you grateful for the money?’
Dorothy explained that they hadn't given her any money; she was here as a reporter for a journal whose name they knew; her membership of the feminist abortion campaign to which PopCon had just made a large grant was irrelevant to the present discussion; she was just doing her job.
‘Yeh, doing your job, seeing weird and wonderful conspiracies everywhere,’ said the clipped-haired, clipped-voiced man behind the desk, the Press Liaison Officer.
‘Your group better watch out.
If they don't want the money —’
Dorothy scoffed.
‘You know quite well you can't take it back.
I just wonder why you gave it in the first place.’
‘And you're suggesting —’
‘No, I'm asking .
Now, are you prepared to let me look at your research programme or not?’
‘Not if you're going to use it for lies, propaganda and distortion,’ said the Press Liaison Officer.
She got up, grinning.
‘I'll be off, then.’
‘We don't want to be obstructive, Miss Lenham, we want to help the press all we can, and there's nothing secret in what we do here, nothing whatever.
But if we give you information, how do we know you won't distort it?’
‘You don't,’ she said, sitting down.
‘But if you won't let me see unsecret information, I can distort that too.’
The Press Liaison Officer took a heavy file from a shelf and almost  dropped it into her hands; but she had strong wrists and managed a gracious smile of acceptance and thanks.
‘My colleagues and I will be very interested,’ he said sourly, ‘to know what kind of propaganda that red magazine you work for can make out of an international survey of prospective parents.’
‘You've got to be kidding!’ yelped Margaret Lenham, as much astonished as afraid at the sight of what he planned to use for the operation: a knitting needle.
A knitting needle, in this day and age!
It had been good enough in the bad old days, good enough for her mother before her, good enough, in all probability, for her grandmother too, if the secrets of that angelic white head were ever known.
But you expected something better nowadays, especially for a woman in her forties!
‘It is…clean, isn't it?’
‘There's nothing to worry about, Mrs L,’ he said, ‘I know my work.’
And the years rolled away, and it was a different room, yet still the same, the room where she'd had her first; old white paint with the grudging cleanliness of not quite enough scrubbing; the sticky rubber mat under her bottom, that made her wonder what other bottoms had lain on it, wonder desperately enough to take her mind off her panic at the instrument's entry onto her, and the thought,it's like the first screw you ever had — why do we do it, why do we go on doing it?
‘No,’ she said, ‘No.’
She felt the cold steel hesitate.
‘I haven't hurt you?’
‘I don't want to.’
‘Of course you do.’
‘No, I'm — we — we women, we're impulsive in middle age, you know.
Change our minds a lot.‘
‘You'll have to let me finish now that I've started,’ he said.
She raised her head to look at him between her bare knees.
He looked quizzical, concerned — almost personal about her.
Who the hell did he think he was?
‘get-out-of-me!’
Her body heaved, and his hurtled across the from under the unexpected blow from her foot.
She fled home on the underground, scolding herself for being such a coward, it could all be over now if she'd been sensible.
Or if she'd known where to get it done properly.
She could have asked Dorothy of course, Dorothy knew about these things, but she couldn't face the look of exasperation she knew she'd get, the telling-off.
She ran her bleak eyes along the rows of advertisements: bad breath, jobs for temps, are you pregnant?
‘Yes!’ she said in surprise.
‘How clever of you — it doesn't show yet, surely?’
People sitting next to her got up and moved away.
She read the advertisement  carefully: they helped you if you were pregnant!
Well, she was going to need a lot of help, that was for sure, and if someone took the trouble to put an advert in the tube, the least you could do was memorise the number.
The things she was going to need for the baby!
She started to make a list in her head.
Dorothy, Margaret's daughter, looked round the two-room flat that was their home, and groaned.
So it had been a collection day today.
Mother had been making collections.
Eighteen milk bottles on the mantelpiece, some with milky smears and doubtless smelling cheesy.
Rusty tins under the bed and a few more in the sink.
And in a carrier bag, cunningly at the back of a cupboard, a bumper harvest of old newspapers.
Mother must have something on her mind.
‘Oh mother —’ She heard tears in her voice.
She was tired.
‘It's all right, dear, I'm going to wash everything, and either keep it or sell it.
‘Keep old baked bean tins?’
Dorothy fought the anger that was so debilitating, so futile.
‘Sell dirty newspapers?’
Mother couldn't help it.
Things could be worse.
‘The other way round, dear.
Tins can be recycled.
Perhaps the newspapers weren't such a good idea.
Not very hygienic for —’
‘OK, mother, but please clear it, and will you get dinner tonight, I have to write something very urgently —’
Closing her mind to her mother was a survival skill Dorothy had learned many years ago when she realised that if she didn't look after her, no-one else was going to.
Then it became the only way to work: shut mother out, shut out her demands, her outrages, concentrate, work.
It might seem brutal sometimes, but there was no point in having two
‘…don't you think, dear?’
‘Mother, I'm not discussing anything now.
I'm working.’
She got out her PopCon notes, started arranging things in her mind.
Start with a punchy sentence, get them reading.
Then the facts, the evidence.
Then the guesses, the speculations, the comments, the careful qualifications, the neat manipulation of emphasis.
But which was which?
Was it true?
Was any of it true?
Did her excitement at the way the evidence fitted together mean she wanted it to be true?
And if it was true, was any purpose served by revealing it — any purpose other than the advancement of her own career?
‘Dorothy, how would you feel about it if I —’
‘Mother, I can't support us if I can't work.’
Margaret fell silent.
Dorothy was relieved.
Something had apparently been decided, for Margaret's continuous muttering stopped and she went  silently about the business of washing the tins.
At least she only robbed bins and doorsteps, she didn't shoplift.
If she screwed around, at least she was discreet.
She was continent and clean and was usually OK to go out by herself.
And she wasn't violent.
She wasn't really violent like other mad people.
A few days later, one of the cheaper newspapers headed a story: ‘SCIENCE CONFIRMS: TOO MANY WOMEN!’
The text said:
‘Science has finally confirmed what many a mere male has long suspected — that the troubles of the world are women's fault, and if there were fewer of them, things would get on a whole lot better.
This news was given to the world last night, at, of all things — a women's lib meeting!
Posing as a libber, one of our reporters attended a secret meeting of a pro-abortion group and heard its leader, journalist Miss Dorothy Lenham, warn the ‘sisters — that the funding given to the campaign by the  prestigious international research foundation PopCon, might well have sinister implications.
‘PopCon has been doing research all over the world to establish that the majority of prospective parents would prefer a son to a daughter, and many would be prepared to undergo minor medical procedures to ensure that they got their wish, including the abortion of a female fetus,’ Dorothy told a hushed audience in a room at a secret address in North London.
‘PopCon regards this as the final solution to the population problem, since a predominantly male population will obviously produce fewer babies than one in which the sexes are evenly matched.
‘They are investing in the development of a pill that will ensure male-only births.
But in the meantime, some of their researchers think it sufficient to promote sex-tests for unborn babies together with abortion on demand.’
Challenged after the meeting by our reporter and asked if she was not being a bit melodramatic, Dorothy said:’‘It is disgraceful that you have gatecrashed a private meeting like this, and reported on thoughts that have not been fully developed yet.
Wait until I've written a full report.’
But did Dorothy not agree that cutting down on women might be a solution to the population problem in the third world?
‘Birth control isn't just about the population problem, it's about women's autonomy,’ she said.
‘We aren't breeding machines, to be phased out when no more breeding is required.’
Cartoon, Page 7.’
Dorothy woke, tense and listening.
There was someone in the corridor.
She held her breath.
The lighted dial of her watch said one-twenty.
Mother was drawing great rambling breaths and muttering.
There was no stir in the flat.
The footsteps passed on — someone for the people upstairs.
Her conscience had woken her, not the footsteps.
She'd hardly spoken to mother all day.
She'd tried to keep the newspaper story hidden from her because she didn't want to discuss it until she'd had more time  to get her thoughts in order…but of course mother had found it and started questioning compulsively about abortion, what exactly was the law on it now, how did you get one, where did you go, what did it cost, things she must have heard Dorothy and her friends discussing a hundred times but which the newspaper report had triggered into today's obsession.
Damn, damn, damn that bloody newspaper, why couldn't they give people five minutes to discuss something important without destroying everything with their hysteria and filthy ridicule?
How was a person supposed to think straight when?
A world without women!
No — not quite without.
Some would be needed, there would have to be some breeding.
Others would be borne by the few feminists and freaks who preferred girls, for the whole thing would be voluntary; no compulsion would be needed; PopCon's research had been thorough.
In a few generations, of course, people would want girls again, and values and fashions would change…but in the meantime, what would it be like to be one of an endangered species?
What would the world be like?
A universal rotary club, or army barracks, or Dartmoor prison, or Ku Klux Klan, or Catholic priesthood or boardroom or Eton or Glasgow gang!
There was no lack of models.
The doorbell rang.
Dorothy fled to it.
Through the letter box she hissed: ‘Sssh, shh, please, my mother's very —’
Dorothy.
We have to talk to you.’
‘Who is it?’
‘You don't know us.’
She opened the front door and stepped out into the corridor, which was more private than the flat if mother was only pretending to be asleep, which was possible.
She faced two women, one short and tough-looking in a military jacket; the other pale, blonde, anaemic, with watery eyes.
‘We read about you in the papers,’ said the anaemic one.
‘Who are you, though?’
‘I'm Lula, this is Claire.’
‘I can't ask you in.
My mother —’
‘We have to talk somewhere,’ said Claire, the tough one, who was rather frightening.
‘We could go for a walk,’ said Dorothy.
She dressed while they waited, then they went down the greasy stairs into the street.
The two strangers flanked Dorothy, making her wonder, as she had at the PopCon building, whether she could get away.
Not that she wanted to; the cold silence of the night was itself a release from the warm clammy room and her mother's muttered claims on her, claims from which there would be no escape until death.
Three pairs of footsteps  clattered on the pavement, out of step, like three clocks.
Lula and Claire were talking to her, a sort of duet: Lula was persuasive and chatty, Claire chimed in with sharp ideological comments or scornful snorts: hard cop, soft cop.
‘I don't know,’ said Dorothy softly when they wanted an answer from her.
‘I don, t know at all.’
‘How can you not know ?
‘We understand the difficulty,’ said Lula gently.
‘But we — Claire, and I, and a lot of other women — have been wondering how much longer you were going to make money writing articles about the women's movement before you felt a duty to take some kind of action.’
‘I didn't write that article —’
‘No, they got in first, but you were planning to.
You must make quite a lot of money —’
‘I make my living and I support my mother!’
Dorothy looked wildly around her as if for an escape — but nothing was restraining her.
‘I might get my arms blown off, I need them for my work!
Who are you, anyway?’
‘We're a group of women who are tired of talk.’
‘What would it achieve — supposing I did it?
Why me?’
‘Why you, because you know the building and could get into it.
A follow-up story or something.
As to what it would achieve…’
Claire abandoned the explanation, Lula took her cue.
‘It, s symbolic.
Every woman who read about what that place is for will understand.
It’ s an act of solidarity with every woman who's under pressure to have a baby, or have a boy or have a girl or who knows, for god's sake, have a puppy or a kitten or a goddamned foal.
‘I know.’
Dorothy bit her nails miserably.
‘I know.
But what are we saying?
All those bastards want is to let people choose the sex of their baby.
What can we say against that?’
‘You talk as if it was an interesting academic problem,’ Claire snarled.
‘Don't you realise they want to wipe us out?
Can we really do nothing about it, just because they seem to have taken one of our slogans, one of our demands and twisted it?
Why did you go after the story in the first place if your position wasn't clear?’
Dorothy said, ‘I have to live.’
‘So do we all, sister.’
‘What would I have to do…if I agreed.’
‘Just go in there and leave a package.’
‘Is that all?’
‘That's all.’
‘OK.’
Margaret heard Dorothy go out.
Something connected with her work  presumably…poor Dorothy, working all hours!
Dorothy thought her efforts weren't appreciated, but oh, they were, they were.
Margaret knew she wasn't the easiest person to live with, she knew she had her mad days, but Dorothy tolerated, accepted, got on with her career.
Margaret couldn't inflict a baby on her.
‘Doctor, I'm pregnant.’
The doctor grinned.
‘At your age?’
He looked young enough to be her son.
‘You should give it up, you know,’ he said.
‘It's bad for the heart.’
He scribbled on a pad.
‘Still, a short life but a merry one, eh?
Take that along to the hospital.’
She got up and went to the door.
She'd been in the surgery exactly two minutes.
He looked tip.
‘It was an abortion you wanted, wasn't it?’
‘Yes, doctor.
Thank you very much doctor.’
When she got to the hospital, they gave her an appointment to see a gynaecologist in six weeks time.
So she went instead to the place that advertised on the tube that it helped you if you were pregnant; she thought there might be the small chance that they would know where she could get an abortion.
Desperation was beginning to seize at her guts; Dorothy had tolerated so much from her, but she would not take this.
Mother, I can't support us if I can't work , she always used to say when she wanted a bit of peace and quiet…what chance of peace and quiet with a baby in the tiny flat?
Dorothy would leave and abandon her at the very idea.
She wasn't going to tell that fear to anyone though; she wasn't having them prying or saying that Dorothy ought to be glad of a new brother or sister.
She rang the number she'd seen on the underground and went to the address they told her.
‘If you promise not to tell anyone,’ Margaret said, when she finally got to see a doctor, ‘I nearly had it done the old way, you know, with a knitting needle, then I lost my nerve.’
She thought telling him that would prove she was determined.
‘Would you like to tell me why you want an abortion?’
‘I just do, that's all.’
‘Yes, but why?’
‘Why do I have to tell you?'
‘I'm the one who you're asking to do it,’ said the doctor, reasonably.
He leaned forward.
‘Look, it's up to you.
As far as I'm concerned, it, s on demand.
But I have to have something to go on your notes, see?
Just in case we're ever investigated.’
So Margaret started to tell him.
Afterwards she couldn't remember half of what she'd said.
If she'd meant to lie, she'd have planned the lies; as it  was, it was more like someone else speaking, someone for whom all the tales might be true: the tales of the amorous husband who would not be denied, or even delayed; of her horrified discovery that her tried and trusted dutch cap had let her down after all these years, of her disappointment that she would not now be able to train as a doctor or run a campaign for more zebra crossings or offer a home to her poor ailing mother; and then of course there were the medical difficulties, what with her diabetes and the early mongol child that died and all those Caesarians; and the home where there wasn't an inch of space and how the baby would mean eviction and bankruptcy; and the fear that the baby might be too obviously of mixed-race; and the over-riding, gut-rending terror that the baby might have royal blood (of course if ever this got outside these walls there would be no answering for the political consequences for the western world) and in the circumstances it seemed kind that the child should never be born.
‘Come in the day after tomorrow,’ he said.
‘You'll only have to stay one night.’
He couldn't have believed all that, surely?
If she was going to be in the hospital for one night she would need lots of things to read.
Or maybe they supplied them.
They hadn't told her that and she would need to know.
If she had to take her own reading things she ought to start collecting them now, whereas if they supplied them it would be embarrassing to turn up with a bag of newspapers, as if you didn't know how to behave.
She would have to phone them.
It was a stupid thing to phone to ask but she would have to.
She realised in a panic that she had forgotten the number.
Well — kill two birds with one stone.
Down into the Central Line, pick up abandoned newspapers and look for that advertisement.
She found it quite easily.
It was a funny advertisement, it didn't come right out and say it gave you abortions, it just promised to ‘help’.
Why not come out arid say it in this day and age, she muttered to herself as she dialled the number.
‘Hello, this is Mrs Lenham, look about my abortion the day after tomorrow, I just wanted to know if…’
‘You're having an abortion?’
‘Sorry, I mean I'm pregnant and, er, you said you could help me the day after tomorrow and I wanted to know if…’
‘We can help you today , Mrs Lenham.’
‘What —?’
‘The positive way.’
The woman's voice made her realise something was wrong.
‘You're not the place I —’
‘You may have got the wrong number, dear, but it's a stroke of luck for you…and for your baby.’
‘It's not a baby, it's a lump of jelly!’
Margaret panicked, she'd got the wrong number, the wrong place, the wrong advertisement, why didn't they get off the line, why didn't they leave her —
‘It's a baby.
It has arms and legs.
If you were to touch him with a pin — and he's a boy or a girl by now— he'd move away, he feels pain.
If you cut him up and pulled him out of your body — which is what they do —’
‘Oh you liar, you liar, you're lying you liar!’
She banged down the phone, rushed from the station.
How dare anyone tell her what to do?
She'd choose, she'd decide, it was her body, her life.
The fire at the PopCon building was big news for a day or so.
One office was burned out completely, and with it some fairly important papers that would take several months, research to restore.
Seven fire engines were called, and traffic was held up all over London.
The firm which had fire-proofed the building got high praise for the containment of the blaze.
It was clearly a case of arson, but the motive was puzzling at first.
The culprit was assumed to be the young woman whose charred body had been trapped by the flames; she was identified as a feminist — funny, when PopCon had been giving money and moral support to feminist groups.
Then the paper that had published the earlier report recognised her name as that of the rather hysterical women's libber who was planning to expose PopCon as the enemy of women…and this seemed to clear the matter up.
Obviously a one-man operation by a disturbed girl who believed in her own propaganda.
‘The cause of female freedom,’ warned the paper, ‘which we have always supported, is ill-served by terrorism of this kind.’
Margaret called the new baby Dorothy Two.
With Dorothy One so suddenly dead, the abortion had been impossible.
Dorothy Two was a difficult baby.
Margaret had to be anaesthetised for the birth, and she was hardly well when they sent the two of them home.
Dorothy Two cried all day and cried all night, and Margaret's only respite was when she went to work, to the factory-cleaning job she had had to take.
She wished Dorothy One was still there to help, but she was determined to manage.
If she didn't manage they'd take the baby away, and then everything would be wasted.
She used to slip home from the factory during her lunch breaks to make sure Dorothy Two was all right.
And there she'd be, always crying.
And one day a lady came from the clinic.
She was a fat, plain woman  in blue overalls, with moles on her face and no wedding ring.
’ Good afternoon, Mrs Lenham.
We're a bit concerned about Dorothy, we haven't seen you and her for such a long time.
‘She's all right.’
‘May I —’
’ She's asleep !’
Dorothy Two wailed treacherously.
The clinic woman hoisted her into the air and looked at her in distaste.
Margaret gasped at the way the child suddenly became thin and feverish-looking under the woman's gaze.
‘Have you got a clean towel?’
‘What for?’ demanded Margaret.
‘Whose baby is it, anyway?
Whose room?
Whose towel?’
‘I want to lie her down and have a look at her.
Did you plan to have this child, dear?’
‘I'll put some newspaper on the bed.’
‘But that's dirty newspaper!
Really, this place is very squalid, Mrs Lenham, if you don't mind my saying so.’
‘Well, you see, I was going to have an abortion, only —’
‘So why didn't you?’
The clinic woman laid her own coat on the bed and put Dorothy Two on it.
She poked a finger at the big red raw patches on her thighs.
‘Urine burns,’ she pronounced; and soon Dorothy Two was taken off into care.
Into care — yes, that was what they called it, care.
But who cared?
It made her howl with bitterness when she was alone in the weeks that followed, and it made her grit her teeth as she strode through the streets looking for revenge, or for her baby, or for Dorothy, not too sure what she was looking for but usually coming home with nothing better than a bag of old tins.
She phoned a lot of numbers — for London seemed suddenly full of numbers to phone if you wanted help.
As well as the numbers to phone if you wanted an abortion or if you didn't, there were numbers for if you felt like committing suicide, were going bald, wanted a job, had been arrested or wanted today's recipe.
Margaret tried them all, but none of them had any help for her.
Because there was no help for her.
In between bouts of crying and phoning, she knew that.
She was bereaved of two daughters.
She wished neither of them had ever been born.
‘I should have had abortions both times,’ she muttered.
But you couldn't really say that.
Dorothy One had died for something she believed in (though Margaret was not quite sure what it was), but she'd have helped keep Dorothy Two if she'd lived.
After the Ball was Over
Sara Maitland
I met Kelly yesterday.
She was eight months pregnant.
Despite everything it was one hell of a shock.
I didn't notice at first; I saw her walking down the street in front of me, and without any hesitation I knew who it was — I hadn't seen her for over a year, she had cut her hair off short and was wearing a dress, but I knew.
‘Kelly,’ I shouted and she turned round and shrieked, ‘Annie, darling’, and we tried to fall into each other 's arms.
She managed this better than I did, presumably having had practice and certainly having the advantage of knowing in advance that she stuck out about eighteen inches in front of where she ought to have been.
As I said, it was a shock and I was clumsy.
She didn't seem to notice.
‘O, my dear,’ she said, ‘how lovely.’
But it was she who was lovely, damn her.
So we entered a genteel teashoppe/cafe which happened to be handy and ordered coffee, as so often before.
It came, repulsive, in genteel cups.
‘I'm married,’ she said, not quite without  aggression , but not bad.
‘So I heard.
You didn't ask me to the wedding.’
We both grinned experimentally.
‘You wouldn't have liked it, my great-aunt was there.’
‘Is he nice?’
I asked, I had to say something.
‘Absolutely,’ she said and glowed.
I couldn't help remembering: the second time we met she had asked the party at large, ‘Are there any twin comets?,
‘What?’
’ Twin comets?’she'd repeated.
‘Because that's what Annie and I are going to be.
We will lighten up the dreary Brighton sky and dim the fluorescent pier.’
She was drunk, but it was not a prophesy or even a sexual invitation, it was an expression of delight.
And now she was saying with the same delight, about someone else, ‘Absolutely.’
Then after a long pause she added, ‘Absolutely nice.
But do I love him?
Yes.
But why?
Ah, there's the rub.
‘The urge to beget is blind and sinister.’
It is also confusing.’
‘What's that from?’
I pounced on the quotation because she had no  right, no right at all to burden me with her doubts, after a year, and after everything.
‘Translation by Auden of poem by unpronounceable Czech.
Also true.’
But she knew at once why I had asked and went on with hardly a break for punctuation, ‘Well, love, what's with you?
I heard you were living with a cabinet member's daughter and fighting for Gay Rights in Fast Cheam?’
We laughed, more easily this time.
‘Putney.
And her Dad is not a Cabinet Minister.
An MP, bourgeois Labour, you know, votes for Comprehensives and sends his kinds to public school.
Votes for anti-discrimination and throws Lucy out of the house for fear of moral contamination.
Poor Lucy, he's a dreadful embarrassment to her, nearly as bad as she is to him.’
Kelly laughed again, but for one moment I was afraid she'd do something awful like ask if Lucy was pretty, or something.
Quickly I said,’ And where have you been?
Making Quiche Lorraine in the suburbs, or bacon and egg pie in some more working class district?’
‘Don't be such a goddam bitch,’ but she said it affectionately.
Then she looked at me almost slyly.
’ Actually I saw you at the Central Conference last month.’
Then with more confidence, ‘And at the abortion thing in May.’
That did surprise me, and hurt.
‘Why the fuck didn't you make your presence known?,
‘Look at me.
I'm pregnant.
I didn't feel up to the snubs your radical feminist friends would have handed out.’
‘They are NOT radical feminists.
‘Well they bloody looked like it.’
‘You're one to talk.
Who wouldn't join a Marxist reading group because he was an antiquated masculist, who couldn't recognise the glory of women in struggle?’
‘Did I really say that?
Ever?’
‘Yes, you did.
Is that really why you didn't come and chat?’
‘Sort of.
Unless you're about forty-five and come from Bradford or Stepney and already have about nine children who've brought you to recognise your oppression, there's a big down on pregnancy.’
‘Bull.’
‘Think about it Annie.’
I did.
‘All right, not bull.
But it’ s not without reason.
A baby.
Marriage.
Embrace your oppression as masochistically as possible.’
‘You're joking.
I choose to have a baby like you choose to be gay.’
‘I didn't choose to be gay.
I am gay.’
‘I didn't choose to be womb and boob endowed.
I am.’
‘Not the same.’
‘No, you're right, it's not the same.
But it's still my right to choose my  own form of sexual self-determination.
Anyway, you can see I feel confused about it still, because I couldn't face the flak from your friends.
Also of course I didn't know how you'd feel about it.’
‘That's nearer the truth.’
But we were getting too near the truth.
I searched for something different to say and really put my foot in it:
‘You've stopped smoking.’
And as soon as I'd said it I realised how odd it was, Kelly without a cigarette, without fiddling with the packet and dropping matches on the floor.
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘I had to.’
Just following the flow of words I said, ‘Oh.
Why?’
She looked away and said, ‘Because of the baby.’
Trying to pull us both up short she started on a lecture on the foetal damage caused by nicotine, but neither of us was listening; we were looking at a memory.
Kelly sitting hunched in the corner of our vast mattress, with burn holes in our beautiful sheets and an overflowing ashtray beside her, looking into one of the half-dozen cigarette packets and suddenly screaming, ‘You fucking bitch, you've finished the goddam bloody cigarettes.’
Then after a long while, during which neither of us could escape from her hatred and savagery, she'd said tiredly, ‘OK, Annie, we can't do it.
Get on the bloody telephone.’
And without one word, even of acknowledgement, I had got up and gone downstairs and telephoned.
‘Jesus, Kelly, I'm sorry.’
‘Don't be.
It would never have worked.
I've met women since who've done it, and seem to be together all right.
I always want to ask them.
But it wouldn't have worked for us.’
‘Too young?’
‘Mm, maybe.
But not just that.’
‘Come on, Miss Wisdom of the Ages 1977, try and clarify.’
‘We never talked it out properly; why I wanted the baby, because it was I, not us, that wanted it, true?
Why I wanted it and how that ties in with who I can love, get it together with, I mean long term.’
‘Sounds neurotic.
Freud calls it masochism.’
‘Let him.
As of when was he the feminist gospel.
Anyway, it's not neurotic, it's a fact of life, a biological, evolutionary thing.
At least, a psycho-physiological thing.’
‘Get off it, Kelly, you can't posit norms like that.’
‘I'm not positing norms.
I'm…let me see, what am I doing?
Clinical case-histories.
My own, anyway.
It’ s not, I'm Normal, you're Queer.
It's more…mm…would you buy ‘bio-chemical predisposition’?'
‘No.
Nor androgen therapy for gay guys.’
‘It's not the same.
I'm not trying to cure anything.
I'm trying to  analyse a quite common fact.
That some women want to have children and some don't.
I don't see what's so sinister about biology as a hypothesis.
Biologically pregnancy clearly suits me.
See how great I look.’
‘Narcissist,’ I said, wanting to get her back into the subject; but she dropped it.
‘Yes?
No, I don't think…not sure.
Funny, if we’ d been more discreet we'd have got away with it.’
‘Relationships belong in the public political sphere.’
‘Damn, Annie, stop quoting me at me.
I know.
That's why you, if anyone, ought to understand why Dick and I got married.
Socialise a private relationship.
But it is more risky.
All our beloved friends.’
‘Not just.
I couldn't forgive you him.’
‘Who?’
’ Harry.’
Once we'd decided to have a baby we had had to find a Father.
The Father had been Harry.
It had been a hellish week.
Kelly and he had been so calm and businesslike, and yet…
I found myself hating them, hating myself for hating them, hating myself for wanting to say so, hating them for putting me in a position of wanting to say so.
Insane.
I found myself obsessed with voyeuristic sub-passions; I wanted to watch them, I would not say so.
One horrible night I found myself crouched at the door, listening for sounds of pain which would have given me pleasure, sounds of pleasure that would have hurt.
‘Harry?’ exclaimed Kelly.
’ Good lord.’
‘I was afraid you'd enjoy it too much.’
‘Perhaps I did.’
After a pause she added, ‘I knew you were jealous.
There's worse than that.
I was glad you were.
But we could have worked that through.
It was Carol and Bill who shook me.’
Once we knew she was pregnant we'd felt great, and proud.
I think we were near deluding ourselves that Harry had never happened, that we'd done it all ourselves.
Parthenogenesis, or something, though neither of us was exactly virginal.
That week and the waiting afterwards had hurt us, we wanted to be admired, to have our courage and convictions praised, to show off.
We'd always been boastful, conspicuous, triumphalist in our love; now we had to tell the World.
Which in practice turned out to mean Carol and Bill, these friends of Kelly's.
I didn't go with her and I never knew what happened.
I came home later and found Kelly shaken.
‘What did they say?’
‘They gave me the address of a doctor.’
‘Great.
Who is he?
Only the best for my girl.’
‘An abortionist.’
‘But we don't need a fucking abortionist,’ I'd said, ‘we want a bloody mid-wife.’
‘Thanks,’ she'd said, and everything seemed to be all right.
‘You're right,’ I said now, ‘they really laid it on us.
Half the people I know came up and condoled with me on your ‘Infidelity’.
And they thought I was being pathetic to put up with it.’
‘Well, we'd been so public I suppose everyone thought they had a right to make it their business, and what's more according to us they did.’
The pressures had been heavy and from every direction.
‘You must be mad.’
‘You two bring tip a kid, you have got to be joking.’
, What a sell out.’
‘Look, Kelly, if you can't get the money together I'll lend it.
Honestly, I'd be more than willing, you poor thing.’
‘God, Annie, does she still have it off with blokes, you'd better watch it.’
‘Say, Annie, are you both bi, or just Kelly.’
‘What does whoever the Father is think?’
‘Why tie yourselves down?,
‘What's the good of going on about contraception when you can't even get your own head together.’
‘You must be mad.’
We started at each other:
You never wanted this baby.
You preferred it with him, didn't you? didn't you? didn't you?
You're jealous, aren't you? aren't you? aren't you?
An agonising visit to this doctor.
‘And what makes you think you qualify under the law?’
Kelly had looked at me, I hadn't looked at her.
‘I'm a lesbian,’ she'd said.
‘In that case, no possible problem.
Of course.
Of course.’
He confirmed what everyone was saying.
In fact he confirmed it so strongly that we had pulled ourselves together for a few days.
Locked in each other 's arms.
We want this baby.
We want our baby.
We want this baby.
‘Ring me up,’ the doctor had said, ‘when you've made up your mind.’
Because he believed that she would make it up, he knew she would, damn him.
He never said one single word to me.
‘We just weren't brave enough,’ I said to Kelly now, ‘we thought we were so unconventional and clever and we were wrong.
A little more sense and courage, a little less bravado, we'd still be together.’
‘No.
If we hadn't tried we'd have split up anyway.
And I'd have eaten you up with guilt and bitterness first.
It was worth a go.
‘I prefer to believe we weren't brave enough.
I refuse to submit to being biologically determined in that simplistic way.’
‘It's not just biology.
It's history and sociology as well.
Of course we refuse to be biologically determined in that simple sense; but biology is integrally us.
I don't want, no, I refuse to deny my body.
Absolutely.
Point blank.
I don’ t want any denials, puritan denials; but there have to be choices, you can't have everything.’
‘I want everything.’
‘Of course.
So do I, but we change our definitions of everything to fit our most central desires.’
‘Pessimist.’
‘Me?’
‘Or cynic.’
‘Not that.’
A pause.
Kelly grinned.
‘Do you still hate vomit?,
One morning Kelly was sick.
Not just a little sick, but very sick indeed.
I hate vomit, I can't help it, I simply hate it.
I couldn't touch her because she stank of it.
I tried but she sensed my revulsion.
She sat hunched on the bed all day, silent and smoking.
I resented her silence too, it cut me out.
All day.
I sat and watched her.
I couldn't stop myself thinking of the nights she had spent with Harry and wanting to know how much she had enjoyed them.
I tried to tell myself I loved her and when that did no good I tried telling myself I hated her.
We just sat there not looking at each other, all day, until she burst out with all that anger, ‘You fucking bitch you've finished the goddam bloody cigarettes.’
It wasn't even true.
The anger went out of her eyes, she was exhausted, she surrendered.
‘OK, Annie, we can't do it.
Get on the bloody telephone.’
I was exhausted too.
I didn't think of her; I can't say I went because I respected her decision or because I thought it was in her interest; I knew it wasn't in her interest, or mine, or ours.
I did it because I was exhausted, and defeated.
I rang up the doctor.
I was so cowed that I didn't even say who I was; I pretended to be her.
The doctor was all compliance.
A sensible decision, made in good time.
We could do it on the National Health.
For the next few days we made love with a kindliness and consideration we had never experienced before.
I even found I could hold her head and pet her while she threw up.
We did not discuss it at all.
After the operation she came back and there was nothing there.
We talked a lot, made love a little, said nothing and never touched each other .
One day I came home and she was packing.
I didn't even question her.
We both cried and kissed each other, and she said, ‘I love you, even I love you.
Don't forget.’
And I said, ‘Yes, I know,’ and then she went.
‘Yes,’ I said, looking round for the waitress to give us more coffee, ‘I still hate vomit.
Also blood, and menstrual cramps and the thought of labour pains and being stitched up and being woken in the night by a shitty damp bundle and having my tits tugged and bitten, and being mauled around by macho chauvinist piglings who call themselves obstetricians.
You bet I hate it still.’
Kelly laughed.
‘You're denying the complexities of your biology.’
I said, ‘And you, my girl, are denying the simplicities of your lusts.’
After we had drunk the coffee, Kelly said, ‘Do you notice that I'm still wearing the blue boots you gave me for my birthday?
‘I noticed.’
‘Good.’
‘Don't flirt with me, Kelly Edwards.’
‘I'm sorry.
Look, I have to go.
Keep in touch.
Come to supper, you'll like Dick.’
‘Will I?’
‘Yes.’
She grinned.
You have a lot in common.
‘I said don't.'
But I was grinning too.
‘You can be my infant's godmother or something.’
‘Sure.
Give me a ring.’
‘God, Annie, I do like you a lot.’
‘Too true alas.’
‘Not alas at all.
There are far too few likeable people around.’
She heaved herself to her feet and leaned over to kiss me.
There was real delight there.
For both of us.
I bet when she gets home she's sulky with her husband; I know I will be with Lucy.
Martha and Mary raise Consciousness from the Dead
Michele Roberts
There is a dead nun in the school chapel.
She lies in a glass box in front of one of the side altars separating the school chapel from the one the nuns use, both fronting onto the heavily railed-Off sanctuary, surrounded by dusty wax flowers and palms and night-lights winking in ruby glass containers.
Sister Martha fights the other novices for the job of cleaning the chapel, for then she is able to enter the sanctuary and dust off the tabernacle itself.
Only this holy housework enables her to break the chaplain's privilege of closeness to Jesus.
The smell of floorpolish mingles with that of incense, Mary Magdalene wiping Christ's arse with her hair.
My mother got married in black.
You've got long hair too, black hair which you push impatiently away from your face with one hand while gesticulating with the other to make a point as you talk.
Talking about childhood in the consciousness-raising group last week, telling you stories.
Rapunzel, Rapunzel, let down your hair.
That's all I've been able to do all afternoon, sit here like bloody Mariana in the moated grange waiting for the telephone to ring.
That'll be lovely, I say politely over the telephone, do come round, it'll be nice to see you.
Mummy, can Jane come to tea?
Mummy, can I bring Linda home from school?
Mummy, can Liz stay the night?
Mummy, why can't she?
You're coming over so that we can discuss the demand that the women's movement is making for free contraception and abortion on demand, and the strategy that our local women's group might develop in struggling for that at a local level, how we relate to other women and groups of women in the area, how the abortion issue relates to other ones.
How we relate to other women.
I've committed myself to writing some notes on it in cooperation with you so that we can take them back to the group next week to discuss with the others.
We could go away for a weekend together, we could; we could wake up next morning and eat croissants and drink coffee from blue china bowls.
We could lie propped up against wide pillows edged with lace, the legs of  the bed rooted in a froth of cow parsley, convolvulus thrusting through the wrought-iron bedstead, the blue sky and the clouds more solid than the rows of houses underneath.
We could pull the quilt up over our bare shoulders, an oasis on a plain of snow where wolves prowl in the bracken and forests are bleak.
I could colonise you with gifts, sow a garden, reap a harvest in you, label you with nicknames as my own variety.
You spend a lot of time in your garden, I know, planting, digging.
I mostly just look at mine from the window; I've got to know the walnut tree over a whole year now.
My bed is under the window; you might be sitting on it in an hour's time.
We have owls in our garden; they cried softly last night as I lay in my glass coffin, Snow White waiting for the fairy to wake her into feminism with a kiss.
There is a dead nun in the school chapel.
You'd been to convent school as well, you said.
That was when I met you for the first time, last week, at the consciousness-raising group that we started at the women's centre a few weeks ago.
Last week it was my turn to talk about my past; in order to become conscious of my pain, in order to understand what's happening now and why.
We carry the memory of childhood like a photo in a locket, fierce and possessive for pain or calm; everybody's past is inviolate, separate, sacrosanct, our heads are different countries with no maps or dictionaries, people walk vast deserts of grief or inhabit walled gardens of joy.
‘Tell me about your past,’ I began to urge other women, and they to urge me.
The women sit in circles talking, they are passing telegrams along battle lines, telling each other stories that will not put them to sleep, recognising allies under the disguise of femininity, no longer smuggling ammunition over back garden walls.
Tell me a story, my little brother used to clamour, tell me a story about knights on white chargers and damsels in distress.
Tell me a story to keep the bogeys away.
I told the group a story, to keep them entertained, to laugh preferably and not to weep, hiding reality from them and myself with metaphor and rhythm, my face without makeup is vulnerable out on the street.
The bathroom and the lavatory were the only places where I could be myself and on my Own.
My father used to spend hours on the lavatory smoking and reading the paper; when he finally emerged at my mother's disgusted summons, a rich smell of shit and tobacco would sidle out into the corridor.
I would lie for hours in my sea grey with the remains of bubble bath.
The hot water had prickled pleasantly at the nameless place at the tops of my thighs when I got in; cooler now, it lapped at the dome of my stomach.
Two flannels, draped across this, were mermaids, who swam and flopped and basked on islands of flesh.
Somewhere, unseen, hardly formed in my imagination, were ships of princes, sailors, of  pirates, coming to spy them, fondle them, lead them resistless away.
My dolls were never babies to be fed and bathed and kissed but the protagonists of enormous adventures.
They had distinct personalities: princesses forced to disguise themselves as scullery maids or kidnapped into slavery; heroines who dressed up as boys and lived in camps full of men, performing feats of daring beyond description until discovered in bed or in the bath by the hero and proclaimed as beautiful.
My imagination faltered at this point; but I lingered over it, returning over and over again to the discovery of my heroine's and my own female body, and the male contemplation of it.
‘Run into the garden and play,’ my mother constantly urged us.
High fences denied the street, traffic, litter, undesirable kids from the council estate up the road.
In autumn my father watched for boys who climbed in to steal his apples but was stumped by their shamelessness even when caught red-handed.
The youngest son always knew it was only he who would pass the ogre and find the Grail.
In winter the bare trees were florid with the purple and grey of pigeons, and in spring we buried dead baby sparrows under the soapsuds of fallen blossom.
Between the primary school at the top of the hill and the safe back garden gate the crazy man danced, arms outstretched to catch us, prick flapping between the loose folds of his overcoat.
Every Sunday all the family met for tea at my grandparents' house.
My grandfather taught me necessary skills: how to tip my tea into my saucer and blow waves across it until it was cool enough to drink; how to cut an orange in half crossways and pack a sugar lump into each half and then suck out orange-juice and sugar together; how to walk along the crazy-paving garden path without stepping On any of the cracks or a tiger would get you; how to butter the loaf and then clutch it to your chest and then shave off paper-thin slices; what saint to pray to when you woke up at night and saw the devil moving behind the curtains.
We had shrimps for tea, watercress, celery stacked in a glass jug, fishpaste sandwiches, flan made from the blackberries hanging in thickets over the back garden fence from the wild common beyond.
In April the garden was a jungle of bluebells, bursting from under the trees in blue tides above your ankles, but by midsummer my grandmother had it tame again, fifty yards of earth between wooden fences bearing docile rows of hollyhock and sweet peas; an ex-army rug was spread on the shaven lawn for the children to sit on for tea outdoors.
After tea we children would wander off casually into the garage with despising giggles for the grownups planted solidly in their wicker chairs talking boring grown-up talk.
We played the same game every Sunday; each one in turn pulled down his or her underwear and rotated slowly while the others watched.
The fact that I knew it was wicked to expose my  smooth bare slit gave me a feeling both of pleasure and of power, never vocalised.
The game was carried on in silence.
‘What about your school, though?’
One of the women asked.
Do you remember how, do you remember when, can you begin to realise why?
And do you really want to?
I'm telling you a story, you remember that.
Nostalgia for simple sensory experience cancels out the pain I didn't recognise then.
On our retreat in the last year of school, a visiting priest talked to us from Sister Superior's throne.
The priest waved his arms up and down and exhorted us ‘Be the angels of your homes’.
For those with problems or vocations to be discussed, there were interviews in the convent parlour, hitherto sacrosanct.
Most of us went, to savour talking to the man who abhorred women, in the forbidden room with its hard chairs and unopened windows and the heart bleeding over the door.
The priest made us sit next to him on footstools; he bent his red face towards us and whispered that we should become the angels of our homes and his.
In that last summer term we spent a lot of time outdoors in the convent garden, in that part of it where our noisy unhallowed feet might tread.
In our explorations, ostensibly in search of good compositions to sketch, we often came upon the nuns: a solitary sister on her knees in front of a grotto, a nervous magpie secreting days off purgatory, would fly up; a group of novices, disturbed roller-skating or playing the guitar, would look to their novice-mistress for permission to accept a boiled sweet.
I and my best friend Katy lay in the long grass below the tennis courts.
The bell ringing the office was tinny on the warm air, the smell of mown grass was part of the heat of the afternoon, the fat ugly school dog Muffin wandered in search of Sister Superior's caresses.
‘Are your parents coming to Open Day?’ asked Katy through a mouthful of grass.
‘My mother is.’
We lay back, our faces buzzing with heat and the noise of insects.
We were practising for what we conceived of as adulthood.
Our freedom that term: to lie and masturbate each other in the long grass below the tennis courts until the bell rang again, for the end of art class.
I did well at school because I was in love with and afraid of my teachers.
A good essay meant a dry word of praise or an ironic look; not remembering theorems brought a turned back, sarcasm.
Sister Paul would pretend not to see me as I hung about outside around the staffroom to see her pass by for the third time that day.
It took me a long time to learn to transfer my attention to men.
But once at university I was an apt student.
I learnt it, along with Old English grammar and D.H.
Lawrence, another whole language of self-hatred and subservience.
Late afternoon, summer, the small suburban garden bloated with the marquee empty after my cousin's wedding and departure on honeymoon, my father's flushed face, my mother's face jerking, my own imminent departure back to Oxford, my head racing with wine and incense.
I rang Peter from a callbox in Paddington station and asked if I could drop in to see him before going back.
He understood me, was reassuring and only slightly bored.
The bottle of cheap wine empty, he kissed me expertly, then moved both our bodies onto the bed on the floor, a sheath tucked into his cheek in readiness.
I was embarrassed.
The nuns and my mother, though schooling me well in the use of items such as forks, napkins, gloves, had omitted instructions on the manipulation of lips, arms, legs, cunt.
These had always been kept closed, trussed-up, gingerly moved, kept out of the way lest they offend.
Exposing them meant asking for it: whistles, pinches, rape.
Now they were required to explode, dance, vibrate, arch, become continents crawling with armies of desire.
I lay back, stiff not with fear but with social embarrassment.
Peter, finally noticing my immobility, ceased his busy efficient caresses and looked at me.
‘D'you mean to tell me that this is the first time you've slept with anyone?’ he asked incredulously.
Ashamed, I could only nod.
His actor's training came to his support.
Giving me his most tender childlike smile he murmured, ‘Well, what a very wonderful occasion,’ and resumed his task.
Five minutes later he flopped on top of me.
Both our stomachs were set; a tiny trickle of blood on the sheet confirmed what I had not noticed: that I was no longer a virgin.
We slept, In the morning he was kind, fed me melon and wine on a pavement cafe in South Kensington, then pushed me Onto a bus with a fatherly peck on the cheek, and went back to writing his play.
I marched back to the flat past couples strolling damp and contented from the Cherwell boathouse.
The north Oxford gardens were heavy with blossom, crowding sweetness along the roads, bushes of raindrenched lilac crouched behind stone walls, waiting for evening and release.
The chipped face of the Virgin, newly gaudy for Easter with pink and blue paint, stares detachedly through Sister Martha: close half-sleeves to the elbow under the wide sleeves of her habit, kneelength stockings, large loose knickers doled out that morning from the heap in the laundry basket, lumpy sanitary towel strapped like a dead rabbit between her legs.
A mild day, poached-egg clouds on a mottled sky like a face after crying, warm damp wind tossing the hair and skirts of bicyclists beyond the wall, the arms of trees.
Sister Martha's father was a butcher in Fecamp years ago, his overall as blue as the habit she wears now.
She paces the  gravelled path between the redbrick walls of the kitchen garden, goosepimpled arms, legs and breasts under the serge tent, face frilled in white like a crown-roast cutlet.
The novices empty vats of mutton scraps into the dustbins and pack them down with their bare hands.
Her brother Claude creeps across to her bed in the middle of the night and strokes her toes.
He served at mass every morning, you could see the muck on the soles of his boots.
She was sometimes allowed to ring the little handbell at the elevation of the host.
They had palms stuck behind the crosses above their beds; she used to get hers down and hold it when the man inside her bolster started trying to get out.
You were watching me steadily as I talked, listening, not saying very much.
There were eight women at the meeting that night, sitting hunched about the room and on the floor.
I knew I found it hard to remember they were there, was very aware of you as I talked.
‘Go on,’ you said as I stopped, ‘go on.’
So I began to sleep with men in order to discover myself, to see, through their unknown, hitherto unmet eyes, the self that I really was at the same time as the self that I really might be.
The confrontation involved in sex seemed of all those available to me for that purpose the most powerful, the most open, the most personal.
But at the final moment, with a succession of lovers and of mirrors, vision distorted: I was presented with only a fractured picture of myself.
That was how I perceived it, in wordless ways in my head, in my gut.
Yet I did not know which to trust: the splintered yet separately concrete vision of myself each man offered me which was the product of his necessary fantasy; or the amorphous, difficult to establish whole self which struggled to say that his vision of me and mine through his, had distorted it.
If I became part of his fantasy landscape a certain amount of security, great pleasure even, was possible, at the cost of feeling split and unknowable afterwards and unsure whether I as I felt I really was had experienced anything.
If I did not trust and live his fantasy image of myself I could no longer reach out to distorted splinters and did not know where to begin to look for myself.
I seemed to live two inches behind the front of my skin, that part of me created wilfully by my lovers.
Certain parts of me were defined by the grass that I dented with my feet or the cushion that I hollowed with my back and had an identity both in time and space; but the breasts and cunt he briefly fondled existed only because touched at his will and through his perception of them.
Poets plunged perpetually through thickets, climbed mountains, mapped new continents; whose were they, I wondered, where did they come from?
‘Tell me,’ I began to urge other women, ‘what might be’, and they to urge me.
The men who watched us began to feel uneasy.
They hinted to all the women dependent on them in various ways that their shrill cries rendered them boring, humourless, sexually unappetising; they talked of castration by these same women and wept and offered themselves as small soft snails out of their snailshells to be cosseted back by mummy into strength and pleasure-giving.
After a long day of wiping her son's eyes, arse and office floors, mummy was often too exhausted to continue the struggle.
My parents loved me without conditions, so they and all the stories told me; I seek a lover who will do the same.
If you will not love me, having won me, I do not know who I am.
I will be both the tiger in your back garden and the dove of your green jungle; Griselda under her disguise of ashes and ass's skin in your back kitchen and the radiant princess who reveals her lineage at your high table.
I have learned to please, to gauge and sniff the air before I move off, to swing my head from side to side as I put one foot carefully in front of the other, ears and hair raised to twang on the slightest change in the atmosphere.
This is the nature with which I desperately attune, knowing no other, with which I painfully harmonise, fearful always of the loss of the love which keeps me that way.
Self-hatred finally brought silence.
One of the women pierced it in its tenderest place.
‘Have you ever wanted to sleep with another woman?’
I couldn't answer that question because my thoughts were aimed at you, not at the painful roots of my current practice but at you, the conjuring of feelings by the spell and ritual of words, the seducing of you with poetry, I a  pedlar tumbling stories before your dais.
I began to recognise a landscape.
I wanted to weep for an enormous violent sensuality I would never know again.
The words tumbled out like machine gun fire.
My mother got married in black.
Her punishment for wanting that English Protestant, my father, who proposed to her by telegram.
Very keen marry you.
It was wartime.
They were punished together by the priest in black in the crypt of the French Catholic church in Leicester Square, its sombreness relieved only by Jean Cocteau's androgynous wall-paintings; they were allowed no flowers and no music.
My mother wore a black suit with padded shoulders, a little hat over one eye, rolling shoulder curls, a hint of black veil.
Afterwards they had a wedding breakfast in the Escargot restaurant in Greek Street nearby whose proprietor was an unofficial father figure to my mother so far away from home, and then they sent my mother's parents in Brittany a coded message via the free French radio: Marie is still eating snails and all is well.
Marie is still within her father's house and all is well.
Next day my father went back to the war and my mother back to the boarding school where she was on teaching practice as a French assistante, and spoke to  the future wives of doctors and civil servants: Je suis, tu es, il est, nous sommes.
A romantic history, untouchable and unprovable and finally only consolatory, because my mother is dead.
Dead before I knew it was not my anger killed her, dead before I told her how much I loved her.
That was when I started crying.
Pity for myself, for the dislocation of my words, of the edifice carefully constructed to bury pain.
Words, like death, like time or distance preserve love; fragrant as pot-pourri she scents my bed by night, my brain by day.
She permeates me like scent in a room when the lid is liked and the petals stirred, never a memory occasionally summoned but, so totally that I am unaware of it, forming the very fabric of the structure from which I gain my substance.
So I cried in self-pity, and after watching me, you put your arms around me, as mothers and as lovers do.
You can't see down that part of the cloister leading off from the chapel into the convent.
It goes straight for a few yards and then bends round the corner into blackness.
They say there's a small garden there and a ten-foot high crucifix, they say that last Lent Sister Martha spent five hours in front of it every day.
Sister Martha's hair shows under the drift of her veil, it's a dark cloud of seaweed around her pale and drowning face.
The prettiest child in the first year holds her train, the Daughters of Mary, their medals on red cords around their necks, toss rose petals in front of the chaplain bearing his god-burden, hands wrapped in tangerine brocade, under a canopy with lurching gold fringes.
Sister Martha's hair is cut off with a pair of gold scissors, she lies arms outflung on the marble slab.
Her father, who is a butcher in Fecamp, has sent over the wedding breakfast for all the nuns and pupils: pate, garlic sausage and ham.
There is a dead nun in the school chapel; Father gives the bridal sermon over my dead body.
My mother got married in black.
There has been so much mourning to do.
I am the fountain sealed up, the walled garden where the lord Christ takes his rest at noon; I am my Own grille and enclosure and the desperate bride vowed to him who blesses my chains.
He enters me as fortress, I can only thank him from my battlements; I am the pearl the knight must capture to win heaven and the drug that will detain him from his quest.
I am always and everywhere his place; if I am the barren land he thinks to water into an oasis I am also the blight on his crops and the locust destroying grain; I am both the ruined harvest and the shameful blood that sickens cattle.
And so I'm crying now; it's five o'clock and you'll be arriving any minute.
My own tears, hot noisy gulping that burns and blotches, that  neither you nor any of the women in the group is going to offer to staunch, tears of anger for myself and all of us, anger with the women in the group for making me face up to what I'm doing to you, for making me want to take out those dusty bundles of old stories from where they've lain for my lifetime tied up with pink ribbon and reread them and throw them away.
Traitor goddess.
Whore madonna.
Bitch sister.
Someone I've dreamed of and whom I'm going to work with.
Whose equal vulnerability once frightened me, whose equal violence gladdens me.
You've arrived wearing a black suit with padded shoulders and a whole garden pinned to your lapel.
We discuss the abortion struggle for a long time.
We speak with effort and with care, trusting each other equally to climb alone across the clumsy stepping-stones of words, no longer corpses in the church and mouths of men.
Keep It Clean
Michelene Wandor
The following fragment of a manuscript is the third in our series ‘Women: 50 years ago’.
It was found among a collection of magazines, news-sheets and leaflets which were sent to us by one of the researchers for our archives on feminism in the 20th century.
The fragment was accompanied by a letter.
dated March 10, 1991, from ‘Annie’ to ‘Sheila’.
The two women met at the International Women's Day March, after a break in their friendship of twenty years.
Annie recalls, in fictional form, the event which led to the rift in their friendship, apparently referring to herself in the third person.
Regular readers will recall that the first half of the 1970s saw an unprecedented upsurge of feminist activism, the most vigorous since the struggle for the vote in the first two decades of the century.
Following the fragment is the first in our series chronicling the origins, the political range of what was then called the Women's Liberation Movement.
The fragment sheds some illumination on what it was like to be a feminist 50 years ago, though we would point out that it was written 20 years after the event with all the problems of interpretation that implies.
If readers have any other memoirs, stories, conference notes of the period, we would be grateful for them.
After being recorded on Film they will be returned.
We do not know if the fragment was ever sent to ‘Sheila’.
(Editorial Board:History Lives , October 2026)
(…benefit of hindsight.
Of course, it was all too immediate, though some of us kept diaries,; now we select and interpret looking back from a different Personal life and a very different political time.)
Annie and Sheila perched side by side on a high window-sill, their feet resting on a table on which three other women sat.
From the walls framed aldermen stared blandly down at the gathering of some five hundred local people, mostly women, mostly in their twenties and thirties.
A line of people filed onto the stage: Annie and Sheila split a roll of mints, and waved to other women they recognised.
It was the third in a series of six meetings on women's liberation, organised by the women s group in the local Polytechnic.
1971, it was.
The chairperson adjusted the microphone The assembly whispered into silence: she welcomed  everyone, introduced the people on the stage, including two members of the local Trades Council who had helped sponsor the meetings, and introduced the evening's main speaker, Lesley Wright.
Lesley walked to the microphone as the chairperson retreated from it to a spatter of applause.
Lesley surveyed the audience, her shock of blonde permed hair catching the light, her denim jeans and combed cotton T-shirt a kind of individual permutation on the unofficial ‘uniform’ of the younger, higher-educated feminism.
She pushed the microphone aside, and began to speak in a firm voice, used to public speaking, hands leaning forward on the table, one occasionally raised to emphasise a point.
Sisters.
Ours is a powerful movement.
All over the world we are rising up and refusing the exploited identity for which we were conditioned.
‘As women we are forced to accept that if we have a relationship with a man, it will involve a lot of work: looking after him, putting his needs before ours.
Even if both man and woman are earning a wage, the man's wage will be higher than the woman's and so his job more important than the woman's.
If we want children, then our wage will stop when the children are young and we are home fulltime.
We will have to depend on the father for money or else scrape by on Social Security.
The wife and mother who goes out of the home to earn a wage, to escape being totally dependent on a man, being isolated in the home, and the penny-pinching that trying to make one wage feed the family involves, takes a second job.
And even if we don't marry or live with a man, the fact that most women do means that every man will see a housewife when he sees us.
Men expect us to be at their disposal sexually and emotionally.
To be sympathetic to their problems, bolster their egos, have a ready smile, care for their children, make the tea.
‘All women are housewives .
Single or married, young or old, with or without children, lesbian or straight, that housework is our first job.
We are saying that government and employers — the State owes us a living.
Men and women work all day and at the end of the week those in waged work get a wage packet which doesn't buy much more than the necessities of life.
Those who have worked at home get nothing.
The wealth that we have created goes to the employers and the State.
Our housework goes on behind the scenes, unnoticed, uncounted, uncharted as long as it is unpaid.
We demand that our work should be recognised for what it is — we produce and reproduce in other people and ourselves the ability to work and go on working, we produce labour power.
All other production would grind to a halt tomorrow if women weren't producing these workers.
‘What we want is very simple: we want wages for housework.
It is not a new idea, and it is the only demand around which all women can unite, the demand which makes explicit how it is that the working class is divided between the waged and the unwaged.
Money is power in our society; give us a wage for our housework, and then we will have power.’
A burst of applause from the middle of the hall; Sheila clapping energetically, her hands held high in front of her; Annie, confused, somewhat anxious, a knot of surprise at Sheila's enthusiasm.
Something she couldn't quite articulate, an intuitive hostility to both the arguments and the conclusions they had just heard.
The chairperson was back, Lesley seated to her right.
She invited questions, responses to ‘a very interesting speech’.
A man stood up:
‘I'm not really for all this women's lib business, but I go for what this young lady says.
My wife'd be a lot better off if she was getting a proper wage for her housework, then she'd have to bloody well do it properly.’
Women round him started heckling —’ She's a woman, not a young lady’, ‘When did you last boil an egg’.
The man began to retreat towards the door under the hail — I'm with you, girls, I want my wife to get a wage; then if she don't do her work, she don't get paid — like me.’
As he reached the door, with a variety of helpful obstructions he shouted his Parthian shot —‘You can't bloody have it both ways…’
‘Good riddance,’ shouted Sheila.
Annie nudged her, whispering: ‘Isn't it a gross over-simplification to say the working class is just divided between the waged and the unwaged?’
’ Pedant, Annie,’said Sheila happily.
‘Great, isn't she?’
Annie stood up on the table.
‘I'm going,’ she said to Sheila.
‘See you later,’ said Sheila, already half listening to the next question.
‘…wages for housework is the only thing that unites women.
After all, isn't that a rejection of the complexity of women's oppression?
We can't just reduce the struggles of half the population to a demand for money.
Anyway, wouldn't it come out of taxation?’
Lesley stood to reply: ‘Let me explain.
Wages for housework…’
The swing doors shut behind Annie.
As she walked down the wide stone steps to the ground floor her confusion was diverted by the sight of two men in their twenties, chatting together and keeping a watchful early evening eye over two three-year-olds playing hide and seek round the curve of the banisters.
(…sorry I've got to go, sorry I'm late, sorry I'm so pretty, sorry I'm a housewife, sorry I'm not pretty enough, sorry it's my fault, pardon me for breathing, sorry I'm a woman.
We did stop apologising, didn't we?)
When Annie got home, Mike was sprawled over the couch watching telly.
She went straight into the kitchen, and automatically made them both a cup of coffee, a mutual family ritual when one of them went out  to a meeting.
He patted the arm of the couch as she came in, but she ignored it, sitting on the floor, and absent-mindedly collecting bits of crushed crisp off the carpet into one hand.
The credits came up and Mike switched the TV off.
‘Well?’
‘Kids all right?’
‘Fine.
A fight over a car.
but otherwise calm.’
‘Good.’
‘Well?’
‘Well, what?’
‘Well.
how was the meeting?’
‘Oh, all right.’
‘Was that the meeting about women and the family?’
‘Supposed to be.
This woman talked about housework.’
‘How to get hubby to do the washing up?’
Mike trying to cover up his unease about staying in so she could go out by patronising sarcasm.
Annie couldn't be bothered to spell out his response for him to become aware of.
‘Wages for housework, that's what she suggested; good safe economist demand.
Should be right up your street.’
Matching sarcasm with sarcasm didn't really help, it just made you feel momentarily better.
‘I've heard of them,’ said Mike.
‘They've put out a pamphlet, haven't they?’
‘I don't know.
Why didn't you bloody tell me?’
‘I've hardly seen you this evening, have I?
Saw it in the People's Bookshop window on the way home.
‘Wages for Housework’ it's called.’
‘Well, they're up the creek.’
Annie picked up her half-full coffee mug and flounced into the kitchen, suddenly at bay.
She poured the coffee down the sink, then started running hot water to wash up the supper dishes.
Mike followed her in.
‘Leave it, Annie, I'll do it in the morning.’
‘Bullshit.
You've got to be at school by quarter to nine in the morning.
I'll do it in the morning.
Except I won't because I hate doing damn dishes in the morning.’
Mike gently pulled her away from the sink and began washing up.
Annie allowed him, irritated at his apparent calm.
She wiped the top of the stove to give her something to do.
‘It was bloody awful.
Screwy sort of argument — I mean, what she was really saying was half right on the nail, and half like a whirlpool that sucks everything into it.’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Well, she said a lot of good things about how housework and things were essential social work — you know, saying it was work, hard work, servicing other people, not that airy fairy labour of love stuff, and how it ought to be recognised, and how it was because women were seen as wives and mothers that they got low wages, no money when they were at home looking after small kids.
And then she kind of jumped into this absurd thing of suddenly saying that meant that all women were housewives, and that wages for housework was the thing that united all women.’
‘What did she mean by a wage?’
‘Just money.
I’ m afraid I got very annoyed and left; it was pretty obvious to me that there wasn't going to be a proper discussion.’
‘Did her whole group come?’
‘What a suspicious mind you've got.’
‘Tactics, Annie.
No-one's above tactics.’
‘Someone was beginning to ask about women as wage-earners when I left.
I imagine the wages for housework people must think that any work by women in the unions is a waste of time.
By definition women are first and only housewives.
And yet ii is true in a way that women have two jobs…’
‘87 per cent of women work at some time in your lives.’
‘Lucky us, eh?’
‘And some of us men are learning to take a second job, eh?’
‘Learning's a matter of opinion.’
‘Right.
Coming to bed?’
Mike dried his hands on the tea-towel.
Annie nodded and automatically went over to the sink to check that everything was done.
With a rush of fury she picked up the J-cloth which was sitting in a pool of greasy water at the bottom of the sink.
‘And what's this?’
‘What?’
‘This.’
Holding up the cloth.
‘That,’ said Mike, ‘is a J-cloth.
Now come to bed.’
‘You don't bloody notice when we've run out, do you?’
Neither of them slept particularly well that night.
(Remember the good bits ?)
Annie was putting the baby's night nappy on.
A towelling nappy, and nappy liner.
He was in a rosy mood, kicking his legs and grabbing at her hands as she tried to get the material firmly round his podgy middle.
When she  manoeuvred her hands out of his reach he would suddenly arch his back, straighten his legs, dig his heels into the bed and twist his body vigorously to the left, trying to get free of those firm, busy hands.
He was still small and malleable enough for Annie to put the palm of her hand over his chest and tummy, swing him back onto his back and tickle him gently with the tips of her splayed fingers.
Alex giggled deep down in his stomach and his arms and legs met like a soft anemone over her hand in  an attempt to come to terms with it.
Annie felt her hand enclosed in a warm cocoon of talcum powder and smooth baby skin.
As Annie adjusted the nappies under the wriggling body, she glossed back over the previous week.
Unusually for her and Sheila, they had had no contact with each other.
Their local women's group had met the day after the public meeting, and Sheila and Annie had had a fierce argument; Sheila had been enthusiastic, Annie icy and antagonistic to the idea of wages for housework.
The argument had in effect been adjourned to this week, during which time the group was to read and digest the pamphlets Sheila had brought along.
Annie had an uneasy sense of premonition, a kind of dread in her stomach at the prospect of this evening's meeting.
She and Sheila had had disagreements before — not really surprising when you'd known someone for twelve years, since the first day they had peered at the college noticeboard together.
The two of them had been virtually inseparable — periods of separation coinciding with the respective presences of boy-friends; even though Sheila had left university abruptly in her second year, hating the academic competitiveness.
Where Annie had got an average degree, taught English ‘O’ Level, married Mike and had Sally and Alex, settling in London, Sheila had sailed close to the fringes of student politics in the late 1960s, been arrested for demonstrations against the American presence in Vietnam in the war which ended in the early 1970s, squatted with the squatters, and done a variety of part-time nomadic jobs.
The last few years they had been more apart, until in 1969 they both rediscovered each other in one of the first Women's Liberation groups in London.
The group had been meeting for two years, and it was mainly a consciousness-raising group, although, with only about twenty groups in London as a whole, some of them, the ‘housewives’, the women who worked part-time were also able to help run the voluntary rota in the central London office, the Women's Liberation Workshop.
It was all very well letting the panorama of London feminism run through your head, but meanwhile Alex had decided he didn't like thoughts.
He squirmed, and the safety-pin, almost clasped, flew open and onto the floor.
As Annie bent to retrieve it her face came in line with Alex's rosy bottom.
As the nappy fell apart, a rich brown revelation mingled itself with the scent of talcum powder.
‘Oh, shit, Alex,’ she said.
Alex giggled in anticipation of more fun and games.
‘You don't know which end is up, do you, piggy?’ she said, wiping his bottom with the clean nappy and then with it in one hand and Alex under the other arm she went back into the bathroom.
She sluiced down the lower half of his body in the bath, rinsed the nappy and carried him back into the bedroom.
This time he sensed the determination behind her hands and played with a rag book as she put a new nappy on him.
Now simply efficient, she finished dressing him, put him into his cot and handed him his final bottle of milk of the day.
He held up his arms for a kiss and she melted into a sleepy hug and kiss, during which he had the final word and spluttered dribble against her cheek.
She tickled him briefly, making him fold sitting into the cot.
‘Night, night, fatty boy.’
’ Ni, ni,’said Alex, already slurping into his bottle.
Annie was going to be late.
She hurried through the living room, picking up her bag, coat, pamphlet as she went.
She kissed Mike and Sally; he was sitting in a huge armchair, looking through the notes for his radical teachers group meeting, Sally sitting quietly on his lap.
After a year of experiment she and Mike had agreed that where both of them had meetings on the same night, Mike would try and arrange his at home: he could listen and take part in a discussion with a two-year-old on his lap.
Annie couldn't.
(This is the hard hit.
Can you ever remember all the second-by-second nuances, points of view, movements in a single evening, let alone a generation?
In how many ways have we written our history?)
The front door to the house was ajar.
Annie rang the top bell and then went to the third floor, Susan's flat.
(Remember the group?
Originally nine of them, now six, skip this if their images are as stamped in your Find as they are in mine.
But it was a fairly typical group of its time.
Susan
27.
Left school at 17 when she got pregnant, married, now separated, with two kids.
In her first year at teacher-training college, her older sister looks after her kids after school, but can't baby-sit in the evenings.
The meetings hence always at Susan's.
Ruth
21.
Serious, rarely smiles, sociology student at the local poly-technic, Father a miner, mother dead.
In Annie's own youth Ruth would have been a swot in suburbia.
Jennifer
26, had a variety of white-collar-jobs, now in her second year of training to be a State Registered Nurse.
Had had trouble being accepted for training — they said she was ‘over-qualified’.
Shared a house with other people; was gay but so far reticent about discussing it in such a predominantly heterosexual group.
Rachel
33, married to a long-distance lorry driver, twins, worked mornings in a local cafe, probably the only member of the group who would define both her family history and her own current social position as unequivocally ‘working class’.
Born and brought up in the area, unlike other members of the group who had lived locally for Periods of one to seven years.
Sheila
30, London suburban background, now squatting, helping to set up a law centre to advise women.
No children.
Annie
31, English teacher in a comprehensive school, Part-time, two children, married to Mike, primary school teacher full-time.
Apart from times when one of them was out at work, they tried to share housework and childcare between them.)
Rachel was usually the last to arrive, but tonight Annie found she was the last.
People were sitting on chairs, the floor, drinking coffee and chatting, various newsletters and pamphlets on the floor in the middle.
Annie picked up her copy of the Workshop weekly newsletter and skimmed down the list of meetings, appeals for information, contacts, list of new women's liberation publications.
Susan came in, flustered, her youngest with tooth-ache, she said, but now with Junior Disprin hopefully off to sleep.
There was a small silence; then Jennifer asked a question about one of the meetings listed for next week in the area.
Then another small silence.
Annie began to feel a surge of impatience.
One of the important elements in the small ‘consciousness-raising’ group had been the principle of a non-hierarchical structure and form for discussion.
This, everyone had agreed two years back, was because women were so used to being in groups dominated by a minority of articulate men (all groups — social, work, political) that it was important they (we) should be able to discover and articulate our own understanding of all the minute day-by-day ways in which we were oppressed, and relate these to a developing understanding of the ways women were oppressed in society generally.
The exploration of our own personal experiences, and the linking up of these to an understanding that the isolated experience of individual women was part of a more complex system of female subordination.
We want to break away from the way men behave, not imitate them.
In practice, of course, this often resulted in one or two women talking too much in a meeting, ‘dominating’, it was called.
It meant some women sat in virtual silence, unable to speak, even in the relative security of women's groups.
The group had had numerous discussions about whether or not they should have a rotating chairperson, some people arguing fiercely that we shouldn't imitate male structures, that we were developing genuinely new ways of relating, conducting political discussions; we must all learn to be more sensitive, not interrupt each other, not talk for too long.
Everyone would nod.
Others in the group argued that up to a point all those things were right, but that often a subject was complex, often it could be constructive for everyone to have a chairperson who would guide discussion, not control it, who would be able to be supportive when someone talked too much or too little.
We should  develop or modify existing structures as well as work out new ones.
Everyone would nod.
The result was an uneasy compromise, in which for some meetings there would be a chairperson, in others not.
It depended on whether one of the pro-chairperson people suggested it.
Tonight, surprisingly, Annie thought, it was Rachel who said ‘Let's have a chair, eh?
Susan
Do we need one?
Rachel
I reckon it'll help.
Sheila and Annie did go on a bit last time.
Ruth
Jenny, will you do it?
Jenny
OK.
I'm not very good, though.
In response to a question Sheila described the South London women's group who had produced the pamphlet arguing for wages for housework.
She had been to one of their meetings, and was even more confirmed not only in the conviction that they were right, but that her own group should get involved in trying to organise women to campaign for wages for housework.
Sheila
We've spent two years meeting, talking, going to other meetings, we should get involved in doing something practical.
Annie
We do all do some other political things, Sheila.
Sheila
But not as a group.
We're becoming a kind of hen-party.
Ruth
I don't think that's an accurate description of us, Sheila.
Sheila
Well, perhaps I didn't mean it quite like that.
The thing that hit me, really hit me, was that they are the first group who have really said anything serious, analytical, about housework.
I mean, we all wrote loads and loads of stuff saying what a drag housework was, how trapped women were in their kitchens, but no-one's analysed it before, and no-one's had any ideas about what to do about it.
They want to make housework recognised and valued for what it is — necessary social labour.
Annie
And they say the whole system would collapse if women didn't do housework.
Sheila
Right.
Annie
What about if all the power workers, you know, gas, electricity, coal even, what if they all went on strike.
Susan
What do you mean, Annie?
Annie
It isn't only women, it isn't only housework that's necessary social labour.
Sheila
But only housework doesn't have a wage, only housework isn't really thought of as work, only housework is despised, and only women do housework.
Rachel
Oh come off it, Sheil, I know men who do housework.
Sheila
Yes, they ‘help’.
Rachel
No, no, I mean blokes who live on their own, men who help, men who do other work about the house, even if it isn't cleaning and  that.
And you can't say that a woman on her own, going out to work, with no kids, just doing for herself, is a housewife like say I'm a housewife.
Sheila
But that's what we're all brought up to be.
Rachel
Yes, well, that is right, we are, mainly.
Susan
But what Sheila says is right, isn't it?
I mean you say ‘I'm only a housewife’, and then some man comes home and thinks you've done fuck-all all day.
They never see what you've done, do they?
I mean, it's all invisible.
They come home to a nice bathed kid and they don't know how much shit you've wiped up during the day…
Rachel
Yes, but I don't think you can just say all women are housewives.
Because I don't think wages for housework is the same thing as saying that when women have to give up their jobs when their kids are little, or if there aren't no nurseries, that they should have bigger family allowances, that isn't the same as saying wages for housework, is it?
Susan
Well, you needn't call it wages for housework, you could call it the state paying for childcare at home, couldn't you?
Ruth
Sue, that does seem to me a very different issue from wages for housework.
Sheila But all women do do housework, don't we, whether we're with guys or not.
Rachel
You must be pretty gormless if you go on doing your boyfriend's washing, is all I can say.
With kids it's different.
With men you tell 'em to do their own or go smelly.
You don't want to get paid for doing it and them still not do it.
I think I'll get Fred to wash his own overalls.
See what it's like.
Sheila
But you've only got a job in the mornings.
Rachel
Yes, that's true.
Well, he can iron his best shirts.
That's it.
I'll teach him to iron his shirts.
Ruth
Children are dependent.
And that's why it is wrong for women to be financially penalised when they have children.
But surely what we want is more than just housework to be waged and left as it is?
We want to be able to challenge the whole idea of housework being women's work, just as we want to challenge whether engineering or surgery or being a crane driver or a football referee, whether any of those are men's jobs.
Sheila
Men won't value housework until it's paid.
Ruth
But look, Sheila.
Women are not vulnerable just because they do housework.
What I mean is, women are vulnerable when they are housewives because they also have sole responsibility for childcare at home.
Do you see what I mean?
I mean, with women getting equal pay,when women get equal pay, when there are things like adequate maternity leave and women don't lose their jobs because they have kids, and when there are enough nurseries —
Sheila
When, when, when.
Wages for housework bypasses all those other struggles — well, I mean, with wages for housework, women wouldn't have to go out and take a second job.
Rachel
You're joking.
I go round the bend just looking after kids all day.
Whether I bloody got paid for it or not.
If I want to have a job looking after kids, I'll get one in a nursery.
or learn to be a teacher.
Even if I was paid twice what I get at the cafe, I still wouldn't bloody stick at home all day.
Sheila
But don't you want the choice?
Rachel
No, thank you.
I'd have liked the choice of a nursery when they, were little, but you know, in a way now I have got the choice.
I only work part of the week, well, for money.
Then I am at home when the kids get in from school.
I like that, yes.
I think we want more part-time jobs, properly paid, not slave labour.
Jennifer
‘You don't get me, I'm part of the union?’
Rachel
That's right, that's right.
Sheila
When did the unions last get off their arses to do anything for women?
Who runs the unions?
It's men, isn't it?
Men who want their wives at home.
Jennifer
But there's an Equal Pay Act that's supposed to come into force at the end of 1975 — that will give women equal pay and a bit more power.
Sheila
Look, the unions have had an Equal Pay for women thing down on the TUC statute books since 1889, and they've done nothing.
This Act isn't going to make any difference.
Annie
Of course it's going to be evaded, and it will be quite hard work to get it enforced, but you can't avoid the things women have to fight for at work, you can't pull women out of work, out of the unions, just because housework isn't recognised by a direct wage.
Sheila
Women need money of their own.
We don't want any more housekeeping dollops.
We want our own money for the housework we do.
Just think what would happen if every single woman went on strike, refused to do housework.
Susan
What a fantastic idea.
Annie
A very nice symbolic action, but on its own it gets us exactly nowhere.
You're just arguing women into complete inactivity, not more and better activity.
Sheila
You're so bloody superior, Annie, you and your nice little middle-class husband, nice little part-time jobs, you just condescend to women who are on the breadline, fucked over by their husbands, exploited by the capitalists…
Annie (very very calm): Rachel has a part-time job.
Sheila
And her guy does fuck-all.
Rachel
He works a ten-hour day, Sheil.
You know that.
He's away half the time.
That's not his choice.
That's his job.
Sheila
Women's power isn't going to come from the unions, it's going to come from being organised as women.
That's when the class will be strong.
Ruth
What class?
Sheila
The working class.
Ruth
But women aren't a class, Sheila.
To and fro, weaving, sometimes tied back to the point, moving from point to point, guided by Jennifer, each woman deeply involved with the dual effort of formulating an opinion and arguing for it at the same time.
The argument often taking the form of assertion pitted against assertion, women trained for so long to hide their intelligence, to be polite, show an interest in other people, draw them out with questions, now in the relative security burst out with a pent-up aggression, asserting themselves, their opinions.
A testing ground with other women in which the moments of assertion were not always secure, in which women attacked and were attacked, in which in an inverted way we both used the consciousness-raising groups to assert a new independence, a new self-determination, and at the same time to express the unarticulated tensions we felt in the other areas of our lives.
Often the tensions made it appear as though there was a ring of invisible men sitting outside the circle of women, a silent audience whose approval we often still needed.
Annie had been slotting in and out of the discussion, focusing as much on Sheila as on her desire to make a logical sense out of the argument.
She felt exhausted; she had not spoken for ten minutes and felt that unless she said something soon she would disappear.
The network of warm nuances, security, so important to the weekly meeting, the ‘sisterhood’ of which they all so proudly spoke outside the group, was no longer the fine-spun filigree in which air and light and communication were held.
The filaments were now electrified, buzzed when touched, couldn't avoid being touched, everyone was so close.
Jennifer
Ruth, what you were saying earlier, about women and class, could we go back to that, could you develop that a bit?
Ruth
Well, this business about housework being unwaged.
I don't think that's right.
I mean, wages, benefits from the welfare state — the cost of reproducing labour power, which is really what the wages for housework argument turns on, this cost is covered in a variety of ways — not adequately, that's true and working class women are most vulnerable, but I don't think we can say simply that housework, childcare is given free, is not paid for at all.
Sheila
But women must have money of our own.
Ruth
I agree.
But calling it wages for housework not only simplifies the solution, it also simplifies the problem.
But I'm not very clear.
I must read the pamphlet again.
The filigree flashed.
Annie thought, Ruthie, you liar, you do know, you're just holding back in case we think you're being heavy, theoretical male for godsake.
Male.
What's male about using your head.
Nothing intrinsic and you bloody know it.
Games feminists play.
‘I'm not very clear’ my arse.
Annie
Sheila, it strikes me that one of the main problems with the argument is just what Ruth said: wages for housework is a kind of global undefined demand which sucks everything into it like a whirlpool, and ignores all the other demands — what about equal pay, what about equal educational opportunities, what about contraception and abortion, what about nurseries — there's no short-term strategy in it, let alone long-term strategy.
What about the rest of women's experiences, the rest of working class experience?
Sheila
You're just sloganising.
Susan
Yes, the pamphlet doesn't ignore those other things.
Annie
But it says wages for housework is the centre, the uniting demand and that's just wrong.
Sheila
You're so bloody smug, aren't you?
What do you know about the working class?
Rachel
Watch out, there's a spy about.
Sheila
Well, I think it's a bit unnecessary to put me on the spot — this isn't a bloody inquisition.
It's so bloody personal.
Annie
Sheila, it's not personal, we are actually having a political disagreement, in case you hadn't noticed.
The meeting that evening went on late, till eleven.
Annie walked to the bus stop with Ruth and Jennifer, Sheila went off on her bike and Rachel walked home.
None of them talked much, but Ruth tentatively suggested as a parting thought that perhaps they should think about doing some more systematic theoretical study.
Sheila and Annie did not contact each other during the following week: Annie planned to invite Sheila back for coffee after the next meeting, to have a friendly talk, away from the hothouse of the group, but Sheila sent her apologies to the meeting.
Annie veered between a irritated disappointment and a suspicion that perhaps Sheila was avoiding her.
The group did not have another discussion about wages for housework as such, although they did for some months follow Ruth's prepared reading list — an introductory series of Marxist texts, and the issue of  wages for housework emerged again through that, in a theoretical discussion.
In the meantime the women's liberation movement was changing rapidly; expanding, feminists were becoming active in a whole range of trade union activities, setting up women's centres, refuges for battered wives, all kinds of research, discussion…the group, although it continued to meet, give or take a member or two, for a further four years, was a friendship, a support group of women who had struggled through to political consciousness together, and whose own political allegiances sparked off in many directions: a gay commune, further teaching, trade union organising, membership of one of the numerous revolutionary left-wing groupings which flourished in the seventies, involved in producing feminist journals.
What they each gained separately was a greater individual confidence and capacity for self-determination as women, and each of them fed that confidence back into a variety of struggles to change the position of women, and in the case of the majority of women in that particular group, to a struggle for some kind of socialism.
So in their ways did Sheila and Annie.
Sheila committed herself completely to working with the group that campaigned for wages for housework.
Annie watched her group's progress with interest; the literature they produced and the meetings they held had a certain sort of agente provocateuse element in them.
None of the arguments, she thought, held up to any serious analysis; at best they provoked people into thought about housework, at worst they antagonised large numbers of women and hostility in all men and women who worked in the labour movement in any way.
At least, that much Annie gathered from other discussions and the political writing which flourished at the time.
Sheila only came to two more group meetings.
Annie missed the first, she had flu; every time Annie felt an urge to phone Sheila something held her back — a kind of fearful pride.
Fearing a more violent explosion of disagreement, pride in not wanting to be the first to make a move.
It was not something she was ever able to discuss thoroughly with Mike.
The second and last time Sheila came back to the group was some months later.
There were two new women who had joined the group to take part in the study programme.
Sheila burst in late, breathless from a hilarious encounter between a raw young policeman and a group of women night cleaners picketing a building from which two of them had been sacked.
The women had made great play with brooms and buckets, sweeping the pavement around the policeman's feet till he was forced to jump over them to avoid being floored.
Next time round on his beat he made sure he crossed the road.
As Sheila told the story, everyone joined in her laughter, as though they too were remembering a shared experience, Annie too.
But after the  laughter died down, her eyes met Sheila's and they both quickly looked away.
The political shades were down.
(Editorial note: some of the words and phrases used in this piece will be explained in the course of our historical series on feminism: eg. consciousness-raising, gay, Vietnam war, student politics, housewife.)