

Jack saw the ambulance tearing down the factory service road, siren screaming, lights blazing.
Standing beside him in the playground of the brand new glitter-and-glass comprehensive school was Tina Shepherd.
She watched the ambulance's progress with savage amusement.
‘There we go again — must be the fourth time this month.’
She was tall and skinny, with a thatch of blonde hair.
Her face was set, her mouth angry.
Tina looked amazing when she was angry — rather like a warrior queen.
She always made Jack feel inadequate — a soft southerner in this hard north-eastern territory.
Jack supposed he was a bit of a wimp, with his dislike of rugby and love of photography.
Ever since Mum had married Ken Lomax and they had come up here, he had felt useless.
But for some reason, Tina had adopted him in her rough, kindly way, and for the last few months school life had been bearable.
She had a gang of friends in which he was included, even if he did still feel very much the outsider.
‘They've got no idea of safety,’ she pronounced.
‘Not like the days in the yards.
There weren't any accidents then.’
There must have been, thought Jack, but as usual he didn't argue.
He didn't want to be noticed — that was the trouble.
Despite the fact that he was tall for his age, he was gawky and skinny.
He had been born with a hare-lip, which had been corrected when he was a baby, but he was  nervous.
‘My dad said last time enough was enough,’ Tina went on.
‘Now it's more than enough.’
They were looking down at the new Japanese car factory, Sakata, which had just opened in Humberside.
The shipyards, the traditional industry, had closed and there had been widespread unemployment.
Now Sakata, with its new car, Glory, had at least made a dent in the numbers of unemployed.
Set out with freshly landscaped lawns and flowerbeds, the factory was almost entirely made of one-way glass: you could see out from inside but not in from outside.
It stretched over several hectares of land, its one-storied buildings lying bland and soulless under the surrounding hills.
Tina had told Jack the very first time they met: ‘My dad hates the place — like my brothers do.’
Jack had wondered what she herself felt, but Tina had not confided in him.
Her father, Ray Shepherd had worked in the shipyard until it closed and her elder brother, Steve, had been out of work since leaving school.
Then, like his father, he had been offered work at Sakata.
Jack had originally wondered why he wasn't grateful.
But later, through Tina, he realized that Steve still felt his father's bitterness about the closure of the yards, and suspicion about the future.
Yet there was something else — an inner core of hatred in the Shepherd family that he couldn't understand and which continually disturbed him.
It was in evidence now as Tina upbraided him.
‘You listening?’
‘Yes,’ said Jack, but as she turned to him she saw his face suddenly turn pale as he stared down at the factory.
‘What's the matter?’
‘It's my mum's car.’
‘What?’
‘And she's going like a bat out of hell.’
Sure enough, the battered little red Mini was speeding  down the service road, following the same route the ambulance had taken.
A coldness spread through Jack and he looked up at Tina in mounting anxiety.
‘Something's wrong!’
‘It's all right, love,’ she said, her anger instantly forgotten and all her northern warmth and love spilling over.
‘Don't take on.
It's going to be all right.’
‘It must be Ken,’ he said.
Despite encouragement, he still couldn't call his stepfather dad.
His own father had died when he was four and he had only dim memories of him.
Since then, he and his mum had struggled on together in Oxford where she had worked as a secretary in the Austin plant and had met Ken, a big, happy-go-lucky but ambitious bear of a man.
Jack liked him but he didn't love him yet and couldn't call him dad.
But now, as shock waves surged through him, he realized that his liking had at least become fondness.
It must be Ken!
Why else should Mum be following the ambulance?
She didn't work at Sakata because she was pregnant.
Jack hadn't felt bad about that either, for their relationship was too close to be threatened, even by a new baby.
‘Let's go to the office,’ Tina said, putting an arm round his shoulders.
‘We must find out what's going on.’
As they walked into the school building Mrs Cramp, the school secretary, rushed out.
She doubled up as matron, treating every illness, injury, headache or toothache with determined suspicion, certain in her own mind that the pupil was trying to get away with something.
‘Lomax!’ she snapped, her voice sounding as if it came from inside a biscuit tin.
‘Yes?’
Jack replied, looking very worried.
‘There's been an accident.’
Tina grabbed his arm and held on to it fiercely as he stared back into Mrs Cramp's hard little boot-button eyes.
‘Your stepfather's in hospital.’
‘What's wrong with him?’
‘An accident at work,’ she replied briskly.
‘Is he all right?’
‘I really have no idea — this is the only information I have.’
‘What should I do?’ asked Jack helplessly.
‘Your mother will call later.’
‘Is that all?’
‘Yes,’ said Mrs Cramp with bright insensitivity.
Tina could bear no more.
‘You must know more than that ,’ she said scornfully.
‘I beg your pardon?’
Mrs Cramp wheeled round on her, her face pinched in disgust.
‘You can't leave him in the dark like that,’ Tina exploded indignantly.
‘I told you, young lady, that is all the information I have.’
‘Then find out some more,’ Tina insisted rudely.
‘I beg your pardon?’ said Mrs Cramp again, reeling back as if she had just been slapped in the face.
‘Ring the hospital —’ Tina continued, but she was not to get very far.
‘How dare you speak to me like that!
Any more from you and I'll report you to your form tutor.’
‘Which hospital is he in?’ pleaded Jack.
‘The Royal,’ Mrs Cramp returned grudgingly.
‘OK,’ said Tina, completely unabashed.
‘Let's go.’
‘And just what do you think you're doing?’ asked Mrs Cramp, her voice rising sharply.
‘My grandad's at home and he's got a car — he'll drive us there,’ snapped Tina, ignoring her completely.
‘Come on, Jack!’
She grabbed his arm.
‘You can't leave without permission!’ called Mrs Cramp, but Tina and Jack had gone.
It was only a five-minute run to Tina's estate.
It was not part of the Sakata residential sector, which had its own workers' and managers' houses where the Lomaxes lived, but was much more run-down.
The Shepherds preferred to live where they had lived in their shipbuilding days.
Jack had been to tea at Tina's house several times already and he rather liked the estate's atmosphere, which was friendly and rackety, despite the fact that most of the inhabitants were out of work.
Ray Shepherd's obsessive grudge against Sakata didn't worry Jack too much; he was kind to him, even if he was the son of a manager and a southerner as well.
Jack had also met Tina's grandad, whose quick mind and sense of humour had won him over at once.
Jamie Shepherd was well over eighty, yet he was as mentally alert as a man half his age.
But Jack had only one thought as he and Tina ran down the broken tarmac of the estate road, finally arriving breathless at the front door of the Shepherd's house.
She rang the bell, and a few seconds later the bent, withered figure of Jamie Shepherd appeared.
‘Jack's dad's had an accident at work.
Can you drive us up to the Royal?’
Tina didn't waste any words and neither did her grandfather.
‘I'll get the van out.’
Seconds later he was backing an ancient Bedford van out of the driveway.
Jamie Shepherd drove the bucketing old vehicle out of the estate towards the main road.
Above them, on a grassy hill, loomed the Monument — an imitation ruined temple that could be seen for several kilometres around.
Jack didn't know much about its history, just that it was a folly built by someone rich, but he had walked there many times with his camera, photographing the temple from all angles.
It was a strange place, and as he looked up at it now, he shivered.
Tina squeezed his arm.
‘Don't think about all that,’ she said.
‘It's just an old story.
Jack felt irritated.
How could she be so stupid as to think he believed in the legend of the Kershaw Worm?
She must be crazy, he thought.
Beside Tina, her grandfather grunted with impatience.
‘That old rubbish hasn't been raked up all over again, has it?’
‘It's all over the school,’ Tina replied abruptly.
‘There was an assembly about it yesterday.
The Head was livid.
Some of the young kids have been scared stiff.’
‘It always comes up,’ said Jamie Shepherd angrily.
‘Every new generation drags up the Kershaw Worm.’
He fumbled in a bag and put an empty pipe in his mouth.
‘Haven't you kids got anything better to talk about?’
But Jack was hardly listening, his thoughts now focused on Ken and his mother.
He couldn't bear to think of what she must be suffering.
He gave Tina a sideways look and was surprised to see her staring up intently at the Monument.
There was a curious look in her eyes, and Jack suddenly felt afraid.
‘He's a manager, your dad, isn't he?’ asked Jamie Shepherd a few minutes later as they bounced round a corner with the old van rattling as if it was going to shake itself to bits at any moment.
‘Not been there long?’
‘He used to be at Cowley,’ said Jack rather reluctantly, not feeling up to casual conversation.
‘Likes his job, does he?’
‘I think so.’
Glancing at the old man, Jack suddenly realized he was just trying to distract him, to prevent his mind leaping ahead to whatever was happening at the hospital.
But talking about Ken wouldn't help — it had to be something quite different.
What is all this business about the Worm?’ he asked suddenly.
A conversation about the Kershaw Worm could be just the thing to keep his mind off Ken.
‘I mean, Mr Tanner was coming on pretty strong in assembly, but he never explained anything.
Just told the older kids to stop frightening the younger ones.’
‘Well…’
The old man gripped the wheel harder  with his arthritic hands.
‘The only true part of the old story is that a meteorite hit that hill way back in the late nineteenth century and dug a damn big crater there.’
He sucked on his empty pipe.
‘Then the locals took over.
People like us, I suppose, but with a bigger dose of ignorance and superstition.
Someone claimed they saw a huge wormlike thing slither out of the meteorite and bury itself in the earth.’
He fell silent as he wrestled the van round a corner and on to the main road.
‘Is that all?’ asked Jack.
‘Not quite,’ Jamie Shepherd replied.
‘When the meteorite landed there were big problems in Kershaw, just like there were again a few years ago.
In Victorian times the big shipyard here belonged to Sir Arnold Hammond.
But he drank and gambled away the lot, and it closed.
Later he started sheep farming, employing a few of his old workers.
But the drinking continued and the farming venture went bust too.’
He paused as the first hospital direction sign came up on the road.
‘Go on,’ said Jack, desperate for the old man to keep talking.
He didn't want to think about anything except this nonsense until he was with his mother.
‘Then the meteorite came — and the sighting of the Worm.
Everyone said it was a curse on Hammond and that the Worm was getting bigger and bigger, feeding off the hatred Hammond had aroused, that it would turn.’
He laughed huskily.
‘Of course they would say that, wouldn't they?
It was all very convenient, like most legends are.’
Jamie Shepherd drove the accelerator almost into the floor as the van spluttered past a milk cart.
‘Of course the hatred was there sure enough.’
The tone of his voice had altered slightly, and for some reason Jack couldn't understand Tina shot her grandfather a warning glance.
But the old man carried on regardless while Tina frowned.
‘There was a family called Ram.
Jonathan Ram was the father.
They'd trusted Sir Arnold — not just with the yard, but with the sheep-farming business too.
They became  destitute — ended up in the workhouse.’
‘What happened to them?’ asked Jack, gripped by the story in spite of his own pain.
‘They died there,’ said the old man bleakly.
‘It was said Jonathan killed his wife and children and then himself.
Anyway, when Sir Arnold finally died, his wife must have wanted to whitewash his reputation.
She had the Monument built on top of the hill so everyone could see it as a landmark.
She had that stone chess table made too and put inside.
Chess was Hammond's passion.
Jack watched the swollen knuckles whiten as Jamie gripped the wheel.
‘It's a shame he didn't stick to chess instead of cards,’ the old man finished.
‘Was there ever a chance of the shipyards re-opening?’
Jack asked.
‘Yes,’ Jamie replied after a pause.
But his voice seemed cold and hostile.
‘Some Americans wanted to open up the Spurling yard, and offered big money to the Borough Council, but that useless lot — that bunch of pen-pushers — they turned down the offer in favour of the Japanese.
And that caused quite a bit of resentment, I can tell you — the Americans and the Japanese competing for our future.
It's like Sir Arnold's chess.
We're just pawns in their game — like Jonathan was a pawn before us.’
Tina suddenly spoke.
‘So many people hate working at Sakata — it's just mindless routine work.’
‘You could respect the shipyard jobs,’ Jamie added.
‘How can you respect bashing in a bolt and just waiting for a robot to take over your job?
Because that's what's going to happen — you mark my words — however many Sakata reassurances are given out.’
‘It hasn't come to that yet,’ began Tina, but now the van was lurching through the hospital gates, pulling up with a screech of brakes and a grinding of gears at the Casualty entrance.
Jack's heart lurched as he saw the ambulances and the busy, functional building and he immediately forgot everything they had been saying.
‘I'll ask where he is,’ said Jamie Shepherd as they walked towards the reception desk.
In contrast to the outside, the area was softly carpeted, softly lit, as if illness and death had to be cushioned away, made to look as if they didn't exist.
‘No thanks.
I'll find out.’
Jack was grateful to the old man but he wanted to be in charge now.
He didn't want an adult to take over, to shield him from the truth.
‘Can I help you?’ asked the young receptionist at the desk.
‘My stepfather — Ken Lomax.’
Jack stuttered slightly.
‘He was brought in about half an hour ago.
He had an accident at the Sakata factory.’
He always began to stammer when he was under pressure and immediately became conscious of his cleft palate.
‘One moment.’
She pushed computer buttons, picked up a telephone, muttered discreetly and then turned back to Jack saying, ‘He's in Abbey Ward.
First floor.
Turn left and then go straight ahead.’
‘Is he OK?’ demanded Jack.
‘They'll let you know everything on the ward,’ she replied with a smile.
‘He's going to be all right,’ whispered Tina.
But Jack was unconvinced.
‘I'll wait down here,’ said Jamie quietly.
Jack nodded and headed for the lift, followed by a determined Tina.
‘My stepfather —’ said Jack to the ward sister, his stutter worsening.
Tina squeezed his arm reassuringly and he finished his explanation with more confidence.
‘How is he?’ he said at last.
‘Your mum's here,’ the sister replied, dodging the question completely.
‘How's my stepfather?’ persisted Jack.
‘As comfortable as can be expected,’ replied the sister, with a bright, official smile.
‘What does thatmean?’ asked Tina forcefully, and for a moment the sister looked disconcerted.
‘Are you related?’ she asked.
‘No.
I'm his friend.’
Sister turned back to Jack as if Tina didn't exist.
‘Your stepfather was hurt in an accident at the Sakata factory.
Apparently the brakes of a fork-lift truck failed.’
She paused and then added, ‘Unfortunately he's in a coma.’
Her voice was neutral, precise, measured and Jack felt sick with fear.
‘Will he come out of it?’ he asked, almost pleading, and he felt Tina's steadying hand on his arm.
‘The doctors are doing everything possible,’ the sister replied evasively, glancing back at the scornful Tina.
‘Shall I take you to see your mother?
If you're not family, I think you should wait here,’ she added for Tina's benefit.
‘I want her to come.’
Jack was adamant.
‘But —.’
‘I want her to come.’
There was a definite edge to his insistence.
‘Oh, very well.
Follow me.’
Looking disapproving, the sister strode off down the corridor and they hurried after her.
Eventually Jack saw his mother.
She was crying quietly, a cup of milky tea on the table beside her.
He ran up to her, throwing his arms round her, but saying nothing.
The sister walked on down the corridor, with a muttered comment that wasn't even heard.
‘He's in a coma,’ Mrs Lomax wept, not noticing Tina hovering awkwardly in the background.
‘I know,’ replied Jack.
He kissed his mother on the forehead.
‘Tina came with me,’ he said, suddenly remembering she was there.
His mother nodded vaguely but didn't look up.
‘How could a fork-lift truck run away on its own?’ she sobbed.
‘I dunno,’ replied Jack.
‘It was just an accident, I  suppose.’
He turned to look at Tina, and caught a look of anger on her face.
Now what was she thinking?
Minutes later, Jack went to sit at his stepfather's bedside in a private ward.
He had a black eye and there was a great dark bruise down one side of his face.
His head was bandaged and wires linked his body with machines.
Ken's eyes were closed and his breathing was horribly loud and erratic.
‘Ken!’ whispered Jack.
‘Can you hear me, Ken?’
There was no reaction.
‘Ken!’
Still no reaction.
Gingerly, Jack took his stepfather's wrist and felt the light fluttering of his pulse.
He squeezed his wrist a little.
‘If you can hear me,’ said Jack, ‘just move a finger.’
But Ken Lomax remained completely motionless.
He's going to die, thought Jack.
I know he's going to die.
Half an hour later, Jamie Shepherd, who had been patiently waiting in the hospital foyer, drove his granddaughter home.
As he thanked them and said goodbye, Jack noticed a tension between the two.
Jamie was looking unusually downcast and Tina gave the impression that she was angry with her grandfather.
But Jack was too worried to try to work it out.
All he could think of was his stepfather's pale face on the pillow, and the ragged sound of his breathing.
‘That's all right, son,’ replied the old man.
‘I just wish your stepdad all the luck in the world.’
‘He'll need it,’ said Jack miserably.
‘Count on us,’ Tina reassured him in her rough, warm way.
‘Count on the Shepherds.’
But there was still a degree of anger in her voice.
When they had gone, Jack felt very alone.
After what seemed like hours his tearful mother joined him in the hospital foyer.
They were both silent as they drove home, and when they passed Monument Hill Jack hardly gave a thought to the Worm or Jonathan Ram, or anything else Jamie Shepherd had told him.
Again he wondered about Tina's anger and the tension between her and her grandfather, but his thoughts soon concentrated on his mother's suffering.
‘I'll cook your tea when we get in,’ she said.
‘And then I'll go back.
I don't want to leave him for long.’
‘I can look after myself, Mum,’ protested Jack, but she  wouldn't hear of it.
‘I might sleep at the hospital though,’ she said.
‘Would you mind that?’
‘Of course not.’
‘I'll keep phoning.’
‘I'll be fine, Mum.’
‘Oh, Jack — what am I going to do?’
The tears came again as she erratically negotiated a roundabout.
‘What am I going to do?’
‘I'll get you a cup of tea,’ replied Jack inadequately.
His mother phoned him several times and Jack had a disturbed night's sleep.
He dreamt that he was in the coils of a giant worm, and when he woke he found the bedclothes wrapped tightly around him.
At about seven his mother returned from the hospital to make him breakfast, looking utterly exhausted and reporting no change in his stepfather's condition.
Jack didn't feel much like eating, but to please her he swallowed toast and peanut butter.
It made him feel sick and he was grey with misery by the time he walked into the school playground.
He had pleaded with his mother not to make him go to school, but she had insisted, saying that she would pick him up at the end of the day and take him to the hospital, and that he was to ‘keep busy’.
But Jack knew that he would think about nothing but Ken all day.
He had taken only a few steps across the playground when he was stopped by a rough command.
‘You!’
‘Eh?’
‘Lomax!’
It was Derek Shepherd, Tina's older brother who was still at school.
He was only a couple of years older than Jack but he was huge — almost as wide as he was tall — and although Jack had never had much to do with him he knew he was reputed to be a bully.
‘What do you want?’ he asked defensively.
‘To give you a warning.’
Derek had a big pasty face covered in spots and was not a pretty sight.
‘What about?’
‘Private matter.’
‘I've got to go into registration,’ said Jack quickly.
‘There's ten minutes yet,’ came Derek's mocking voice.
‘So —‘
‘You come with me.’
Jack shrugged resignedly, too preoccupied to be afraid.
‘Where are we going?’
‘Back of the lab.’
Jack reluctantly followed Derek's vast bulk until they were behind the concrete hut that served as a laboratory.
‘Now what?’ he asked, looking round with sudden apprehension, but no one else was about.
As Derek came close to him, Jack could smell fry-up on his breath and it suddenly made him feel sick again.
‘Here's your warning,’ muttered Derek.
‘Keep away from my sister!’
Jack stared at him in bewilderment.
He hardly knew Tina's brothers but neither of them had ever objected to him before.
‘Why?’
‘We don't want management associating with us.’
He spat the words out.
‘Management?’
‘Well, your dad's a manager, isn't he?
It's OK for him, isn't it?
He can do what he likes, and if he loses his job he can always get another one.’
‘I don't know what you're on about,’ replied Jack miserably.
‘Sakata's not going to close.’
‘It will,’ whispered Derek.
‘It'll close all right.
They're going to replace my dad and my brother with robots.
That's what your dad's working towards, isn't it?
Eh?
Isn't it?’
‘He's in a coma,’ said Jack bleakly.
‘He's not working on anything.’
Taken aback, Derek paused.
Then he added truculently, ‘He'll be back.’
‘I hope so.’
‘And then he'll start trying to get rid of us again.’
‘Look —‘
‘We're not going to let that happen.
None of us,’ said Derek.
‘Is someone causing the accidents?’ asked Jack slowly, as an idea began to form in his mind.
‘I didn't say that.’
‘Because if they are, they're barmy.
They're destroying their own living.’
‘Better that than being used,’ sneered Derek.
‘We're just setting it all up, till they bring the robots in.
Then we're out.’
‘Who told you about robots?
And are you really saying it's sabotage?
Because if you are —‘
‘I said nothing.’
‘You should watch what you say!’
Jack thought of his mother's anguish and his stepfather's injuries and anger rose in him like a demon.
‘Your grandad took me up to the hospital,’ he ground out.
‘He was really good to me.’
‘He hasn't got enough to do, that one.’
Derek blinked at him stupidly and Jack noticed one of his spots was oozing slightly.
‘You keep away from her, anyway.’
‘Why should I?
Tina's my friend.’
‘Look, take my advice.
Your dad's had a nasty accident, right?
And you could get beaten up.’
Jack stared into Derek Shepherd's slate-grey eyes and recoiled.
There was something there — a kind of hatred that shocked him.
But he still wasn't going to be intimidated.
Tina was too important to him.
‘I choose my own friends,’ he said.
‘OK, you twerp — I'll have to spell it out!’
Derek moved nearer and raised a ham-like fist.
‘Push off!’ said Jack, trying to sound hard.
The fist came up and caught him on the side of the head and Jack went down, seeing little sparkling stars.
There was a roaring in his ears as the pain slowly spread.
‘You've been warned,’ said Derek as he walked slowly away.
Jack picked himself up painfully.
He could feel the bruise coming up on his cheek and his whole face was stiff and jarred.
Well, he wouldn't go into school now, he thought, close to tears.
He wanted to go somewhere where he could be alone — where he could get some peace.
No one could make him stay at school.
But as he hurried down the path that led to the school gate he ran straight into Tina.
‘What the hell's happened to you?’ she demanded immediately.
‘Derek,’ he muttered.
‘He told me to stay away from you.
I told him to push off and he hit me.’
‘That brute!’
She tried to examine Jack's cheek but he moved away.
‘I'm going.’
‘Where?’
‘To see my stepdad.
I'm not staying here.’
‘Shall I tell Mr Soames?’ she asked.
‘You can do what you like.’
‘I'll get my dad on to that brother of mine.
He'll beat him black and blue,’ she said hopefully, but without much conviction.
‘What's the matter with Derek?
Why doesn't he want me to see you?’
‘It's the men-folk in my family.
They make me sick.’
She paused, then added, ‘It goes back a long way.’
‘It's not my family's fault,’ said Jack, turning away.
‘Listen, Jack, Dad and Steve — they've got lousy jobs at Sakata.
They could be replaced by automation any day.’
She paused and then began to speak with real passion.
‘In the shipyard my dad was a craftsman and he could have some self-respect — just Like Grandad did.
And the money  was better.
Steve never worked in the shipyard, but he knew what it was like from Dad and Grandad and all their mates.
He left school and went straight on the dole, like Derek probably will.
He spent three years on it till he got into Sakata.
The jobs are nothing — just the same thing, day after day.
They're going nowhere, and the hatred's built up really bad.’
‘But what's that got to do with us being friends?’
Jack asked.
He already knew the answer — knew that Tina was only going to repeat what Derek had told him.
‘Because your dad's a manager — he's got it made.
They haven't.
But it won't make any difference what they think,’ Tina added passionately.
‘You're my mate and that's the end of it.’
‘He'll beat me up if he knows we're still friends,’ said Jack, looking round fearfully.
Tina was silent.
‘Is it just yourfamily who hates Sakata so much?’
Jack burst out suddenly.
‘There're plenty more,’ Tina said quietly.
Then Jack voiced his real fear, and the anger returned, bubbling up inside him, wanting an outlet.
‘Could someone have done it on purpose?’ he asked.
‘If management are hated so much.’
Tina shook her head quickly.
‘It doesn't go that deep,’ she said flatly.
‘I thought you said it did,’ he replied.
Jack walked through the quiet roads for almost an hour before he came to the bottom of Monument Hill.
Above the sharply rising hillside, the grass on its sides cropped short by sheep, the Monument stood starkly.
It was simple in structure: three pillars at the front and three pillars at the back held up a flat stone ceiling.
Inside, open to the weather, was the stone chessboard.
As he tramped up the hill in the pale sunshine, Jack's thoughts turned back to Sir Arnold Hammond, Jonathan  Ram, the meteorite and the Worm.
What a load of rubbish! he thought.
Then he remembered how the Worm was said to feed off hatred.
Well, the hatred was strong enough now, and his hand went to his bruised cheek.
Maybe hatred could grow so strong that it became a force of its own, he thought — a real physical force.
And if the Shepherds felt so strongly about Sakata, how many other people in Kershaw felt the same?
Jack finally crested the hill and stood in the shadow of the Monument.
Even in the daylight it was a dank, dark place, its pillars covered with moss and lichen, scarred by the weather and defaced by graffiti.
No one seemed to be responsible for looking after it, and there was a considerable quantity of debris inside.
Worse still, the chess table and its two attendant stone seats had been hacked and scratched, and a paint spray had been used to produce yet more graffiti.
It had become a very sad sight indeed, but Jack hardly noticed as he turned and stared back down the hill to Sakata, its neat rows of buildings looking like so much Lego.
He barely registered the factory — all he could see was his stepfather's face on the pillow, grey and shrunken, and his mother sitting patiently beside him.
Jack sat down on one of the stone seats.
Supposing it hadn't been an accident?
Supposing someone had tried to kill his stepfather deliberately?
Was it such an extraordinary thought?
Suppose someone wanted to destroy Sakata and the attack on his stepfather was part of the campaign?
But the more he thought about it, the more ridiculous it all became.
Of course it had been an accident — it must have been.
Slowly he rose to his feet.
As he did so, some loose change fell out of his trouser's pocket and rolled under the table.
Jack crawled under the table to pick it up, then wriggled over on to his back, catching sight of something.
Underneath the table, carved into the stone, was some kind of design.
It was so faint that he had to look at it for  some time before he could make any sense of it.
There was a setting sun, a ship docking and a ram running towards a shepherd who had an axe in his hand.
On the axe was some lettering so small and cramped that Jack could barely make it out.
Then, at last, he understood.
The lettering read: HE ROBBED US, MAY HE BURN In HELL.
THE WORM WILL TURN.
‘What are you doing here?’ asked his mother.
She was sitting beside Ken, who looked depressingly the same as he had done the previous night.
‘I want to be with you — with him.’
Jack plumped
down exhausted on to a chair.
‘I can't be at school with all
this going on.’
His mother nodded understandingly.
‘I thought you should be busy,’ she muttered as if trying to justify herself.
‘I know, Mum.
I don't blame you.’
He looked down at his stepfather again.
Was he that little bit greyer, his breathing that little bit harsher?
‘How is he?’ he asked despondently.
‘No change.’
Her voice was clipped, defeated.
‘Haven't the doctors said anything?’
‘They're doing all they can.’
They sat there, silent and hopeless.
He's just a vegetable now, thought Jack.
His mind slipped back to the carvings under the chess table.
The worm will turn, he said to himself silently.
Jamie Shepherd had said that.
What could it mean?
Then something else surfaced.
Jamie Shepherd?
Ram?
The shepherd with the axe?
The worm turning?
His mind was in overdrive.
‘What's the matter, darling?’ asked his mother anxiously.
‘Nothing — I'm just tired,’ Jack replied.
Days passed and Jack spent most of his time at the hospital.
His mother, unable to find the strength to battle against him, wrote to the school and asked for him to be excused.
The next day she received a kind, understanding letter from the Head Teacher, agreeing to Jack's absence and extending his condolences.
For Jack, time seemed to stand still as he sat at his stepfather's bedside, gazing down into the inanimate features and waiting for a miracle.
The doctors told them to talk to him as much as possible and to play tapes of his favourite music, but Ken Lomax did not respond to their long, rambling, one-way conversations or the endless repetitions of his favourite country and western music.
One Friday morning a new young doctor arrived in the private room where Ken Lomax lay.
‘Is he ever going to get better?’
Jack asked.
His mother, whose eyes were red and puffy from fatigue, tried to protest.
‘You know he is, darling.’
‘I don'tknow,’ he had replied like a sulky baby.
But the young doctor was not in the least disconcerted.
‘Remember this,’ he said.
‘It's possible he's listening to every word we say.’
Jack looked doubtfully at the waxen face of his stepfather.
How could he?
Ken was without any response at all.
But the doctor read his thoughts.
‘I know he doesn't look as if he can, but it's a very  strong possibility.’
‘OK.’
Jack was impatient.
‘But couldn't he even raise a finger so we'd know he can understand us?’
‘Not at the moment.
The coma's very deep.
But as far as we can tell he doesn't seem to have any brain damage.’
‘Won't he get it, lying there like that?’
Jack was fleetingly surprised at his own boldness.
Usually he was tongue-tied with strangers.
‘Depends how long the coma lasts.’
‘How long will it last?’
‘We can't say.
But we hope it'll get lighter — that his reflexes will start to recover.
Keep talking to him, and keep playing the music.’
‘If I ever hear Wichita Lineman again,’ said Mrs Lomax, ‘I'll go right round the bend!’
On Friday night, Tina phoned just after Jack had come back from the supermarket with the weekend shopping.
His mother was still at the hospital and wasn't due home until nine.
‘How are you?’ she began gently.
‘I'm OK,’ he replied flatly.
‘When are you coming back to school?’
‘Dunno.’
‘How's your dad?’
‘No change.’
There was a long pause.
Then Tina said, ‘Want to see me?’
‘Yes, but he said —‘
‘Derek?
To hell with him!
I make my own friends.’
‘But won't —‘
‘Do you want to see me or not?’ she snapped.
‘Yes,’ he replied simply.
‘What about tomorrow evening?
Before it gets dark.’
‘Where?’ asked Jack eagerly.
‘How about the Monument?
We could have a talk — and then go and get some chips.’
‘Fine.’
‘And Jack —’ Tina suddenly sounded unusually hesitant.
‘Yes?’
‘I've been thinking about you.’
‘Thanks.’
‘'Bout seven?’
‘See you then.’
Jack put down the phone and began to lay out the tea.
The house felt cold and empty around him but a small
warm glow, somewhere in the pit of his stomach, slowly
began to spread through his whole body.
He was glad she had phoned.
Jack spent most of the next day at the hospital, but he left around six, telling his mother he was going to meet a friend.
She was instantly pleased.
‘I'm so glad you're going out.’
‘I won't be late.’
‘You must go back to school next week,’ she said.
‘We'll see.’
‘Have a good time.’
He went over and kissed her.
Then he did the same to his stepfather, whose forehead was dry and cold, almost as if he were dead already.
How long can this go on? he wondered.
Would someone soon say they'd have to switch off the respirator?
Maybe it would have to happen, he thought.
Either way, it was out of their control.
The air was full of driving rain as Jack climbed the hill.
The sky was dark with swollen clouds, and the Monument stood etched sharply against the elements.
He walked quickly, his head full of morbid thoughts.
It was only when he was near the crest that he became aware of the sound of crying.
Jack stopped, listening again, and then ran the last few metres.
At first he couldn't see anyone, but suddenly, in  the dark shadow of the Monument, he spotted Tina.
She was leaning against one of the scarred pillars, her whole body shaking with sobs.
‘What's the matter?’
Tina looked up quickly, almost furtively, and he couldn't make out whether she had heard him coming or not.
‘Tina —’ he began hesitantly.
‘What?’
Her voice was broken, distant.
‘What's the matter?’ he repeated urgently.
‘Nothing.’
‘There must be something.’
‘I said, nothing.’
She choked.
‘Don't be daft.’
‘Don't call medaft!’ she said, but she was a travesty of her usual bossy self.
‘You were crying.’
‘It's nothing.’
‘It must be something,’ he persisted.
‘Look!’
Her voice was high and cracked as she wheeled round on him.
Then he saw her swollen, cut face.
Jack stepped closer.
Yes — she looked even worse close to.
‘Who did that?’ he asked, clenching his fists.
She turned away again.
‘Who did it ?’
‘Our Derek.’
‘That brute!
Why?’
‘He got it out of me.’
‘Got whatout?’ he rapped.
‘That I was going to see you.’
‘No —‘
‘He told me to stay in the house — not to go out.’
‘And?’
‘I told him what to do with himself.
We had this fight.
He won, of course.’
‘This is awful!’ said Jack.
He was horrified.
‘It happens.’
‘Why does he hate me so much?’
‘He doesn't.
It's what you represent.’
She went and sat down at the stone table and Jack sank down opposite her.
‘Didn't your mum and dad intervene?
Didn't they stop him?’
‘They were out.
So was Steve.’
‘How could he have done this?’
‘To a girl?
Come on, Jack, don't be sexist.
I attacked him.’
Jack was silent.
He knew there was nothing he could say.
‘Have you seen what's under this table?’ he asked eventually.
‘The engravings?
I found them when I was a kid.’
‘What do they mean?’
‘What Kershaw is all about,’ she answered savagely.
‘Frustration and hatred.’
She looked down at the darkened valley and the bright lights of the factory.
‘It's been here for too long.’
‘Where have you been?’
‘Just out with Tina.
Any change in Ken?’
‘No.’
She was looking calmer.
‘Do you want some hot chocolate, Mum?’
‘OK, that would be nice.’
She was sitting in front of the television, watching snooker.
She hated watching sport normally, but Jack guessed that she was taking none of it in.
He went into the kitchen, made the hot chocolate and brought it out to her.
She was still sitting there, looking glazed.
‘Mum?’
Jack asked fearfully.
‘Mmm?’
‘There's nothing the matter, is there?
You would tell me, wouldn't you?
I mean he's not taken a turn for the worse or anything?’
‘No, I told you.
There's no change.’
‘But you look so —.’
‘I've just been given a present.’
She turned to him, looking rather bewildered.
‘The company have given me a Glory.
It's being delivered tomorrow.’
‘Their new computerized car?’
Jack was astonished.
‘They cost a bomb!’
‘Mr Ormond rang me.
He said he'd noticed that our Mini was getting a bit down at heel, and in the light of Ken's injuries he thought the least he could do was to give me a better means of transport.
Isn't that amazing?’
‘Well, they're certainly generous,’ replied Jack.
‘Are they?
It's more like guilt, isn't it?’
‘So you won't take the car?’
‘Oh, I'll take it all right.
I'll take everything I can,’ she said bitterly.
Then she began on another tack.
‘You ought to go back to school tomorrow.’
‘I don't want to, Mum.’
‘Is it something to do with that bruise?’
‘I didn't think you'd noticed.’
‘Of course I had,’ she said, almost angrily.
‘I didn't say anything because I didn't think you wanted me to.’
‘I didn't.’
‘Do you want to talk about it now?’ she asked hopefully.
‘No.
But I'll go back to school —’ Jack paused.
‘You'll be careful in that car, won't you?
It's pretty high-powered and…’
‘Are you saying I can't drive?’
She smiled to take the sting out of her words.
‘No, Mum.
I'm just saying a Glory's a bit different from a beaten-up Mini.’
The Glory arrived at eight, well before Jack was due to go to school.
It was taxed and the log book was already in his mother's name.
Behind the wheel was a young Japanese man he had never seen before, but Mum seemed to know all about him.
‘You're Mr Chan, aren't you?’
He sprang out, looking very dapper in a dark silky suit, and shook their hands enthusiastically.
‘And you are Mrs Lomax, and you must be her son.’
‘That's right.’
‘I wish to extend my condolences about your husband's accident.’
‘Thank you.’
She turned to Jack.
‘Ken was talking about this gentleman, Jack.
He's the new General Manager of the factory.
Haven't you just arrived from Japan?’
‘Yes, although this isn't the first time I've been here.
I've had the pleasure of coming to England before.
But this time I've come to — hopefully — make things happier for everybody.
More secure.’
‘Why?’ asked Jack boldly.
‘Weren't they happy or secure before?’
Mr Chan looked at Jack very directly.
‘I have a good deal of experience in staff relations,’ he said.
‘I think this is needed very much at Sakata.’
You can say that again, thought Jack.
Avoiding his mother's admonishing eye, he plunged on.
‘There's been a lot of accidents,’ he said.
‘Do you think they were deliberate?’
Mr Chan smiled brightly.
‘What a terrible thought —‘
‘Really, Jack,’ chimed in Mrs Lomax, looking very upset.
‘How can you say such an awful thing?’
She was beginning to notice a change in Jack.
Perhaps Ken's accident had made him more articulate.
But Mr Chan seemed to want to pursue the matter.
‘No, it is a very pertinent question, particularly in the light of what has happened to Mr Lomax.
But I can assure you, the accidents wereaccidents.’
‘How can you know?’ asked Jack belligerently.
‘You've only just arrived.’
‘Jack, really!’ began Mrs Lomax, but Mr Chan didn't seem put out.
‘All the files and relevant information were faxed to me in Tokyo,’ he said.
‘And I'm quite certain that the series of injuries was no more than an unfortunate set of coincidences.’
‘Or carelessness?’
Jack pursued.
‘Jack!’
‘No, let the young man express his feelings,’ Mr Chan insisted.
‘He has every right.
But no, I cannot agree with you.
There's been a thorough investigation.
There has been no carelessness, and safety regulations were observed.
It is, as I said, a very unfortunate chain of circumstances.
Now I am here I intend to boost morale.’
‘Do you think loss of morale could have anything to do with it?’ asked Mrs Lomax.
‘No.’
Mr Chan was as firm as ever.
‘That would imply carelessness again, wouldn't it?
But we are aware that many ex-shipyard workers are engaged in some very routine work,and that many of them feel they could be made redundant at any moment.
Sakata has the welfare of its workers at heart.’
He smiled.
‘We want them to grow with the company.’
Would that satisfy the Shepherds? wondered Jack.
Would they grow to trust Mr Chan?
He was sure they wouldn't.
But maybe they, and so many others of their kind, were too suspicious anyway.
Then, without warning, something clicked in his mind as his thoughts returned to Sir Arnold Hammond and Jonathan Ram.
Ram.
Shepherd.
The names.
And under the table — the shepherd, the ram, the axe.
Jack felt quite strange.
Was it just a coincidence that the names were so similar?
Surely it must be.
‘Will you try your Glory, Mrs Lomax?’ asked Mr Chan courteously.
She looked at her watch.
‘Well —‘
‘Go on, Mum,’ persuaded Jack.
‘We've got half an hour.’
‘I don't want you late for school on your first day back.’
‘I won't be.’
‘I was going to ask you a small favour,’ said Mr Chan.
‘As you attend the school.’
‘Yes?’ asked Jack suspiciously, waiting for the catch.
‘My son, Ho.
He is your age and will start school today.
Would you be prepared to look out for him?’
‘Yes,’ said Jack, thinking of Derek Shepherd.
‘I'll do that for you.’
‘Until I can reassure our workers I am a little concerned that Ho might — might not make as many friends as he  would otherwise do.
And he has never been to England before.’
For the first time the bright smile had vanished from Mr Chan's lips.
‘I'm sure he'll be fine,’ said Mrs Lomax, looking at her watch.
‘I'll keep an eye on him,’ reassured Jack.
‘That is very kind.
Now, please let me demonstrate your Glory.’
He ushered them towards the car.
It was magnificently low-slung, almost like a sports car, but with four plush leather seats and a thrusting bonnet.
It was painted a fiery red and had huge windows.
Inside, the dashboard was more like an aircraft control panel.
Mrs Lomax didn't exactly shrink back, but she seemed nervous as she glanced over the instruments.
Just above the milometer was a small computer screen, and Jack guessed that she would find that pretty disconcerting.
He himself was thrilled, but his pleasure was diminished as he imagined Ken's pallid, bandaged head shadowed on the screen.
‘This computer,’ Mrs Lomax began.
‘What's it meant to do?’
‘First it will tell you about your Glory — it's running condition — anything wrong.
Then it will remind you about speed.
And it will even map-read for you; if you tap in your destination the computer will work out the best route for you, giving you a read-out on the screen.’
‘Will it take you there?’ asked Jack.
Mr Chan gave him one of his winning smiles.
‘Not yet,’ he said.
‘You still have to steer.
But we're working on it!’
He took them for a test drive and then Mrs Lomax drove, a little jerkily until she got more used to the Glory.
‘Well,’ she said, when they returned home and the car was idling almost silently at the roadside.
‘It's a bit different from the Mini.
But we're very grateful.
I mean — it's immensely generous of Sakata to do this.’
‘It's a pleasure.
And when Mr Lomax has recovered, the Glory will take you on some nice trips.’
‘I'll take it to the hospital this morning,’ she said, adding  rather pathetically, ‘and talk to him about it.’
‘How is he?’
‘No change,’ she replied wearily, and the smile temporarily disappeared from Mr Chan's face.
‘So you've decided to come in!’
Tina walked towards him in the rain-washed playground while Jack looked warily round for her brother.
‘It's all right,’ she added.
‘Derek's at home with a cold.’
‘Good,’ he said and launched into a description of the gift of the Glory.
But she was far from pleased.
‘Typical!’ she snapped.
‘What?’
‘Management bribe.’
‘Come on!’
‘Would they ever do that for the workers?
What about that young foreman who got his wrist broken?’
‘Maybe they didn't think that was worth a car.’
‘Or Ted Allen who fell down the inspection pit?’
‘He only broke his arm.’
‘Anyway,’ she said grudgingly, ‘it's good to see you back.
How's your dad?’
‘No change,’ he said in a monotone.
‘I wanted to ask you something.’
‘Ask away.’
‘Your name — Shepherd —‘
‘Well?’
‘And the Rams — Jonathan Ram.’
‘So?’
‘They're similar.’
‘What amazing observation!’ she said sarcastically, but he thought she seemed uneasy.
‘You related?’
‘The Rams and the Shepherds?
Why should we be?
Just because they're names to do with sheep.
You barmy or something?’
‘No, I don't think so.’
‘What a stupid question!’
‘Thanks a lot!’ said Jack.
‘I only wondered, that's all.’
The school day passed uneventfully.
He didn't see much more of Tina and the teachers treated him with gentle sympathy, almost as if he were an invalid.
When Jack arrived home, his hopes suddenly soared, for his mother seemed tremendously elated.
‘What's up?’
‘He moved!’
‘What?’
‘Ken moved a finger!’
‘You sure?’
‘I told him to.
I begged him to — and he moved his finger!
It was a signal.’
‘You don't think —‘
‘I promise, Jack!
I promise!’
‘I'm so pleased, Mum!’
They ran into each other 's arms.
Later, as they were finishing tea, Jack asked: ‘What was he responding to?’
‘Well, it was a bit odd,’ she said.
‘Odd?’
‘I was telling him about the Glory, and I said I'd driven it over and what did he think — was he looking forward to driving it and all that —’ She paused excitedly.
‘I thought I saw something pass across his eyes — a kind of flicker of intelligence.
At first I thought it was just my imagination.
Then I saw it again.
So I said to him, ‘If you want to drive the Glory move your finger.’
And it didn't move, so I tried something else.
I said, ‘If you don't want to drive the Glory, move your finger.’
And he moved it.
Only a little bit.
But he definitely moved it, because I repeated the question, and he moved it again.
I'm sure of it, Jack.’
‘All right, Mum.’
‘You don't believe me,’ she accused.
‘I do.
But I'd like to see it for myself.
Can we go to the  hospital now?’
She hesitated.
‘He might be tired.’
‘Let's give it a swing,’ insisted Jack.
The drive to the hospital in the Glory was wonderfully smooth and easy.
‘Used the computer route-finder yet, Mum?’ he asked.
‘I know the way, Jack.’
‘Can't we use it for fun?’
‘All right.
You set it on the way back.’
‘Thanks.’
When they arrived at Ken's bedside, Jack thought he looked the same as ever, but Mrs Lomax was both optimistic and decisive.
‘Here's Jack, Ken.
We came over to see you in the Glory.
Now if you want us to drive back in it, wiggle your finger.’
Nothing happened.
Disappointed, her confidence evaporating, she tried turning the question round as she had done before: ‘If you don't want us to drive back in it, wiggle your finger.’
‘There!’ she said triumphantly.
‘What, Mum?’
‘See that flicker?’
But he hadn't seen anything.
Thoroughly upset now, she repeated the question and instruction, and this time Jack did see something move in his stepfather's eye.
‘I saw it.’
‘Look!’
His right finger was definitely moving.
‘Let me try,’ said Jack.
‘Don't tire him,’ she warned anxiously.
‘I'll try something else.’
Jack leant over his stepfather so that he could see him properly.
‘Ken, why don't you want us to go home in the Glory?
What have you got against it?
Is it dangerous or something?’
‘Too many questions, Jack,’ Mrs Lomax interposed.
‘Make it simple.’
‘OK.
Is the Glory dangerous?’
‘That's a silly —’ The flicker was more intense and the finger moved more decisively.
‘Goodness, Jack!
What does he mean?’
‘I don't know.
I'll try again.’
He bent over his stepfather and looked straight into his eyes.
‘Is the Glory dangerous?’ he repeated.
The finger moved again — this time more weakly.
The eyelids fluttered, closed and fluttered open again.
‘He's tired, Jack.’
‘Maybe.
‘Leave him now.’
‘But what does he mean — the Glory's dangerous?’
‘I don't think he means anything.’
Her voice shook.
‘What?’
‘I think I was being a bit too optimistic.’
‘But why?’
‘I don't think he's on our wavelength,’ his mother said to him in a choking voice.
‘But suppose he's right?
Maybe there is something wrong with the Glory’
‘No,’ she said firmly.
‘This finger-moving doesn't mean anything.
At least, it can't mean much.’
‘Have you asked the doctor?’
Jack asked impatiently.
‘Yes, he was very pleased.
But I don't know what to think.
I suppose I don't want to raise our hopes.’
‘I understand, Mum,’ said Jack, trying to be soothing and not show his frustration.
He stared down at his stepfather almost angrily.
His eyes were closed now.
‘Don't try him again.’
‘Why not?’
‘Please.’
‘All right.’
Jack continued to gaze down at Ken's blank face.
Are you just a cabbage? he wondered — brain-dead? or are you trying to warn us about something?
Again the eyelids flickered.
Was there intelligence there?
And if so, what  agony Ken must be in!
It would be terrible to see Mum so upset and not be able to communicate.
And what if he knew something they didn't and was desperate to tell them, but could do nothing but move a finger?
‘It can't be dangerous, can it?’
Jack stared at the glowing dashboard of the Glory.
‘Of course not.’
Mrs Lomax was tired, desperate and impatient.
She had raised false hopes in herself and in Jack and she was ashamed as well as bitterly disappointed.
‘Let's put the computer route-finder on,’ he said.
‘Oh, I can't be bothered now.’
‘Please, Mum —‘
‘But why?
We're only going home.
We can't be —‘
‘Please.’
‘All right then.’
She sighed as she switched on the ignition and the Glory moved off.
‘I don't know why I ever agreed to have this car.
It's guilt money.
That's all it is.
Jack suddenly remembered that he hadn't sought out Ho Chan at school; he hadn't even thought about it.
He must find him tomorrow and make sure he was all right.
At least Derek Shepherd hadn't been around today.
As he switched on the torchlight on the dashboard and began to study the Glory's manual, Jack again thought of Tina's angry reaction to the idea that the Ram and Shepherd names might be linked.
Of course it had been a silly question, but why had she been so cross?
Life was full of mysteries — his stepfather's response, Tina's anger…
But at least the computer route-finder seemed simple enough and he had no problems in setting it.
‘Look, Mum — it's up on the screen.’
‘Mmm.’
She looked vaguely at it and then said, ‘I thought you'd set it for home.’
‘I have.’
‘You haven't.
You've set it for that rough track.’
‘What track?’
‘The one that goes up the back of Monument Hill.’
‘I can't have done.’
‘You have.’
He stared at the screen.
She was right.
How weird.
But perhaps he had been tired, and what with hearing so much about the wretched Monument…
Yes, he had definitely made a mistake.
Using the manual again, Jack began to re-programme the computer.
The screen flashed up and Jack studied it intently.
‘What on earth —‘
‘Yes, darling?’
‘It's showing the Monument again.’
‘Let's not bother.
You probably don't understand it yet.
It's bound to be terribly complicated.’
She yawned.
‘Don't worry about it.’
They drove on silently for a few minutes and then Mrs Lomax suddenly spoke.
‘That's funny!’
‘What is?’
Jack said irritably, staring down at the manual.
‘The steering wheel went all stiff.
It's OK now.’
‘Mmm.’
Jack was still absorbed in the instructions.
‘But we're on the wrong road.’
‘Yes?’
‘I said we're on the wrong road.
Now how did I do that?
I'll take the next right.’
‘OK.’
She was driving slowly now, with a worried frown on her face.
Then she switched on the indicator.
‘I don't know —‘
‘What now?’
‘I can't get the indicator to work.’
‘Sure you got the right button?’
Jack asked.
‘Yes, of course I'm sure.
It's not a button anyway — it's on the wheel.’
‘Try again.’
‘I'm trying, curse it!’
‘Perhaps —‘
‘We're coming to the right turn.’
She sounded panicky.
‘Just go — there's no one behind us.’
‘I s'pose — Jack!
Jack!’
‘What's the matter?’
There was a pinched feeling in his stomach and a tingling sensation in his hands.
‘I can't turn the wheel!’
‘Mum —‘
‘I tell you — I can't turn the wheel!’
‘Stop the car then.’
‘I think I'll have to.
Oh, Jack — what's wrong ?’
A thought flashed through his mind.
He saw his stepfather's finger moving so slightly — so very slightly.
The Glory was dangerous.
He had really meant it.
‘Stop!’
Jack yelled.
But the Glory was speeding up.
‘Stop, Mum!’
‘I can't!’
‘Take your foot off the accelerator!’
‘I've taken it off, but the brakes don't work!’
Her hands were off the wheel too and the Glory was driving itself.
This is unbelievable!
Jack thought.
‘Where are we going?’ she screamed.
Jack knew where they were going.
They were heading for Monument Hill.
His mother put her hands back on the wheel but threw them off with a scream.
‘It's hot!
The steering wheel's hot!’
Jack reached out for it, and withdrew his hand with a cry of pain.
‘What's happening, Mum?’
He was a child again, wanting everything to be sorted out by an adult.
‘Your dad's right — the car is dangerous.’
She sat with her hands in the air, rather like a rodeo cowboy.
It was a ludicrous but terrifying sight.
Jack's glance fell on the tiny computer screen, which  seemed to be going crazy — flashing up numbers, graphics and a kind of blue fuzz, each image speeding into the next.
‘We're on the track — the track up to the Monument.’
The internal light came on and the radio turned itself on and blasted out heavy rock music at full volume.
‘Turn it off!’ cried Mrs Lomax.
Jack tried but it was quite impossible; the button, like the steering wheel, was red hot.
With a howl of pain, he jerked back and sat huddled in his seat, trying to soothe the burning sensation.
‘Don't touch anything!’ he said, as the Monument loomed into view.
The Glory showed no sign of slowing up.
Were they going to hit the columns?
Jack wondered.
He closed his eyes against the unbelievable horror of it all.
The Glory shuddered to a sudden halt on the grassy slope in front of the Monument and they were thrown forward against their seat-belts.
The engine cut out but the headlights remained full on.
They were focused on the stone table and Jack could see particles of dust swirling in the beams.
It was a clear, mild night, completely silent.
Mother and son sat transfixed in the stillness, watching the shadowed columns and the spotlit, graffiti-splashed table with its scratched chessboard outline.
‘Don't touch anything!’
It was her turn to hiss the warning now.
‘I'm not going to.’
‘Let it cool off.’
They sat there for what seemed like hours, although it was only minutes.
The computer screen was still going crazy in front of them, but after a while it slowed down.
Then it faded and went blank.
‘Shall I try one of the doors, Mum?’
‘Wait.’
‘OK.’
They stared ahead but nothing stirred.
‘All right,’ she said.
‘Let me try.’
‘Mum —‘
‘Let me try.’
‘All right.’
He watched her hand anxiously as it hovered above the door.
Then, with sudden commitment, she grabbed it, but the handle didn't budge.
She tried again  and again until Jack grabbed his own.
It wasn't hot, but it wouldn't open.
‘We're locked in.’
They continued to rattle and pull, but nothing happened.
Jack felt a numbness beyond fear.
He was almost curious to see what was going to happen next.
But his mother had not reached this stage and her terror was mounting.
‘It's all right, Mum.’
‘All right?’
She stared at him wildly.
‘What do you mean, all right?’
‘We've just got to sit it out; it's all we can do.’
Suddenly his mother grabbed his arm and pointed out of the nearside window.
‘There's something —‘
‘What?’
‘I don't know.
Look over there.’
Jack heard it before he saw anything — a low rumbling sound that began to vibrate through the car.
Then he saw the earth moving…
‘No —’ his mother whispered.
Jack grabbed her arm, not knowing whether it was for protection or reassurance.
‘Something's coming!’
‘It's under the ground.’
He could see the crust of the earth trembling just under the Monument.
It ridged, undulated and suddenly flattened again.
Then there was nothing to be seen and the low rumbling slowly faded away.
The sound was a bit like an underground train at a distance, and there was a feeling of complete emptiness when it had gone.
Suddenly the headlights of the Glory went out and they found themselves sitting in pitch darkness.
Jack tried the handle of the door again and it gave.
‘Mum, I can open the door,’ he whispered in the blackness.
‘Stay where you are.’
‘I can open the door.’
‘I said — stay where you are.’
She tried to put the headlights on again, and then turned the ignition switch, but there was no response.
‘It's as if the batteries are dead,’ she said.
‘Try again.’
She tried, but still nothing happened.
‘I'm getting out,’ said Jack purposefully.
‘No!’
‘Why?’
‘There's someone out there!’
‘There isn't.’
‘I can sense there is.
Please, Jack, wait.
Listen.’
They sat again in complete silence.
Slowly a faint sound reached Jack's ears.
Someone was singing, sweetly and melodiously.
It was a tune he recognized — an old nursery rhyme.
‘I see the moon
And the moon sees me;
God bless the moon
And God bless me.’
‘Now what?’
His mother stared at him and he could see the fear in her eyes.
‘Now what's happening?’
‘Stay here.
I'll go out and see.’
‘Don't leave me!’
She clutched at him.
Now their röles were reversed and she was the child.
‘I won't belong.’
The rhyme was repeated, softly, sweetly and childishly.
‘I see the moon
And the moon sees me;
God bless the moon
And God bless me.’
Slowly and cautiously, Jack got out of the Glory, leaving the door open behind him.
Someone was sitting at the stone chess table.
The figure was hunched up on the seat, its head on the table, apparently almost sleeping.
Jack crept up as far as he dared and then froze.
To his amazement he found himself looking at Tina.
She was wearing a dressing gown and pyjamas.
He almost spoke her name, but quickly decided against doing so, realizing that she was not entirely conscious.
Had she been sleep-walking?
He was so dazed by all he had just been through that he couldn't think straight.
Gently he moved nearer.
She was muttering the rhyme now and her thumb was stuck babyishly in her mouth.
What should he do?
Speak — or not?
He decided to whisper.
‘Tina?’
She went on muttering.
‘Tina?’
Slowly she looked up.
‘You OK?’
There was something in her face that was unfamiliar; it was not exactly a different expression — more as if her eyes were not her own.
‘Curse you !’ she began, but she was speaking in a harsh man's voice.
‘Curse you — we'll all die in the poor-house now!’
Jack could feel the waves of hatred washing over him — a real force which literally buffeted him.
Then the ground began to ripple again and he could hear his mother screaming in the car.
‘Tina!’
He drove himself towards her and grabbed her arm.
‘Tina, it's Jack!’
For a moment she was rigid but then he felt her whole body suddenly relax.
‘Jack?’
‘You've been sleep-walking or something.’
‘Where are we?’
‘Monument Hill.’
‘No —‘
She was staring down at the undulating ground.
Clods of earth were tearing their way up through the humped grass.
‘The worm !’ she shouted out in a hoarse voice that was still barely her own.
He smelt raw earth and then something else — rotten eggs.
It must be sulphur.
The ground heaved for about a hundred metres, more turf broke through and the smell increased.
He heard his mother continuing to scream and then the headlights on the Glory turned back on, the radio crashed out again with its heavy rock and the doors closed and locked.
The car began to move forward, slowly this time, until its wheels reached the disrupted earth, which heaved and heaved again.
‘Tina —‘
Behind the windscreen his mother's face was distorted with terror.
She looked as if she were drowning in a goldfish tank.
‘Tina — what's happening?’
But she had hidden her face in her hands.
Without warning the grass suddenly exploded in a great shower and a livid white head emerged.
There were no eyes — no features — just a pinkish head that seemed swollen, bloated.
It nuzzled the Glory and Jack could hear the sound of breaking headlights.
‘Mum!’
He began to run towards the car, but the ground heaved under him and he fell sprawling, a few centimetres from the head of what he now guessed to be the Worm.
The stench of sulphur seemed to increase and Jack rolled over, still yelling.
The Worm reared up above him, its flesh soft and moist.
Then, just as suddenly as it had appeared, it dived, sliding back into the earth at an immense speed.
Jack stood up as the  Glory rocked to and fro.
Then he noticed something else.
Down in the valley, a great light seemed to blaze up towards him.
It was some time before he realized that the entire Sakata factory was lit from end to end by bright, dazzling light.
As the Worm vanished, the lights dimmed until there was total darkness and the factory disappeared back into the valley — a black, huddled shape, like a sleeping animal.
Jack reached the Glory and tugged open the door without meeting any resistance.
‘You all right?’ he demanded urgently.
She was shaking.
‘Yes —‘
‘You sure?’
‘I told you, I'm all right!
That thing — that creature — it was vile!
What on earth wasit?’
‘Don't think about it now, Mum.’
‘Don't think about it?
Are you crazy?
It'll need an army to shift it!’
‘I'm not sure they'll believe us, Mum.’
‘Why not?’ she asked.
‘A giant worm — it'll take some swallowing.’
He giggled slightly hysterically as the after-affects of the shock gripped him.
‘And what's shedoing here?’
‘I don't know.’
Tina was standing, watching the car in bewilderment.
Jack walked back to her.
‘You must have been sleep-walking,’ he said.
‘Maybe.’
‘How did you get out of the house at this time of night?’
He looked at his watch and saw to his amazement that it was only just after ten.
‘Walked out.
They're up the pub.’
‘They're always out, aren't they?
Your parents.’
‘None of your business.
You saw it too, didn't you?’
‘The Worm.
I saw it.’
He spoke slowly.
‘But it's like a dream.
Except —’ He looked down at the trenches of  scattered earth.
‘Except it was here.
Sure enough.’
‘It was here all right,’ she said woodenly.
‘You ever seen it before?’
‘No.’
‘And you sleep-walked up here?’
‘I was in bed.
And I heard them talking — Mum and Dad and Steven and Derek.
They were talking about it coming.
They sounded almost religious-like.’
‘Religious?’
‘They belong to a Church — the Unification Church.
They've belonged to it ever since the shipyard closed.’
‘You ever been?’
‘No.
I wouldn't go in there, It gives me the shakes.
But they keep going.’
She looked defeated.
‘I thought it was something religious.
I didn't know it was real.’
‘The Worm?’
‘Well, it wasreal, wasn't it?’
‘Yes.
I saw it.
Mum saw it.
The Worm was real all right.
And the car — the car headed for the Monument,’ explained Jack as his mother came slowly over.
‘And I was drawn up here too,’ said Tina quietly.
‘You were singing a nursery rhyme — about the moon.’
‘Mum used to sing that to me when I was a baby.’
She sounded amazed.
‘I haven't even thought about it since.’
‘Well, you were singing it just before the Worm came.’
She looked at him incredulously.
‘What does that mean?’
‘God knows!’ interrupted Mrs Lomax.
‘We'd better walk home.
I'm not touching that car.’
‘Don't leave it here, Mum!’ said Jack sharply.
‘Why not?’
‘The Worm might get it.’
‘That doesn't worry me.’
She was adamant.
‘Think of the value of it,’ pleaded Jack.
‘You can't leave it here, whatever's happened.’
‘Look —‘
‘I think we'd better try to get it home, Mrs Lomax,’ said Tina.
She seemed more like her old managing self now.
‘There's been a lot of damage to the ground here.
Maybe they would think you'd done it.’
‘But the Worm —‘
‘Will they believe you, Mum?’ repeated Jack.
‘Besides, we need to get the car checked out.’
She stood, considering the situation.
Then she suddenly made up her mind.
‘Get in,’ she said.
‘Get in, both of you.
But I can assure you the car won't work.’
The Glory purred into instant life and Mrs Lomax sat there astounded.
‘Come on, Mum,’ said Jack.
‘Let's get out of here.’
‘That's what they say in gangster films.’
Tina seemed the most restored of them all.
Still dazed, Mrs Lomax put the car into gear and drove slowly in a semi-circle, back to the rough track that led away from the Monument.
‘I can't get over it,’ said Jack.
‘How can it live down there?’
‘It was over eight metres long,’ added Mrs Lomax.
‘You're right — no one 's going to believe us.’
Then she thought of something.
‘Except there's all that thrown-up earth.
How are they going to explain that away?’
Jack didn't know, but he was sure the authorities would explain it somehow.
What else would they do?
Go on a giant worm-hunt?
It seemed very unlikely.
But surely if they did they would find it easily enough.
‘How could a giant worm like that exist?’ he asked.
‘What could it feed on?’
‘Hatred,’ Tina broke in quietly.
‘You don't believe that, do you?’ asked Mrs Lomax, as the Glory moved slowly down the rutted track.
‘I don't know what to believe,’ she said.
‘So it came out of the meteorite — years ago,’ wondered Jack.
‘Or did it?
Maybe it's something new — something to do with the soil.’
Then he paused.
‘But what about the  legend?’
He turned to Tina.
‘You spoke like someone else when I came up to you.
You kept saying ‘Curse you’, but it was in a deep voice.
Weird.’
‘I don't remember that,’ she said.
‘But I do.’
Jack was insistent.
‘The Worm — or the Monument — must radiate some kind of power.
It pulled you here.
And the Glory.’
‘That's absurd!’ said Mrs Lomax.
‘There must be so me natural explanation.’
‘But what?
The door handles were red hot.
Everything was going full blast, and the computer went crazy.’
‘I'm going straight to the police station.’
‘But I'm sure —’ began Jack.
‘It's the only thing I can do,’ she snapped.
‘What with all this, and Ken still lying in that bed —’ She broke off and Tina intervened.
‘I think you're doing absolutely the right thing, Mrs Lomax,’ she said gently.
But Jack wasn't listening.
They were back in a narrow country road and there were powerful lights behind them.
Dazzled, Mrs Lomax put a hand to her eyes.
‘Why doesn't he dip his lights?’ she cursed.
For the next five minutes, its full beam still on, the car kept behind them, even when the road widened enough to make passing possible.
Eventually Jack blurted out, ‘I think that car's following us, Mum.’
‘I know it is,’ she replied grimly.
Mrs Lomax drove on nervously, with repeated glances in her mirror.
‘He's going to overtake us.’
She pulled over as far as she could into the bushes at the side of the lane and slowed down while the car, a beaten-up old Ford, passed.
‘It's Dad,’ said Tina, ‘and Steve.’
The Ford slowed down in front of them and slowly came to a halt, blocking the entire road.
‘What do they want?’ gasped Mrs Lomax.
‘Me, I expect,’ said Tina quietly.
Ray Shepherd was a tall man with a craggy, lined face that looked as if it had once been weathered but was now the colour of chalk.
His son, Steve, was fat like Derek.
Maybe they take after their mother, thought Jack, trying to keep calm.
Maybe she's absolutely enormous.
But there was no doubt who Tina took after; she was tall and slim and strongly built, just like her father.
Gazing up at gay Shepherd apprehensively, Jack saw that his eyes were nugget hard, as if any kindness or compassion had disappeared years ago.
Then he suddenly smiled, and for a moment the sun seemed to illuminate a bleak and hostile landscape.
But with dismay Jack soon realized that the smile didn't reach his eyes, and beside him Steve's face was fixed in a look of rigid hostility.
‘Please don't be alarmed.
I just caught sight of my daughter in the car and —‘
‘Yes,’ said Jack hastily.
‘She seemed to have sleep-walked her way up to the Monument.’
He wasn't going to say anything about the Worm, but of course he'd reckoned without his mother.
‘We've had a terrible experience!’
Her words tumbled over each other.
‘A really dreadful —’ She broke off.
‘We saw the Worm.’
Steve sniggered and Mr Shepherd gave them a quiet smile.
‘It's a lonely spot up there —’ he began.
But Jack broke in quickly.
‘We saw it all right, didn't we, Tina?’
She hesitated.
‘Tina?’
‘It was quite misty up there.’
‘The Worm — it tore up the earth,’ said Mrs Lomax.
‘Do you want to come back and look?
You saw it too, didn't you, Tina?’
There was an edge to Jack's voice.
What was the matter with her?
She was blank-faced and wouldn't  look at him.
‘I told you,’ Tina said at last.
‘It was so misty up there, I couldn't be sure of anything.’
‘Mum told you — it tore up the earth!’ yelled Jack, beside himself with frustration.
‘No need to get excited, young man,’ said Ray Shepherd calmly.
‘I know what it's like up there.
Right spooky.
You feel anything could happen.’
‘It did,’ replied Jack curtly.
But his mother was beginning to shake her head.
‘I don't know — maybe I dreamt it.’
‘You didn't, Mum.’
‘What with the car going wild —‘
‘You've got a Glory,’ said Steve resentfully.
‘It was given to us,’ replied Mrs Lomax defensively, ‘by Mr Chan.
They wanted to help us.
My husband had an accident.’
‘Yes,’ said Mr Shepherd, ‘I heard about all that.
And I've heard about the problem on these new Glory models too.’
‘Problem?’ asked Mrs Lomax.
‘They're all going bananas — something to do with the computer.’
‘It droveitself,’ she insisted.
‘I couldn't control the thing.’
‘Apparently the steering gets fouled up and the self-locking goes berserk.’
Mr Shepherd's voice was slow and quiet.
‘Something about the gearbox too,’ he continued.
‘Something about everything,’ commented Jack drily.
‘But of course all you need to do is to turn the ignition off.’
‘I tried that.’
Mrs Lomax was insistent.
‘It didn't work.
The car took us to the Monument, and then we saw the Worm.’
There was a long, rather embarrassed silence during which Jack sensed that neither of the Shepherds believed a  word they were saying, and were probably secretly scoffing at them.
And what was the matter with Tina?
The Worm had been real enough, surely?
He stole a glance at her.
She looked defeated, quite unlike her normal self.
Despite the fact that they had stopped their car, neither of the Shepherds seemed to care how she was, or whether she had done herself any harm sleep-walking up to the Monument.
It was weird!
‘Well,’ said Ray Shepherd to his son, ‘we'll have to look into all this, won't we?’
‘Look into what, Dad?’
‘We'll have to try and drive one of the Glories ourselves.
I know it's on the grapevine that there have been problems with the cars, but nothing's ever been said officially.
Come on, Tina.
Thanks for finding her, and I do hope your husband's condition improves.’
‘Thank you.’
Mrs Lomax fumbled with the ignition switch and Jack could see that she was close to tears again.
As they drove off behind the Ford, he said, ‘It all happened, Mum.’
‘I don't know —‘
‘It did.
Really.’
‘Tina didn't seem to think so.’
‘That's because she's scared of her dad,’ said Jack confidently.
‘But why?
Why should she be?’
‘I don't know,’ he replied, his conviction collapsing.
‘I must be going potty.
It's all this pressure and strain.
Ken — and now this car.
I'm going back to my Mini —‘
‘It happened, Mum.
It really happened.’
‘No.’
‘Aren't you going to the police?’
‘They'll only laugh.’
‘But we must —‘
‘Jack, leave it alone.’
She was angry now.
‘Whatever happened out there was just — just a result of our over-heated imaginations.
No more, no less.’
‘Rubbish!’
‘Don't speak to me like that!
What are you doing?’
Her voice was raised in alarm.
‘Switching on the computer,’ he said firmly.
‘Don't dothat!’ she raged.
‘Why not?’
‘I don't ever want that thing on again!’
‘It's on now,’ he crowed triumphantly.
‘Switch it off!’
‘Look,’ Jack insisted.
Her gaze dart ed to the screen and immediately she screamed and swerved.
‘Watch out!’ he yelled.
‘Oh, God!’
Somehow she managed to control the car.
‘Why did you give me a shock like that?’
‘It's fading now.
Look, it's almost vanished.’
‘It wasn't anything at all.
Just my nerves.’
‘No, Mum.
You know it's not your nerves.’
‘Of course you don't —‘
‘It was the Worm.’
And of course it had been the Worm, clearly displayed in broken-up dots on the computer screen.
She knew it.
He knew it.
But his mother wasn't admitting anything.
She had decided to pretend that nothing had happened.
Jack remembered that she was quite capable of doing this.
She had done it when he had failed his eleven-plus, when her sister had become an alcoholic — maybe when his father had died, for all he knew.
Somehow his mother could shut out the unpleasant from her mind as if it had never existed and she had shut out the Worm as successfully as she had shut out everything else.
But Jack couldn't.
Tina, the Glory, the Worm — they all hammered away at him.
Feeling quite desperate, he decided to have one more go at his mother.
They were nearly home now and he knew that once inside the house, she would dose the front door symbolically on all that had  happened.
A dreadful thought occurred to him.
If Ken died, would she do that with him too?
‘Mum?’
‘Yes?’
She sounded very distracted.
‘You must go.’
‘Where?’
‘To the police.’
‘To tell them about a misunderstanding?’
‘The Worm?
A misunderstanding?’
Despite his knowledge of her, Jack was still appalled.
‘We were tired.
We were frightened.
We didn't see anything.’
Her voice was clipped and final.
‘We didn't see anything at all.’
‘Mum —‘
‘And I don't want any policeman laughing at me.
So the subject's closed.’
And Jack knew that it was.
He must have lain awake all night.
A giant Worm on Monument Hill; a giant Worm somehow feeding off hatred and able to use its power to link up with the Glory's computer and turn the car into its servant.
But why?
No wonder his mother had shut it out of her mind; it was all absolutely and completely ludicrous.
Yet they had both seen the horror, and so had Tina.
Was she just covering it up because of something to do with her father, or had she banished it from her mind too?
Jack eventually got up just before dawn, and went to the window.
Should he phone Tina?
Something told him not to — at least not yet.
He would see her at school soon enough.
Suddenly he knew what he had to do: he had to go to Monument Hill and see the broken earth for himself.
Only then would he know for certain that it had really happened, and that he would have to take some action.
He went quickly downstairs and left a note for his mother saying that he couldn't sleep and had gone out for an early morning bike ride.
That, at least, was partly true.
As he got on his bike, Jack found himself trembling slightly.
Monument Hill was the last place he wanted to go to, but he knew he had to see it again for himself.
Half an hour later he reached the rutted track and began to struggle up on his bike.
After a while he dismounted, exhausted, and suddenly he caught sight of the car.
It was another Glory and it had been abandoned, half in and half out of a ditch.
Jack walked over to examine it.
As far as he  could see the car was undamaged, except for the inside of the driver's door, which was dented and tom.
It was as if someone had been trapped inside and had kicked and beaten the door — perhaps without success — until the power had gone and they had been able to drive back down the hill.
The thought clamoured in his head.
The car was exactly the same model as his mother's.
Had the same terror struck the unknown driver?
And where was the occupant now?
Jack looked up to Monument Hill and saw movement.
Instinctively he ducked down.
But the movement was no Worm.
It was a figure, bent over, rather furtively, with something in its hand.
Then he saw others, similarly bent, all working away at something he couldn't make out.
Jack paused indecisively, looking back at the Glory and wondering if there was any connection between its abandoned state and the mysterious figures on the hill.
Something about them made him feel deeply afraid, but he knew that he couldn't just stand there.
He must either go home and try to forget all that had happened or creep up the hill and find out what was going on.
Jack didn't stop to try and work it out.
Slowly, determinedly, he walked on up.
Jack took care to keep to the side of Monument Hill that was overgrown with a dense tangle of undergrowth and a little wood.
He knew that if he kept under the trees, he should be able to crest the Monument yet remain hidden from the mysterious workers.
Slowly, as quietly as he could, Jack pushed through the undergrowth, trembling slightly in anticipation of what might happen.
But he was uninterrupted in his journey, eventually arriving at a vantage point near the Monument.
He lay on his stomach on a small mound and parted a dead gorse bush.
There was no one there.
Slowly, very cautiously, Jack stood up and after a minute  walked softly towards the Monument.
There was complete silence and not even a breath of wind disturbed the peace.
Or was it peace? he wondered.
Wasn't it really a brooding stillness that he didn't want — dare — to break?
He hovered uncertainly and then hurried on.
Once Jack had passed the back of the Monument and reached the green slope that overlooked the factory, he stopped and gasped in astonishment.
Instead of the great undulations of disturbed earth thrown up by the Worm, he saw a filled-in trench with fresh turf covering the rawness.
It was a good job, and only someone in the know would see any difference.
Jack stood there for some time, staring at the repairs.
Then he walked slowly over to the edge of the hill and looked down.
Suddenly he dropped down.
He could see a group of men at the bottom, surrounding the Glory.
They were huddled together, deep in conversation, but Jack had recognized one of them.
It was Ray Shepherd.
The men stood and stared at the abandoned Glory for what seemed like hours.
Then with slow deliberation they walked on, their spades clasped to them, as if they were a band of ancient warriors.
As they disappeared from sight, a bout of shivering swept over Jack.
When it passed off he straightened up and looked at his watch.
It was seven a.m.
He didn't feel tired — just enormously, incredibly relieved.
Then he heard the rustling in the bushes behind him.
His heart beating painfully, Jack wheeled round, only to see a man and a woman emerge, looking dishevelled and frightened.
They stared at him in gathering alarm, while his own fears abated.
Whoever they were and whatever they were doing, both were obviously far more scared than he was.
‘You —’ The woman began to speak but her voice trailed away.
The man continued to gaze at him in alarm.
‘What are you doing here?’ she managed.
‘I could ask you the same.’
Jack felt some of his tension  seeping away.
‘Well,’ said the man at length, ‘well — I don't know.’
‘Don't know what?’
‘I don't know what's going on.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Perhaps I'd better explain.’
Suddenly the woman seemed to relax and Jack warmed to them a little more.
They were both in their fifties — she in a tweed coat, he in a sports Jacket and flannels.
They were both, well, comfortable was the word that exactly described them, he thought.
‘We were going to the cinema — last night.
We hadn't been out for ages and there was a good film on.’
She paused.
‘And we'd just bought a new car.’
‘A Glory?’ asked Jack with mounting excitement.
‘How did you know?’ asked the man suspiciously.
‘I saw it — abandoned — as I climbed up.’
‘Just for fun we set the computer route-finder for home after the cinema.’
She was beginning to speak more quickly now, as if she wanted to rush all the words out.
‘But it went berserk and, you'll not believe us, but the car brought us here.’
‘What time was this?’ asked Jack.
‘About eleven,’ said the man, almost unwillingly.
His wife darted him an impatient look.
‘We couldn't control the car.’
She was almost gabbling now.
‘I know it sounds ridiculous but Henry — my husband — he did everything.
But when we got here it was worse.
There were these awful rumblings underground and then, well before dawn, the men came with spades.
The earth — it was all over the place — as if something had broken through.
From underground.’
‘Don't be daft, Madge.’
‘I'm not!’ she snapped.
‘I'm just explaining what happened.’
‘It was a bit of thunder.’
‘Thunder?
You were as scared as I was.’
‘You've stayed out here all night?’ asked Jack incredulously.
‘Well, I wasn't going anywhere near that car again once we could get out,’ she said.
‘And when we'd walked up the hill…
’ Her voice died away.
‘You walked up the hill?’ asked Jack, still amazed.
‘Why didn't you go back to the road and phone a taxi?’
There was a long, uncomfortable silence.
Then Madge said awkwardly, ‘I don't know.’
Henry shook his head; he had clearly abandoned all pretence of trying to rationalize the situation.
‘I don't know either.’
His eyes filled with tears as he turned towards Madge.
She put a steadying hand on her husband's arm.
‘Neither of us know and that's a fact.
We seem to have made a little camp.’
‘Seem to?’ said Jack puzzled.
‘Well — yes — I remember getting out of the car, but not much about climbing the hill or making the camp.’
‘I made the camp,’ grumbled Henry, rather like a sad child.
‘I expect you did,’ she replied soothingly.
‘We must have slept when all the terrible sounds died away.
We suddenly woke up very cold and saw the men climbing up the hill and we hid.’
‘Why did you hide?’ asked Jack.
‘I don't know,’ she said.
‘Again — I just don't know.’
‘Can't explain anything,’ muttered Henry.
‘Maybe we're going out of our minds — getting geriatric.’
‘No, you're not,’ said Jack firmly.
‘What are you going to do about your car?’
‘Get it fixed,’ said Henry.
‘It's a disgrace, allowing it out on the road like that — in a state like that.’
But he looked bewildered, as if he wasn't sure what he was saying.
‘Shouldn't you go to the police?’
Henry shook his head.
‘And be laughed at?’
‘But they —’ began Madge.
‘No,’ said Henry, obviously quite adamant.
‘The car — the sounds — the men —‘
‘All a figment of two old people's overblown imagination.’
He was very firm now and his growing reaction reminded Jack of his mother's.
Both of them were wiping out the experience, banishing it totally from their minds.
‘But —‘
‘There's nothing to be discussed.’
Henry was almost aggressive now.
‘Come on,’ he said sharply to Madge.
‘Let's be on our way.’
‘Henry —‘
‘Yes?’
‘Nothing.’
‘We'll leave the car.
The garage can tow it in.
We'll phone a taxi from a call-box.’
‘Henry!’
‘Come on, Madge.’
Reluctantly she turned to follow him.
‘Goodbye, young man,’ she said over her shoulder.
‘Forgive me if I've talked rubbish.’
Her voice was very strained.
‘You haven't !’ shouted Jack.
‘Goodbye!’ said Henry briskly.
At break-time an exhausted Jack confronted Tina in the playground.
It was a grey, rain-streaked day and the lessons had matched the mood of the morning.
She, too, looked tired and edgy, and he knew that she was ready to argue.
‘Why did you lie?’ he whispered threateningly.
‘Lie?
Me?
What are you on about?’
‘You saw the Worm.
You know you did.’
‘I saw no such thing.’
She blushed.
‘Just a lot of confusion.
I wasn't sure where I was — or what I was doing.’
‘Come on , Tina!’
Jack hissed furiously, but he could see she was not to be harried.
‘Leave me alone!’
‘Not till you admit what you saw.’
‘I said — leave me alone!’
They stared at each other in hostile silence.
Then Jack spat out, ‘I suppose your dad and your brothers — they've leant on you, haven't they?’
‘No one leans on me.’
Tina was absolutely furious now, but the extraordinary events of the last few days had increased Jack's confidence and he refused to be put off.
‘You know what you saw,’ he insisted.
‘Someone got at you.’
‘Shut up and leave me alone!’
‘Not till —’ But their argument was violently interrupted as a cheer of derision went up from another  corner of the playground and Jack caught a glimpse of Derek's looming bulk in the middle of a crowd of children.
He was waving something in the air and laughing.
It looked like a newspaper.
Then someone broke out of the crowd and began to run towards the side of the school where Jack and Tina were standing.
As the rain
trickled down, Jack could see a boy with oriental features and what seemed to be a rain-soaked face.
Then he realized that the boy was crying and his lower lip was cut and bleeding.
It suddenly flashed into Jack's mind that this must be Ho, Mr Chan's son — the boy he had been asked to protect and whose existence he had virtually forgotten in the confusion of events.
Jack stepped forward reluctantly, still frustrated and angry with Tina.
‘What's the matter?’
The boy paused in his flight, looking up with a mixture of suspicion and hostility.
‘What do you want?’
‘I'm Jack Lomax.
Your father asked me to — to keep an eye out for you.
What's happened?’
‘They beat me up — those boys.’
He wiped the tears from his eyes angrily.
‘Why?’
‘Haven't you seen the paper?
They're laughing at me, but really they're afraid.’
He pushed past them.
‘I'm going to wash my face.’
‘Shall I come with you, love?’ asked Tina in a return to her usual motherly attitude.
‘No,’ replied Ho.
‘I'm fine.’
He disappeared and was immediately replaced by an angry Derek, waving a crumpled newspaper.
‘I warned you,’ he said to Jack furiously.
‘Stay away from my sister!’
‘Be quiet, you!’
Tina butted in contemptuously.
‘What's in that paper?’
He thrust it into her hand and thundered past her, calling over his shoulder, ‘They've gone and done for us now — them Japs and the management!’
She smoothed out the newspaper.
It was the local weekly and its huge black banner headlines raved:
MASS REDUNDANCIES AT SAKATA PLANT ROBOTS TAKE OVER
Then, in smaller headlines:
POSSIBLE RECALL ON NEW GLORY MODELS
The news item which covered all of the front page read:
Sakata management, having shocked Kershaw with the sudden announcement of a redundancy plan, are considering recalling all their new Glory models for modifications to the computerized route-finder.
Dealers have been showered with complaints about this highly sophisticated piece of equipment which has apparently developed a serious fault.
J.R.Chan, the Managing Director of Sakata UK, who has recently arrived from Japan, made a press statement in which he said: ‘The introduction of an automated robot-operated assembly line will eliminate this fault and, meanwhile, we are considering a recall of all the new Glory models.
Although I regret the reorganization that has brought about so many redundancies, I do feel it is necessary in the light of quality control.
I also …’
Tina grabbed the newspaper and screwed it up.
‘There you are!’ she said with a weary triumph.
‘No wonder they're all banding together.’
‘Banding together?’
Jack stared at her.
‘What do you mean?’
Tina looked guilty, as if she had just betrayed a secret.
Then her eyes flashed angrily and Jack knew that she didn't care what secrets she betrayed.
‘It's happening all over again, just like it did in Jonathan Ram's day.
First the shipyards go, then the next job.
Then the next.’
‘Sakata's a bit different from sheep-farming,’ Jack protested.
‘They'll all get redundancy payments,’ he added feebly.
Tina shot him a glance of withering contempt.
‘You can talk — your dad's management.
You'll be all right.’
‘You won't starve!’ he snapped back, wanting to hurt her.
‘There's a welfare state, isn't there?’
‘You try living in it!’ she shouted.
‘You try having a father — or at any rate a stepfather — who's in a coma.
At least your family's alive and healthy.’
But she wasn't having any of that.
‘For how long?’ she stormed back.
‘Just for how long?’
Somehow Jack got through the rest of the day and arrived at the hospital tired and miserable.
But he was confronted by an ecstatic welcome from his mother, who was waiting for him on the doorstep.
‘He's whispering!’
‘What?’
‘He whispered, darling — and the doctor says he's coming out!
Isn't that marvellous?’
‘It's great!’
Suddenly he was as elated as his mother.
‘What's he been whispering?’
‘Oh, a load of rubbish.
But the main thing is, he's going to be all right.’
‘You sure?’
‘They can't find any sign of brain damage.
And the doctor seems optimistic.
It's just going to be a long, slow process.
Come and see him.’
She led the way down the corridor.
For Jack, it was a joy to watch her walk; her step was light and happiness shone from her.
He felt she was about to laugh aloud and he wanted to join her, his every thought consumed with the miracle that had so suddenly happened to bring Ken back to them.
When he arrived at Ken's bedside, Jack felt a little deflated.
His stepfather was lying on his back, muttering to himself, his eyes oddly fixed, staring up at the ceiling.
Was he really better?
Yes, he must be.
He shouldn't be disappointed.
He mustn't be.
The muttering was relentless; it went on and on, indistinct from a distance, and it didn't stop, even when his mother held Ken's hand.
After a while Jack bent over and listened, although she said, ‘It doesn't mean anything, love.
It's all nonsense at the moment.
But at least he's coming out.’
She sat there, entranced and happy.
But still Jack listened, and after a while he began to make out the quick flow of words.
‘It's the unification of unification where and how they all gather that's where they all are.
In the Unification Church and they're stealing a march on us right enough and that's what they're doing — stealing that march — and they're up to no good in their unification and I know they're not and they know I know they're not and that's why it all happened.
It's the unification of unification…’
The gabble continued, not repeating itself word for word but always saying the same thing.
‘Don't bother,’ said his mother brightly.
‘He's coming out, that's all.’
For a long while Ken said nothing different.
Then it seemed that a new cycle of muttering was beginning.
‘That Church isn't a Church isn't a Church isn't a Church.
It's a unification den.
A den or a den or a den or a den.’
Then his muttering went back to its original round: ‘It's the unification of unification…’
Jack sat back and glanced across at his contented mother.
So it was all nonsense, was it?
He wasn't so sure.
‘Mum?’
‘Yes?’
‘Is there a Unification Church in the town?’
‘You're not listening to —‘
‘Is there?’
‘Yes,’ she said unwillingly.
‘It's just an old chapel I once saw with Ken.
The name must have stuck in his mind because that's what he keeps muttering all the time.’
‘Yes, Mum.
I know.
Do you remember where it was?’
‘It's on the edge of the estate — the council estate.
But 
it's locked.’
‘How do you know?’
‘Ken tried the door.
I was surprised — he's not normally interested in old buildings.’
‘But he was in this one?’
How could she be so naïve, he wondered.
Or was she behaving again like she had after the strange happenings on Monument Hill?
Was she shutting everything off?
Screening herself away?
Obviously his stepfather had discovered something.
And was he mown down by the fork-lift truck as a result?
Did they — whoever they were — deliberately try to kill him?
How were the Shepherds involved?
And what was the connection between the weird behaviour of the Glory cars and the loathsome undulating worm?
Jack had no idea but he knew he had to do something.
He wished he hadn't quarrelled with Tina, then she could have come along to share what he was going to do.
Now he knew what he had to do: he had to go to the Unification Church and find out what, if anything, was going on there.
He bent over his stepfather and whispered, ‘Ken, I'm going to the Church.’
The muttering continued unabated.
‘Ken, the Unification Church — I'm going there.’
‘What are you on about?’ asked his mother, and Jack quickly straightened up.
‘Just saying goodbye.’
‘Aren't you going to wait for me to give you a lift?’
The Mini was back in use and the Glory had been relegated to the garage until she ‘had time to check it out with Mr Chan’.
But Jack knew she was trying to banish the car from her mind.
‘I've got my bike.’
‘So where are you going?’ she asked suspiciously.
‘Just for a ride.
Then I'll do my homework and make supper.
‘I'll be back about nine.’
His mother gave Jack a searching look.
‘I'll find you in, won't I?
No more long bike rides like this morning?’
‘No, Mum.’
‘There's trouble at the factory.’
‘I know.’
‘We're management’ she added darkly.
‘And management aren't exactly popular.’
Jack found the Unification Church without any trouble.
It was in a sad little side street — one of a few survivors from the era of terraced housing before the sprawling council estate was built in the fifties.
There must have been a cosiness to the street once, but now there was such a sense of decay that Jack could almost smell it.
All the houses were boarded up and so were the few shops.
Clearly the tiny outpost was awaiting demolition, but maybe that wouldn't come for many years.
Jack paced around the church.
Its windows were boarded up too and its door firmly locked.
A broken-down wall at the back enclosed a small, dusty graveyard, with a scattering of dingy-looking graves.
Climbing over the broken masonry, he stood uncertainly in the graveyard.
Had he heard a rustling, shuffling sound in the chapel?
He tried the back door but it was firmly bolted.
Then, looking up at the circular window above it, Jack saw that the catch was not fully in position.
If he stood on the shelf above the door, he could probably — possibly — prise the catch further open and maybe squeeze in.
After all, he was certainly thin enough.
But would someone see him?
He glanced around fearfully but there was nobody around.
The streets were in a dip and couldn't easily be seen from the estate.
Everything seemed ideal for his attempt, and with sudden resolution he hauled himself up on to the shelf above the door and manoeuvred around gingerly until he was able to stand up.
Feeling quite ill and willing himself not to look down, he stretched up and found that he could just reach the circular window.
After fumbling for several minutes, his arms aching desperately, he was able to push up the catch.
It opened just enough for him to haul himself through.
Half in and half out of the window, Jack looked down at the scene below him in disappointment.
Rows of benches, a long table — the total simplicity of the low church.
Nothing else.
Directly below him was a wooden ledge, and by twisting himself around he managed to lower himself on to it gradually.
From there he dropped down lightly to the floor below.
The first thing he noticed was that there was no dust.
Despite its poor condition, someone clearly swept the chapel regularly.
But there was no evidence of anything else.
Then Jack heard the shuffling, rustling sound again; it was much louder this time and more urgent.
It must be a trapped bird, he thought, noticing a door at the front where there was a partitioned-off section.
He walked over and rattled at the locked door.
What could it be?
Suddenly he had a vision of the Worm, coil upon coil, waiting for him behind the door in the dark.
The grunts came again and Jack realized that they sounded all too human.
Someone was behind that door, and Jack steeled himself to find out who it could be.
He pushed at the door.
It was rickety but it held.
He pushed again, but it still didn't give.
Eventually he put his shoulder to it, and after a couple of bruising attacks the door fell in — and he with it.
But as he went in, something landed on his back and he felt strong, sinewy hands fasten round his throat.
‘Get off!’
Jack yelled as he and his assailant rolled over and over on the floor.
As the hands squeezed tighter a redness swam in front of his eyes and he couldn't speak.
Then, just as suddenly as they had grabbed at his throat, the hands released his windpipe and the weight lifted off him.
Jack stared up in the half light into the eyes of someone he dimly recognized.
Then he saw that he was looking at the puzzled, desperate face of Ho Chan.
‘What are you doing here?’ they both asked at once, and immediately both laughed, more out of relief than humour.
He had last seen Ho at school with a cut lip.
Now he had a great swelling under his eye.
‘I'm sorry,’ Ho said.
‘I thought you were one of them.’
‘Them?’
‘They call themselves the Unifiers.
They're a kind of protest group, I guess.
They seem to meet here in this old church.’
‘Protesting about what?’ asked Jack.
‘Sakata and the redundancies they'd guessed would happen.
They want the shipyard re-opened.
There was an American buyer once.
I don't suppose they're still interested, but the Unifiers think they are.’
He paused.
‘They're running a terror campaign, and they're lethal.
They really hate my father — they'd do anything to get at him.’
‘Did they kidnap you then?’
‘I was walking home from school and a masked man grabbed me and hauled me into a car.
There were others.
They knocked me around and I blacked out, then they must have locked me up in here.
I came to quite quickly, though, and heard them talking.’
‘But if they wanted to kidnap you, why didn't they make a better job of it?’ asked Jack.
‘Why didn't they tie you up or guard you or something?’
‘I don't think they wanted to kidnap me properly — just to give me and my family a nasty shock.
It's one more part of their campaign.
They started off with a chain of accidents, then your dad —‘
‘My stepfather?
Are you sure?’
‘Aren't you?’ asked Ho quietly.
‘I suspected, but —‘
‘Then you suspected right.
I don't think they meant to hurt him as much as they did.’
‘No?’
‘Not then, anyway.
But the redundancies weren't a certainty, and now they are, they're desperate.
‘How many of these Unifiers are there?
And why do they call themselves that?’
‘Because they meet here,’ said Ho impatiently.
‘There aren't many — fifteen, twenty.
‘Who's the leader?’
‘They called him Shepherd, I think.
Ray Shepherd.’
‘I wondered —‘
‘The next victim could be my dad,’ said Ho.
‘We have to find out what they're going to do next.
But there's something else — something else they've known about for a long time but kept to themselves.’
‘What's that?’
‘It's horrible.’
‘You mean — the Worm?’
‘What do you know about the Worm?’ asked Ho fearfully.
Quickly, in as few words as possible, Jack told him what had happened with the Glory, how he had seen the gigantic Worm break through the earth, and how both Tina and his mother had denied all knowledge of what they had seen.
He finished by telling Ho about the terrified middle-aged couple and the men who had covered the Worm's tracks — men headed by Ray Shepherd.
Ho hung on his every word, looking terrified as Jack's fantastic story unfolded.
‘Do you believe me?’ asked Jack suspiciously.
‘Yes,’ said Ho simply.
‘So you know about it already?’
‘I heard them talking,’ he said.
‘I just couldn't believe it.
They kept talking about this creature.
They said it had been captive but had escaped.’
‘And they knew it had broken loose?’
‘Oh yes,’ said Ho positively.
‘They knew all right.’
‘It thrives on hatred,’ replied Jack.
‘And there's plenty of that around.’
‘A monster worm that thrives on hatred?’ asked Ho.
‘How can anyone believe that?’
‘You would if you saw it,’ said Jack.
He explained about the legend and the Monument and the meteorite that had brought it in the first place.
‘It's incredible!’
‘I know — I'm trying to convince you.’
Jack sounded very confident.
‘Whatever this monstrous thing is, however they've managed to keep it captive, it exists all right.
And it has power, enormous power.
That's why these computerized route-finders are going up the spout and taking the Glories towards Monument Hill.
If they don't call them all in pretty fast, there'll be more of them up there.
That's their object, I suppose: ruin Sakata so that the Americans get a second chance with the yard.’
Ho stared at Jack.
‘You know what we've got to do?’
‘What?’
‘They're meeting tonight.
If they find I've escaped they won't be worried.
They want to frighten me — and my parents.
They're warming us up for the next attack.’
‘But won't they be worried you'll identify them and the police will come here?’
‘No.
I'm sure they thought I'd be knocked out for ages and not come round until they'd gone.
They're so amateur they never even checked.
It's a risk we've got to take, anyway.’
‘So what are you driving at then?’
‘We need evidence.
Let's get a tape-recorder.
I've got a small cassette.
Then we'll creep back.’
He looked at his watch.
‘They're meeting at nine — we've just got time.’
‘We must find somewhere to hide.’
‘There's a cellar with a trap door under that bit where I was locked in.
I had plenty of time to explore it, but it doesn't go anywhere.
If we prop it open a bit we should pick up their voices on the tape.’
‘And what if they discover us?’
‘Then we'd be done for.
But I've got to take the risk, in case they hurt my dad.’
‘Why don't you tell him?’ suggested Jack hopefully.
He wasn't sure he wanted to be in on such a dangerous idea.
‘The Worm?
The power?
He wouldn't believe me.
Not till I had it all down on tape.’
He paused.
‘You don't have to come.’
‘No,’ said Jack, fighting his own doubts.
‘You can't do it alone.
I'm on.’
But he wished he wasn't.
The cellar was a very unpleasant place, dusty and full of small scurrying insects.
It was also very cramped — more of a coal hole than a cellar — and there was only just room for both of them to crouch under the trap door and wait.
And wait.
For a while they talked.
Ho told Jack about living in Japan; his daily English lessons and the enormous threatening culture shock that awaited him in England.
He had been expecting a great difference, but not the extent of the hostility that had greeted him and the reality of a giant Worm wielding enormous electrical energy.
Jack told Ho about the changes in his life: his mother's re-marriage, the harsh reality of the north-east, Tina's rough charm and her painful bonding to her family, and finally Ken's so-called accident.
He then repeated in more detail the amazing ride in the Glory and the horrendous first sighting of the Worm.
Then they fell silent.
Jack kept looking at his watch; time seemed to move painfully slowly and each minute was like an hour.
By ten past nine, both boys were becoming more and more convinced that no one was going to arrive.
Then they heard the back door of the chapel being unlocked.
For a while, there was no other sound than the tramp of heavy footsteps, but the silence was finally broken by a familiar voice.
It was Ray Shepherd's.
‘He's gone.’
‘Well, shows he's got a bit of get up and go,’ replied another familiar voice.
‘Tina's brother Steve,’ mouthed Jack at Ho.
‘I'm relieved.
Thought he'd been a bit hurt when we grabbed him.
Must have climbed out of that top window.’
‘His parents — and the police — could be up here soon.’
‘Can't prove a thing.
Those carnival masks were pretty OK.’
Ray Shepherd laughed, but there was no humour in it, just a kind of grinding bitterness that was dreadful to hear.
‘Well, Dad, what are you going to tell the Unifiers?
They'll be wanting something pretty sharp after the news.’
‘And they'll get it.’
‘You going to let me know first?’
‘The plan's simple enough.
It's the one we always relied on.’
Ray's voice was grim.
‘Dad —‘
‘Yes?’
‘It'll be murder.’
‘I don't see it that way.
No one can predict what will happen when we let that thing loose.’
‘We already have,’ said Steve fearfully.
‘That was an accident.’
‘It's getting so big we can't contain it — not any longer.’
Steve sounded desperate now.
‘The very reason why we're going to release it.
It'll cause one hell of a stir!
Think of the tabloids!
The Worm of Hatred — I can see the headlines now.
And it'll serve our cause well.
There'll be such a movement for the re-opening of the yard, we'll all be inspired.’
‘But what about Chan?’ asked Steve.
‘What about him?’
Ho stiffened beside him and Jack grabbed his arm to keep him still.
‘He won't stand a chance if we can get him up there.’
‘It'll look like an accident,’ said Ray Shepherd.
There was an awkward pause and then he added, ‘He was in the wrong place at the wrong time.’
Both the Shepherds were silent again for a long time, and in the tiny cellar Ho started shivering violently.
Jack had to hold on to him with all his strength.
Then Steve Shepherd said, ‘That energy — it's getting stronger all the time.
All the computers were cracking up on the factory floor this morning.’
‘Then we should have a lot of motorists there too.
Come on, Steve, it's our chance.
The one we've been waiting for ever since we found the Worm.’
‘It was only small then.’
‘And it's got bigger.’
‘But it's not the hatred, is it?
It's something to do with the energy generated throughout the factory.’
‘What the hell does it matter?’
Ray Shepherd sounded angry.
‘Don't be a fool — it's the legend that counts and we'll feed it to the media.
We'll feed the hatred in.’
‘You really feel for Jonathan Ram, don't you, Dad?’
‘Why shouldn't I?
He's my own ancestor.’
‘Then why did we change the name if we were so proud of him?’
‘I wouldn't have done.’
Ray Shepherd sounded defensive.
‘But after what he did, maybe they couldn't live with the name.’
His voice was partly drowned by the clatter of footsteps on the hard stone floor of the chapel as the others began to arrive.
Minutes later, Jack and Ho heard Ray Shepherd's voice again, but this time it had a more hectoring tone and they knew he was addressing the meeting.
‘It's good to see so many new faces here,’ he said.
‘But I shall have to explain a few things.
The first is the need for great secrecy.
As you can imagine, that's vital.
Now, most of us are middle-aged here and we remember the yard and the old times.
It was hard work but we all felt rewarded at  the end of the day — not like at Sakata — routine work and then out on your neck.’
He paused.
‘If we want the old way of life back we have to vote with our feet and vote now.’
There were noises of enthusiasm but he quickly quelled them.
‘What we have to do is…very unorthodox…and this is where we need to pledge each other to the utmost secrecy.’
There was a sudden air of hushed expectation in the dark chapel.
‘We call ourselves the Unifiers — an inner core of trade unionists who are prepared to take a few risks to get what we must for the majority.
I'm not going to minimize the risk.
It's very great indeed.
A few years ago I and my two sons made an amazing discovery — a discovery we shared with a few of our colleagues here.
Now we're going to share it with all of you.’
He paused again as the expectant hush intensified.
‘You'll be familiar with Monument Hill and its legend — how the meteorite landed and the Kershaw Worm came into being, and then the Monument itself being built.
We've all put the Worm down to a dusty old legend.
Well, our Derek was exploring one day at the base of the hill where, as you probably know, there are a few shallow caves.
At least we always thought they were shallow until young Derek found otherwise.
He was a lot smaller then and he managed to squeeze himself through a cavity and found himself in a network of very small, narrow tunnels — far too small for most adults to enter.
But my lad heard something and he went back and back through that crevice until he couldn't get any further.
He knew there was something there.
He heard a slithering sound.’
He paused again and Jack could feel that Ray Shepherd had his audience on a knife edge.
‘I tell you, I didn't believe the lad until I heard it myself.
I was too big a man to get through the caves, but I listened hard and was sure I heard something.
Even then I didn't really believe it until I actually saw it.
None of us expected to see it, but we did.
That great white blob of a head — it was a terrible shock.
And it was small then — five years  ago.
I tell you I was flabbergasted and right terrified out of my wits.
But even then I felt the power, deep down in my bones.
We told no one; I didn't want to be laughed at.
I always knew I shouldn't speak, not to any outsiders.
Jonathan Ram was our ancestor, and I was sure then that the Worm fed off his hatred.
Now I've seen its power.’
Again he paused and there was total silence.
‘Then the Worm began to grow.
I can see some of you looking at me as if I'm crazy, although many of you have seen the beast.
It grew and grew, but still kept to its tunnels, some of which it enlarged as it grew.
When the yard closed we began to wonder if we could use the Worm in some way, and when Sakata opened we began to realize how.
The Proximity of the factory and its computers seemed to charge the Worm.
It began to burrow towards the factory.
It seemed to be drawn nearer and nearer.
The factory's built over a quarry; the builders used thousands of tons of in-fill.
Just to the north of the factory Sakata laid out those playing fields, to keep its army of workers shackled to the corporation even in their spare time, until they were made redundant.
At the bottom end of the playing fields is a rocky outcrop.
Only a few of us knew about the cave.
But it's there.
One day we found the Worm again — three metres long and still growing.
It seemed exhausted; maybe it was growing too fast for its own good.
But this time I knew I could use it, even if I couldn't think exactly how.
So my two boys and I took it prisoner.’
There was a gasp of astonishment.
‘There was another cave at the back of that one.
I waited until the Worm was back in there and then blocked up the hole through which it had come.
The beast didn't seem aggressive, but we could still feel the power radiating from it.
It didn't affect us physically but the hands on my watch started to turn so fast they came off, and Derek's digital watch went crazy.
But I still wasn't prepared to tell anyone about it.
It was our legend — our secret.
Then one  night I got some concrete, mixed it and filled every hole in the rock I thought the worm could escape through.
And so it was our prisoner.
It didn't seem to need any food, though we tried everything we thought it might like.
It grew with the power it was picking up, grew and grew until it filled the cave.
Then, the other night, it managed to push its way back up the hill.
It burst through the earth at the top and we had to cover its tracks.
But the Worm itself went back to the cave — to the cave by the factory.
And it's there now.
Growing bigger.’
There was a long silence, then someone said, ‘Pull the other one!’
Immediately another voice reproved, ‘It's true, George!
I seen it!’
‘Go on!’ said someone else.
‘Giant worms feeding off computer power?
It's straight out of a video nasty!’
‘No!’ said yet another voice.
‘It's true.
I can show you.’
‘Ray!’
‘Yes, Charlie?’
‘That beast's getting bigger every day?’
‘That's so.’
‘If we don't do something with it soon, it'll escape.’
‘I'm sure that willhappen,’ said Ray Shepherd confidently.
‘So what you going to do about it then?’
There was mumbled agreement that something must be done.
‘For a long time,’ replied Ray, ‘I hadn't the faintest idea.
Just an instinct that this weird thing might serve us well.
Now I know what to do.’
He paused for effect and then carried on rapidly.
‘I've concreted up the mouth of the cave and the gap in the rocks which it burst through because I wanted to hold it there for a bit longer.
But tonight I'm going to drill that concrete out and provide the beast with an escape route.’
There was a muffled intake of breath and a thrill of mounting expectation.
‘I think it'll surface again, and I'm going to make sure the press are there.
As you know, something's wrong with the computerized route-finder on the Glory; one's already been found up on the hill.
What if the Worm's absorbed enough power to attract other cars up there?’
‘But where does it all get us ?’ someone shouted.
‘We still won't have any jobs — Worm or no Worm.’
‘Don't you see?’ said Ray Shepherd impatiently.
‘The Worm surfaces — it's the Worm of hate.
It'll bring the legend to life; all Jonathan Ram's hatred locked up in that beast.
It'll be like capturing the Loch Ness Monster — the biggest shock from the natural world this country's had in years.
And we'll use it — and all the massive resulting publicity — to support our cause.
The cars won't work — they're dangerous.
Sakata will withdraw, go back to Japan, and the government will have to open the yard again.
It'll be an omen.
And once the Worm's in captivity — in a zoo or suchlike — it'll go on reminding folk about Kershaw and the unemployed.’
If there's any hate, thought Jack, real, blinding hatred, it's in Ray Shepherd — not the Worm.
‘I'll call the press and get the TV cameras out to Monument Hill in an hour or so,’ said Ray Shepherd.
‘But I'm going to release the Worm now.’
‘What if it doesn't surface up there?’ someone asked.
‘It'll surface somewhere,’ said Steve Shepherd confidently.
‘It's got so big, I think it has to.’
‘What I want you all to do is to go home,’ insisted Ray.
‘Switch on your TV sets and wait.’
‘Can't we come up to the hill?’ asked someone.
‘Directly you see what's happening on TV you can do what you like.
But you may find the road blocked.
Now go home and wait.’
There was a shuffling of feet and muttered conversation as the Unifiers slowly left the chapel.
Had the Shepherds gone with them? wondered Jack.
He motioned Ho to keep  still and they sat on in cramped discomfort.
‘Well, Dad?’
It was Steve's voice.
Thank goodness they hadn't moved, thought Jack.
‘Well, son?’
‘What are you going to do about Chan then?’
‘Him?
I'll finish him all right.’
Ray Shepherd's voice was hard with bitterness and hatred.
‘He won't show his face round here again.’
‘What are you going to do, Dad?’
Even Steve sounded a little apprehensive about his father's anger.
‘We grabbed his kid, now the Worm will grab him.’
Ray Shepherd laughed, and Jack knew that by now he was not entirely sane.
He could feel Ho's body rigid with tension beside him and clutched at his shoulder, forcing him to stay still.
‘How do we do that?
That Worm doesn't seem very aggressive to me.’
‘Chan's still in his office.
I'm going to get him up Monument Hill.’
‘How?’
‘Drive him — drive him in a Glory.’
‘How are you going to get the Glory and convince him to come?’
Steve was sounding more and more uneasy.
‘I'm going to go and see him — tell him I've got an idea or two about the malfunctioning cars.
I'll get him in a Glory all right and up Monument Hill.’
‘Then what?’
‘You'll see.’
‘Tell me, Dad.’
‘I said — you'll see.’
‘You're not going to —‘
‘Leave it to me, son.
Now let's go.’
‘What about the Worm?’
‘When I've finished with Chan you can help me get that beast boring again, and then I'll be making a whole load of calls.’
‘Dad, about Mr Chan —‘
‘Shut up!’ said Ray Shepherd angrily.
And Steve shut up.
Jack and Ho heard the Shepherds leaving.
They stayed where they were for another minute or so, although Jack had to practically hold Ho down while they waited.
‘I've got to get to my father!’ he hissed.
‘If they see us, they'll clobber us right away and you'll never be able to warn your dad.’
‘Let me out!’
Ho's voice was getting louder.
‘No.’
‘You'll let me out.
Now!’
Ho punched and kicked Jack as he unsuccessfully tried to hold him down.
Although Jack was taller, Ho hit him with such force that soon Jack fell away from him and he sprang out.
‘Wait!’
‘I'm going to my father.’
Jack stayed where he was, his face still smarting from the punch.
He looked at his watch, suddenly remembering his mother would be home and he had done nothing about supper.
She'd be worried out of her mind.
He had to find a call-box and ring her, and — what was that?
What was that cry?
Without thinking, he scrambled out of the cellar and set off after Ho.
At the back entrance to the chapel, Jack came to a shuddering halt.
Ho must have run right into them, for he could see that Steve had him in a headlock and was dragging his kicking, struggling figure along the deserted street while Ray Shepherd followed, laughing.
‘So you stayed to listen, did you?’
Jack heard him say.
‘Good for you, son!
I like a lad with some guts.
But it won t do you any good.
Not you or your old man.’
He laughed again, but the sound was harsh.
Jack watched the Shepherds drag Ho down towards the little wood where no doubt they would have parked a car.
He supposed they would lock Ho in the boot or hide him somewhere while his father was fetched.
Did Ray Shepherd really intend to harm them?
To kill them even?
Was his hatred that strong?
He was reminded of Sir Arnold and Jonathan Ram locked in their mental combat.
Now the management of Sakata and Ray Shepherd were locked in more than mental combat.
Ray was knocking them down one by one, unlike his tragic ancestor who only knocked himself down.
And, of course, he had — or thought he had — control of the Worm, the legend come alive.
Jack looked at his watch.
No time now to phone Mum.
He would have to reach the factory double quick and warn Mr Chan before the Shepherds got there.
And if he didn't get to him first — well, it just didn't bear thinking about.
But at least he had the advantage of being able to cut across country.
Grabbing his bike from the hedge where he'd hidden it, Jack raced with all his might, his long, gangling legs pumping for all they were worth.
The Sakata factory was a couple of kilometres into the valley and he had never ridden so fast in all his life.
Eventually, puffing and panting, he arrived at the security gate.
Not even thinking to stop, Jack dashed through and then whirled round as someone yelled out, ‘You!’
‘What?’
‘I said you!’
The security guard hurried up to him, his face stamped with official displeasure.
‘Me?’
‘Don't play funny games with me, son.’
‘But I've got to go in, said Jack desperately.
‘You have, have you?’
‘I've got to see someone.
‘Who?’
‘Mr Chan.’
‘The General Manager?’
The security guard grinned sourly.
‘And he wants to see you, does he?’
‘He doesn't know.’
‘Ah!’
‘But his son's been kidnapped, and his own life is in danger.’
Jack was suddenly aware that he sounded absurdly melodramatic.
‘Oh yes?’
‘It's true.
Ring him if you don't believe me.
Please.’
‘He'll have gone home,’ said the guard smugly.
‘I know he's still here.’
‘You do?’
‘Please,’ Jack pleaded.
‘We're wasting time.
You've got to ring him.’
Something in Jack's desperation must have moved the guard, and he turned back to his control room.
‘Stay here.’
‘Hurry!’
‘What's your name?’
‘Jack Lomax.’
‘Will he know you?’
‘Yes .
Tell him I must see him.
Hurry!’
Jack watched the guard dialling and then waiting for a nerve-stretching length of time.
Eventually he put the receiver down.
‘What's happened?’ demanded Jack frantically.
‘Not a lot.’
‘Why?’
‘He's not there.’
Jack stared at the complacent guard in mounting horror.
‘Then where is he?’
‘Gone home.’
‘Got his home number?’
‘Now, look —‘
‘I said —‘
‘Wait.’
The guard was looking past him and up towards the heart of the factory complex.
‘Isn't this him?
Driving down in a Glory?’
‘What?’
Jack wheeled round again.
Certainly a Glory was coming down the factory drive.
But behind the wheel was Ray Shepherd.
Mr Chan was in the passenger seat and behind him was Steve.
Instinctively Jack dashed into the centre of the road.
‘Stop!’ he yelled.
The security guard pushed Jack out of the way and bent down to the driver's window as the Glory slowed down.
Ray Shepherd looked up at them as coolly as if he had just driven in to work on a routine day.
But Jack could see real fear in Steve's eyes, while Mr Chan remained suave, perhaps just a little politely curious.
‘Yes?’ asked Ray Shepherd.
The security guard looked surprised.
‘You got a new chauffeur tonight, Mr Chan?’
‘Mr Shepherd very kindly offered me a lift.
He's — er — testing this new Glory.’
‘Testing?’
The security guard looked even more surprised.
‘Yes, it's a good idea to have some of our workers test the new models.’
Mr Chan sounded very firm.
‘I've never heard of that, sir.’
‘It'll be in the weekly bulletin.
I'm sure you'll get your chance.’
The security guard smiled and then suddenly remembered Jack.
‘Er —‘
‘Is there anything else?’
Mr Chan's eyebrows were raised.
‘Yes, sir.
I stopped this young lad from cycling into the factory and —‘
‘Aren't you young Jack Lomax?’
‘Yes.
And I —‘
But the guard interrupted.
‘He's got some amazing story — about your son being kidnapped — and your life being in
danger.’
‘Really?’
‘It's true, Mr Chan,’ Jack burst out.
‘That's odd, Jack.
We're just going to pick up Ho now.
Apparently he's having fish and chips in town with some of the boys.’
‘Honestly, Mr Chan, it's really true —’ Jack was beginning to feel quite frantic.
‘Let's take him with us, sir, down to the chippy — the fish and chip shop.
He's got a long way to go home,’ said Ray Shepherd quietly.
Mr Chan hesitated.
‘I'm not so sure —’ he began.
Then he suddenly seemed to change his mind.
‘Very well.
Do get in, Jack Lomax.’
Jack hesitated, wondering what he should do, and Ray Shepherd said impatiently, ‘Come on.
Mr Chan hasn't got all day.’
On impulse, Jack scrambled in, leaving the security guard still looking puzzled.
Then the Glory sped away.
The snub-nosed revolver looked like a toy in Ray Shepherd's hand.
He drove with one steady hand while the other held the gun pressed hard into Mr Chan's side.
‘Sit there quietly, Jack,’ said Mr Chan.
‘And everything will be all right.
Mr Shepherd appeared in my office with my son — said he'd found him roaming about the factory.
Then he produced his gun and forced me to provide the car.
Ho is in the boot.
He told me how you tried to rescue him.
I'm very grateful.’
Jack was amazed at how calm he sounded — which was more than Steve did.
‘Dad!’ he pleaded.
‘We're in too deep!’
‘Shut up!’
‘It's past a joke now.
Where did you get that gun from?’
‘It never was a joke, Steve, as you well know, and the weapon's real.
I've had it for some time — like a little nest
egg.’
Ray Shepherd's voice was quiet and he ignored his son's mounting horror.
‘And I haven't gone barmy either.
You're going to meet with an accident, Mr Chan, and so is your son.
And so are you, Jack.
All three of you are going to be the first victims of the Kershaw Worm.’
Jack felt his stomach turn into a cold and leaden ball.
‘Why are you doing this to us?’
‘To make a point.’
‘Dad —‘
‘Shut up, Steve!
And don't anyone try anything, or Mr Chan will be killed.
When tonight's over Sakata will be finished.’
‘Why do you think that?’ asked Mr Chan coolly.
Like Ray Shepherd he didn't seem in the least panicky.
‘After all, whatever happens to us Sakata will continue.’
‘No way.
No one will want to know a Glory again.
Not after tonight.
Sakata'll go and they'll have to open the yard again when they see what the hatred's done.’
His voice trembled for the first time.
‘You can't take away our living.
Not without paying a price.’
Mr Chan still sat calmly.
‘I understand what you must be feeling, Ray.’
‘Don't patronize me!’
‘But automation was necessary for the economy.’
‘No one told us.’
‘That was regrettable.’
‘I suppose you'dput it down to had management tactics,’ sneered Ray.
‘Yes, I would.
Sakata has not been well run.
They duped you.
At least I'm being frank.’
‘You're making us redundant.’
‘It is management policy.’
‘Yeah.
Which you're carrying out.’
‘That's correct.
Now please, take me —’ For the first time Mr Chan's voice shook.
‘Release my son, and this boy  here.’
‘They'll shop me won't they?’
‘No.
Please let me go.’
‘You crazy?’
‘I'm begging you.’
‘Shut up!
I don't want any more talking!’
Ray Shepherd yelled, suddenly losing control.
‘Please —‘
‘I said, shut up!’
Jack began to feel sick with fear.
The whole bizarre situation had finally slid right out of control.
‘Is the Worm free, Dad?’ asked Steve suddenly.
‘Don't be a fool!
You're going to do it while I cover these two.’
‘Worm?’ began Mr Chan.
‘What is —‘
‘I said, shut up!’
Ray Shepherd's voice was menacing.
‘I mean what I say.’
‘Dad?’
‘Yes, son?’
‘I think the Worm isfree.
It's done the job for us.
Again.’
‘How do you make that out?’
Then his gaze quickly shifted to the computer route-finder.
It had gone completely haywire.
Jack shuddered.
It was going to happen to him all over again, and he was in the worst possible company.
‘Can you control her?’ asked Steve.
‘Can you control her, Dad?’
Ray Shepherd fought with the wheel.
‘No.’
As he spoke, the door locks snapped shut and the sound from the radio became blazingly loud.
In seconds, or so it seemed, the Glory was mounting the rutted track up to Monument Hill.
Ray continued to wrestle with the wheel, but with no success whatever.
He swore and peered out of the window, and as he did so the gun in his left hand wavered.
Seizing his opportunity  immediately, Mr Chan grabbed at it and Ray Shepherd was soon wrestling with Mr Chan as well as with the wheel.
Jack froze, not knowing what he should do, and when he looked at Steve beside him, he knew he felt the same.
Suddenly they were awkwardly and hopelessly united.
‘They'll kill each other,’ muttered Jack.
‘They'll crash the car!’ yelled Steve.
‘No!’
‘What do you mean no?’
Steve snapped at him.
‘Look, his hands are off the wheel.
The car's steering itself.
It doesn't need any help.’
And Jack was right.
Swaying on the bumpy track, the radio blaring out, the Glory roared up Monument Hill at over 130 kilometres an hour with Ray Shepherd and Mr Chan locked together.
Then the gun went off.
The first bullet went through the windscreen.
Almost immediately the safety glass shattered and all they could see were white chips.
But the Glory continued to hurtle upwards and the two men in the front to fight for possession of the gun.
Then it went off again and Ray Shepherd slumped over the wheel, blood pouring from his shoulder.
‘Dad!’
‘I'm all right.
Get Chan!’
Instinctively, Jack flung himself on to Steve, but he simply pushed him away.
‘I'm not getting anyone,’ he said quietly.
‘Now who's got the gun?’
‘I have,’ said Mr Chan softly.
‘But we can't stop the car.’
‘It'll stop,’ replied Jack shakily.
‘It'll stop when it gets to the Monument.’
But the Glory stopped well short of that.
It suddenly ground to a skidding halt and they were all thrown forward.
Ray Shepherd gave a grunt of pain.
The car radio  was still playing unbelievably loudly.
‘We're trapped!’ screamed Steve hysterically, rattling at the doors.
‘Listen.’
‘What?’
‘Listen,’ repeated Mr Chan.
‘There's more than one radio playing.
There're dozens.’
Mr Chan punched out the shattered windscreen and fresh, cold air flowed into the Glory.
The sight that met their eyes was truly amazing.
Dozens of Glories were parked around the Monument, which was lit livid white by their blazing headlights.
The racket from the radios was incredible.
More were arriving by the minute, but were not coming up the track.
Many had great dents in them, as if they had been drawn through fences and over walls, and had taken the rough side of the hill.
And behind the steamed-up windows sat their drivers, sometimes alone, sometimes with a companion, sometimes with a carload of passengers.
Jack looked at their terrified eyes and then down at the computer screen.
‘Blimey!’
‘What's up?’ asked Steve.
‘It's a worm,’ said Mr Chan.
‘The graphics have all merged into a worm.
What does that mean?’
There was a rumbling from under the Monument and the stone table shook.
Then one of the car doors flew open.
‘Who are you?’ asked a terrified Mr Chan.
A man stood there in a dressing gown.
Jack stared and stared, unable to say a word.
It was Ken — his stepfather.
It was his eyes that riveted their attention.
They were staring ahead, gentle and sad.
‘Ken!’ shouted Jack.
He didn't reply.
‘Ken — it's me!
Jack!’
But he turned away, slamming the door.
He began to  walk towards the Monument in the glare of the headlights, then he sat down at the stone table and beckoned.
Ray Shepherd sat up and groaned.
‘He wants me.’
‘Dad, don't go —‘
‘He wants me now.’
‘Dad!’
Steve reached out desperately to stop his father but he had already opened the driver's door and had somehow inched himself out.
He staggered slowly towards the Monument and at last sat down opposite Jack's stepfather with painful slowness.
The horns of the Glories began resounding.
‘I've got to get him out!’
‘Who?’ asked Jack dazedly, unable to think of anybody else except Ken, whom he had left in hospital, just emerging from a coma.
Had no one in the hospital tried to stop him leaving or even noticed that he was missing?
And above all, what on earth was he doing up here?
Then something clicked into place in his mind.
Of course!
It must be to do with the power of the Worm.
Was it just electrical power — hence the staggering sight of all the massed Glories — or was it more to do with some human power the Worm had absorbed in its long sojourn under Monument Hill?
Had the vibrations of Kershaw reached it as it lay slumbering in the earth?
And was that emotion hatred picked up from all the disasters, the closures, the hopes, the ideals — all crushed, all violated, all laid waste?
Jonathan Ram had laid waste his children, his wife and himself.
Had that begun it all?
Begun the hatred that swelled the tiny spark of life that had escaped from the meteorite and become the Worm?
It didn't bear thinking about.
He scrambled out blindly on to the damp grass while Mr Chan rattled at the lock of the boot.
‘Ho!’ he called over and over again.
‘The key's in the ignition,’ said Jack, coming to at last.
He ran back to the window, snatched the keys and tore back to the boot.
After fumbling around with it, the boot  suddenly swung open.
Crouched inside, blinking in the night air, was Ho.
Mr Chan grabbed him and lifted him out in his arms.
‘Are you all right?’
‘Yes.’
‘You didn't answer when I called.’
‘I'm OK.
They didn't hurt me.
What's going on?’
‘Not a lot,’ muttered Jack as Mr Chan gently put Ho on to his feet.
Ho looked round for the first time at the massed ranks of Glories with their headlights blazing, and the two figures, stark in the hard glaring light of those headlights, seated opposite each other at the stone table under the Monument.
Blood was still seeping from Ray Shepherd's shoulder, and near them, Steve was weeping and softly calling out his father's name.
‘What is it?’ whispered Ho, but no one replied.
He turned to Jack.
‘What is it?’ he repeated.
‘I don't know.
Something to do with the power.’
‘What's going to happen?’
‘I think the Worm's coming.’
‘And then?’
‘I don't know.
I just don't know.
That's my stepfather up there,’ he added.
‘But I thought he was in hospital.’
‘Yes, so did I. I've got to speak to him.’
‘Where are you going?’ said Ho sharply.
‘To the Monument.’
‘Let me come with you,’ said Ho.
‘No!’
‘You need someone.’
‘I must go alone.
I've got to speak to Ken,’ Jack insisted.
‘Wait a minute —’ began Mr Chan, but Jack was already on his way.
As Jack approached the Monument, the atmosphere grew colder, and when he reached the two silent figures at the 
chess table he began to shiver.
He felt a kind of frozen hardness blocking him out, as if there were a wall of ice between him and the two men.
Their eyes were fixed on each other in cold fury, their hands placed on the table, palms down, and they seemed to be waiting — waiting for
something to happen.
Then they turned towards the
Glories and Jack saw that both men's eyes were blank and unfocused.
They stared ahead, but Jack was sure they saw nothing.
‘Ken!’ breathed Jack.
‘Ken!’ he repeated.
Still nothing.
He repeated his stepfather's name over and over again to no avail.
Gradually Jack realized he could never
penetrate the chilling force-field that lay between him and the two men.
He turned back to the glaring headlights and dimly made out the terrified eyes of the drivers and their passengers.
Some were tearing at the glass, others struggling with the doors, but none of them could get out.
Jack could hear the muffled sound of shouting, of children crying, but they all gave the impression of being underwater somewhere — a thousand kilometres away from him.
He turned back to the Monument.
‘Ken!’ he called pitifully.
There was no reply.
‘Dad,’ he whispered.
‘You've got to come back to the hospital.
You're ill.’
Jack glanced across the table at Ray Shepherd, on whose shoulder black blood was congealing.
He was completely inanimate and it was difficult to even see if he was breathing.
‘Come back,now!’
Jack pleaded again with his stepfather.
Then he turned to Ray Shepherd.
‘You're waiting, aren't you?’ he yelled.
‘It's not you at all!
You're Jonathan Ram inside, aren't you?
You're making the hatred worse!
You're making the Worm growl.’
But Ray Shepherd still stared ahead and Jack gasped with pain as the cold forced him back.
‘Jack!’
‘Who's that?’
‘It's Tina.
I've got your mum with me.
We saw the lights up here, Grandad and I. Then your mum phoned after you.
We brought her up with us.’
Jack wheeled round, half grateful, half fearful.
‘Where is she?’
‘She's in the truck with Grandad.
They couldn't get to the top; there were too many cars.
I mean Glories.
Isn't it amazing?
What's happening?’ she went on.
There was a hard edge to her voice.
‘You know what's happening.’
‘I don't.
What do you mean?’
Jack looked at Tina's face in the glare of the cars' headlights.
He remembered how strong she was and how much he had always relied on her.
If only she would join with him now, perhaps together they could find a way through this terrible situation.
‘Listen, Tina,’ he said urgently.
‘You did see the Worm the other night, didn't you?’
‘I'm not —‘
‘You did see it.
There's no need to cover up now.
Honestly.’
‘All right, I saw it,’ she replied bleakly.
‘Now will you tell me…’
‘The Worm has this enormous power, and it's increasing.
I don't know what it is, but it's brought all  these Glories up here.
And it's brought my stepdad up here too.’
‘Your stepfather?
But he's in —’ Tina broke off as she suddenly noticed the figures at the Monument.
‘What's the matter with them?
Why don't they move or speak?’
Suddenly, without warning, she burst into tears.
Jack put his arm round her.
Out of the corner of his eye he could see Mr Chan trying to comfort Steve while Ho stood by his side, staring at the Monument in terrified fascination.
‘What's the matter with your father, Tina?’
Jack asked very gently.
‘He hates — he just hates them so,’ said Tina, sobbing.
‘Sakata?’
She nodded.
‘He loved the work in the yard, and that was taken away from him, so he came to Sakata.
But he knew it wouldn't last, and it didn't.
Now he's up there, just staring ahead.
He doesn't even know who he is any longer.’
‘What?’
‘He's been…strange for some time.
as if —‘
‘Jonathan Ram?’
‘— had come inside him or something.
Or at least his hatred.
The boys didn't pick it up — they had so much anger in them too.
But Dad doesn't just have his own hatred — he's got Jonathan's too.
It's been too much for him, too great a burden.
And now he's up there,’ she choked, ‘waiting for the Worm.’
‘Why didn't you tell me you'd seen it?’
‘I knew he'd be angry.
And I wanted to pretend I hadn't seen it.
Can you understand that?’
‘Yes.
Mum feels the same.’
Suddenly the ground shook slightly under their feet.
‘It's coming, Tina.
The Worm's coming!’
They clung together and the ground stopped shaking.
‘I'm going to ring the police,’ said Mr Chan.
‘They're here already,’ replied Jack.
It was true; dozens  of policemen had appeared, but they weren't doing anything.
They all stood as if rooted to the spot, staring at the Monument and its two occupants.
‘What now?’ asked Tina.
‘I don't know,’ agonized Jack.
‘I just don't know.’
The ground shook again.
Then he suddenly thought of something.
‘Tina!’
‘What?’
‘Your grandad's truck.’
‘What about it?’
‘Were the instruments messed up?
Did you have trouble getting up here?’
‘You mean did it run away out of control?
No.’
She looked surprised.
‘It drove quite normally.’
‘And the police cars must have been OK.’
‘So?’
She stared at him, mystified.
‘If we could get the truck and the police cars past the Glories, perhaps we could rescue your dad and Ken.’
Again the ground shook and there was a rumbling sound.
‘You know what that means, don't you?’ she said.
‘No.’
‘It's the Glories that are affected.
They are made with the Worm underneath them.
Commanding them.
And with those computers they were bound to be receptive.’
‘Let's go back to your grandad,’ said Jack.
The ground seemed to be permanently shaking now.
‘What about your mum?’
Jack turned to Mr Chan.
‘I've got an idea.’
He briefly explained it but only Ho seemed to take it seriously.
Mr Chan simply looked bewildered.
‘What do you want me to do?’ asked Ho.
‘Help look after my mum,’ Jack repeated.
‘We're going to try and get Tina's grandad's truck closer.
It doesn't seem to be affected by the power.’
‘OK.
But one thing —‘
‘Yes?’ asked Jack impatiently.
‘The police.
Why are they just standing there doing nothing?’
‘You could say the same of the people in the cars,’ said Tina.
‘Look, they've stopped trying to get out.’
Ho turned to his father.
‘Father!’
But Mr Chan didn't reply.
He was simply staring straight ahead.
‘Father!’
There was no response as Ho grabbed at his father's arm in panic.
‘Father!’
Still no response.
Mr Chan was relaxed, but peering ahead intently.
‘Look at his eyes,’ said Tina.
‘They don't look as if they're seeing.
They're — kind of blank.’
Jack ran up to the nearest policeman.
‘His too.
Look!
Just like Ken and your dad.’
‘Wait!’
Ho pointed to the base of the Monument.
‘It's opening up!’
But it wasn't the Monument.
It was the ground.
The earth seemed to be breaking up, and as it did so a white vapour erupted from the soil.
They could feel the added chill from where they were standing.
The Monument seemed to rock slightly, settle and then rock again, but nothing broke the deadly concentration of Ken Lomax and Ray Shepherd.
Eventually the ground seemed to stabilize and there was a long silence during which the mist curled slowly upwards.
No one moved; no one seemed capable of movement.
Even Jack felt a curious stiffening of the limbs.
He looked round at Tina, and then at Ho.
‘There's some kind of crater opened up.
Maybe we should have a look.’
He didn't know why he was saying these words; deep down he knew that he should be running back to the truck and getting the rescue organized.
‘Yes,’ said Tina.
‘We mustlook.’
‘Come on.’
Ho began to move forward stiffly.
‘Let's go!’
‘No!’ whispered Jack, then in a louder voice he said commandingly, ‘Go for it!’
It was an effort to move their legs but just possible, and they edged forward, past Mr Chan and Steve, past a couple of policemen — all looking as if their real selves were somewhere else and only their bodies were on Monument Hill, held immobile just as the cars were.
To Jack the whole place seemed empty, as if only Tina and himself and Ho existed on the face of the planet.
Even Ken Lomax and Ray Shepherd seemed at a vast distance from them.
We shouldn't be doing this!
The thought beat in the back of Jack's mind.
We shouldn't be doing it — we're walking into danger!
But he carried on.
It was like walking through porridge.
Maybe the very atmosphere itself was telling him to go back.
Nevertheless he carried on.
‘No!’
Before them lay a pit, out of which the deadly cold vapour was still drifting up.
It wasn't dense enough, however, to obscure what lay on the bottom.
It was the Kershaw Worm, coiled, enormous, with a pulse beating in its forehead.
‘It's grown!’ whispered Tina.
‘Can it grow any bigger?’ asked Ho.
‘What happens if it grows every day?’
His voice was shaking.
‘Look!’ said Jack.
‘It's transparent.’
They stared down into the pit in horrified fascination.
There seemed to be lights glowing behind the Worm's flesh, and dimly, very dimly, they could see a room with beds closely grouped together.
In the beds, children slept, except one who tossed restlessly to and fro.
The lights in the Worm became brighter and all three of them could now see more clearly.
The room was very old fashioned and beside each bed was a locker and a pitcher of water.
Jack could see hard frost gleaming on the windows and he could feel the  bleak coldness of the beds inside himself.
‘Help me!’ said a voice in his head, and Jack knew he was listening to one of the Ram children.
They were Jonathan's children, sleeping in the workhouse, waiting to be killed by the tragic compulsion of their father.
Around them other children slept, no doubt offspring of the workers in the closed-down shipyard.
There was nothing else for them — just the workhouse and dependence on charity.
Then more light came on, this time in the worm's tail.
A man was walking down a street, and the street was narrow, mean, full of poverty-stricken houses.
In his hand, he held a knife.
‘No!’ wept Tina.
‘No!’
‘He's going to kill them,’ said Jack.
Ho stood uncertainly, not understanding.
‘We've got to stop him.’
‘How?’ hissed Jack.
‘It's all in the past; it's all happened.
We can't change what's happened.’
‘We can't watch it all either,’ replied Tina angrily.
‘Let's go away.’
Ho tried to move.
‘We must go.’
Jack tried to turn round, but he couldn't.
He was as rooted as the policemen, as the people in the cars, as Steve and Mr Chan.
No one could move.
‘Wait!’ he said suddenly.
‘I can move.’
But he could only move forwards — to the edge of the pit.
‘It's meant,’ said Tina.
‘What is?’ asked Ho in confusion.
‘That we go down there.’
‘We can't!’
Jack yelled.
‘We can't alter the past.
Don't you understand, Tina?’
‘We have to go,’ she said.
‘No.’
‘I'm going.’
The sides of the pit were not steep; they sloped quite gently.
It would be easy to scramble down, thought Jack.
So easy.
He glanced at Ho, and knew that he was thinking the same thing.
‘Wait!’
Ho's voice was as sharp as Tina's as, with sudden determination, he began to slither down the cold, wet, acrid-smelling earth.
‘We can't let her go alone,’ he said to Jack.
‘You bet we can't!’
Jack hurled himself down and Ho followed.
Sometimes on their fronts, sometimes on their backs, sometimes half standing, they threw themselves down to the damp coils below.
The Worm turned and reared up at them, and there was something in its sightless head that they knew showed satisfaction.
But Jonathan Ram continued to stride down the tumbledown street, his knife at the ready, drawing close to his beloved children.
Gasping for breath, they arrived at the bottom of the pit.
Still Jonathan Ram walked; still the children slept; still the knife gleamed in his hand.
Shivering with the intense cold, Ho and Jack stood staring into the transparent body of the Kershaw Worm.
They couldn't believe it was all real — that the nightmare was actually happening to them.
But Tina did not hesitate.
She began to beat on the worm's flesh, trying to wake the children, calling, shouting, yelling.
They slept on, however, cocooned in their own history, and the soft flesh simply yielded to her fists.
‘It's no good,’ said Jack sadly.
‘I told you — it's all in the past.
There's nothing you can do for them.’
‘Shut up!’
The hatred was hard and intense in her voice and there was a snarling edge to it that was horrible to hear.
‘Tina —‘
‘I said shut up!
I'm going in.’
‘In?’
Ho was amazed.
‘In where?’
‘In there, you fool!’
She began to walk towards the worm's head.
‘You can't!’
‘The little ones —’ Her voice ended on a half sob.
‘He's going to kill them!’
‘He's already done it!’ shouted Jack.
‘It's you who's  the fool.
Can't you understand he's already killed them?’
There was hatred in his voice now.
He'd like to kill her — he'd like to kill everyone.
‘You!’
He turned to Ho viciously.
‘It's all your fault!’
‘What?’
‘You sacked them!’
‘I did?’
‘It was you who got rid of them — made them redundant.
You killed the babies!’
Ho was looking at him now with a sneer on his face.
‘If you'd worked harder, you'd have saved the yard.’
His voice was almost a growl.
‘Worked harder?
On your wages?’
Jack spat back at him.
‘Know your place!’ rapped Ho.
‘Don't answer me back!’
His voice was different — imperious, high-handed.
‘I'll not take orders from you!’
It was not his own voice.
Jack knew that.
He walked up to Ho and punched him hard in the chest.
Ho staggered back and then came at him, fists flying.
They closed, lost balance and fell to the ground, rolling, kicking, punching, hands reaching for each other 's throats.
Then he heard the voice calling.
It was familiar as he rolled and thrashed, his hands at last finding what he sought, his fingers pressing the soft flesh of Ho's throat.
‘Jack!’
Now he was astride Ho, his knees pinning down his shoulders, his fingers squeezing, squeezing.
‘Jack!
Stop!
Leave him!’
He continued to squeeze and felt Ho's body go limp under him.
‘Jack!
It's over!’
His mother's voice was soft and commanding.
‘Please, Jack!’
The hatred began to drain out of him.
Jack felt it go, like a migraine or a bout of seasickness.
It left him, and he felt relaxed and relieved.
He looked up into his mother's calm, kind eyes.
Tina's grandad was there too, and so were Ken  and Ray Shepherd.
They looked normal, anxious, loving.
Then Mr Chan and Steve completed the group.
Slowly Jack stood up and looked down at Ho.
‘Is he all right?’ asked Mr Chan without rancour or dislike.
He spoke as if his son had been ill.
Ho opened his eyes and rubbed at his throat.
Jack helped him to his feet.
‘I'm so very sorry, Ho.
Are you all right?’
‘I'm fine,’ he replied evenly.
‘How did you get here, Mum?’ asked Jack.
‘Walked, didn't I?
I'm not being stuck away in some smelly old truck.’
‘No stopping her,’ smiled Grandad.
‘And them?’ said Jack, bewildered.
‘Those two?’
He pointed to Ken and Ray Shepherd.
‘I didn't know what to do,’ said his mother.
‘Ken was sitting up there, just staring at that awful pit.
I could feel such hatred.
I didn't know what to do,’ she repeated.
‘What did you do?’ asked Jack.
‘It was just instinct.
I was so surprised to see Ken, so relieved, that I rushed over and gave him a kiss.
It's a miracle he's walking about, isn't it?
A real miracle.
Then I saw Mr Shepherd — and he looked so — so strange that I kissed him too.’
They were touched by love!
The thought was like a bird of freedom in Jack's mind.
That was how she'd done it — she'd touched them with her warm love and it had been too much for the Worm's heart of hatred.
The Worm?
All his original fears returned.
The Worm — and Tina?
He wheeled round and at the same time Ho breathed, ‘Tina — where is she?
We've got to find Tina.’
She was in there — in the Worm.
Standing in the dormitory, trying to shake the children awake.
Then they saw the door open and Jonathan Ram stood on the threshold, knife raised.
‘No!’ said Jack.
‘Please — no!’
But something was happening.
Something was  happening to the Worm.
‘It's bursting!’ yelled Ho.
It wasn't bursting.
The worm was deflating like a torn
balloon.
There was a sound of rushing air and Tina stood up.
Around her was grey parchment.
She began to walk towards them.
She was crying.
‘You can't change the past,’ said Jack.
‘At least you tried,’ said Ho, smiling at her.
They took her in their arms and Jack said gently: ‘Look up — your dad's here.
And he's fine.’
When the three of them scrambled to the surface, a scene of incredible noise and chaos met them.
Police numbers had doubled, two ambulances had somehow squeezed up on the hill, and the drivers and passengers were out of their Glories, milling around in confusion.
The police were trying to interview them and a TV reporter was talking into a camera, his face lit with a bright light.
Behind them, the Monument leant at a crazy angle, its foundations undermined by the yawning pit beside it.
‘The hate's gone,’ said Jack as he threw his arms round his stepfather.
‘I don't know what you're on about,’ replied Ken.
‘I can't remember anything.
Not anything at all.’
‘We can tell you,’ said Jack.
‘Later.’
He looked at Tina and Ho, deep in their fathers' embrace.
There would be a lot to tell.
Now the police, the ambulance crews, the crowd, the reporter, were approaching the pit, looking down at the grey shard that was all that was left of the Kershaw Worm.
‘It was you, Mum.’
Jack kissed his mother.
‘You did it!’
‘Did what?’
‘Stopped the hate,’ he said.
Jack looked at the warm innocence of her bewildered face.
‘You did it all right.’
While the adults talked to the police, and the police listened to their explanation with incredulity, Jack, Tina and Ho stared down into the pit.
‘It just looks like a scrap of old cloth or parchment or something,’ said Tina.
‘And it's still falling apart.
Look!’
The sharp white lights of the television crew picked out the shards of the Worm, blowing about at the bottom of the pit until they became transparent and brittle, breaking into thousands of tiny pieces.
After a while, there was nothing to be seen at all.
‘How did a wind get down there?’ asked Ho.
‘There's not even the slightest breeze up here.’
‘I don't know,’ said Jack.
‘It's all part of whatever it was.
‘Magic?’ asked Tina.
‘Not magic,’ replied Ho.
‘Just feelings.
Feelings so strong they made things happen — made the Worm grow.’
‘Do you think that meteorite really landed?’
Jack mused.
‘Really tipped out a worm?’
‘Oh, yes,’ said Tina confidently.
‘It existed all right.
Dad and Derek and Steve — they finally captured something.
But they made it grow, didn't they?
Fanned it with their own hatred.’
‘Will we ever grow up like that?’ asked Jack fearfully.
‘Full of hatred and bitterness — enough to make that poor old Worm grow so big?’
‘We can't afford to,’ said Tina.
‘We mustn't let it happen to us, however we feel.’
Ho looked up at the dawn-streaked sky.
‘I wonder if there are lots of other worms up there living in lumps of rock.’
‘There might be,’ said Tina.
She suddenly looked very afraid.
‘There's enough hatred down on earth for them to feed on, isn't there?’
Jack put his arm round her shoulders — and his other arm round Ho's.
‘We've got to stop hating, that's all,’ he said, looking down into the pit again.
There was no wind now and the ragged earth was still.
The Kershaw Worm had disappeared without a trace.