

INTRODUCTION
Of all exercises walking is the best
THOMAS JEFFERSON
In one sense you could say that we begin our lives in the wheelchair of the womb; we begin our lives literally by being carried around.
In fact it would be true to say that many of us spend most of our lives being carried around.
As we leave the womb, enter the world and grow, and get over the initial wonder of walking, we change our pre-natal wheelchair for a series of substitute wheelchairs — bicycles, motor-cycles, cars, taxis, buses, trains, aeroplanes — and chairs (in houses, schools, offices; anywhere where people gather and sit).
For this is the age of ‘homo sedentarius’(sedentary man), the man who sits.
In all ages prior to our modern scientific age, people had a more physical and active lifestyle.
They spent more time on their feet than they did sitting.
But this is no longer true.
The table below, derived from a 1985 study of Welsh adults, shows the extent to which all of us become increasingly sedentary as we get older.
The figures can be taken as generally representative for both Europe and the USA.
By their mid-40s, more than 40 per cent of males and more than 80 per cent of females are sedentary.
And through all age groups for women  (12–64), two-thirds of them take very little exercise at all.
TABLE 1
Percentage sedentary or minimally active at work or play
But there is evidence that this pattern is changing.
As the 1980s came to an end the fitness movement worldwide had become a £1 billion industry.
The National Sports Goods Survey and other surveys estimate that 25 million people exercise regularly in Britain and the USA.
And the General Household Survey in Britain informs us that 3 million women now participate regularly in keep-fit, yoga and aerobics.
The 80s had been all about obsessional lifestyles, body consciousness, diet fads, work-out videos, designer leotards, Reeboks and Aqua Libra.
As the 80s came to an end, punishing exercise routines had become almost an alternative religion for many people.
For the first time exercise was an end in itself.
However, despite these encouraging figures, marketing studies carried out in the USA show that most home-gym equipment goes unused and only around 10 per cent of American adults engage in  brisk, regular exercise.
And in Britain, the last survey carried out by the Sports Council revealed that up to 75 per cent of the population were doing very little at all to get fit.
Other surveys show that Britain as a nation is no fitter than it was ten years ago.
So the increased interest in fitness may not be the healthy trend that it first appeared to be.
EXERCISE — THE FINAL FRONTIER
For more than two decades now, first one, then another exercise programme has been thrust at us as the answer to all the ills of modern living from heart attacks to stress.
We have been preached to by film stars and eastern gurus; by so called fitness experts and by celebrities who want to tell us how to maintain youthful looks.
Books on jogging, cycling, swimming, rowing, aerobics, and various exercise routines all crowd the bookshelves clamouring for our attention.
Yet how many people who buy all these books are still actively following the exercise programmes laid out in them?
And what have all these books been telling us to do?
TO JOG — Jogging is popular and many claim it is the best way to exercise.
We have all seen the new jogger in his designer track suit and shoes, puffing and panting along the pavement, joints creaking and heart pounding as though his life depended upon it.
But the truth is that it is easy to overdo jogging.
Jogging has a high failure rate with beginners, and is the cause of numerous painful injuries.
Ankle strain, foot strain, stress fractures, strained knee ligaments and inflammation of the Achilles tendon are all common  injuries suffered by joggers.
And don't forget, the arch-guru of jogging himself, Jim Fixx, dropped dead in the end — while jogging!
TO SWIM — Swimming is claimed to be an excellent way to exercise, but unless you have regular access to a swimming pool, it's unlikely that you will ever be able to swim enough to gain any real benefit from it.
And water does not allow the full natural movement of the body under the force of gravity which is needed to develop and retain structural strength in the bones.
TO CYCLE — Cycling avoids the excess strain that running puts on the joints, but tends to over-develop the leg muscles.
Getting out in the open air on a bike can be an exhilarating experience.
It is aerobic and helps build stamina but it is difficult and potentially dangerous in traffic; and like jogging it is easy to overdo.
Stationary exercise bikes are no better, with the need for long periods of hamster-like moronic trundling to get any real benefits from them.
Some people reckon to do half an hour every day.
Good luck to them.
Ten minutes, in our experience, is enough to bore anyone out of their mind.
Other enthusiasts have been trying to persuade us to do aerobics, skip, row and a dozen other things to keep fit.
Exercise and fitness has become the final frontier.
Whatever next?
Maggie and I were no different to anyone else.
The 1980s had left us both with spreading waist-lines and a feeling that we were beginning to slow down.
Like many people around 40 we desperately needed a programme for diet and exercise that would fit in with our busy lifestyles.
Yet we knew that if a programme was going to work it had to be ‘user friendly’— we had had enough of diet and exercise books written by doctors and self-proclaimed experts.
We did not have the time to visit the swimming-pool three times a week, and we were not interested in pumping iron or trundling around on an exercise bike every morning.
We had tried to combine exercise with a healthy diet.
We both played tennis and squash and most weekends we would walk in the countryside, on the hills or along the seashore.
We had tried cycling, skipping and jogging and we both had an exercise bike in the spare room.
But like many people we had sustained injuries and we had finally become disillusioned about ever becoming fit.
We felt that our diet was reasonably balanced.
We had increased our fibre intake and we were eating more fish, fruit and vegetables.
We had reduced our consumption of saturated fats, sugar, salt and alcohol.
Neither of us smoked.
And yet despite all this the pounds were creeping up on us and we seemed to be fighting a losing battle.
So what were we doing wrong?
Quite simply, like millions of other people, we had become sedentary.
We were spending too much time sitting.
‘But hold on,’ we can hear you say, ‘I thought you said that you walked on weekends and played tennis and squash.’
True.
But that still makes us sedentary, like most other people.
For if you are not exercising aerobically using some form of whole body continuous movement (brisk walking, jogging, cycling) for 30 minutes at least three to four times a week, then by definition, you are sedentary.
Let's say you get up in the morning and spend 15 minutes sitting down for breakfast.
Then you spend another 30 minutes sitting in a car, bus or train on the way to work.
When you arrive at work you may then spend another six hours sitting in a chair working.
Then 30 minutes back home again and about another four hours sitting around the house before retiring to bed.
Is this an exaggeration?
Not for many people it isn't.
And if you think about it, that's more than 11 hours each and every weekday.
And unless you make a special effort to do something active on a weekend, then you can add another 16 hours or so to the total, making a grand total of more than 70 hours each week.
If you exclude the eight hours on average spent in bed each night, then you could be spending around 65 per cent of your entire waking life in one form of sedentary position or another.
You could be described as being no more than a brain on wheels or a brain stuck in a chair.
And don't say that you are much more active than the people described above, for the sedentary label applies to most people in Western society, including club golfers, club squash and tennis players, mailmen, and Mrs Smith next door who is out in all weathers exercising her dog.
The figures for percentage sedentary people at the beginning of this chapter tell only part of the story.
Being active is not enough!
If you are not regularly stretching your body aerobically in some form of continuous whole body exercise, then you are sedentary.
Join the ranks of homo sedentarius — you have a problem.
WALKING — THE BEST EXERCISE
These men I have examined around the world who live in vigorous health to 100 or more years are great walkers.
If you want to live a long, long time in sturdy health you can't go wrong in forming the habit of long vigorous walking every day…until it becomes a habit as important to you as eating and sleeping.
Dr Leaf, Executive Health Organisation, California
Experience tells us that many people who take up jogging, cycling, and other aerobic routines often sustain injuries, or simply give up after a short time.
They Join the increasing number of people who regularly try to get fit and fail.
So what are they doing wrong?
There are only two facts you need to know about exercise:
1
IF YOU DON'T DESIGN AN EXERCISE PROGRAMME FOR YOURSELF THAT REMAINS ENJOYABLE AS YOUR FITNESS IMPROVES YOU'LL QUIT!
That is why it is often only enthusiasts who are still cycling, swimming, jogging and doing aerobics.
The rest of us quit a long time ago.
2
EXERCISE REALLY MEANS CONTINUING TO EXERCISE: TODAY, TOMORROW AND FOR THE REST OF YOUR LIFE.
Exercise is not a short-term cure like taking an aspirin to cure a headache.
If exercise is to be effective it must become as natural to us as breathing, eating, or cleaning our teeth.
Otherwise most of our efforts are all a waste of time and energy.
This is why walking scores every time:
Walking is the best exercise — it is a totally natural activity; your enjoyment will improve as your fitness improves.
Walking is habit-forming; the more you do it the more you will want to do it.
Walking aerobically will give you all the fitness benefits of jogging, cycling and dance aerobics — without the injuries.
Walking aerobically makes you slim and is the perfect weight-management system.
Walking is simple and safe; just about anyone can do it, including the young, elderly and those recovering from illness.
Walking is a prevention against heart and circulatory disorders and may lower blood pressure.
Walking will help you to sleep and is an antidote to stress, nervous tension and depression.
Walking can improve your posture and may prevent lower back pain.
Walking requires no special skills or equipment.
Walking can be done almost anywhere.
Regular, vigorous aerobic exercise like brisk walking can lead to beneficial physiological changes in many of the body's processes: lower blood pressure, lower cholesterol level, and improved cardiovascular and respiratory response
Many of the benefits that come from brisk walking are due to the CV effect — the effect produced on the cardiovascular (CV) system.
By gently stretching the capacity of the heart and lungs through exercise, the CV system's capacity is  increased.
This is what makes this type of exercise (like jogging and cycling) aerobic.
But if exercise is not kept up, the body reverts to its original inactive state.
Former athletes who took no further exercise were found to have the same risk factor for a heart attack as those who had never been active.
It can take three to six months of regular vigorous aerobic exercise to build up a powerful heart and lungs; and it can take the same period of inactivity to lose it all.
I began serious walking after the long hot summer of 1989.
For the first time in my life I had a weight problem.
I had put on around a stone during the year and I was beginning to take on the traditional pear shape.
My waist size had suddenly increased and I could not get into my trousers any more.
I was determined to lose the weight.
I had always loved walking so it seemed the obvious thing to do.
I would simply get out more often and walk faster and for longer.
I decided on a 30-day plan.
I felt that if I could get into a regular habit-forming routine then I would be able to keep it up beyond the 30 days.
My plan was to increase my pace from normal (around 3 miles per hour) to brisk (3.5–4.0 miles per hour) and to walk longer and further as the weeks went by.
And the key to maintaining the regularity and discipline would be to walk out of my front door and do a circuit around the block and back home again.
I knew that if I had to drive to the park or into the country first, then the walking would never get done except at weekends.
This was the key to the whole thing — REGULAR, RHYTHMIC BRISK WALKING OUT OF MY FRONT DOOR, AROUND THE BLOCK AND BACK AGAIN.
After two weeks I felt better in myself and I had lost several pounds.
Although previously I had been walking only on weekends, I was now walking up to five times a week for half an hour at a time.
I was not only losing weight but I felt better: fitter, more alert, more vigorous.
The plan was working.
After 30 days of aerobic walking and cutting down on fattening foods I had walked away half a stone.
I was able to get back into some of my trousers and I was well on the way to my ultimate goal of health and fitness.
Maggie had also started to use the plan and walk her way to health and fitness.
We both knew that walking alone would not keep the pounds off forever.
We had to get our diet right also.
Maggie has always loved cooking and everything to do with food, so she began to put together all her low fat lean cuisine recipes and a complete diet/exercise programme evolved which would not only get rid of the pounds but keep them off forever.
And so the Walking Diet evolved.
The one thing that we decided from the outset was that calorie counting was out.
No one can seriously go on counting calories all their lives.
What we needed was a moderate approach that we could work with and modify to our own needs.
The ancient Greek concept of diet had impressed us both.
To them ‘diata’ meant a way of living, a way of finding wholeness through health, fitness and correct nutrition.
This had to be the way to go.
With regular brisk walking, and eating the right kinds of food, we should be fit and healthy without having to resort to extreme, fanatical exercise routines or slimming diets.
Our own experiences with walking were very quickly confirmed when we read in Time magazine, November 1989, that after the most detailed fitness study ever carried out by the Aerobics Institute in America, it had been established that moderate exercise can have all the beneficial effects that are normally associated with hard ‘no pain, no gain' exercising (see Table 2).
The Time report confirmed that moderate brisk walking for half an hour three to four times a week is all that is needed to provide protection not only from cardiovascular disease and cancers, but also against death from a wide range of other causes.
They also confirmed that people who exercise moderately tend to live longer.
It has been estimated that for every hour of brisk walking, you can add one extra hour to the length of your life.
In a separate study of 17,000 Harvard graduates in 1986 it was determined that moderate exercise could add up to two years to a person's life.
It is now official.
Not only is walking the best, cheapest, all-round exercise available to everyone young and old, but it is ‘green’, natural and organic.
It is the diet exercise for the 1990s.
DIATA — A BETTER WAY OF LIFE
The first wealth is health
RALPH WALDO EMERSON
In Britain there are 200,000 deaths each year from coronary heart disease — that is, nearly one every three minutes.
In Britain there are between 500,000 and 800,000 heart attacks each year.
In Britain one in ten men under the age of retirement will suffer a heart attack.
By the age of retirement that figure will increase to one in every five.
Britain is the world leader in deaths caused by heart disease.
Even with the improved health record of the USA and a population four to five times bigger than Britain's, more than 1 million Americans suffer a heart attack each year and more than half of them die before reaching hospital.
By anyone's standards these statistics are horrifying and are at epidemic proportions, yet there is no reason why we should accept heart disease as being inevitable.
And why is heart disease so common?
Why is  there an epidemic?
And why pick on heart disease alone?
The UK not only has some of the highest rates of cardiovascular disease in the world, it also has some of the highest rates for cancer and respiratory disease.
And we are just as prone to other ‘Western diseases’ such as large bowel cancer which together with lung cancer (caused largely by smoking) are the commonest causes of death from cancer.
Disease of the colon, diabetes, haemorrhoids, varicose veins, mental illness, arthritis and tooth decay all play their part in reducing the quality of life for large numbers of people each year.
And these problems are not restricted only to life in Britain, the USA and the rest of the Western world.
No matter where one looks throughout the world, wherever a Western lifestyle coincides with a Western-style diet, the above effects can be observed.
CHANGING TIMES
The better off we are, the more energy rich foods we eat: meat, cheese and chocolate.
And we eat more convenience foods, high in calories: burgers, pizzas, Indian and Chinese food, cakes, biscuits and pastries.
A thousand million fast foods are being consumed in Britain alone every year.
In contrast to modern man, prehistoric man, ‘homo erectus’, was a hunter-gatherer, walking through necessity, and running to pursue and capture his prey.
He had a high fibre diet and plenty of exercise.
Modern man, however, homo sedentarius, does not need to pursue his food.
Every type of food is readily available and preparation and cooking have never been easier; and if he cannot spare the time, convenience foods reduce the time  required for shopping and preparation to the bare minimum.
But we do not have to go back to prehistoric times to witness the change in our diet.
Most of the changes have taken place in the past 200 and many in the past 50 years.
We keep animals in pens to fatten them.
Homo sedentarius, in contrast, does not need to be kept in pens.
He accepts voluntary inactivity and as a result gets fat.
It has been observed that some people switching from using a typewriter to a personal computer can gain up to half a stone a year because they no longer have to get up to consult filing cabinets; and the same effects can be observed when people use remote-control television, extension phones, lifts and dishwashers.
And consumption of food tends to be higher in sedentary people; as a result they tend to have lower metabolic rates than active people and an increased chance of becoming even fatter.
And being sedentary can increase the risk of heart disease.
Since the end of the Second World War people have been getting fatter.
In Britain alone 16 million people are overweight.
The population as a whole is about 10 per cent fatter than it used to be.
We seem to be forever ‘fighting the flab’, going on crash diets, and trying to cut calories.
Yet essentially, we are what we eat.
During the 20th century the average person in Western society has been eating too much fat and too little fibre.
A hundred years ago the average person ate less than 25 per cent fat in their diet; today half our energy is derived from fat in different forms.
‘YOU CAN'T GET FAT EXCEPT BY EATING FAT!’
(Martin Katahn —T-Factor Diet )
In Britain, each of us gets on average 40 per cent of our calories from fat.
That is bad news for our figures, and bad news for our health.
The United States Surgeon General, Dr C. Everett Koop, commented recently that FAT IS WESTERN SOCIETY'S GREATEST NUTRITIONAL HAZARD.
Is it any wonder then that the Western way of eating is also the Western way of dying.
There are no simple answers as to why people suffer from cardiovascular, respiratory and other Western diseases.
But various characteristics of population and lifestyle are usually blamed for the problem:
Poor diet
Lack of exercise
Family history
Obesity
Stress
High blood pressure
High cholesterol level
Alcoholism
Smoking
All of the available evidence on lifestyle and nutrition suggests that by eating a healthier diet, exercising regularly, and finding time for relaxation, many of the above problems can be reduced if not eradicated.
And a moderate approach to alcohol and the cutting out of smoking would save needless deaths and improve the quality of people's lives.
DIET AND DISEASE
Diet and disease are inseparable.
If not always a causal factor, diet is always involved (Leon Chaitow —The Stone Age Diet ).
You would think from the figures for deaths and illness from Western diseases that little was being done to improve the situation.
You would be wrong.
Health education and nutritional information are widely available to everyone.
Newspapers and magazines carry extensive coverage of diet and health topics and diet books are among the best sellers.
In 1990 more than 25 new diet books were launched and the market is increasing.
If you add to this the growing number of health and fitness related books then you would expect us all to be getting healthier and fitter.
And we are trying to become healthier.
A survey released in November 1990 suggested that 90 per cent of us are trying to eat more healthily.
This follows on from the 1970s and the health conscious 80s when increasing numbers of people were becoming more responsible towards themselves and their lifestyle.
Yet despite all the good intentions, health and fitness for large numbers of people are still elusive goals which seem to recede further and further away.
Advertising surveys tell us that one-third of the British population uses slimming products.
Other surveys tell us that 50 per cent of British women are on a diet at the moment and 25 per cent have tried three or more diets in the past year alone (New Woman magazine — November 1990).
People are genuinely trying to become more health conscious and fit.
A 1989 Gallup Fitness Consumer Survey found that women are not only  using diets and exercise to improve their looks but also their health.
For many people the problem of how to become fitter and healthier is more a question of method than intention.
And that is where ‘diata’ can help.
DIATA
Eating is about making choices; healthy eating is about making the right choices.
And like exercise, it's all about balance and moderation.
It's no use taking up extreme reducing diets this week if we end up giving them up next week.
We need something we can work with today, tomorrow and the rest of our lives.
Healthy eating is about much more than the kinds of food we eat.
It's also about lifestyle, which affects eating habits.
We like to think of it in terms of the ancient Greek idea of ‘diata’ which means literally ‘a way of living’.
It is both how we exercise and what we eat that defines our ‘diata’.
Diata suggests a holistic way of looking at our health and lifestyle to find the balance and rhythm that is lacking.
When you think about it the ancient Greeks had some pretty good ideas.
The motto engraved on the wall of the temple at Delphi was ‘Know Thyself’, and was adopted by the philosopher Socrates as the basis for the study of philosophy.
It is also the basis for ‘diata’.
Know yourself: know your own body and mind; know what your real needs are.
To listen to many authorities on nutrition, you might think that eating is an exact science.
Having analysed the calorific value of every type of food under the sun, they then try to organise your entire  life around their rigid schedules telling you exactly what to eat and what to avoid.
The truth is that eating is not an exact science and never will be.
How many people consciously buy food each week in an organised, scientific way?
Eating is not a science; it is an art.
It is much more a question of knowledge and awareness of which foods to eat and which to avoid than it is of following blindly someone else's strict regime.
Knowledge, awareness, and the desire to change are the best motivations you can have.
This is what diata is: a balanced, moderate approach which will provide the long-term benefits that you desire.
The biggest single change you can make in your lifestyle is to do a personal food and drink audit — an awareness audit of what you eat and drink.
Write down a list of everything that you regularly eat and drink, and compare it with the following recommended lists of foods and drinks to increase and decrease.
This will enable you to work out the changes you need to make in your diet and plan your own personal ‘diata’.
PERSONAL FOOD AUDIT
Increase your consumption of:
OILY FISH
mackerel, herrings, pilchards, sardines, tuna, trout, salmon
WHITE FISH
cod, haddock, coley, hake, plaice, sole, turbot, monkfish
VEGETABLES
potatoes, carrots, peas, cabbage, cauliflower, broccoli, spinach, french beans, parsnips, onions, leeks, aubergines, courgettes, garlic, sweetcorn, asparagus
SALAD VEGETABLES
beansprouts, celery, cucumber, peppers (green/red), radish, spring onions, chicory, lettuce, fennel, watercress
STAPLE FOODS
beans (haricot, kidney, soya), chick peas, lentils, bread wholegrain), rice (wholegrain), pasta (wholemeal), cereals (wholegrain), bran, seeds, nuts, oatbran
FRUIT
apples, pears, oranges, bananas, grapefruit, lemons, limes, tomatoes, pineapple, avocado, guava, passion and other exotic fruits, mango, nectarines, apricots, dried fruit, berries
Decrease your consumption of:
SATURATED FATS
meat and meat products: beef, pork, lamb, sausages, mince, bacon, liver, burgers, roast chicken, luncheon meat, liver sausage (replace with lean cuts of red meat; chicken, turkey, game); dairy products: whole milk, cream, butter, cheese (replace with: skimmed milk, low fat yogurt, low fat cheeses)
VEGETABLE OILS/FATS
palm oil, coconut oil, lard, dripping, suet, hard margarine (replace with small amounts of sunflower, safflower, corn & soya oils, olive oil, polyunsaturated spreads)
SNACKS
crisps, peanuts, samosas
REFINED CARBOHYDRATES
sugar, chocolate, sweets, desserts, biscuits, pastries, puddings, pies, white bread, rolls, crackersSALT
PERSONAL DRINK AUDIT
Increase your consumption of:
WATER
6 glasses daily (Water is our most important nutrient; up to three-quarters of the body's weight is water.
It regulates body temperature; assists all bodily functions.)
ANY LOW-CAL SOFT DRINK
Decrease your consumption of:
ALCOHOL
maximum: 3 units per day for men 2 units per day for women (1 glass of wine, half pint beer, small whisky, each equal one unit)
Alternate with low-alcohol/alcohol-free drinks with food; drink with an equal measure of water; try two or three AFDs — alcohol-free days — each week; cut out altogether, if desired.
COFFEE
Drink weaker, without milk, or with skimmed milk; try decaffeinated.
TEA
Try weak Darjeeling or any other tea, or herb or lemon tea, or try decaffeinated.
A NEW BALANCE
A good diet should maintain health, provide energy, promote growth, and give protection against disease.
According to a report by the UK National Advisory Committee on Nutritional Education (NACNE) our total energy consumption should be derived from the following food sources:
Carbohydrate 55%
Fat 30%
Protein 11%
Alcohol 4%
The United States Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs makes similar recommendations:
Carbohydrate 55–60%
Fat 25–30%
Protein 15%
The important thing to remember is that we should all be seeking to eat more of the right kinds of food (foods with health and nutritional properties) rather than seeking to fit in with someone else's ideal consumer.
Using the personal food and drink audit we should be seeking a new balance in our diet that will provide us with all the essential nutrients that our bodies need.
We need nutrients for energy, cell growth, organ function, and efficient food utilisation.
The six important nutrients are carbohydrates, proteins, fats.
vitamins, minerals and water.
Macronutrients  (carbohydrates, protein and fat) need micronutrients (vitamins and minerals) to release the energy contained in them.
During digestion, enzymes then break these nutrients down so that they can be absorbed through the walls of the digestive tract and enter the bloodstream.
Using the personal food and drink audit, Walking Dieters will be provided with all the essential nutrients that they need.
Water has already been covered in the audit; fats, proteins and carbohydrates are covered below in the section ‘Where to Begin'.
Now just a few words about vitamins and minerals.
Vitamins are natural substances vital for growth and health.
They cannot be manufactured by our bodies.
Some are needed for the efficient action of enzymes; others form essential parts of hormones.
The most important thing to know about them is that they work synergistically with minerals: that is they enhance each other, adding up to more than the individual sum of their parts.
We need them all.
The most important vitamins are the water soluble and fat soluble vitamins.
Water soluble vitamins are the range of B vitamins (B1, B2, B3, B5, B6, B12) and vitamin C. The B vitamins are found in the staple foods (wholemeal bread, brown rice, pulses, oat bran, nuts, grains) and meat, fish, eggs, milk, poultry, green vegetables, bananas and cheese.
Vitamin C is found in green, leafy vegetables, potatoes, tomatoes, fruits and berries.
The B vitamins are often called the ‘stress vitamins’.
They are essential for a healthy nervous system and they give protection against infection, aid in energy production and promote growth.
Vitamin C is also required by those under stress and smokers, and it is important for the growth  and repair of cells, gums, blood vessels, bones and teeth.
And it helps in healing disease.
Both B and C vitamins, being water soluble, cannot be stored in the body and must be replaced daily.
However, the fat soluble vitamins — A, D, E & K — can be stored in the body and these can be found in root vegetables, spinach, cheese, milk, eggs, fish, fish oils, dairy foods, nuts, green vegetables, and cereals.
They promote growth, give protection from infections, and are essential for other body functions.
The important minerals are calcium, zinc, iron, potassium, magnesium, phosphorus and iodine.
Other minerals required by the body are selenium, manganese, sodium, and other trace elements.
Like vitamins, they cannot be manufactured by the body, so they must be provided in our daily diet.
They can be found in milk, cheese, soya beans, seafood, poultry, green vegetables, meat, eggs, nuts, beans, seeds, oat bran, citrus fruits, apples, bananas, and potatoes.
If you follow the Walking Diet you will get the vitamins and minerals that you need.
However, anyone who is on the move, under stress or is likely to skip meals should think about taking a multi-vitamin and mineral supplement to make up for any deficiencies in diet.
Remember that the B vitamins and vitamin C cannot be stored in your body.
They need replacing every day.
WHERE TO BEGIN
START BY REDUCING FAT
Each fat gram that you eat contains 9 calories.
Each protein and carbohydrate gram you eat contains 4 calories.
It is the fat in your diet that makes you fat.
Our bodies are designed to burn carbohydrates and store fats.
The important thing is not to count calories, but to recognise those foods which are fat-dense.
It is fat-awareness not calorie-awareness that is needed.
The main thing to cut is saturated fat which can cause high blood cholesterol levels, leading to clogged up arteries and potentially a heart attack or stroke.
Saturated fat is found in fats of animal origin such as red meat, butter, milk, cheese and cream.
Use skimmed or semi-skimmed milk, margarine low in saturated fats, low fat cheese, reduced calorie mayonnaise and low fat yogurt instead of cream.
And try to avoid frying food wherever possible, cutting out fat, and using an oil for cooking which is low in saturated fat and high in polyunsaturates — sunflower, corn and soya oil.
The body actually needs fat.
In order to grow and function effectively, fat is needed by the brain, muscles, heart, hair, skin, immune system, and cell walls, etc.
The problem is that we have got the balance wrong.
What we need is an oil change!
Research done among the Greenland Eskimos has shown that they have almost no record of heart disease.
This is because the key factor in their diet is the amount of seafood they eat daily.
Seafood contains Omega-3 fatty acids.
These particular fatty acids can play a significant role in preventing heart disease and clogged up arteries.
High levels of these fish oils can be found in mackerel, herrings, pilchards, sardines, tuna, trout and salmon.
Research recently carried out by the Medical Research Council in Cardiff involved 2,033 men under 70 who had suffered a heart attack.
One group of men was told to eat foods rich in Omega-3 fatty acids at least twice a week.
After two years it was found that the fish eaters had up to 30 per cent less chance of dying from a second heart  attack than those who had been told nothing about fish.
Fat from a land based diet is known as Omega-6.
The best advice now available is to cut down on Omega-6 fats and balance them with Omega-3 fish oils.
A word about cholesterol.
Cholesterol has had a bad press.
Although it can be responsible for a variety of illnesses, it is actually essential for health.
We now know that there are two types of cholesterol — LDL and HDL (low density and high density lipoproteins).
Lipoproteins are agents in the blood which transport cholesterol.
The higher your HDL level the less chance you have of developing heart disease.
It is interesting to note that Eskimos have higher HDLs.
This is due to their large consumption of Omega-3 fatty acids which contain the polyunsaturated fats EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) and DHA (docosahexoenic acid).
The other beneficial effects of these fish oils have already been observed above.
It has also been observed that moderate alcohol drinkers (two glasses of wine, beer or whisky a day) have higher levels of HDLs in their blood; so it seems that a small tipple each day may actually be good for you.
And moderate exercise (such as brisk walking) has also been shown to raise HDLs.
Cholesterol is raised by saturated fats, sugar, coffee, food additives, the pill, stress, and lack of exercise.
REDUCE REFINED CARBOHYDRATES
Carbohydrates, along with fats and proteins, are the three main building blocks of life.
Carbohydrates are compounds of carbon, hydrogen and  oxygen and their function is to provide energy.
There are two types: simple and complex, or sugar and starches.
Simple carbohydrates are digested quickly, while complex ones are digested slowly, which means they can provide more energy and stamina.
Some carbohydrates in a Western diet, such as sugar and syrup, are refined and provide little food value.
Sugar has been described as ‘pure, white and deadly’.
In Britain we eat, on average, over 100 lb (50 kg) a year each.
It provides energy but hardly any nutrients.
If we cut it out of our diet today we will be none the worse off but will have a head start in reducing our total intake of calories: 100 LB OF SUGAR CONVERTS ROUGHLY INTO 3,500 CALORIES A WEEK.
(3,500 calories is equal to 1lb of fat — 1lb every week that you would not have to lose if you gave up sugar.)
But remember, sugar does not only come out of a packet.
Two thirds of our annual consumption is hidden in processed foods such as cakes, biscuits, custard, tinned fruit, beer and fizzy drinks.
Even some brands of muesli contain up to 25 per cent sugar.
Almost all tinned foods contain sugar.
So watch the labels.
And don't forget chocolate.
Britain has the highest chocolate consumption in the world, far more than any other country.
The British munch through 533,000 tons — £3.5 billion worth — each year.
The average consumer now eats six chocolate bars a week.
Eating refined carbohydrates such as those above can raise the blood cholesterol level, and is a possible cause of heart disease.
Other refined carbohydrates, such as white flour and white rice, like sugar, have been stripped of most of their vitamins, minerals and fibre content  and should be replaced with unrefined staple foods such as listed in the Personal Food Audit.
REDUCE PROTEIN
Proteins are divided into two types: animal and vegetable.
Animal protein, or first class protein as it is known, contains all eight essential amino acids which the body depends on for good health.
Vegetable protein, or second class protein, lacks some of these amino acids, the one exception being soya beans.
In our Western diet we eat more than twice as much protein as we need, and of an unhealthy type.
We should cut down on red meat, always choose lean cuts and eat more white meats, such as chicken and turkey.
We should also eat more fish.
Fish is an excellent, low calorie source of protein.
100g (4 oz) of cooked white fish provides one third of our total daily requirements for less than 100 calories.
Fish is also a rich source of vitamins and minerals which the body needs and we have already seen above the benefits obtained by eating fish containing Omega-3 fatty acids.
As long as all the amino acids are present, all protein is ultimately the same.
If pulses (the bean family) are combined with nuts and grains, or seeds (sunflower, pumpkin, sesame, etc.) then the body should be under no risk of protein deficiency.
But people who wish to reduce animal protein by including some vegetarian dishes in their diet should make sure that they include eggs.
Eggs are the perfect protein, containing all eight essential amino acids, so they can make up for any deficiency that may be caused elsewhere.
INCREASE FIBRE
Fibre helps you slim; and we should be eating at least 30 grams a day of it.
Fibre is unrefined carbohydrate.
It is a complex carbohydrate and consists of starches and fibre bound up together in such things as bread, potatoes, fruit, vegetables, nuts and pulses.
Fibre is important to us in healthy eating because it provides filling food without being fattening.
Bulky carbohydrates satisfy our hunger with less than half the calories weight for weight of fatty food: 1 gram of carbohydrate is 4 calories; 1 gram of fat is 9 calories.
There are two types of fibre — soluble and insoluble.
Insoluble fibre is found in cereals and in fibrous fruit and vegetables.
This fibre, or roughage, helps food and waste products to pass through the digestive system.
Food containing insoluble fibre is satisfying as it needs more chewing than other foods and, as it absorbs water and swells in the stomach, it is filling.
Soluble fibre, found in fruit, vegetables and pulses, helps prevent hunger between meals, as it delays the absorption of certain nutrients.
Without this fibre, there can be a large fall in the blood sugar level, which causes hunger.
Oat bran, which is the outer protective coating of the oat grain, is one of the best sources of soluble fibre and can be eaten raw or cooked.
The Fat and Fibre Counter later in the book lists the fibre in all the major foods but the following lists give a general idea of high and low fibre contents in some of the main foods:
HIGH
Peas Bran Prunes Beans Sweetcorn Bananas Wholemeal bread Brown rice Dried fruit Potatoes, baked Leafy vegetables
MEDIUM
Most green vegetables Most nuts Apples Oranges Celery
LOW
Potatoes, boiled White bread White rice Tomatoes Lettuce Cucumber Grapefruit
NONE
Meat Fish Eggs Sugar Milk Butter Cheese
REDUCE SALT
We eat up to ten times the amount of salt we actually need; on average about two teaspoonfuls a day, half of which is added by manufacturers during food processing.
Too much salt can cause high blood pressure, which can increase the risk of heart disease.
If you eat a balanced diet you will get all the salt you need without having to add it to your diet.
Try reducing your use of salt slowly over a period of weeks and use flavouring substitutes like herbs, spices and lemon juice.
Try to break the habit of adding salt at the table, if necessary using a low sodium salt substitute.
And cut down on crisps, salted meat, salted fish and processed canned foods.
A WAY OF LIFE
In a recent survey carried out for New Woman magazine, 500 women aged between 20 and 45 were asked about their personal experiences of losing weight.
The majority claimed that the best method for them was simply cutting down on fattening foods, and following healthy eating habits.
The report concluded that ‘all the evidence is that while a gradual change in eating patterns may yield slower results, those results are far more likely to prove permanent’.
The Walking Diet is not a short term cure.
It is a long term solution to fitness and health.
Walking makes you slim, builds cardiovascular fitness, and can develop into a long term habit that you can use for the rest of your life.
And your own personal ‘diata’ will help you to build up the long term eating habits that are necessary for good health.
We have suggested that ‘diata’ means a way of living; it means taking a holistic viewpoint on the food we eat and the exercise our bodies need.
It means taking into account our current eating habits and including in our diet the necessary changes that are required to maintain a healthy lifestyle.
Don't let anyone tell you that diet and exercise don't go together.
THEY DO.
A balanced healthy approach to lifestyle (your own personal ‘diata’) is a balance between healthy eating, exercise and relaxation.
AND DON'T FORGET!
Homo sedentarius is most of us: your spouse perhaps, your father, Uncle Fred, the family next door, the girl sitting all day behind the reception desk at work.
Don't become next year's statistics.
Switch off the television set, follow the recipes, get out and  walk, and just LET GO.
Remember, your health is in your own hands; or should that be feet?
WALKING MAKES YOU SLIM
If you do not get active and stay active, you've got a snowball's chance in hell of maintaining any weight loss.
You will face semi-starvation for the rest of your life if you remain sedentary and want to control your weight.
MARTIN KATAHN — THE ROTATION DIET
Millions of people have already discovered the magic of walking and are walking regularly for fitness, slimness and health.
Why cause ourselves so much anxiety, and spend so much time, money and energy on failed diet/exercise routines when the answer to all our problems is staring us right in the face.
Walking is the easiest, cheapest, most convenient, most effective (in the long term) exercise of all.
And we have been doing it all our lives.
The only problem is that we are not doing enough of it and in the right way.
To begin with we already have a solid foundation from which to build our exercise programme.
We all walk a certain amount every day of our lives, even if we are sedentary, and that is  easier than starting from scratch for the first time jogging or cycling.
Our bodies already use the muscles required to walk, so it is simply a question of increasing the duration and then the intensity of our walking in order to build up to the fitness level that we require.
But it is still boring old walking, isn't it?
No, it isn't.
Forget about strolling down to the shops to get a newspaper or sauntering in the park with the family on Sundays.
For that is exactly what it is, strolling and sauntering.
There is nothing wrong with that.
Both activities can be very enjoyable But neither activity will get you very far in your quest for fitness, and to be honest they give walking a bad name.
Brisk fitness walking — aerobic walking — is an exhilarating experience.
Aerobic walking provides all the fitness benefits of jogging, cycling and rowing with less chance of injury, ‘burn-out’ and sheer boredom.
And it really does make you slim.
HOW IT WORKS
There was a time when diet books insisted that exercise could not help in losing weight.
But these days most people would agree that regular whole body continuous exercise, such as brisk fitness walking, is an effective way of losing weight, particularly fat.
And it works for several reasons:
1
IT'S AEROBIC — The key to walking aerobically is to walk at a pace of 3.5 — 4.0 miles per hour for a minimum of 20 minutes, during which time the heart rate is elevated to 60–85 per cent of its
maximum.
Below 60 per cent the exercise will not have an aerobic effect and only very fit people can gain any aerobic effect above the 85 per cent level (see Table 3).
If you think about it, air is essentially the ‘breath of life’.
We cannot live without it, but many of us are living each day with too little of it.
Our sedentary lifestyle induces shallow breathing and instead of inhaling as much as 3,000 cubic centimetres of air, we often inhale as little as 500 cubic centimetres.
Imagine what the performance of your motor car would be like if you reduced the air supply to the carburettor.
It would jump and shudder and you would have a very uncomfortable ride.
Lack of sufficient oxygen affects our bodies in the same way.
We feel tired and sluggish and cannot be bothered to do anything.
We are trying to run our bodies on too little air.
Aerobic means literally ‘with oxygen’ and walking aerobically causes the lungs to take in more air with less effort.
The lungs are then able  to extract more oxygen from the increased air supply and deliver it to the cells where it is needed to combine with food to produce energy.
It is this increase in oxygen that provides the extra fuel to burn up the food in our internal fire.
When oxygen is supplied to a flame it burns faster; the same thing happens to our body when we walk aerobically.
The action of the lungs works like a bellows which enriches the internal fire where food is converted into energy.
The result is an improvement in the vital efficiency of the lungs and the whole cardiovascular (CV) system.
As the CV system improves, the blood vessels enlarge and become more elastic, and the heart becomes bigger and stronger.
The muscles are strengthened by an increased flow of blood, as are the ligaments that attach them to the bones.
Strength and mobility of joints improves, and because the muscles need more energy, stored body fat is broken down and utilised, leading to a reduction in weight.
It is the heart and lungs that help to determine the fitness of the whole body.
Other organs, although vital in their own way, cannot survive without a blood supply rich in oxygen and nutrients.
Whenever you run for a train, cope with stress at work, or lose your temper, the heart and lungs have to cope with the extra demands placed on them.
Your heart beats faster; your lungs take in more air.
And it is the healthy CV system that can cope easily with all the strains placed upon it by modern living.
Conversely, it is the weak CV system that is easy prey to high blood pressure, coronary attack, colds, viruses, and other diseases.
Listen to what Gabe Mirkin and Martshall Hoffmann in The Sportsmedicine Book say about the athlete's heart:
Because the athlete's heart is so muscular it can pump the same amount of blood with 50 beats per minute that the average heart pumps with 75 beats.
Thus the athlete's heart will beat 13 million fewer times per year.
It works less, rests more, and consequently takes a much longer time to wear out.
You may not end up with an athlete's heart through aerobic walking, but you will have gone a long way to improving its strength and efficiency, thus ensuring a longer and healthier life.
You should now be able to see that aerobic walking is vigorous sustained exercise that provides all the health and fitness benefits of jogging, cycling and rowing.
And it is this regular aerobic routine that speeds up the body by increasing its metabolic rate and gives it the ability to shed those extra pounds.
2
IT INCREASES YOUR METABOLIC RATE — Aerobic exercise such as brisk walking speeds up your metabolic rate.
Basal or resting metabolic rate (BMR) is the speed your body burns calories at rest — in other words carrying out the job of staying alive: blood circulation, cell growth, digestion, thinking and so on.
The BMR of a man or woman is dependent on weight, height, fitness and body composition.
Body composition is the amount of lean muscle compared with fat.
A fat 60 kilogram person will have less lean tissue in total body mass than a thin 60 kilogram person, the difference being the excess fat.
A person's total daily need for calories is the amount of calories needed to maintain BMR plus the calories needed for movement, i.e. physical activity.
Everyone's BMR is different.
The important  thing is that we can influence it through aerobic exercise.
The problem of dieting without increased physical activity is that the BMR slows down rather than speeds up.
Then when you stop dieting, the body, which has been acting in a kind of starvation mode, finds that it has become used to its new BMR and requires less calories to function.
And so it deposits the extra calories it does not need as fat.
Dieting without exercise also forces the body to manage on less oxygen, and it reduces its oxygen intake even further when it has to take energy, not from food, but from the body itself.
In contrast, during aerobic walking the heart and respiratory rates increase and the BMR speeds up.
It is the increase in oxygen and the increased BMR that burns off excess calories and keeps them off forever.
Generally speaking, compared with being sedentary (sitting watching TV, working at a desk), you will burn around three times more calories walking at 3 miles an hour.
And when you walk aerobically at 4 miles an hour, you will burn around five times more calories than you would being sedentary.
Table 4 is an estimate of the calories you can expect to burn off as you increase your activity from a gentle stroll to brisk aerobic walking.
It is based on a person weighing 150 pounds.
These figures are only estimates because people have different metabolic rates.
Men normally have higher BMRs than women because a larger part of their total body weight is muscle tissue, and muscle tissue can burn up to three times more energy than fat tissue, even when it is inactive.
Aerobic walking will help change your body composition by increasing the amount of muscle   tissue compared with fat tissue.
This is important because up to half the weight normally lost on calorie-reducing diets without exercise is muscle tissue.
And this loss of muscle tissue lowers BMR rather than increases it.
This is the problem of dieting without exercise.
You can end up losing weight, lowering your BMR and be stuck with maintaining a semi-starvation diet to keep the pounds off.
Regular aerobic walking, on the other hand, will increase your BMR and still allow you to eat well and stay healthy and slim.
Increased BMR is good news for aerobic walkers.
For not only does it burn off on average up to 100 calories for every 15 minutes of activity, but the raised BMR can continue to burn off calories for several hours after exercising is over.
And there is evidence to suggest that sustained aerobic walking not only increases BMR but that the increased BMR continues permanently.
3
IT SHEDS FAT — Most diets are calorie based and rely on calorie restriction for results.
Until recently it had always been assumed that all calories are the same, regardless of where they came from.
In other words a fat calorie was exactly the same as a carbohydrate or a protein calorie.
And if we overate on any one of them then any surplus energy would end up by making us fat.
However, recent research has confirmed that all calories are not the same.
Studies at Stanford University and the Human Nutrition Centre in Maryland, USA, have overturned the conventional wisdom.
In one research study a group of overweight women were given a high fat diet while another group received a low fat diet.
Both provided the same amount of calories.
It  was found that women on the high fat diet gained weight more easily than women on the low fat diet and a similar project for men reached the same conclusion.
The Vanderbilt Weight Management Program in the USA has produced similar results.
Martin Katahn confirms that ‘it's the fat in your diet that makes you fat…when it comes to being fat and overweight, it's primarily the fat calories that count, not the carbohydrate and protein calories’(T-Factor Diet ).
In the typical Western diet all the energy in protein is burned up daily and none is converted and stored as fat.
And whereas protein and carbohydrates use 25 per cent of energy converting dietary fat to body fat, fat itself requires very little energy to convert dietary fat to body fat-3 per cent in fact.
It is the ease with which the body converts dietary fat to body fat that causes the main problem in weight control.
It is not just weight control that we need but fat control.
Although the body is not as efficient at converting excess carbohydrate to body fat as it is at converting dietary fat to body fat, it was thought until recently that any extra calories would still end up as body fat.
This has now been disproved.
Under most circumstances the body converts very little carbohydrate to body fat.
Our bodies are designed to burn carbohydrates and store fats.
And this is where metabolic rate (BMR) comes in again.
Because if you eat a regular high carbohydrate diet then your BMR is likely to be higher than a person eating a high fat diet.
Your body has to work that much harder to convert the additional carbohydrate into energy and it is this thermic effect which can burn off up to another 200–300 calories each day.
And remember that this is  in addition to the calories you are burning away every day during aerobic walking, another 200–400 calories depending upon time and effort.
The thermic effect (thermogenesis) is the action of the body in burning up excess calories consumed as food energy to produce heat.
The additional thermic effect produced by the Walking Diet (low fat food and aerobic exercise) will gradually help produce the change in body shape that you desire and bring you back to your target weight.
As we know, exercise plays an important part in any diet/exercise routine, but the key thing is that all exercise is not the same.
Aerobic walking carried out as part of the Walking Diet will burn off more fat during the activity period than carbohydrate.
Not only will you burn off up to 300 calories walking briskly at 4 miles an hour for 45 minutes, but up to 180 of these calories will be fat calories.
In contrast, if you perform an anaerobic (literally ‘without air’) activity such as squash for 45 minutes, then you will burn off up to 650 calories but only around 260 of these will be fat calories.
This is because regular continuous aerobic exercise like brisk walking is a fat burning activity whereas start-stop anaerobic exercises like squash and tennis are carbohydrate burning activities.
During aerobic walking your heart and breathing rates increase, level out, then remain there for the duration of the exercise.
Your body is supplied with the oxygen it needs when it needs it to burn in its fuel mixture.
Anaerobic exercise on the other hand requires short sudden bursts of energy which are provided by fuel supplied from the muscles, and not from the increased oxygen supply provided by aerobic exercise.
This leads to  the feeling of rapid heart beat and breathlessness that is typical of anaerobic exercise.
The good news for everyone is that aerobic walking has the greatest effect around the hips and thighs where fat tends to accumulate, particularly in women.
This is good news for all women who have been unsuccessful with hip and thigh diets that concentrate mainly on dieting and calorie-counting.
It's also good news for men who are trying to lose weight around their hips and thighs and especially their waistlines.
Regular aerobic activity not only burns off this excess fat, but it keeps it off forever.
I hope you are now convinced that regular aerobic walking is the answer to all your exercise and diet needs and that you cannot wait to get out and try it.
As the saying goes, the journey of a thousand miles begins with just one step, so by now you should be thinking of putting all your good intentions into practice and getting out to walk.
STARTING OUT
This walk is the beginning of a habit which will change the rest of your life.
So put on suitable clothing and a pair of comfortable sturdy shoes and set yourself a target of a 20 minute brisk invigorating walk.
You can walk almost anywhere that is convenient and safe, but we have found that the easiest and quickest way to build a regular walking habit is to walk right out our own front door and do a circuit around the block and back again.
Once you start walking regularly you can vary your walks by going to the park, the beach or the hills.
But in the beginning you should make it as easy as possible  to get into the habit without excuses getting in the way.
The aim is to start walking and keep walking.
But first a HEALTH WARNING!
If you are uncertain about your physical condition; if you are overweight, suffer from cardiovascular or respiratory disease, or have a medically diagnosed problem, then you should consult your doctor before starting to walk briskly.
And beware of the passive fitness syndrome.
Just because you are thin and never suffer a day's illness does not mean that you can embark on an energetic walking programme without building up to it.
The advice is always the same.
Warm up first (follow the exercises in Chapter 6 — The Walker's Workout), start slowly and don't hurt yourself, for that is the fastest way to break the routine in your programme and is often the reason why so many exercise programmes fail.
The resting pulse rate (heart rate) is a rough guide to your general physical condition.
It is a barometer which determines your state of wellbeing, stress or illness.
It should be taken first thing in the morning, before it has had time to be increased by exertion, mental excitement, eating, or stimulants like tea, coffee or nicotine.
Take your resting pulse rate by first sitting quietly in a chair and breathing normally.
Then use either of the following methods:
1
Place the first two fingers of your right hand on the main artery of the inner wrist of your left hand just below the base of the thumb.
Count the number of beats in either 15 or 30 seconds and multiply by either four or two to obtain the resting pulse rate.
2
Place two fingers on your neck beside your windpipe; you will feel the pulse.
This is the  carotid artery which carries blood to the head.
Count the number of beats in the same way as for the wrist.
Whatever you do, don't press both sides of the neck at the same time: you could diminish the flow of blood to the head, or even cut it off.
Your pulse rate changes throughout the day.
It is lowest whilst sleeping.
On awakening it will rise from five to ten beats a minute, and during the day it will rise gradually and may be up to ten beats higher at bedtime than it was when you got up in the morning.
Pulse rates vary greatly.
Generally speaking, the lower the resting pulse rate, the healthier you are.
The average for men is between 70 and 85 a minute; a woman's pulse tends to be faster at 75–90 beats a minute.
If your pulse rate is between 90 and 100, it is likely that you are unfit, and a brisk walking routine will gradually bring it down.
Having said that, some people have normal pulse rates up to 100 and some athletes and other normal people have pulse rates as low as 40.
The main thing to remember is that the heart is simply a pump: the less work it has to do (the less beats it makes), the longer it is going to last.
You should now begin your walking routine to suit your physical condition.
If you have been sedentary for some time and are not used to physical exertion, then you should begin slowly, walking for no more than 20 minutes every other day, at a pace which stretches you but does not overtire you.
Your goal should be to exert yourself a little more each time until you reach a brisk pace and you feel comfortable with it.
On alternate days walk at a slower pace to help you build up a regular habit of walking.
Then continue walking at this pace until you feel ready to go on to the 30 day  walk back to fitness programme later in this chapter.
Whatever you do don't hurt yourself.
It is at the beginning of an exercise routine, when the desire for results exceeds the ability to cope, that you will suffer from musculo-skeletal injuries.
It's at this point that so many people give up.
The beauty of walking is that no matter where you start, you can gradually build up the duration and intensity of your routine until you reach the fitness level that you require.
If you are already physically active, then you should start out with a brisk, vigorous walk for 20 minutes, stretching yourself as you walk.
At the end of it you should feel refreshed.
If you feel tired then you are going too fast.
If you cannot hold a conversation with someone without getting out of breath then you are going too fast.
The key to the whole thing is to listen to what your body is telling you and to slow down if necessary.
You should walk briskly every other day, and on alternate days walk for 20 minutes at a slower pace to build up a regular routine, until you feel ready to go on to the 30-day walk back to fitness programme at the end of this chapter.
To get the real benefits of aerobic walking and to walk towards that fitter, slimmer you, then you have to achieve a walking heart rate between 60 per cent and 85 per cent of your maximum heart rate (refer again to Table 3).
There is a simple way of calculating your aerobic walking rate.
Subtract your age from 220.
This gives your maximum heart rate in beats per minute.
Then multiply that figure by 0.60 (60 per cent) for the lower end of your aerobic walking rate and by 0.85 (85 per cent ) for the higher end.
After you have been walking for about ten  minutes take your pulse.
You will need a watch that records seconds for this.
Take your pulse in the same way that you calculated your resting pulse rate earlier.
If your heart is beating beyond the high end of your aerobic range then you are walking too fast.
If you are unfit, three miles an hour will probably be a comfortable rate to walk at to reach your aerobic range.
When you first start out you should stick to the lower end of your aerobic range (60 per cent) until you feel comfortable with it.
Then as you progress, measure your aerobic improvement by taking your pulse at several points during the walk and immediately upon finishing.
This will ensure that you remain within your aerobic range.
As your fitness improves you will find that your heart rate decreases while performing the same level of exercise.
This is because the increased size and strength of the heart muscle enables it to pump a larger volume of blood into the arteries with each beat.
Once you are comfortable walking at the 60 per cent level, then experiment up to the 70–75 per cent level.
You should not need to go higher than this.
At this level you should get all the fitness, slimness and cardiovascular benefits that you need.
But as you progress from the 60 per cent level upwards, remember that your body is the best judge of what feels comfortable.
If it hurts then slow down.
Gentle stretching is what is needed, not painful exertion.
There is nothing more demoralising than coming home with an injury which keeps you out of action for a few weeks.
WALKING WITH THE WEATHER
You should keep up your walking routine regardless of the weather.
There are few days when the weather is so unpleasant that it is impossible to walk; and even on a rainy day there are often periods when the rain stops.
After all, the weather does not normally stop you getting to work, playing golf, or getting on with the rest of your life.
On a cold day you can keep your whole body warm with far less clothing than you may think.
The main thing is to wear gloves, cover your head and neck, and keep your thighs warm.
When the extremities are warm, the whole body can be kept warm with light clothing.
If you start to feel too warm you can always take off the hat and gloves.
Don't put on too many sweaters.
Instead, wear several light layers of clothing that can easily be added or removed as you walk.
There are some excellent lightweight clothes available these days made from such materials as Gore-Tex, which keep out the wind and rain but allow your sweat to evaporate.
For warm-weather walking, wear light-coloured clothes to reflect the heat and light, and if it is sunny, wear a brimmed hat.
Choose a time of day such as early morning, late afternoon, or early evening to walk.
Don't let the weather put you off.
Once you build up a regular routine you will want to get outside whatever the weather is doing.
And remember that you are walking for the psychological benefits as well as the fitness and slimness benefits.
Each season has its own delights to offer.
Mist and fog, snow, spring rain, and summer heat are all attractive and beautiful to the walker who takes the time to look.
FINDING YOUR STRIDE
Pace is the key to finding your stride and reaching a good rhythm in your walking.
Set off at a good pace with the longest stride that is comfortable, letting your arms swing naturally in opposition to your feet.
The arms should move at the same speed as the legs.
Relax your shoulders, then as you walk the arms will swing by themselves.
When your right foot swings forward, your left arm will swing with it; when your left foot swings forward, your right arm will swing in opposition to it.
The arms and shoulders move and swing in a pendulum motion in counterbalance to the legs and hips.
The legs and hips have the largest muscles in the body: let them set the rhythm, then let the arms follow that rhythm.
You will notice that as your legs speed up so do your arms.
Your elbows will bend naturally and you will feel the natural flow of brisk rhythmic walking.
With each stride you will begin to feel yourself reaching further with your hips.
This is good news!
The more you stretch your hips the more you will improve your shape.
If you continue to stretch your hips forward, you will find that they move naturally without any sort of exaggerated wiggle.
You will now want to make sure that your feet are landing in the right place.
The most comfortable and efficient way is to use the heel-toe method.
The heel of your leading foot should touch the ground, just before the ball of the foot and toes.
Then, as the heel touches the ground, lock your ankle and shift your weight forward with the knee bent, rocking forward onto the toes and using them to push you off to the next step.
WALKING TO YOUR GOAL WEIGHT
The first thing to do is to find a pair of old jeans or other piece of favourite clothing that is too tight and use this as a measure for making progress.
There is nothing like the thrill a week or two later of being able to get back into clothing that you thought had been discarded forever.
Next, weigh yourself and make a note of it.
If you don't know your height then measure that too.
Then check yourself against the Height/Weight Chart (see Table 5).
For each height there is an acceptable weight range covering small to large frames.
If you are a woman your goal weight should be nearer the lower figure; for men, depending on build, it should be towards the higher end of the scale.
You now have a goal to aim for.
But don't get obsessed with weight watching.
Body weight fluctuates rapidly at times.
Weigh yourself once a week and try to get back into your chosen piece of clothing.
If you build up an aerobic walking programme you will soon see the excess pounds drop away and you will feel and look fitter and slimmer without weight watching.
By now you should have been out on several practice walks and determined your state of fitness.
You should be listening carefully to what your body is telling you and you should be judging your pace and duration so that you finish tired and refreshed, not exhausted.
You are now ready to make some real progress.
But don't look for instant results.
Concentrate rather on the walking itself.
Get into the habit first of feeling the sheer thrill and exhilaration of getting out of doors away from telephones, noise, and distractions.
Think about how good you feel.
Tell yourself that this is a habit which is going to change your life forever, and that it is going to bring you the health, fitness and slimness that you deserve.
I promise you that if you persevere with aerobic walking the psychological benefits alone will make you want to get out every day.
So let yourself go.
You are learning to do the most natural thing in the world.
This is what your body was designed for.
DISTANCE, TIME AND SPEED
As we have stressed previously, the easiest way to begin aerobic walking is to walk out of your own front door and do a circuit round the block and back, or around some other convenient route that is known to you.
You will need to gauge the distances covered so the best way is to take a car ride around your proposed route and use the odometer to measure the distance between familiar landmarks.
Alternatively, some bicycles have an odometer on them which you could use in the same way.
As you build up your walking program, you will need to increase the length of your circuit if you are going to cover several miles.
And you will need to measure it.
Or you can simply cover as many circuits as you want around the same track in the way that athletes do circuit training on a track.
And you will want to calculate your speed.
It is useful to remember the following formulas:
1
Distance = Speed x Time
2
Speed = Distance/Time
3
Time = Distance/Speed
If you know any two of the above variables, it is easy to work out the third.
Time is the easiest to measure: most people have a watch.
So if you can measure the distance, it is then easy to calculate the speed.
Once you begin to stray from easily measured routes and landmarks, you will need to acquire a pedometer.
A pedometer is a small gadget that clips onto your belt and you adjust it to the length of your own stride to measure the distance covered.
With the help of your watch, it will also tell you the speed at which you are travelling.
Pedometers can be purchased in most sports shops and large department stores.
There are two further methods to estimate the distance covered whilst walking:
1
WALKING SPEEDS (M.P.H.)— Walk for one mile along the route you have previously measured with the car's odometer and time yourself.
If it took you 15 minutes then you were walking at 4 m.p.h.: Speed = Distance/Time = 1 mile/0.25 hours
As you vary your walking pace (increase your speed), then repeat the above method to calculate your new walking speed.
You will soon get a feel for the speed you walk at and be able to judge different walking paces (2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0 m.p.h.).
If you can estimate your speed, and you know the time, then it is easy to work out the distance: Distance = Speed x Time
2
THE STEP METHOD — Count the number of steps that you take in one minute at your normal walking speed.
Since the average stride is approximately two feet per step and there are 5,280 feet in one mile then it will take 2,640 steps to cover one mile.
If your speed is 176 steps per minute then it will take 15 minutes to cover one mile: Distance = Speed x Time = 176 steps/min x 15 mins = 2,640 steps
You may want to measure your exact stride in the way that a pedometer does.
To do this, measure the distance from toe to toe or heel to heel when you take a normal stride.
The easiest way is to get someone to help you.
Then calculate the distance walked in the same way as above.
All this may sound very complicated.
It is.
The easiest way to measure distance is to get hold of a pedometer.
WALK BACK TO HEALTH & FITNESS IN 30 DAYS
At the same time as you begin your 30 day walking programme, you should also begin the 30 day Walking Diet as detailed in Chapter 4.
You should be aiming to lose 1–2 lbs per week until you get back to your goal weight.
This is quite enough to lose, and it is the most efficient way to control weight loss.
It is quite normal of course to have a rapid weight loss of several pounds in the first week due mainly to water loss (our bodies are 70 per cent water).
Although the walking programme and the diet routine are organised through Day 1 to 30, we  recommend that you begin the programme on a Monday, as the aerobic walking gradually builds up throughout the week, with more aerobic walking on weekends.
Before you walk, always warm up first (using the warm-up exercises in Chapter 6 — The Walker's Workout).
Then start slowly, and build up your speed as you go along.
As this chapter proceeds, there is an aerobic walking record for you to fill in.
If you wish, you can copy this and use it as an ongoing walking record after the 30 days.
The record will help to measure your progress and to motivate you; for it is motivation that will get you going, and it is motivation that will keep you going.
If you keep this up to date, then you can plan each day or week in advance, inserting where, when and for how long you are going to walk.
You will notice that each day is divided into a.m. and p.m.
Some days you may not be able to fit in your daily walk in one session, so you can divide it into an a.m. and a p.m. session.
However, we do not recommend that you split the times for your aerobic walks during the first 14 days.
Walk for 20 or 30 minutes aerobically, as directed, during this time, either a.m. or p.m.
Then, if you wish, split your walks into a.m. and p.m. on alternate days when you are walking at a moderate pace.
The times suggested throughout the 30 day programme are minimum times that you should walk each day.
If you hit your stride and get a rhythm going, you may feel comfortable going on a little longer than the minimum times.
If it feels good, then stretch a little further before finishing.
Then as you walk each day you can compare your actual, achieved time against your planned time; and you can record the distance, speed and any  other information about the route (whether it is flat, rough ground, or uphill).
At the end of each week you can then add up your total time and compare your planned and achieved time to measure your progress; and you can do the same thing at the end of 30 days.
Please don't treat your walking record as a chore to fill in every day.
Be businesslike about it.
Clearly defined aims and objectives will bring you the results you desire, and remember: if you don't know where you are going, then how are you going to know when you have got there.
WEEK 1
DAY 1 — Begin by walking aerobically (3.5 — 4.0 m.p.h.) for 20 minutes around the route you have measured out.
Set off at a good pace, with the longest stride that is comfortable, your arms swinging naturally in opposition to your legs.
Remember to take your pulse at intervals along the walk to make sure you are within your aerobic range.
DAY 2 — Walk for 20 minutes at a moderate pace and simply take in the joy of walking.
For the first three weeks you will be alternating aerobic walking with moderate walking for the first four days each week, followed by one day's rest.
This will help you get into the habit of regular walking without placing too much emphasis initially on results.
DAY 3 — Walk aerobically for 20 minutes.
Concentrate on finding your stride and building a good rhythm.
DAY 4 — Walk for 20 minutes at a moderate pace.
You will now be feeling the psychological as well as the aerobic benefits of regular walking.
You will not be able to wait to get out each day.
DAY 5 — Rest day.
DAY 6 — Walk aerobically for 20 minutes.
As we have stressed, the times quoted are minimum times.
Weekends are a good time to knock up those extra miles and get away from your measured route — into the country, etc.
DAY 7 — Repeat Day 6.
At the end of the first week you will have a solid foundation on which to build in future weeks.
You will already be feeling fitter, healthier, and be starting to shed the first few pounds of excess weight.
Week 2
DAY 8 — You are now starting to make progress, and can increase your walking time from 20 to 30 minutes each day.
The important thing is to increase time before pace; so walk at a moderate pace for 30 minutes, gently stretching yourself as you go.
DAY 9 — Walk aerobically for 30 minutes.
It normally takes the first ten minutes of any brisk walk to get into a rhythm and feel aerobic, so increasing the time from 20 to 30 minutes is effectively doubling the aerobic benefits.
DAY 10 — Walk at a moderate pace for 30 minutes.
Try early evening walks to de-stress after a hard day's work.
Feel the rhythm in your feet, calves, thighs, arms and shoulders.
Relax — and go with the flow.
DAY 11 — Walk aerobically for 30 minutes.
Think about the calories you are burning up — 200 for every 30 minute walk!
DAY 12 — Rest day.
DAY 13 — Walk aerobically for 30 minutes.
Remember that you are not only burning up calories while you walk, but your increased metabolic rate will keep burning up calories when you finish walking.
DAY 14 — Repeat Day 13.
WEEK 3
DAY 15 — The cumulative benefits of regular walking will now be starting to add up and you will be well on your way to that healthier, slimmer you.
You can now increase your walking time from 30 minutes to 45 minutes per day: walk at a moderate pace for 45 minutes.
Take your spouse, a friend, or the children for a walk.
DAY 16 — Walk aerobically for 45 minutes.
If you wish, split your walking time between a.m and p.m.
You can now start venturing away from your measured route and start looking for additional ways to clock up the extra miles — try walking to the shops instead of driving; try parking the car further away from work and walking the rest of the way; or getting off the bus or train one or two stops from your destination and walking the rest of the way.
DAY 17 — Walk at a moderate pace for 45 minutes.
Think of all the opportunities that are available each day to walk, instead of taking the easy option by using cars, buses, taxis and trains.
The miles all add up.
DAY 18 — Walk aerobically for 45 minutes.
In your aerobic walking record we mentioned that you should make a note of conditions about the route.
This is important because walking uphill requires more energy than walking along a level surface.
Uphill walking is a great calorie burner (up to 600 calories  an hour); even rough road surfaces help to burn off more calories.
Try small hills first.
DAY 19 — Rest day.
DAY 20 — Walk aerobically for 45 minutes.
Try energy breathing as you walk: breathe in through the nostrils counting 1 to 8 then out through the mouth counting 1 to 8.
DAY 21 — Repeat Day 20.
WEEK 4
DAY 22 — Only nine more days to go.
Today, walk at a moderate pace for 45 minutes.
Vary your walking routine with morning walks, lunchtime walks, late afternoon walks, early evening walks.
Try walking breaks instead of coffee breaks.
The miles all add up.
DAY 23 — Walk aerobically for 45 minutes.
Over the past week you have been walking away a minimum of 300 calories a day during your walk, and your increased metabolic rate will have been burning up another few hundred calories when you have finished walking.
And all this is in addition to the calories you will be shedding by using the low fat recipes in the Walking Diet.
DAY 24 — Walk aerobically for 45 minutes.
See the world at 4 miles an hour; this is what your body was designed for.
DAY 25 — Repeat Day 24.
Cultivate awareness: savour the sights and sounds of the journey.
Walk to break out of the pattern and routine of normal daily living.
DAY 26 — Rest day.
DAY 27 — Walk aerobically for 45 minutes.
Try inner walking and walking meditation (see Chapter 8).
Discover who you are.
Walk for the inner benefits as well as the fitness and slimness benefits.
DAY 28 — Repeat Day 27.
DAY 29 — Almost there!
Only two days left.
Walk aerobically today for 45 minutes.
After four weeks of aerobic workouts, you  have built the foundations for a lifetime's health and fitness.
DAY 30 — The final day: walk aerobically for 45 minutes.
Feel the wind in your hair, and the satisfaction of a task well done.
In the past 30 days you have been training your body to work at its optimum potential; and you will now have a good idea of what you can achieve by using the Walking Diet recipes and aerobic walking.
Keep walking!
It may take longer than 30 days to achieve your goal weight; it depends how much you need to lose.
But when you do achieve it, you will find that you can then use aerobic walking as part of an ongoing maintenance programme to keep you at your goal weight.
In future you will be in control of your own body.
Once you have reached your goal weight, you will want to maintain the health, fitness and slimness benefits that you have achieved.
You should continue to walk aerobically for a minimum of 30 minutes each day, four times a week; and you should continue to use the low fat Walking Diet recipes and adapt them to your own diet.
Everyone binges on food from time to time, particularly at Christmas and holiday periods, but you will find that once aerobic walking becomes an enjoyable habit, it will be easy to walk away those excess pounds any time you need to.
You simply use the Walking Diet, put your foot down, and clock up the necessary aerobic miles to get you back to your goal weight.
THE WALKING DIET
‘Will you walk a little faster–’ said a whiting to a snail
LEWIS CARROLL
The recipes in the Walking Diet are easy to follow and quickly prepared, so that even the busiest people have a chance to cook mouth-watering food that is full of goodness and at the same time is low in fat.
Having formed the habit of buying lots of fresh fruit and vegetables, fish, white meat and low fat alternatives to dairy products, we need to cook interesting and attractively presented dishes.
This is not difficult, even for an inexperienced cook.
The recipes are very versatile.
In many cases, you can change the meat or fish suggested, to make an equally tasty dish.
For instance, Swordfish Pilaki could easily be made with halibut or cod and the Tuna Tortiglioni could be made with any other fish or indeed some ham cut into pieces.
Use smoked mackerel, smoked trout or kippers instead of smoked salmon to make a pate and use other vegetables for the kebabs.
When shopping, see which are the best foods available.
Many of the most highly regarded chefs choose their menus after seeing for themselves which the freshest foods are at the market!
If it is more convenient to prepare, for instance, Day 5's recipes on Day 3, then do so, as long as within the week you are eating a balance of meat, fish, vegetables and fruit.
Some people prefer to eat their main meal at lunchtime and their light meal in the evening, whereas for others it is more practical to do the reverse.
Therefore, adapt the diet according to your lifestyle, to your personal diata.
The diet is laid out in such a way that, starting on a Monday, the slightly more elaborate meals are at the weekend.
If you wish to start on another day, by all means do so; simply change the order within the week if you so wish.
Bearing in mind that many people eat lunch at work, most of the light meal dishes can be taken to work either in a food container or, for a more filling lunch, pocketed in some pitta bread.
Add more spices, herbs or garlic if this is to your taste.
Adapt some of your own favourite recipes to low fat versions by using methods suggested in these recipes, such as cooking onions in water or in chopped tomatoes instead of frying them.
A meal should be an occasion enjoyed by all.
Too many people nowadays seem to eat while watching television, hardly noticing what or how much they are eating.
How much nicer for a family or friends or even just oneself to sit at a table set for a meal!
At the end of this chapter, there are suggestions for eating out and entertaining.
If one is entertaining friends or business colleagues, it is nice to offer three courses, but this does not have to be the case every day.
When eating on your own or with the family, serve a variety of crudités (raw vegetables) soaked in lemon juice or with a little reduced calorie mayonnaise as a dip.
Thin strips of carrot, celery, cucumber and pepper, cauliflower florets and chicory leaves are all excellent foods, taste good and look appetising.
Generally, eat fresh fruit or yogurt as a dessert.
Take advantage of the enormous variety of fruit now to be found in the shops.
Whatever the circumstances, always present the food in an attractive way!
RECIPES
All recipes are for two people.
Simply halve or multiply quantities as required.
DAY 1 — GREEK SALAD
crispy lettuce leaves (Iceberg or Cos)
1 beef tomato, cut into wedges
cucumber, cut into wedges
raw onion rings (soaked in cold water for half an hour if possible)
75 g (3 oz) Feta cheese
8 black olives
2 lemon wedges
lemon juice
freshly ground pepper
Arrange salad, squeeze over some lemon juice and add freshly ground pepper.
Garnish with lemon wedges and serve with pitta bread.
SALMON RISOTTO
150 g (6 oz) boneless fresh salmon
1 medium onion, chopped
½ fennel, chopped
1 small tin sweetcorn, drained
100 g (4 oz) frozen petits pois
300 ml (10 fl oz) fish stock
75 ml (3 fl oz) white wine
75 ml (3 fl oz) water
3 ml (½ tsp) Nam Pla fish sauce
(available from Oriental delicatessens)
freshly ground pepper and salt
100 g (4 oz) risotto rice
5 ml (1 tsp) sunflower oil
2 wedges of lime
Poach the salmon in the white wine and water for 5 minutes.
Remove the salmon.
Cook the fennel, onion and petits pois gently in the cooking liquid for 10 minutes, then put with the salmon, reserving the cooking juices.
Add the fish stock to the juices and keep warm.
In another pan, warm the sunflower oil.
Add the Risotto rice and, stirring continuously, cook for 2–3 minutes.
Add 150 ml (6 fl oz) of the stock to the rice and simmer, stirring occasionally, until the liquid is absorbed.
Add a further 150 ml of the stock, repeating the process.
Finally, add the rest of the stock and the salt and pepper.
If the rice is still not cooked, add a small amount of water.
Stir in the Nam Pla fish sauce, sweetcorn, petits pois, fennel and onion and finally, for a few moments, the salmon.
Garnish with wedges of lime.
DAY 2 — SMOKED MACKEREL AND RED KIDNEY BEAN SALAD
1 large smoked mackerel, skinned and flaked
1 small tin red kidney beans, drained
1 small onion, finely chopped
lemon juice
freshly ground pepper
4 chicory leaves
Mix the smoked mackerel, red kidney beans and onion together.
Squeeze over some lemon juice and add freshly  ground pepper.
Garnish with chicory leaves cut into rings.
Serve with a wedge of fresh wholemeal bread.
AUBERGINE A L'ITALIENNE
1 large aubergine
1 medium onion
1 small tin tomatoes
1 medium red pepper
100 g (4 oz) mushrooms
1 Mozzarella cheese
10 g (2 tsp) grated Parmesan cheese
10 g (2 tsp) chopped fresh basil
or 5g (1 tsp) dried mixed herbs
1 clove garlic, chopped
5 ml (1 tsp) Nam Pla fish sauce
freshly ground pepper and salt
Slice the aubergines into ⅓&in rings and chop onion.
Cook together in boiling, salted water for 10 minutes.
Drain and arrange in an ovenproof dish.
Chop the red pepper and mushrooms and arrange on the aubergines.
Pour the tomatoes over the vegetables.
Add the garlic, herbs, Nam Pla fish sauce, salt and pepper.
Slice the Mozzarella cheese fairly thinly and arrange on the vegetables.
Sprinkle the Parmesan cheese over the top.
Bake in a preheated oven, Gas Mark 6,(200C/400F), for 30 minutes.
Put under a hot grill for a few moments until golden.
Serve with crusty brown bread.
DAY 3 — SHREDDED HAM AND GRAPE PITTA /OPEN SANDWICH
75 g (3 oz) lean cooked ham, shredded
75 g (3 oz) grapes, halved and seeded
6 capers, chopped
10 ml (2 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
freshly ground pepper
Mix all ingredients together and pile into a wholemeal pitta or onto a slice of fresh wholemeal bread.
SPAGHETTI ALLE VONGOLE
1 tin baby clams
1 medium onion, chopped
100 g (4 oz) frozen petits pois
50 g (2 oz) mushrooms, sliced
1 tin chopped tomatoes
1 clove garlic, chopped
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh parsley
or 3 ml (I/2 tsp) dried mixed herbs
5 ml (1 tsp) tomato puree
75 ml (3 fl oz) white wine or water
5 ml (1 tsp) Nam Pla fish sauce
freshly ground pepper and salt
spaghetti (wholewheat) cooked as directed
2 wedges of lemon
Cook the onion, garlic and petits pois in the tomatoes for 10 minutes.
Add the mushrooms, herbs, tomato puree, wine or water, fish sauce and salt and pepper.
Finally, add the clams.
Serve the spaghetti with the clam sauce poured over.
Garnish with wedges of lemon.
DAY 4 — WATERCRESS AND KIWI FRUIT SALAD
watercress
2 kiwi fruit, peeled and cut into pieces
cucumber, cut into small pieces
6 radishes, sliced
6 cashews, chopped
5 ml (1 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
10 ml (2 tsp) low fat natural yogurt
freshly ground black pepper
Mix salad ingredients together.
Combine mayonnaise and yogurt and mix with salad.
Scatter over the chopped cashews and add some freshly ground black pepper.
TORTILLA
1 medium onion
1 red pepper
2 medium potatoes, peeled, cut into ⅓&in slices and boiled
3 ml (1/2 tsp) dried mixed herbs
5 ml (1 tsp) sunflower oil
3 eggs
freshly ground pepper and salt
Cook the chopped onion and red pepper in the sunflower oil in a non-stick frying pan.
Add the cooked potato slices and the herbs.
Whisk the eggs with a little water and some salt and pepper and pour over the vegetables.
Cook until the tortilla is set.
Serve with a green salad.
DAY 5 — STUFFED PEPPERS
1 medium green pepper (cut in half lengthways
1 medium red pepper and de-seeded)
1 medium onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
75 g (3 oz) brown rice, cooked
1 small tin tomatoes
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh rosemary
or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
freshly ground black pepper
Simmer the onion and garlic in the tomatoes, herbs and black pepper.
Remove the vegetables from the liquid and mix with the rice.
Arrange the rice and vegetable mixture into the pepper halves.
Put in an ovenproof  dish.
Make the cooking liquid up to 250 ml with water and pour over the peppers.
Cover the dish and bake in a preheated oven, Gas Mark 5 (190C/375F) for 30 minutes.
ROYAL INDIAN CHICKEN
2 chicken breast fillets
1 medium onion
100 g (4 oz) mushrooms, chopped
50 g (2 oz) ground almonds
125 g (5 oz) low-fat natural yogurt
10 ml (2 tsp) ground coriander
5 ml (1 tsp) ground cumin
3 ml (½ tsp) ground turmeric
3 ml (½ tsp) hot chilli powder
10 ml (2 tsp) lemon juice
200 ml (8 fl oz) water
freshly ground pepper and salt
toasted almonds
Cut the chicken into bite-size pieces and chop the onion.
Poach gently in the water for 20 minutes.
Add all other ingredients except the yogurt and toasted almonds.
Stir carefully and cook for a further 10 minutes.
Reduce liquid if necessary.
Add the yogurt.
Garnish the chicken with toasted almonds.
Serve with brown rice.
DAY 6 — JACKET POTATO WITH CHILLI BEANS
2 large baking potatoes
1 large tin red kidney beans
10 ml (2 tsp) tomato puree
chilli sauce
lemon juice
Bake the potatoes.
Heat the red kidney beans in the  mixture of tomato puree, chilli sauce and lemon juice.
Open the jacket potatoes lengthways and pile the chilli beans on top.
SWORDFISH PILAKI
125 g (5 oz) swordfish (or any white fish), skin removed
1 small onion, chopped
I clove garlic, chopped
small bunch celery leaves, chopped
150 g (6 oz) tomatoes, skinned and chopped
15 ml (1 tbsp) lemon juice
15 ml (1 tbsp) chopped fresh parsley
freshly ground pepper and salt
125 ml (5 fl oz) fish stock
4 green olives chopped
Simmer the onion, garlic, celery leaves and tomatoes in the fish stock for 10 minutes then add the swordfish.
Cook gently for a further 10 minutes then break the fish into bite-size pieces.
Reduce the liquid.
Stir in the lemon juice and parsley and add salt and pepper to taste.
Garnish with chopped green olives.
Serve with brown rice and a tomato and onion salad.
DAY 7 — SALADE NICOISE
1 tin tuna in brine, drained
1 tin anchovy fillets, soaked in milk to reduce saltiness
1 hard-boiled egg, quartered
8 green or black olives
watercress or any other salad leaf
1 beef tomato
1 small green pepper
1 small onion
1 clove garlic
10 ml (2 tsp) lemon juice
5 ml (1 tsp) olive oil
freshly ground black pepper
Combine all salad ingredients with the flaked tuna.
Toss in the dressing of lemon juice and olive oil.
Decorate with the anchovy fillets, olives and quarters of hardboiled egg and finally grind some black pepper over the salad.
TURKEY PROVENCAL
2 turkey breast fillets
1 small tin tomatoes
1 medium onion
100 g (4 oz) courgettes
50 g (2 oz) mushrooms
1 green or red pepper
50 g (2 oz) black olives
1 clove garlic
1 bouquet garni or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
freshly ground pepper and salt
This can be cooked in a large pan on top of the oven or in a casserole in the oven.
Chop vegetables.
Put all ingredients except mushrooms, pepper and olives into a pan or casserole.
Cook on top of oven or in preheated oven, Gas Mark 6 (200C/400F), for 40 minutes.
Add other vegetables and seasoning and cook for a further 10 minutes.
Serve with Lyonnaise potatoes and petits pois.
DAY 8 — POTATO AND HERRING SALAD
2 large potatoes
4 herring fillets
4 medium gherkins
10 ml (2 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
freshly ground black pepper
Boil the potatoes.
When cool, cut into small pieces and coat with the mayonnaise.
Cut the herring fillets and gherkins into small pieces and mix with the potatoes.
Add some freshly ground black pepper.
MUSHROOMS A LA GRECQUE
300 g (12 oz) mushrooms, chopped
1 medium onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
2 medium tomatoes, chopped
or 1 small tin tomatoes
1 green pepper, chopped
4 green olives, chopped
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh parsley
or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
1 bay leaf
75 ml (3 fl oz) water (unless using tinned tomatoes)
freshly ground pepper and salt
Cook the onion, garlic and tomatoes in the water for 10 minutes.
Add all other ingredients except the olives and cook for a further 5 minutes.
Garnish with the chopped green olives and serve with brown rice and a green salad.
DAY 9 — BEETROOT AND CHICORY SALAD
4 large cooked beetroot
2 heads chicory
lemon juice
freshly ground black pepper
Cut the beetroot into small pieces or grate it.
Cut the  chicory into rings.
Put the beetroot onto a plate and surround with the chicory.
Dribble over some lemon juice and grind some black pepper onto the salad.
PENNE WITH HAM
100 g (4 oz) penne (or other pasta shapes)
100 g (4 oz) cooked ham, cut into strips
100 g (4 oz) petits pois
1 medium onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
2 medium courgettes, cut into small pieces
75 g (3 oz) mushrooms, chopped
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh thyme
or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
dash Tabasco or chilli sauce
1 small tin tomatoes
freshly ground pepper and salt
Cook the pasta as directed.
Cook all other ingredients, except the ham, in the tomatoes, with a little added water if necessary, for 10 minutes.
Add the ham for a few moments, then stir the pasta into the sauce.
Serve with grated Parmesan cheese and a green salad.
DAY 10 — SWEETCORN AND RED PEPPER MAYONNAISE
1 large tin sweetcorn
1 medium red pepper
1 small onion
10 ml (2 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
cayenne pepper
Cut the red pepper into small pieces and grate the onion.
Mix all ingredients together.
Dust the top of the salad with cayenne pepper.
MACKEREL IN ORANGE DRESSING
2 mackerel, gutted
juice of 2 oranges
½&in piece root ginger, peeled and shredded
freshly ground black pepper
Place each mackerel in a parcel of foil with the orange juice, ginger and black pepper.
Bake in a preheated oven, Gas Mark 6 (200C/400F), for 20 minutes.
Serve with brown rice and a chicory and orange salad.
DAY 11 — WALDORF PITTA /OPEN SANDWICH
2 sticks celery
1 red apple
1 green apple
10 ml (2 tsp) chopped walnuts
1 small onion
15 ml (1 tbsp) low fat natural yogurt
lemon juice
freshly ground black pepper
Cut the celery and apples into small pieces and grate the onion.
Mix together all ingredients and pile into a wholemeal pitta or onto a slice of wholemeal bread.
LEEKS MORNAY
440 g (1 lb) leeks
1 medium onion, chopped
2 eggs, hard-boiled
150 g (6 oz) low fat Cheddar cheese
300 ml (10 fl oz) skimmed milk
15 g (½ oz) cornflour, mixed with a little water
freshly ground pepper and salt
Cook the leeks and onion in a steamer for 10 minutes.
Arrange in an ovenproof dish and put slices of hardboiled egg on top.
Add salt and pepper.
Make a white sauce with the milk and cornflour and add most of the grated cheese.
Pour the sauce over the leeks and egg.
Scatter the remaining grated cheese over the top.
Bake in a pre-heated oven, Gas Mark 5 (190C/375F) for 15 minutes.
Brown under the grill.
Serve with jacket potatoes and a green salad.
DAY 12 — PASTA SALAD
50 g (2 oz) cooked pasta shapes
2 medium tomatoes, cut into small pieces
cucumber, cut into small pieces
8 capers
5 ml (1 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
10 ml (2 tsp) low fat natural yogurt
dash of soy sauce
freshly ground black pepper
lemon wedges
Combine all ingredients.
Arrange on a plate and garnish with lemon wedges.
CHINESE PORK FILLET, PRAWNS AND CELERY
100 g (4 oz) pork fillet
100 g (4 oz) prawns
2 sticks of celery
1 medium onion
1 clove garlic
100 g (4 oz) mushrooms
5 ml (1 tsp) soy sauce
5 ml (1 tsp) Teriyaki sauce
150 ml (5 fl oz) water, or wine and water, mixed
5 ml (1 tsp) lemon juice
freshly ground pepper and salt
handful of cashews to garnish
Bake the pork fillet with the lemon juice in foil for 25 minutes in a preheated oven, Gas Mark 6 (200C/400F).
When cooked, shred the meat, reserving any juices.
Meanwhile, in a wok or a large pan, gently poach the chopped celery, onion and garlic in the wine/water for 5 minutes.
Add the chopped mushrooms and cook for a further 5 minutes.
Stir in the soy sauce and the Teriyaki sauce, then add the pork, with any remaining juices, and the prawns.
Add salt and pepper.
Garnish with cashews.
Serve with egg noodles or brown rice.
DAY 13 — JACKET POTATO WITH COTTAGE CHEESE AND KIWI
FRUIT
2 large baking potatoes
220 g (8 oz) low fat cottage cheese
2 kiwi fruit
Bake the potatoes, then open them lengthways.
Pile the cottage cheese onto the potatoes and arrange slices of kiwi fruit on top.
GIGOT OF MONKFISH
1 medium monkfish tail
300 ml (10 fl oz) cider
5 ml (1 tsp) soy sauce
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh dill
2 sprigs of dill
75 ml (3 fl oz) reduced fat single cream
freshly ground pepper and salt
Put the monkfish into an ovenproof dish.
Pour over the cider and soy sauce and add salt and pepper.
Cover with  foil.
Bake in a preheated oven, Gas Mark 5 (190C/375F), for 25 minutes.
Remove foil and bake for a further 5 minutes.
Pour juices into a pan.
Keep the monkfish warm.
Reduce cooking liquid to 75 ml (3 fl oz).
Stir in the chopped dill and the fresh cream.
Cut the sides of the monkfish from the bone and arrange on individual plates.
Spoon the sauce onto the plates.
Garnish with sprigs of dill.
Serve with brown rice or jacket potato and cauliflower florets.
DAY 14 — FENNEL AND SMOKED TROUT SALAD
½ fennel bulb
1 smoked trout fillet
lollo rosso or other salad leaf
2 lime wedges
10 ml (2 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
freshly ground black pepper
Chop the fennel into small pieces and flake the smoked trout.
Mix together with the mayonnaise.
Serve on individual plates, garnished with lollo rosso and a wedge of lime.
Grind some black pepper over the salad.
CHICKEN LOMBATTINI
2 chicken breast fillets
50 g (2 oz) mushrooms
5 ml (1 tsp) lemon juice
dash Tabasco or chilli sauce
½ glass white wine
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh basil
or 3 ml (I/2 tsp) dried mixed herbs
10 ml (2 tsp) olive oil
freshly ground pepper and salt
2 wedges of lemon
Cook the chicken gently in olive oil for 8 minutes.
Add mushrooms.
Pour over wine, lemon juice and chilli sauce.
Add herbs, salt and pepper.
Garnish with wedges of lemon.
Serve with new potatoes and French beans.
DAY 15 — LENTIL AND TOMATO SALAD
75 g (3 oz) lentils, soaked and cooked as directed
2 medium tomatoes, sliced
1 small onion, grated or cut into small pieces
3 ml (½ tsp) mustard
lemon juice
freshly ground black pepper
Mix together the lentils, onion and mustard.
Put on a plate and arrange the tomato on top.
Squeeze some lemon juice and grind some black pepper onto the salad.
TAGLIATELLE WITH PRAWNS
100 g (4 oz) tagliatelle
150 g (6 oz) cooked prawns
1 medium onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
75 g (3 oz) mushrooms, chopped
100 g (4 oz) sweetcorn
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh dill
or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
5 ml (1 tsp) Nam Pla fish sauce
150 ml (5 fl oz) low-fat single cream
freshly ground pepper and salt
Cook the pasta as directed.
Cook the onion and garlic in a little water for 10 minutes.
Add the mushrooms, sweetcorn and dill and cook for a further 5 minutes.
Reduce liquid if necessary.
Pour the cream into the pan and add the prawns, fish sauce, pepper and salt.
When the cream and prawns are heated through, arrange the  tagliatelle on a serving dish and pour over the sauce.
Serve with a green pepper and cucumber salad.
DAY 16 — COURGETTES AND MUSHROOMS WITH RICE
2 medium courgettes, sliced
100 g (4 oz) mushrooms, chopped
1 small onion, chopped
75 g (3 oz) brown rice, cooked
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh parsley
or 3 ml (I/2 tsp) dried mixed herbs
soy sauce
lemon juice
freshly ground black pepper and salt
black olives
Gently simmer the courgettes, mushrooms, onion and herbs in water for 10 minutes.
Reduce the liquid.
Mix vegetables with the rice, soy sauce, lemon juice and pepper and salt.
Garnish with black olives.
MAGYAR GOULASH
150 g (6 oz) pork fillet, cut into bite-sized pieces
1 large onion
1 clove garlic
1 large carrot
1 small swede
1 large parsnip
100 g (4 oz) petits pois
100 g (4 oz) cooked Borlotti beans
1 bouquet garni or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
1 bay leaf
10 ml (2 tsp) tomato puree
150 ml (5 fl oz) red wine
150 ml (5 fl oz) boiling water
15 ml (1 tbsp) paprika
freshly ground pepper and salt
soured cream
Clean all vegetables and cut into pieces.
Put in a large casserole with the pork, petits pois, beans and herbs.
Mix together the tomato puree, wine, water, paprika, pepper and salt and pour over the casserole.
Cook in a preheated oven, Gas Mark 5 (190C/375F), for 1 hour 30 minutes.
Garnish with a little soured cream and serve with Brussels sprouts and jacket potatoes.
DAY 17 — SALMON AND APPLE MAYONNAISE
125 g (5 oz) salmon, cooked and flaked
1 apple, grated or cut into small pieces
15 ml (1 tbsp) pumpkin seeds
5 ml (1 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
10 ml (2 tsp) low fat natural yogurt
freshly ground black pepper
lime wedges
Combine all the ingredients.
Arrange on a plate and garnish with the lime wedges.
MUSHROOM RISOTTO
325 g (12 oz) mushrooms, chopped (use different types
if possible — oyster, shiitake, cup, brown)
1 medium onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
100 g (4 oz) petits pois
100 g (4 oz) cooked chick peas
360 ml (12 fl oz) vegetable stock
150 ml (5 fl oz) white wine
150 ml (5 fl oz) water
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh thyme
or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
100 g (4 oz) risotto rice
5 ml (1 tsp) sunflower oil
freshly ground pepper and salt
2 wedges of lemon
Gently cook the mushrooms, petits pois, onion and garlic in the vegetable stock and herbs for 5 minutes.
Remove the vegetables.
Add the wine and water-to the cooking liquid.
In another pan, warm the sunflower oil.
Add the risotto rice and, stirring continuously, cook for 2–3 minutes.
Add 150 ml (5 fl oz) of the cooking liquid to the rice and simmer, stirring occasionally, until the liquid is absorbed.
Add a further 150 ml (5 fl oz) of the liquid, repeating the process.
Finally, add the rest of the liquid and the pepper and salt.
If the rice is still not cooked, add some more water.
Stir in all the vegetables and garnish the risotto with the lemon wedges.
DAY 18 — TABBOULEH
75 g (3 oz) burghul (cracked wheat)
1 large tomato, cut into very small pieces
piece of cucumber, cut into very small pieces
1 small onion, grated
15 ml (1 tbsp) chopped fresh mint
or 8 ml (½ tsp) mint sauce
juice of 1 large lemon
5 ml (1 tsp) olive oil
freshly ground black pepper and salt
lemon wedges
Soak the burghul in lots of cold water for 15 minutes, then rinse and drain, squeezing the water out.
Put in a bowl with the lemon juice and the pepper and salt.
Leave for a few minutes.
Add the olive oil, mint and salad ingredients and mix thoroughly.
Garnish with the lemon wedges.
SARDINES PROVENCALES
6 fresh or frozen sardines
1 small tin tomatoes
1 onion, finely chopped
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh parsley
or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
1 clove garlic, chopped
5 ml (1 tsp) lemon juice
2 wedges of lemon
freshly ground pepper and salt
Clean, scale and gut the sardines and remove the heads.
Place in an ovenproof serving dish.
Add all other ingredients except wedges of lemon.
Cover with foil and bake for 20 minutes at Gas Mark 6 (200C/400F).
Remove the foil and bake for a further 5 minutes.
Garnish with wedges of lemon.
Serve with new potatoes and a green salad.
DAY 19 — CHICORY, ORANGE AND CUCUMBER PITTA /OPEN
SANDWICH
1 head chicory, cut into rings
1 orange, peeled and sliced
piece of cucumber, sliced
10 ml (2 tsp) low fat natural yogurt
orange juice
freshly ground black pepper
Combine salad ingredients with the yogurt and pepper.
Squeeze some fresh orange juice over the salad.
JAMBALAYA
2 turkey breast fillets, cut into small pieces
10 ml (2 tsp) lemon juice
1 medium onion
220g (8 oz) tomatoes, skinned and chopped
or 1 small tin tomatoes
1 small tin butter beans, drained
2 sticks celery
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh basil
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh parsley
1 bay leaf
2 chopped spring onions
100 g (4 oz) brown rice
chilli sauce
salt and cayenne pepper
2 wedges of lime
Put the turkey with the lemon juice into an ovenproof dish.
Cover with foil and bake for 30 minutes in a preheated oven, Gas Mark 6 (200C/400F).
Cook the rice.
In another pan, cook the chopped onion and celery with the tomatoes and 150 ml (6 fl oz) water, or if using tinned tomatoes omit the water.
Add the basil, parsley and bay leaf, salt and cayenne pepper.
Stir the rice into the tomato mixture, adding the chilli sauce.
Add the beans, pour over the turkey, mix well and continue to cook, covered, in the oven for another 20 minutes.
Serve garnished with chopped spring onions and wedges of lime.
DAY 20 — JACKET POTATO WITH HERRING
2 large baking potatoes
4 herring fillets
1 large tomato, cut into small pieces
1 small onion, cut into small pieces
lemon juice
freshly ground black pepper
Bake the potatoes.
Mix together the tomato, onion and lemon juice.
Arrange all the ingredients on a plate and dust with black pepper.
MEDITERRANEAN VEGETABLES
1 courgette
1 green pepper
1 beef tomato
1 small onion
1 clove garlic
100 g (4 oz) cooked chick peas
½ cup cooked brown rice
5 ml (1 tsp) soy sauce
5 ml (1 tsp) tomato puree
75 ml (3 fl oz) white wine
75 ml (3 fl oz) water
10 ml (2 tsp) chopped fresh basil
or 5 ml (1 tsp) dried mixed herbs
freshly ground pepper and salt
lightly toasted pine nuts or flaked almonds
Cut the courgette in half lengthways and scoop out inner flesh.
Cut the pepper in half lengthways and remove seeds and stem.
Cut the tomato in half and scoop out flesh.
Cook the chopped onion, garlic, courgette flesh and tomato flesh in the wine and water mixed with the soy sauce and tomato puree.
When cooked, drain and reserve the liquid.
Add the rice, cooked chick peas, herbs, salt and pepper to the onion mixture.
Arrange in the vegetable shells.
Put them in an ovenproof dish and pour over the cooking liquid.
Cover with foil and bake for 30 minutes in a preheated oven, Gas Mark 6 (200C/400F).
Garnish with the nuts.
Serve with a green salad.
DAY 21 — SOYA BEAN CASSEROLE
150 g (6 oz) soya beans, soaked and cooked as directed
1 large onion
1 clove garlic
1 large carrot
2 sticks celery
1 large tin tomatoes
10 ml (2 tsp) tomato puree
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh parsley
or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
1 bay leaf
5 ml (1 tsp) paprika
soy sauce
freshly ground black pepper and salt
Chop the onion, garlic, carrot and celery and put into a casserole with the soya beans.
Add all the other ingredients, cover the casserole and cook in a preheated oven, Gas Mark 6 (200C/400F), for 1 hour 30 minutes.
VENISON WITH BLACK CHERRIES
2 x 125 g (5 oz) venison steaks
220 g (8 oz) tinned black cherries, pitted
150 ml (5 fl oz) juice of black cherries
1 glass red wine
Grill the venison steaks.
Heat the black cherries with the juice and red wine.
Reduce the liquid.
Put the meat onto a plate and pour the sauce and cherries around it.
Serve with parsnip puree and red cabbage.
DAY 22 — FETA AND BACON SALAD
3 large raw spinach leaves, washed
1 small onion
1 small green pepper
3 slices bacon, cut into strips
50 g (2 oz) Feta cheese
100 g (4 oz) cooked Borlotti beans
10 ml (2 tsp) lemon juice
5 ml (1 tsp) olive oil
freshly ground black pepper
wedges of lemon
Cut spinach into pieces.
Finely chop onion (and if possible soak in cold water for 30 minutes).
Cut pepper into pieces and the Feta cheese into cubes.
Arrange all these with the Borlotti beans on individual plates.
Gently cook the bacon strips in the olive oil.
At the last moment, add the lemon juice and black pepper to the bacon.
Arrange pieces of bacon on each plate and pour over the warm dressing.
Garnish with wedges of lemon.
FENNEL PROVENCAL
2 fennel bulbs
220 g (8 oz) tomatoes, chopped
or 1 large tin chopped tomatoes
1 medium onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
100 g (4 oz) mushrooms, chopped
1 red pepper, chopped
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh parsley
or 3 ml (I/2 tsp) dried mixed herbs
freshly ground pepper and salt
Cook the tomatoes in 225 ml (8 fl oz) of water, unless using tinned tomatoes.
Trim the fennel, cut into quarters and core.
Cook all ingredients, except the mushrooms and pepper, in a saucepan for 30 minutes.
Add the mushrooms and pepper and cook for a further 10 minutes.
Serve with brown rice and a cucumber and black olive salad.
DAY 23 — MANGETOUT, TOMATO AND CASHEW NUT SALAD
100 g (4 oz) mangetout, lightly cooked
2 medium tomatoes, sliced
15 ml (1 tbsp) cashew nuts, chopped
lemon juice
cayenne pepper
Arrange the mangetout and tomato on a plate.
Squeeze over some lemon juice.
Garnish with the chopped cashew nuts and dust the salad with a little cayenne pepper.
SAUMON AUX EPINARDS
2 x 125 g (5 oz) fillets of salmon, skinned
10/12 large spinach leaves
2 lime wedges
Blanch the spinach leaves in boiling water for about 30 seconds, then dry with a paper towel.
Wrap 5/6 leaves around each salmon fillet.
Steam in a vegetable steamer over boiling water for 5 minutes.
Garnish with lime wedges and serve with new potatoes and French beans.
DAY 24 — BROAD BEAN AND HAM MAYONNAISE
150 g (6 oz) broad beans, lightly cooked
75 g (3 oz) lean cooked ham, shredded
1 small red pepper, cut into small pieces
5 ml (1 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
10 ml (2 tsp) low fat natural yogurt
lemon juice
freshly ground black pepper
Combine the broad beans and ham with the mayonnaise, yogurt and lemon juice.
Scatter pieces of red pepper over the salad and grind some black pepper on the top.
LAMB KOFTAS
220 g (8 oz) minced lamb
1 small onion, grated
5 ml (1 tsp) ground coriander
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh parsley
freshly ground pepper and salt
Soak 4 6&in kebab sticks in water to prevent burning when cooking.
Mix all the ingredients together and separate into 8 balls.
Flatten into a sausage shape and put 2 pieces of meat onto each kebab.
Cook under a moderately hot grill for about 10 minutes.
Garnish with a wedge of lemon.
Serve with brown rice and a green salad.
DAY 25 — SPINACH, COTTAGE CHEESE AND PEAR SALAD
raw spinach leaves, shredded
100 g (4 oz) low fat cottage cheese
2 pears, cut into small pieces
lemon juice
freshly ground black pepper
Arrange the shredded spinach leaves on a plate.
Mix together the cottage cheese and pear and pile on top.
Squeeze some lemon juice over the salad and add a little black pepper.
TUNA TORTIGLIONI
100 g (4 oz) tortiglioni
150 g (6 oz) fresh tuna, grilled for 4 minutes, then
flaked
or 200 g (8 oz) tin tuna in brine, drained
1 medium onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, chopped
75 g (3 oz) mushrooms, chopped
2 sticks celery, chopped
1 small tin tomatoes
1 bouquet garni or 3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
1 glass white wine and water mixed
freshly ground pepper and salt
Cook the tortiglioni as directed.
Cook the onion, garlic, mushrooms and celery in the tomatoes and wine/water with the bouquet garni.
Add the flaked tuna and salt and pepper, then mix with the tortiglioni.
Serve with a red kidney bean salad.
DAY 26 — CRAB AND WATERCRESS PITTA /OPEN SANDWICH
1 medium dressed crab
watercress
lime juice
cayenne pepper
Mix all ingredients together and pile into wholemeal pitta or onto a slice of wholemeal bread.
AUBERGINE AND COURGETTE KEBABS
1 small courgette
1 small aubergine
1 small onion
1 medium tomato
4 mushrooms
1 small green pepper
100 ml (4 fl oz) white wine
15 ml (1 tbsp) lemon juice
1 clove garlic, chopped
3 ml (½ tsp) dried mixed herbs
freshly ground pepper and salt
Soak 4 6&in kebab sticks in water for 30 minutes to prevent burning when cooking the kebabs.
Cut all the vegetables  to make up 4 kebabs.
Mix all the other ingredients to make a marinade and put the kebabs into the marinade for about 40 minutes.
Grill the kebabs, turning frequently.
Serve with a jacket potato and a green salad.
DAY 27 — JACKET POTATO WITH TUNA MAYONNAISE
2 large baking potatoes
200 g (8 oz) tin tuna in brine, drained and flaked
2 medium gherkins, chopped
10 ml (2 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
Bake the potatoes and open them lengthways.
Mix together the other ingredients and pile onto the potatoes.
CHICKEN AND SEAFOOD PAELLA
2 small chicken breast fillets
50 g (2 oz) cooked prawns
2 squid, prepared
50 g (2 oz) cooked mussels
100 g (4 oz) rice
1 medium onion
100 g (4 oz) frozen petits pois
50 g (2 oz) mushrooms
1 green or red pepper
1 clove garlic
10 ml (2 tsp) chopped fresh parsley
or 5 ml (1 tsp) dried mixed herbs
5 ml (1 tsp) Nam Pla fish sauce
5 ml (1 tsp) lemon juice
freshly ground pepper and salt
few strands saffron
or 3 ml (½ tsp) turmeric powder
wedges of lemon
large prawns and mussels — optional — to garnish
A wok is ideal for making paella; otherwise use a large frying pan.
Cook rice with the saffron or turmeric in a medium pan.
Chop onion and chicken into small pieces and cook with petits pois in water or, if desired, white wine with water, in the wok or frying pan for 10 minutes.
Cut squid into rings and cook with chicken for 5 minutes.
Add chopped mushrooms, pepper, garlic and herbs.
Add rice to the pan and also fish sauce, lemon juice and salt and pepper to taste.
Immediately prior to serving, add the prawns and mussels and amalgamate all ingredients, taking care not to break up the fish.
Garnish with wedges of lemon and, if desired, large prawns and mussels.
DAY 28 — MARINATED HERRINGS
4 herring fillets
4 gherkins, finely chopped
1 small onion, finely chopped
1 medium onion, coarsely chopped
1 bay leaf
4 cloves
pinch of salt
8 black peppercorns
5 ml (1 tsp) brown sugar
75 ml (3 fl oz) white wine vinegar
75 ml (3 fl oz) water
Lay the herring fillets skin side down and put some of the finely chopped onion and gherkin mixture on each.
Roll the fillets up and secure with a cocktail stick.
Put them in a heatproof dish.
Meanwhile, put all the other ingredients into a pan, bring to the boil and simmer for about 5 minutes to let the flavours mingle.
Pour over the herring rolls.
When cool, cover and put in the  refrigerator for at least 3 days.
To serve, remove the cocktail sticks and unroll.
Serve with wedges of wholemeal bread.
MEXICAN BEEF
150 g (6 oz) fillet or sirloin steak
1 medium onion
1 clove garlic
1 green pepper
1 red pepper
100 g (4 oz) mushrooms
1 small tin red kidney beans, drained
½ green chilli, de-seeded
5 ml (1 tsp) tomato puree
150 ml (5 fl oz) water, or wine and water, mixed
chilli sauce
10 ml (2 tsp) sunflower oil
freshly ground pepper and salt
Poach the chopped onion and garlic in the 150 ml wine/ water for 5 minutes.
Add the chopped, de-seeded peppers and chilli and the sliced mushrooms, then cook for a further 5 minutes.
Remove the vegetables and keep warm.
Reduce the juices and stir in the tomato puree, chilli sauce and salt and pepper.
Return the vegetables to the pan and keep warm, then add the red kidney beans.
Meanwhile, cut the steak into slivers, ½&in wide by 1&in, as thinly as possible — this is more easily done if the meat is put into the freezer about 30 minutes before being cut.
Gently cook in hot sunflower oil for 3–4 minutes.
Stir the meat into the vegetables and serve immediately with brown rice or jacket potatoes and a green salad.
DAY 29 — PASTA AND PEPPER SALAD
50 g (2 oz) pasta shapes, cooked
1 small red pepper, cut into small pieces
1 small green pepper, cut into small pieces
small bunch of grapes, halved and seeded
5 ml (1 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
10 ml (2 tsp) low fat natural yogurt
Mix together the pasta shapes, peppers, mayonnaise and yogurt.
Garnish with the grapes.
SWEETCORN MORNAY
2 corn cobs, corn sliced off
or 1 large tin sweetcorn, drained
2 eggs, hard-boiled and cut into pieces
125 g (5 oz) low fat natural yogurt
125 g (5 oz) low fat Cheddar cheese, grated
freshly ground black pepper
Mix together the corn, egg and yogurt and put into an ovenproof dish.
Scatter the grated cheese over the top and grind some black pepper onto the dish.
Bake in a pre-heated oven, Gas Mark 5 (190C/375F), for 15 minutes.
Brown under the grill.
Serve with new potatoes and a tomato and onion salad.
DAY 30 — PRAWN AND RICE SHELLS
100 g (4 oz) cooked prawns
50 g (2 oz) brown rice
25 g (1 oz) frozen petits pois
12 pistachio nuts, shelled
3 ml (½ tsp) soy sauce
5 ml (1 tsp) lemon juice
5 ml (1 tsp) reduced calorie mayonnaise
freshly ground pepper and salt
2 sprigs of parsley
Cook the rice as indicated on the packet and cook the frozen petits pois with the rice for the last few minutes.
Cut the prawns and the nuts into small pieces and, when the rice and petits pois are cold, mix together.
Gently stir in the other ingredients and arrange in scallop shells or on a plate.
Chill before serving.
Garnish with sprigs of parsley.
CHICKEN IN MINT AND YOGURT MARINADE
2 chicken breast fillets
125 g (5 oz) low-fat natural yogurt
5 ml (1 tsp) chopped fresh mint
or 3 ml (½ tsp) mint sauce
freshly ground black pepper
2 lemon wedges
Remove any skin or bone from the chicken.
Cut two slits into the top of each piece of chicken.
Mix together the yogurt, mint and black pepper.
Put the chicken into the marinade and leave for at least 1 hour.
Grill the chicken for 10 minutes on each side.
Garnish with lemon wedges and serve with a jacket potato and broad beans.
BREAKFAST
After approximately ten hours of fasting, the body needs a good source of energy for the rigours of the day to come.
Many people make do with a cup of coffee which, although it may taste good, does little to support you until lunchtime.
And it may tempt you into a mid-morning snack of chocolate biscuits or worse.
People who skip breakfast work less  efficiently than people who have taken the trouble to provide themselves with fuel for the morning.
Other people, however, have a long tradition of breakfasting wholeheartedly, but perhaps in a way that is not wholesome for the heart.
Cereals are an excellent source of energy and there are a large number of packet cereals available.
As a change and to provide more nourishment, try pouring yogurt over them and topping them with fresh fruit.
Porridge can be made up as directed.
Stir a little honey in to sweeten when ready to eat.
Try making your own muesli rather than buying well-known brands.
Eggs are a good source of protein but they should be cooked without using fat.
Poach, boil or scramble the eggs, or make into an omelette in a non-stick pan with a minimum of low-fat margarine.
Chop a little cooked ham, tomato or mushroom into a scrambled egg or an omelette as a variation.
Add small pieces of smoked salmon for a delicious breakfast!
Fish is an excellent food: try kedgeree as an enjoyable breakfast dish.
Home-cooked ham, accompanied by fresh brown bread, is also a nourishing start to the day.
A very low-fat start to the day is tomatoes or mushrooms on a slice of wholemeal toast; and the baked bean must not be forgotten at this time of day.
A small tin of baked beans on a slice of wholemeal toast will provide you with 19 grams of fibre, and help get you through the morning.
(Add a teaspoonful of curry powder, or mix in some red kidney beans and a little chilli sauce for variations on the baked bean theme.)
Eating fruit is a very refreshing start to the day.
Prunes should not be underestimated (4 ounces contain 8 grams of fibre).
They provide one  of the top sources of carbohydrate.
Prunes can be added to other dried fruit to make a fruit compote, or to a muesli; add pumpkin, sunflower or sesame seeds to provide further vital nutrients.
Chop and mix together two or three pieces of fresh fruit.
Squeeze a little fresh orange juice over the fruit — you can almost taste the energy!
Freshly juiced vegetables or fruit provide an excellent meal-in-a-glass.
Carrot juice contains many vitamins, including vitamin A, and is the ideal mixer for other vegetable juices.
It can easily be mixed with orange or apple juice, if preferred.
Experiment with different juices and combinations.
With a little time and imagination, there is no end to the low fat, high fibre energy breakfasts you can make for yourself.
KEDGEREE
75 g (3 oz) rice
150 g (6 oz) smoked haddock
1 medium onion, chopped
1 egg, hard-boiled and chopped
5 ml (1 tsp) garam masala, optional
3 ml (½ tsp) chopped fresh parsley
freshly ground pepper and salt
Poach the smoked haddock with the onion in water.
Skin, then flake the fish and keep warm.
Cook the rice with the garam masala, using cooking liquid and extra water as required.
When the rice is cooked, gently mix in all other ingredients.
Serve with triangles of toast.